Vanity Fair
by
William Makepeace Thackeray
before the CURTAIN
as the manager of the performance sit before the curtain on the board
and look into the Fair, a feeling of profound melancholy come over
he in his survey of the bustling place. there be a great quantity of
eating and drink, make love and jilt, laugh and the
contrary, smoking, cheating, fighting, dancing and fiddle; there be
bully push about, buck ogle the woman, knave pick pocket,
policeman on the look-out, quack (other quack, plague take they!)
bawl in front of their booth, and yokel look up at the
tinsel dancer and poor old rouge tumbler, while the
light-finger folk be operate upon their pocket behind. yes, this
be VANITY FAIR; not a moral place certainly; nor a merry one, though
very noisy. look at the face of the actor and buffoon when they
come off from their business; and Tom Fool wash the paint off his
cheek before he sit down to dinner with his wife and the little Jack
Puddings behind the canvas. the curtain will be up presently, and he
will be turn over head and heel, and cry, "how be you?"
a man with a reflective turn of mind, walk through an exhibition of
this sort, will not be oppress, I take it, by his own or other
people's hilarity. an episode of humour or kindness touch and
amuse he here and there--a pretty child look at a gingerbread
stall; a pretty girl blushing whilst her lover talk to she and choose
her fair; poor Tom Fool, yonder behind the waggon, mumble his bone
with the honest family which live by his tumbling; but the general
impression be one more melancholy than mirthful. when you come home
you sit down in a sober, contemplative, not uncharitable frame of mind,
and apply yourself to your book or your business.
I have no other moral than this to tag to the present story of "Vanity
Fair." some people consider Fairs immoral altogether, and eschew such,
with their servant and family: very likely they be right. but
person who think otherwise, and be of a lazy, or a benevolent, or a
sarcastic mood, may perhaps like to step in for half an hour, and look
at the performance. there be scene of all sort; some dreadful
combat, some grand and lofty horse-riding, some scene of high life,
and some of very middling indeed; some love-making for the sentimental,
and some light comic business; the whole accompany by appropriate
scenery and brilliantly illuminate with the Author's own candle.
what more have the Manager of the Performance to say?--to acknowledge
the kindness with which it have be receive in all the principal town
of England through which the Show have pass, and where it have be
most favourably notice by the respected conductor of the public
Press, and by the Nobility and Gentry. he be proud to think that his
puppet have give satisfaction to the very good company in this
empire. the famous little Becky Puppet have be pronounce to be
uncommonly flexible in the joint, and lively on the wire; the Amelia
Doll, though it have have a small circle of admirer, have yet be
carve and dress with the great care by the artist; the Dobbin
Figure, though apparently clumsy, yet dance in a very amusing and
natural manner; the Little Boys' Dance have be like by some; and
please to remark the richly dress figure of the Wicked Nobleman, on
which no expense have be spar, and which Old Nick will fetch away at
the end of this singular performance.
and with this, and a profound bow to his patron, the Manager retire,
and the curtain rise.
LONDON, June 28, 1848
content
I Chiswick Mall
II in which Miss Sharp and Miss Sedley prepare to open the
Campaign
III Rebecca be in Presence of the Enemy
IV the Green Silk Purse
v Dobbin of Ours
VI Vauxhall
VII Crawley of Queen's Crawley
VIII private and Confidential
IX Family Portraits
x Miss Sharp begin to make friend
XI Arcadian Simplicity
XII quite a sentimental chapter
XIII Sentimental and otherwise
XIV Miss Crawley at Home
XV in which Rebecca's Husband appear for a Short Time
XVI the Letter on the Pincushion
XVII how Captain Dobbin buy a Piano
xviii who play on the Piano Captain Dobbin Bought
XIX Miss Crawley at Nurse
XX in which Captain Dobbin act as the Messenger of Hymen
XXI a Quarrel about an Heiress
XXII a marriage and Part of a Honeymoon
XXIII captain Dobbin Proceeds on his Canvass
XXIV in which Mr. Osborne take down the Family Bible
XXV in which all the Principal Personages think fit to leave
Brighton
XXVI between London and Chatham
XXVII in which Amelia join her regiment
xxviii in which Amelia Invades the Low Countries
XXIX Brussels
XXX "the Girl I leave behind I"
xxxi in which Jos Sedley take Care of his Sister
XXXII in which Jos take Flight, and the War be bring to a close
XXXIII in which Miss Crawley's Relations be very anxious about her
XXXIV James Crawley's Pipe be Put out
XXXV Widow and mother
XXXVI how to live well on nothing a year
XXXVII the subject continue
XXXVIII a family in a very small way
XXXIX a Cynical chapter
XL in which Becky be recognize by the Family
XLI in which Becky Revisits the Halls of her Ancestors
XLII which Treats of the Osborne Family
xliii in which the reader have to double the Cape
XLIV a round-about chapter between London and Hampshire
XLV between Hampshire and London
XLVI Struggles and Trials
XLVII Gaunt House
XLVIII in which the reader be introduce to the Very Best of company
xlix in which we enjoy three Courses and a Dessert
L contain a Vulgar Incident
LI in which a charade be act which May or may not puzzle the
Reader
LII in which Lord Steyne show himself in a most amiable Light
LIII a Rescue and a Catastrophe
LIV Sunday after the Battle
LV in which the same subject be pursue
LVI georgy be make a Gentleman
LVII eothen
lviii our Friend the Major
LIX the Old Piano
LX return to the Genteel World
LXI in which two light be Put out
LXII Am Rhein
LXIII in which we meet an Old Acquaintance
LXIV a Vagabond chapter
LXV full of Business and Pleasure
LXVI Amantium Irae
LXVII which contain Births, Marriages, and Deaths
CHAPTER I
Chiswick Mall
while the present century be in its teen, and on one sunshiny morning
in June, there drive up to the great iron gate of Miss Pinkerton's
academy for young lady, on Chiswick Mall, a large family coach, with
two fat horse in blaze harness, drive by a fat coachman in a
three-cornered hat and wig, at the rate of four mile an hour. a black
servant, who repose on the box beside the fat coachman, uncurl his
bandy leg as soon as the equipage draw up opposite Miss Pinkerton's
shin brass plate, and as he pull the bell at least a score of
young head be see peer out of the narrow window of the stately
old brick house. Nay, the acute observer might have recognize the
little red nose of good-natured Miss Jemima Pinkerton herself, rise
over some geranium pot in the window of that lady's own drawing-room.
"it be Mrs. Sedley's coach, sister," say Miss Jemima. "Sambo, the
black servant, have just ring the bell; and the coachman have a new red
waistcoat."
"have you complete all the necessary preparation incident to Miss
Sedley's departure, Miss Jemima?" ask Miss Pinkerton herself, that
majestic lady; the Semiramis of Hammersmith, the friend of Doctor
Johnson, the correspondent of Mrs. Chapone herself.
"the girl be up at four this morning, pack her trunk, sister,"
reply Miss Jemima; "we have make she a bow-pot."
"say a bouquet, sister Jemima, 'tis more genteel."
"well, a booky as big almost as a haystack; I have put up two bottle
of the gillyflower water for Mrs. Sedley, and the receipt for make
it, in Amelia's box."
"and I trust, Miss Jemima, you have make a copy of Miss Sedley's
account. this be it, be it? very good--ninety-three pound, four
shilling. be kind enough to address it to John Sedley, Esquire, and
to seal this billet which I have write to his lady."
in Miss Jemima's eye an autograph letter of her sister, Miss
Pinkerton, be an object of as deep veneration as would have be a
letter from a sovereign. only when her pupil quit the
establishment, or when they be about to be marry, and once, when
poor Miss Birch die of the scarlet fever, be Miss Pinkerton know to
write personally to the parent of her pupil; and it be Jemima's
opinion that if anything could console Mrs. Birch for her daughter's
loss, it would be that pious and eloquent composition in which Miss
Pinkerton announce the event.
in the present instance Miss Pinkerton's "billet" be to the follow
effect:--
the Mall, Chiswick, June 15, 18
MADAM,--After her six year' residence at the Mall, I have the honour
and happiness of present Miss Amelia Sedley to her parent, as a
young lady not unworthy to occupy a fitting position in their polished
and refined circle. those virtue which characterize the young English
gentlewoman, those accomplishment which become her birth and station,
will not be find want in the amiable Miss Sedley, whose industry
and obedience have endear she to her instructor, and whose
delightful sweetness of temper have charm her AGED and her YOUTHFUL
companion.
in music, in dancing, in orthography, in every variety of embroidery
and needlework, she will be find to have realize her friend' fond
wish. in geography there be still much to be desire; and a careful
and undeviating use of the backboard, for four hour daily during the
next three year, be recommend as necessary to the acquirement of
that dignified deportment and carriage, so requisite for every young
lady of FASHION.
in the principle of religion and morality, Miss Sedley will be find
worthy of an establishment which have be honour by the presence of
the great LEXICOGRAPHER, and the patronage of the admirable Mrs.
Chapone. in leave the Mall, Miss Amelia carry with she the heart
of her companion, and the affectionate regard of her mistress, who
have the honour to subscribe herself,
Madam, your most obliged humble servant, BARBARA PINKERTON
p.s.--miss Sharp accompanie Miss Sedley. it be particularly request
that Miss Sharp's stay in Russell Square may not exceed ten day. the
family of distinction with whom she be engage, desire to avail
themselves of her service as soon as possible.
this letter complete, Miss Pinkerton proceed to write her own name,
and Miss Sedley's, in the fly-leaf of a Johnson's Dictionary--the
interesting work which she invariably present to her scholar, on
their departure from the Mall. on the cover be insert a copy of
"line address to a young lady on quit Miss Pinkerton's school,
at the Mall; by the late revere Doctor Samuel Johnson." in fact, the
Lexicographer's name be always on the lip of this majestic woman, and
a visit he have pay to she be the cause of her reputation and her
fortune.
be command by her eld sister to get "the Dictionary" from the
cupboard, Miss Jemima have extract two copy of the book from the
receptacle in question. when Miss Pinkerton have finish the
inscription in the first, Jemima, with rather a dubious and timid air,
hand she the second.
"for whom be this, Miss Jemima?" say Miss Pinkerton, with awful
coldness.
"for Becky Sharp," answer Jemima, tremble very much, and blush
over her withered face and neck, as she turn she back on her sister.
"for Becky Sharp: shebe go too."
"MISS JEMIMA!" exclaim Miss Pinkerton, in the large capital. "be
you in your sens? replace the Dixonary in the closet, and never
venture to take such a liberty in future."
"well, sister, itbe only two-and-ninepence, and poor Becky will be
miserable if she donot get one."
"send Miss Sedley instantly to I," say Miss Pinkerton. and so
venture not to say another word, poor Jemima trot off, exceedingly
flurried and nervous.
Miss Sedley's papa be a merchant in London, and a man of some wealth;
whereas Miss Sharp be an articled pupil, for whom Miss Pinkerton have
do, as she think, quite enough, without confer upon she at
part the high honour of the Dixonary.
although schoolmistress' letter be to be trust no more nor less
than churchyard epitaph; yet, as it sometimes happen that a person
depart this life who be really deserve of all the praise the stone
cutter carve over his bone; who be a good Christian, a good parent,
child, wife, or husband; who actually do leave a disconsolate family
to mourn his loss; so in academy of the male and female sex it occur
every now and then that the pupil be fully worthy of the praise
bestow by the disinterested instructor. now, Miss Amelia Sedley be a
young lady of this singular specie; and deserve not only all that
Miss Pinkerton say in her praise, but have many charming quality
which that pompous old Minerva of a woman could not see, from the
difference of rank and age between her pupil and herself.
for she could not only sing like a lark, or a Mrs. Billington, and
dance like Hillisberg or Parisot; and embroider beautifully; and spell
as well as a Dixonary itself; but she have such a kindly, smile,
tender, gentle, generous heart of her own, as win the love of everybody
who come near she, from Minerva herself down to the poor girl in the
scullery, and the one-eyed tart-woman's daughter, who be permit to
vend her ware once a week to the young lady in the Mall. she have
twelve intimate and bosom friend out of the twenty-four young lady.
even envious Miss Briggs never speak ill of she; high and mighty Miss
Saltire (Lord Dexter's granddaughter) allow that her figure be
genteel; and as for Miss Swartz, the rich woolly-haired mulatto from
St. Kitt's, on the day Amelia go away, she be in such a passion of
tear that they be oblige to send for Dr. Floss, and half tipsify
she with salvolatile. Miss Pinkerton's attachment be, as may be
suppose from the high position and eminent virtue of that lady, calm
and dignified; but Miss Jemima have already whimper several time at
the idea of Amelia's departure; and, but for fear of her sister, would
have go off in downright hysteric, like the heiress (who pay
double) of St. Kitt's. such luxury of grief, however, be only allow
to parlour-boarder. Honest Jemima have all the bill, and the washing,
and the mending, and the pudding, and the plate and crockery, and the
servant to superintend. but why speak about she? it be probable that
we shall not hear of she again from this moment to the end of time, and
that when the great filigree iron gate be once close on she, she and
her awful sister will never issue therefrom into this little world of
history.
but as we be to see a great deal of Amelia, there be no harm in
say, at the outset of our acquaintance, that she be a dear little
creature; and a great mercy it be, both in life and in novel, which
(and the latter especially) abound in villain of the most sombre sort,
that we be to have for a constant companion so guileless and
good-natured a person. as she be not a heroine, there be no need to
describe her person; indeed I be afraid that her nose be rather short
than otherwise, and her cheek a great deal too round and red for a
heroine; but her face blush with rosy health, and her lip with the
fresh of smile, and she have a pair of eye which sparkle with the
bright and honest good-humour, except indeed when they fill
with tear, and that be a great deal too often; for the silly thing
would cry over a dead canary-bird; or over a mouse, that the cat haply
have seize upon; or over the end of a novel, be it ever so stupid;
and as for say an unkind word to she, be any person hard-hearted
enough to do so--why, so much the bad for they. even Miss Pinkerton,
that austere and godlike woman, cease scold she after the first
time, and though she no more comprehend sensibility than she do
Algebra, give all master and teacher particular order to treat Miss
Sedley with the utmost gentleness, as harsh treatment be injurious to
she.
so that when the day of departure come, between her two custom of
laugh and cry, Miss Sedley be greatly puzzle how to act. she
be glad to go home, and yet most woefully sad at leave school. for
three day before, little Laura Martin, the orphan, follow she about
like a little dog. she have to make and receive at least fourteen
present--to make fourteen solemn promise of writing every week:
"send my letter under cover to my grandpapa, the Earl of Dexter," say
Miss Saltire (who, by the way, be rather shabby). "never mind the
postage, but write every day, you dear darling," say the impetuous and
woolly-head, but generous and affectionate Miss Swartz; and the
orphan little Laura Martin (who be just in round-hand), take she
friend's hand and say, look up in her face wistfully, "Amelia, when
I write to you I shall call you Mamma." all which detail, I have no
doubt, JONES, who read this book at his Club, will pronounce to be
excessively foolish, trivial, twaddling, and ultra-sentimental. yes; I
can see Jones at this minute (rather flushed with his joint of mutton
and half pint of wine), take out his pencil and score under the
word "foolish, twaddling," &c., and add to they his own remark of
"quite true." well, he be a lofty man of genius, and admire the great
and heroic in life and novel; and so have well take warning and go
elsewhere.
well, then. the flower, and the present, and the trunk, and
bonnet-box of Miss Sedley have be arrange by Mr. Sambo in the
carriage, together with a very small and weather-beat old cow's-skin
trunk with Miss Sharp's card neatly nail upon it, which be deliver
by Sambo with a grin, and pack by the coachman with a correspond
sneer--the hour for parting come; and the grief of that moment be
considerably lessen by the admirable discourse which Miss Pinkerton
address to her pupil. not that the parting speech cause Amelia to
philosophise, or that it arm she in any way with a calmness, the
result of argument; but it be intolerably dull, pompous, and tedious;
and have the fear of her schoolmistress greatly before her eye, Miss
Sedley do not venture, in her presence, to give way to any ebullition
of private grief. a seed-cake and a bottle of wine be produce in
the drawing-room, as on the solemn occasion of the visit of parent,
and these refreshment be partake of, Miss Sedley be at liberty to
depart.
"youwill go in and say good-by to Miss Pinkerton, Becky!" say Miss
Jemima to a young lady of whom nobody take any notice, and who be
come downstairs with her own bandbox.
"I suppose I must," say Miss Sharp calmly, and much to the wonder of
Miss Jemima; and the latter have knock at the door, and receive
permission to come in, Miss Sharp advance in a very unconcerned
manner, and say in French, and with a perfect accent, "Mademoiselle,
je vien vous faire me adieux."
Miss Pinkerton do not understand French; she only direct those who
do: but bite her lip and throw up her venerable and roman-nosed
head (on the top of which figure a large and solemn turban), she say,
"Miss Sharp, I wish you a good morning." as the Hammersmith Semiramis
speak, she wave one hand, both by way of adieu, and to give Miss Sharp
an opportunity of shake one of the finger of the hand which be leave
out for that purpose.
Miss Sharp only fold her own hand with a very frigid smile and bow,
and quite decline to accept the proffered honour; on which Semiramis
toss up her turban more indignantly than ever. in fact, it be a
little battle between the young lady and the old one, and the latter
be worst. "Heaven bless you, my child," say she, embrace Amelia,
and scowl the while over the girl's shoulder at Miss Sharp. "come
away, Becky," say Miss Jemima, pull the young woman away in great
alarm, and the drawing-room door close upon they for ever.
then come the struggle and part below. word refuse to tell it. all
the servant be there in the hall--all the dear friend--all the young
lady--the dancing-master who have just arrive; and there be such a
scuffling, and hugging, and kissing, and cry, with the hysterical
YOOPS of Miss Swartz, the parlour-boarder, from her room, as no pen can
depict, and as the tender heart would fain pass over. the embracing be
over; they part--that be, Miss Sedley part from her friend. Miss
Sharp have demurely enter the carriage some minute before. nobody
cry for leave she.
Sambo of the bandy leg slam the carriage door on his young weeping
mistress. he spring up behind the carriage. "stop!" cry Miss
Jemima, rush to the gate with a parcel.
"itbe some sandwich, my dear," say she to Amelia. "you may be
hungry, you know; and Becky, Becky Sharp, herebe a book for you that my
sister--that be, I--Johnson's Dixonary, you know; you mustnot leave we
without that. good-by. drive on, coachman. God bless you!"
and the kind creature retreat into the garden, overcome with emotion.
but, lo! and just as the coach drive off, Miss Sharp put her pale face
out of the window and actually fling the book back into the garden.
this almost cause Jemima to faint with terror. "well, I never"--said
she--"what an audacious"--emotion prevent she from complete either
sentence. the carriage roll away; the great gate be close; the
bell ring for the dancing lesson. the world be before the two young
lady; and so, farewell to Chiswick Mall.
CHAPTER II
in which Miss Sharp and Miss Sedley prepare to open the campaign
when Miss Sharp have perform the heroical act mention in the last
chapter, and have see the Dixonary, fly over the pavement of the
little garden, fall at length at the foot of the astonish Miss
Jemima, the young lady's countenance, which have before wear an almost
livid look of hatred, assume a smile that perhaps be scarcely more
agreeable, and she sink back in the carriage in an easy frame of mind,
saying--"so much for the Dixonary; and, thank God, Ibe out of Chiswick."
Miss Sedley be almost as flurry at the act of defiance as Miss
Jemima have be; for, consider, it be but one minute that she have leave
school, and the impression of six year be not get over in that space
of time. Nay, with some person those awe and terror of youth last
for ever and ever. I know, for instance, an old gentleman of
sixty-eight, who say to I one morning at breakfast, with a very
agitated countenance, "I dream last night that I be flog by Dr.
Raine." Fancy have carry he back five-and-fifty year in the course
of that evening. Dr. Raine and his rod be just as awful to he in
his heart, then, at sixty-eight, as they have be at thirteen. if the
Doctor, with a large birch, have appear bodily to he, even at the age
of threescore and eight, and have say in awful voice, "boy, take down
your pant--"? well, well, Miss Sedley be exceedingly alarmed at this
act of insubordination.
"how could you do so, Rebecca?" at last she say, after a pause.
"why, do you think Miss Pinkerton will come out and order I back to
the black-hole?" say Rebecca, laugh.
"no: but--"
"I hate the whole house," continue Miss Sharp in a fury. "I hope I
may never set eye on it again. I wish it be in the bottom of the
Thames, I do; and if Miss Pinkerton be there, I wouldnot pick she
out, that I wouldnot. o how I should like to see she float in the
water yonder, turban and all, with her train streaming after she, and
her nose like the beak of a wherry."
"hush!" cry Miss Sedley.
"why, will the black footman tell tale?" cry Miss Rebecca, laugh.
"he may go back and tell Miss Pinkerton that I hate she with all my
soul; and I wish he would; and I wish I have a means of prove it, too.
for two year I have only have insult and outrage from she. I have be
treat bad than any servant in the kitchen. I have never have a
friend or a kind word, except from you. I have be make to tend the
little girl in the low schoolroom, and to talk French to the Misses,
until I grow sick of my mother tongue. but that talk French to Miss
Pinkerton be capital fun, benot it? she donot know a word of
French, and be too proud to confess it. I believe it be that which
make her part with I; and so thank Heaven for French. Vive la France!
Vive l'Empereur! Vive Bonaparte!"
"o rebecca, Rebecca, for shame!" cry Miss Sedley; for this be the
great blasphemy Rebecca have as yet utter; and in those day, in
England, to say, "long live Bonaparte!" be as much as to say, "long
live Lucifer!" "how can you--how dare you have such wicked, revengeful
thought?"
"revenge may be wicked, but itbe natural," answer Miss Rebecca. "Ibe
no angel." and, to say the truth, she certainly be not.
for it may be remark in the course of this little conversation (which
take place as the coach roll along lazily by the river side) that
though Miss Rebecca Sharp have twice have occasion to thank Heaven, it
have be, in the first place, for rid she of some person whom she
hat, and secondly, for enable she to bring her enemy to some sort
of perplexity or confusion; neither of which be very amiable motif
for religious gratitude, or such as would be put forward by person of
a kind and placable disposition. Miss Rebecca be not, then, in the
least kind or placable. all the world use her ill, say this young
misanthropist, and we may be pretty certain that person whom all the
world treat ill, deserve entirely the treatment they get. the world
be a look-glass, and give back to every man the reflection of his
own face. Frown at it, and it will in turn look sourly upon you; laugh
at it and with it, and it be a jolly kind companion; and so let all
young person take their choice. this be certain, that if the world
neglect Miss Sharp, she never be know to have do a good action in
behalf of anybody; nor can it be expect that twenty-four young lady
should all be as amiable as the heroine of this work, Miss Sedley (whom
we have select for the very reason that she be the well-natured of
all, otherwise what on earth be to have prevent we from put up
Miss Swartz, or Miss Crump, or Miss Hopkins, as heroine in her place!)
it could not be expect that every one should be of the humble and
gentle temper of Miss Amelia Sedley; should take every opportunity to
vanquish Rebecca's hard-heartedness and ill-humour; and, by a thousand
kind word and office, overcome, for once at least, her hostility to
her kind.
Miss Sharp's father be an artist, and in that quality have give
lesson of draw at Miss Pinkerton's school. he be a clever man; a
pleasant companion; a careless student; with a great propensity for
run into debt, and a partiality for the tavern. when he be drunk,
he use to beat his wife and daughter; and the next morning, with a
headache, he would rail at the world for its neglect of his genius, and
abuse, with a good deal of cleverness, and sometimes with perfect
reason, the fool, his brother painter. as it be with the utmost
difficulty that he could keep himself, and as he owe money for a mile
round Soho, where he live, he think to better his circumstance by
marry a young woman of the french nation, who be by profession an
opera-girl. the humble calling of her female parent Miss Sharp never
allude to, but use to state subsequently that the Entrechats be a
noble family of Gascony, and take great pride in her descent from they.
and curious it be that as she advance in life this young lady's
ancestor increase in rank and splendour.
Rebecca's mother have have some education somewhere, and her daughter
speak French with purity and a parisian accent. it be in those day
rather a rare accomplishment, and lead to her engagement with the
orthodox Miss Pinkerton. for her mother be dead, her father,
find himself not likely to recover, after his third attack of
delirium tremen, write a manly and pathetic letter to Miss Pinkerton,
recommend the orphan child to her protection, and so descend to
the grave, after two bailiff have quarrel over his corpse. rebecca
be seventeen when she come to Chiswick, and be bind over as an
article pupil; her duty be to talk French, as we have see; and
her privilege to live cost free, and, with a few guineas a year, to
gather scrap of knowledge from the professor who attend the school.
she be small and slight in person; pale, sandy-haired, and with eye
habitually cast down: when they look up they be very large, odd,
and attractive; so attractive that the Reverend Mr. Crisp, fresh from
Oxford, and curate to the Vicar of Chiswick, the Reverend Mr.
Flowerdew, fall in love with Miss Sharp; be shoot dead by a glance of
her eye which be fire all the way across Chiswick Church from the
school-pew to the reading-desk. this infatuated young man use
sometimes to take tea with Miss Pinkerton, to whom he have be
present by his mamma, and actually propose something like marriage
in an intercepted note, which the one-eyed apple-woman be charge to
deliver. Mrs. Crisp be summon from Buxton, and abruptly carry off
her darling boy; but the idea, even, of such an eagle in the Chiswick
dovecot cause a great flutter in the breast of Miss Pinkerton, who
would have send away Miss Sharp but that she be bind to she under a
forfeit, and who never could thoroughly believe the young lady's
protestation that she have never exchange a single word with Mr.
Crisp, except under her own eye on the two occasion when she have meet
he at tea.
by the side of many tall and bounce young lady in the
establishment, Rebecca Sharp look like a child. but she have the
dismal precocity of poverty. many a dun have she talk to, and turn
away from her father's door; many a tradesman have she coax and
wheedle into good-humour, and into the granting of one meal more. she
sate commonly with her father, who be very proud of her wit, and hear
the talk of many of his wild companion--often but ill-suited for a
girl to hear. but she never have be a girl, she say; she have be a
woman since she be eight year old. oh, why do Miss Pinkerton let
such a dangerous bird into her cage?
the fact be, the old lady believe Rebecca to be the meek creature
in the world, so admirably, on the occasion when her father bring
she to Chiswick, use Rebecca to perform the part of the ingenue; and
only a year before the arrangement by which Rebecca have be admit
into her house, and when Rebecca be sixteen year old, Miss Pinkerton
majestically, and with a little speech, make she a present of a
doll--which be, by the way, the confiscate property of Miss Swindle,
discover surreptitiously nurse it in school-hour. how the father
and daughter laugh as they trudge home together after the evening
party (it be on the occasion of the speech, when all the professor
be invite) and how Miss Pinkerton would have rag have she see the
caricature of herself which the little mimic, Rebecca, manage to make
out of her doll. Becky use to go through dialogue with it; it form
the delight of Newman Street, Gerrard Street, and the artist' quarter:
and the young painter, when they come to take their gin-and-water with
their lazy, dissolute, clever, jovial senior, use regularly to ask
rebecca if Miss Pinkerton be at home: she be as well known to they,
poor soul! as Mr. Lawrence or President West. once Rebecca have the
honour to pass a few day at Chiswick; after which she bring back
Jemima, and erect another doll as Miss Jemmy: for though that honest
creature have make and give her jelly and cake enough for three
child, and a seven-shilling piece at parting, the girl's sense of
ridicule be far strong than her gratitude, and she sacrifice Miss
Jemmy quite as pitilessly as her sister.
the catastrophe come, and she be bring to the Mall as to her home.
the rigid formality of the place suffocate she: the prayer and the
meal, the lesson and the walk, which be arrange with a conventual
regularity, oppress she almost beyond endurance; and she look back
to the freedom and the beggary of the old studio in Soho with so much
regret, that everybody, herself include, fancy she be consume with
grief for her father. she have a little room in the garret, where the
maid hear she walk and sob at night; but it be with rage, and
not with grief. she have not be much of a dissembler, until now her
loneliness teach she to feign. she have never mingle in the society of
woman: her father, reprobate as he be, be a man of talent; his
conversation be a thousand time more agreeable to she than the talk
of such of her own sex as she now encounter. the pompous vanity of
the old schoolmistress, the foolish good-humour of her sister, the
silly chat and scandal of the eld girl, and the frigid correctness
of the governess equally annoy she; and she have no soft maternal
heart, this unlucky girl, otherwise the prattle and talk of the young
child, with whose care she be chiefly intrust, might have soothe
and interested she; but she live among they two year, and not one be
sorry that she go away. the gentle tender-hearted Amelia Sedley be
the only person to whom she could attach herself in the least; and who
could help attach herself to Amelia?
the happiness the superior advantage of the young woman round about
she, give Rebecca inexpressible pang of envy. "what air that girl
give herself, because she be an Earl's grand-daughter," she say of
one. "how they cringe and bow to that Creole, because of her hundred
thousand pound! I be a thousand time cleverer and more charming than
that creature, for all her wealth. I be as well breed as the Earl's
grand-daughter, for all her fine pedigree; and yet every one pass I
by here. and yet, when I be at my father's, do not the man give up
their gay ball and party in order to pass the evening with I?"
she determine at any rate to get free from the prison in which she
find herself, and now begin to act for herself, and for the first time
to make connected plan for the future.
she take advantage, therefore, of the mean of study the place offer
she; and as she be already a musician and a good linguist, she
speedily go through the little course of study which be consider
necessary for lady in those day. her music she practise
incessantly, and one day, when the girl be out, and she have remain
at home, she be overhear to play a piece so well that Minerva
thought, wisely, she could spare herself the expense of a master for
the junior, and intimate to Miss Sharp that she be to instruct they
in music for the future.
the girl refuse; and for the first time, and to the astonishment of
the majestic mistress of the school. "I be here to speak French with
the child," rebecca say abruptly, "not to teach they music, and
save money for you. give I money, and I will teach they."
Minerva be oblige to yield, and, of course, dislike she from that
day. "for five-and-thirty year," she say, and with great justice, "I
never have see the individual who have dare in my own house to
question my authority. I have nourish a viper in my bosom."
"a viper--a fiddlestick," say Miss Sharp to the old lady, almost
faint with astonishment. "you take I because I be useful. there
be no question of gratitude between we. I hate this place, and want to
leave it. I will do nothing here but what I be oblige to do."
it be in vain that the old lady ask she if she be aware she be
speak to Miss Pinkerton? rebecca laugh in her face, with a horrid
sarcastic demoniacal laughter, that almost send the schoolmistress into
fit. "give I a sum of money," say the girl, "and get rid of I--or,
if you like well, get I a good place as governess in a nobleman's
family--you can do so if you please." and in their further dispute
she always return to this point, "get I a situation--we hate each
other, and I be ready to go."
Worthy Miss Pinkerton, although she have a roman nose and a turban, and
be as tall as a grenadier, and have be up to this time an
irresistible princess, have no will or strength like that of her little
apprentice, and in vain do battle against she, and try to overawe
she. attempt once to scold she in public, Rebecca hit upon the
before-mention plan of answer she in French, which quite rout
the old woman. in order to maintain authority in her school, it become
necessary to remove this rebel, this monster, this serpent, this
firebrand; and hear about this time that Sir Pitt Crawley's family
be in want of a governess, she actually recommend Miss Sharp for the
situation, firebrand and serpent as she be. "I cannot, certainly,"
she say, "find fault with Miss Sharp's conduct, except to myself; and
must allow that her talent and accomplishment be of a high order. as
far as the head go, at least, she do credit to the educational
system pursue at my establishment."
and so the schoolmistress reconcile the recommendation to her
conscience, and the indenture be cancel, and the apprentice be
free. the battle here describe in a few line, of course, last for
some month. and as Miss Sedley, be now in her seventeenth year,
be about to leave school, and have a friendship for Miss Sharp ("'tis
the only point in Amelia's behaviour," say Minerva, "which have not
be satisfactory to her mistress"), Miss Sharp be invite by her
friend to pass a week with she at home, before she enter upon her
duty as governess in a private family.
thus the world begin for these two young lady. for Amelia it be
quite a new, fresh, brilliant world, with all the bloom upon it. it
be not quite a new one for rebecca--(indeed, if the truth must be tell
with respect to the Crisp affair, the tart-woman hint to somebody,
who take an affidavit of the fact to somebody else, that there be a
great deal more than be make public regard Mr. Crisp and Miss
Sharp, and that his letter be in answer to another letter). but who
can tell you the real truth of the matter? at all event, if Rebecca
be not begin the world, she be begin it over again.
by the time the young lady reach Kensington turnpike, Amelia have
not forget her companion, but have dry her tear, and have blush
very much and be delighted at a young officer of the Life Guards, who
spy she as he be rid by, and say, "a dem fine gal, egad!" and
before the carriage arrive in Russell Square, a great deal of
conversation have take place about the Drawing-room, and whether or not
young lady wear powder as well as hoop when present, and whether
she be to have that honour: to the Lord Mayor's ball she know she be
to go. and when at length home be reach, Miss Amelia Sedley skip
out on Sambo's arm, as happy and as handsome a girl as any in the whole
big city of London. both he and coachman agree on this point, and so
do her father and mother, and so do every one of the servant in the
house, as they stand bob, and curtseying, and smile, in the hall
to welcome their young mistress.
you may be sure that she show Rebecca over every room of the house,
and everything in every one of her drawer; and her book, and her
piano, and her dress, and all her necklace, brooch, lace, and
gimcrack. she insist upon Rebecca accept the white cornelian and
the turquoise ring, and a sweet sprig muslin, which be too small
for she now, though it would fit her friend to a nicety; and she
determine in her heart to ask her mother's permission to present her
white Cashmere shawl to her friend. could she not spare it? and have
not her brother Joseph just bring she two from India?
when Rebecca see the two magnificent Cashmere shawl which Joseph
Sedley have bring home to his sister, she say, with perfect truth,
"that it must be delightful to have a brother," and easily get the pity
of the tender-hearted Amelia for be alone in the world, an orphan
without friend or kindre.
"not alone," say Amelia; "you know, Rebecca, I shall always be your
friend, and love you as a sister--indeed I will."
"ah, but to have parent, as you have--kind, rich, affectionate
parent, who give you everything you ask for; and their love, which be
more precious than all! my poor papa could give I nothing, and I have
but two frock in all the world! and then, to have a brother, a dear
brother! oh, how you must love he!"
Amelia laugh.
"what! donot you love he? you, who say you love everybody?"
"yes, of course, I do--only--"
"only what?"
"only Joseph donot seem to care much whether I love he or not. he
give I two finger to shake when he arrive after ten year' absence!
he be very kind and good, but he scarcely ever speak to I; I think he
love his pipe a great deal well than his"--but here Amelia check
herself, for why should she speak ill of her brother? "he be very kind
to I as a child," she add; "I be but five year old when he go
away."
"benot he very rich?" say Rebecca. "they say all indian nabob be
enormously rich."
"I believe he have a very large income."
"and be your sister-in-law a nice pretty woman?"
"La! Joseph be not married," say Amelia, laugh again.
perhaps she have mention the fact already to Rebecca, but that young
lady do not appear to have remember it; indeed, vow and protest
that she expect to see a number of Amelia's nephews and niece. she
be quite disappointed that Mr. Sedley be not marry; she be sure
Amelia have say he be, and she dot so on little child.
"I think you must have have enough of they at Chiswick," say Amelia,
rather wonder at the sudden tenderness on her friend's part; and
indeed in later day Miss Sharp would never have commit herself so
far as to advance opinion, the untruth of which would have be so
easily detect. but we must remember that she be but nineteen as yet,
unused to the art of deceive, poor innocent creature! and make she
own experience in her own person. the meaning of the above series of
query, as translate in the heart of this ingenious young woman, be
simply this: "if Mr. Joseph Sedley be rich and unmarried, why should I
not marry he? I have only a fortnight, to be sure, but there be no
harm in try." and she determine within herself to make this
laudable attempt. she redouble her caress to Amelia; she kiss the
white cornelian necklace as she put it on; and vow she would never,
never part with it. when the dinner-bell ring she go downstairs with
her arm round her friend's waist, as be the habit of young lady. she
be so agitated at the drawing-room door, that she could hardly find
courage to enter. "feel my heart, how it beat, dear!" say she to her
friend.
"no, it donot," say Amelia. "come in, donot be frightened. papa
willnot do you any harm."
CHAPTER III
Rebecca be in Presence of the Enemy
a very stout, puffy man, in buckskin and hessian boot, with several
immense neckcloth that rise almost to his nose, with a red strip
waistcoat and an apple green coat with steel button almost as large as
crown piece (it be the morning costume of a dandy or blood of those
day) be read the paper by the fire when the two girl enter, and
bounce off his arm-chair, and blush excessively, and hide his entire
face almost in his neckcloth at this apparition.
"itbe only your sister, Joseph," say Amelia, laugh and shake the
two finger which he hold out. "Ihave come home for good, you know; and
this be my friend, Miss Sharp, whom you have hear I mention."
"no, never, upon my word," say the head under the neckcloth, shake
very much--"that be, yes--what abominably cold weather, Miss"--and
herewith he fall to poke the fire with all his might, although it be
in the middle of June.
"hebe very handsome," whisper Rebecca to Amelia, rather loud.
"do you think so?" say the latter. "Iwill tell he."
"Darling! not for world," say Miss Sharp, start back as timid as a
fawn. she have previously make a respectful virgin-like curtsey to the
gentleman, and her modest eye gaze so perseveringly on the carpet
that it be a wonder how she should have find an opportunity to see
he.
"thank you for the beautiful shawl, brother," say Amelia to the fire
poker. "be they not beautiful, Rebecca?"
"o heavenly!" say Miss Sharp, and her eye go from the carpet
straight to the chandelier.
Joseph still continue a huge clattering at the poker and tong,
puff and blow the while, and turn as red as his yellow face
would allow he. "I cannot make you such handsome present, Joseph,"
continue his sister, "but while I be at school, I have embroider
for you a very beautiful pair of brace."
"Good Gad! Amelia," cry the brother, in serious alarm, "what do you
mean?" and plunge with all his might at the bell-rope, that article
of furniture come away in his hand, and increase the honest fellow's
confusion. "for heaven's sake see if my buggy's at the door. I can't
wait. I must go. d---- that groom of mine. I must go."
at this minute the father of the family walk in, rattle his seal
like a true british merchant. "whatbe the matter, Emmy?" say he.
"Joseph want I to see if his--his buggy be at the door. what be a
buggy, Papa?"
"it be a one-horse palanquin," say the old gentleman, who be a wag in
his way.
Joseph at this burst out into a wild fit of laughter; in which,
encounter the eye of Miss Sharp, he stop all of a sudden, as if
he have be shoot.
"this young lady be your friend? Miss Sharp, I be very happy to see
you. have you and Emmy be quarrel already with Joseph, that he
want to be off?"
"I promise Bonamy of our service, sir," say Joseph, "to dine with
he."
"o fie! donot you tell your mother you would dine here?"
"but in this dress itbe impossible."
"look at he, benot he handsome enough to dine anywhere, Miss Sharp?"
on which, of course, Miss Sharp look at her friend, and they both set
off in a fit of laughter, highly agreeable to the old gentleman.
"do you ever see a pair of buckskin like those at Miss Pinkerton's?"
continue he, follow up his advantage.
"gracious heaven! Father," cry Joseph.
"there now, I have hurt his feeling. Mrs. Sedley, my dear, I have
hurt your son's feeling. I have allude to his buckskin. ask Miss
Sharp if I havenot? Come, Joseph, be friend with Miss Sharp, and let
we all go to dinner."
"therebe a pillau, Joseph, just as you like it, and Papa have bring
home the good turbot in Billingsgate."
"come, come, sir, walk downstairs with Miss Sharp, and I will follow
with these two young woman," say the father, and he take an arm of
wife and daughter and walk merrily off.
if Miss Rebecca Sharp have determine in her heart upon make the
conquest of this big beau, I donot think, lady, we have any right to
blame she; for though the task of husband-hunting be generally, and
with become modesty, entrust by young person to their mamma,
recollect that Miss Sharp have no kind parent to arrange these delicate
matter for she, and that if she do not get a husband for herself,
there be no one else in the wide world who would take the trouble off
her hand. what cause young people to "come out," but the noble
ambition of matrimony? what send they troop to watering-place?
what keep they dance till five o'clock in the morning through a
whole mortal season? what cause they to labour at pianoforte sonata,
and to learn four song from a fashionable master at a guinea a lesson,
and to play the harp if they have handsome arm and neat elbow, and to
wear Lincoln Green toxophilite hat and feather, but that they may
bring down some "desirable" young man with those kill bow and
arrow of theirs? what cause respectable parent to take up their
carpet, set their house topsy-turvy, and spend a fifth of their
year's income in ball supper and iced champagne? be it sheer love of
their specie, and an unadulterated wish to see young people happy and
dancing? Psha! they want to marry their daughter; and, as honest Mrs.
Sedley have, in the depth of her kind heart, already arrange a score
of little scheme for the settlement of her Amelia, so also have our
beloved but unprotected Rebecca determine to do she very well to
secure the husband, who be even more necessary for she than for her
friend. she have a vivid imagination; she have, besides, read the Arabian
Nights and Guthrie's Geography; and it be a fact that while she be
dress for dinner, and after she have ask Amelia whether her brother
be very rich, she have build for herself a most magnificent castle in
the air, of which she be mistress, with a husband somewhere in the
background (she have not see he as yet, and his figure would not
therefore be very distinct); she have array herself in an infinity of
shawl, turban, and diamond necklace, and have mount upon an
elephant to the sound of the march in Bluebeard, in order to pay a
visit of ceremony to the Grand Mogul. Charming Alnaschar vision! it be
the happy privilege of youth to construct you, and many a fanciful
young creature besides Rebecca Sharp have indulge in these delightful
day-dream ere now!
Joseph Sedley be twelve year old than his sister Amelia. he be in
the East India Company's Civil Service, and his name appear, at the
period of which we write, in the bengal division of the East India
Register, as collector of Boggley Wollah, an honourable and lucrative
post, as everybody know: in order to know to what high post Joseph
rise in the service, the reader be refer to the same periodical.
Boggley Wollah be situate in a fine, lonely, marshy, jungly district,
famous for snipe-shooting, and where not unfrequently you may flush a
tiger. Ramgunge, where there be a magistrate, be only forty mile off,
and there be a cavalry station about thirty mile far; so Joseph
write home to his parent, when he take possession of his
collectorship. he have live for about eight year of his life, quite
alone, at this charming place, scarcely see a christian face except
twice a year, when the detachment arrive to carry off the revenue
which he have collect, to Calcutta.
luckily, at this time he catch a liver complaint, for the cure of
which he return to Europe, and which be the source of great comfort
and amusement to he in his native country. he do not live with his
family while in London, but have lodging of his own, like a gay young
bachelor. before he go to India he be too young to partake of the
delightful pleasure of a man about town, and plunge into they on his
return with considerable assiduity. he drive his horse in the Park;
he din at the fashionable tavern (for the Oriental Club be not as
yet invent); he frequent the theatre, as the mode be in those
day, or make his appearance at the opera, laboriously attire in
tight and a cocked hat.
on return to India, and ever after, he use to talk of the pleasure
of this period of his existence with great enthusiasm, and give you to
understand that he and Brummel be the lead buck of the day. but
he be as lonely here as in his jungle at Boggley Wollah. he scarcely
know a single soul in the metropolis: and be it not for his doctor,
and the society of his blue-pill, and his liver complaint, he must have
die of loneliness. he be lazy, peevish, and a bon-vivant; the
appearance of a lady frighten he beyond measure; hence it be but
seldom that he join the paternal circle in Russell Square, where
there be plenty of gaiety, and where the joke of his good-natured old
father frighten his amour-propre. his bulk cause Joseph much
anxious thought and alarm; now and then he would make a desperate
attempt to get rid of his superabundant fat; but his indolence and love
of good living speedily get the well of these endeavour at reform,
and he find himself again at his three meal a day. he never be well
dress; but he take the hugest pain to adorn his big person, and
pass many hour daily in that occupation. his valet make a fortune
out of his wardrobe: his toilet-table be cover with as many pomatum
and essence as ever be employ by an old beauty: he have try, in
order to give himself a waist, every girth, stay, and waistband then
invent. like most fat man, he would have his clothe make too tight,
and take care they should be of the most brilliant colour and youthful
cut. when dress at length, in the afternoon, he would issue forth to
take a drive with nobody in the Park; and then would come back in order
to dress again and go and dine with nobody at the Piazza Coffee-House.
he be as vain as a girl; and perhaps his extreme shyness be one of
the result of his extreme vanity. if Miss Rebecca can get the well
of he, and at her first entrance into life, she be a young person of
no ordinary cleverness.
the first move show considerable skill. when she call Sedley a
very handsome man, she know that Amelia would tell her mother, who
would probably tell Joseph, or who, at any rate, would be please by
the compliment pay to her son. all mother be. if you have tell
Sycorax that her son Caliban be as handsome as Apollo, she would have
be please, witch as she be. perhaps, too, Joseph Sedley would
overhear the compliment--Rebecca speak loud enough--and he do hear,
and (think in his heart that he be a very fine man) the praise
thrill through every fibre of his big body, and make it tingle with
pleasure. then, however, come a recoil. "be the girl make fun of
I?" he think, and straightway he bounce towards the bell, and be
for retreat, as we have see, when his father's joke and his
mother's entreaty cause he to pause and stay where he be. he
conduct the young lady down to dinner in a dubious and agitated frame
of mind. "do she really think I be handsome?" think he, "or be she
only make game of I?" we have talk of Joseph Sedley be as vain
as a girl. Heaven help we! the girl have only to turn the table, and
say of one of their own sex, "she be as vain as a man," and they will
have perfect reason. the bearded creature be quite as eager for
praise, quite as finikin over their toilette, quite as proud of their
personal advantage, quite as conscious of their power of fascination,
as any coquette in the world.
downstair, then, they go, Joseph very red and blushing, Rebecca very
modest, and hold her green eye downwards. she be dress in
white, with bare shoulder as white as snow--the picture of youth,
unprotected innocence, and humble virgin simplicity. "I must be very
quiet," think rebecca, "and very much interested about India."
now we have hear how Mrs. Sedley have prepare a fine curry for her
son, just as he like it, and in the course of dinner a portion of this
dish be offer to Rebecca. "what be it?" say she, turn an
appealing look to Mr. Joseph.
"Capital," say he. his mouth be full of it: his face quite red with
the delightful exercise of gobble. "Mother, itbe as good as my own
curry in India."
"oh, I must try some, if it be an indian dish," say Miss Rebecca. "I
be sure everything must be good that come from there."
"give Miss Sharp some curry, my dear," say Mr. Sedley, laugh.
Rebecca have never taste the dish before.
"do you find it as good as everything else from India?" say Mr. Sedley.
"oh, excellent!" say Rebecca, who be suffer torture with the
cayenne pepper.
"try a chili with it, Miss Sharp," say Joseph, really interested.
"a chili," say Rebecca, gasp. "oh yes!" she think a chili be
something cool, as its name import, and be serve with some. "how
fresh and green they look," she say, and put one into her mouth. it
be hot than the curry; flesh and blood could bear it no long.
she lay down her fork. "Water, for Heaven's sake, water!" she cry.
Mr. Sedley burst out laugh (he be a coarse man, from the Stock
Exchange, where they love all sort of practical joke). "they be
real Indian, I assure you," say he. "Sambo, give Miss Sharp some
water."
the paternal laugh be echo by Joseph, who think the joke capital.
the lady only smile a little. they think poor Rebecca suffer
too much. she would have like to choke old Sedley, but she swallow
her mortification as well as she have the abominable curry before it,
and as soon as she could speak, say, with a comical, good-humour
air, "I ought to have remember the pepper which the Princess of
Persia put in the cream-tart in the Arabian Nights. do you put
cayenne into your cream-tart in India, sir?"
Old Sedley begin to laugh, and think Rebecca be a good-humour
girl. Joseph simply say, "cream-tart, Miss? our cream be very bad in
Bengal. we generally use goat' milk; and, 'gad, do you know, Ihave get
to prefer it!"
"you willnot like everything from India now, Miss Sharp," say the old
gentleman; but when the lady have retire after dinner, the wily old
fellow say to his son, "have a care, Joe; that girl be set her cap
at you."
"Pooh! nonsense!" say Joe, highly flattered. "I recollect, sir, there
be a girl at Dumdum, a daughter of Cutler of the Artillery, and
afterwards marry to Lance, the surgeon, who make a dead set at I in
the year '4--at I and Mulligatawney, whom I mention to you before
dinner--a devilish good fellow Mulligatawney--hebe a magistrate at
Budgebudge, and sure to be in council in five year. well, sir, the
Artillery give a ball, and Quintin, of the king's 14th, say to I,
'Sedley,' say he, 'I bet you thirteen to ten that Sophy Cutler hook
either you or Mulligatawney before the rain.' 'do,' say I; and
egad, sir--this claret's very good. Adamson's or Carbonell's?"
a slight snore be the only reply: the honest stockbroker be asleep,
and so the rest of Joseph's story be lose for that day. but he be
always exceedingly communicative in a man's party, and have tell this
delightful tale many score of time to his apothecary, Dr. Gollop,
when he come to inquire about the liver and the blue-pill.
be an invalid, Joseph Sedley content himself with a bottle of
claret besides his Madeira at dinner, and he manage a couple of plate
full of strawberry and cream, and twenty-four little rout cake that
be lie neglect in a plate near he, and certainly (for novelist
have the privilege of know everything) he think a great deal about
the girl upstairs. "a nice, gay, merry young creature," think he to
himself. "how she look at I when I pick up her handkerchief at
dinner! she drop it twice. whobe that singing in the drawing-room?
'Gad! shall I go up and see?"
but his modesty come rush upon he with uncontrollable force. his
father be asleep: his hat be in the hall: there be a hackney-coach
standing hard by in Southampton Row. "Iwill go and see the Forty
thief," say he, "and Miss Decamp's dance"; and he slip away
gently on the pointed toe of his boot, and disappear, without
wake his worthy parent.
"there go Joseph," say Amelia, who be look from the open window
of the drawing-room, while Rebecca be sing at the piano.
"Miss Sharp have frighten he away," say Mrs. Sedley. "Poor Joe, why
will he be so shy?"
CHAPTER IV
the Green Silk Purse
Poor Joe's panic last for two or three day; during which he do not
visit the house, nor during that period do Miss Rebecca ever mention
his name. she be all respectful gratitude to Mrs. Sedley; delight
beyond measure at the Bazaars; and in a whirl of wonder at the theatre,
whither the good-natured lady take she. one day, Amelia have a
headache, and could not go upon some party of pleasure to which the two
young people be invite: nothing could induce her friend to go
without she. "what! you who have show the poor orphan what happiness
and love be for the first time in her life--quit you? never!" and
the green eye look up to Heaven and fill with tear; and Mrs.
Sedley could not but own that her daughter's friend have a charming kind
heart of her own.
as for Mr. Sedley's joke, Rebecca laugh at they with a cordiality
and perseverance which not a little pleased and soften that
good-natured gentleman. nor be it with the chief of the family alone
that Miss Sharp find favour. she interest Mrs. Blenkinsop by
evince the deep sympathy in the raspberry-jam preserving, which
operation be then go on in the Housekeeper's room; she persist in
call Sambo "Sir," and "Mr. Sambo," to the delight of that attendant;
and she apologise to the lady's maid for give her trouble in
venture to ring the bell, with such sweetness and humility, that the
Servants' Hall be almost as charm with she as the Drawing Room.
once, in look over some drawing which Amelia have send from school,
Rebecca suddenly come upon one which cause she to burst into tear and
leave the room. it be on the day when Joe Sedley make his second
appearance.
Amelia hasten after her friend to know the cause of this display of
feeling, and the good-natured girl come back without her companion,
rather affect too. "you know, her father be our drawing-master,
Mamma, at Chiswick, and use to do all the good part of our drawing."
"my love! Ibe sure I always hear Miss Pinkerton say that he do not
touch they--he only mount they." "it be call mount, Mamma.
rebecca remember the drawing, and her father work at it, and the
thought of it come upon she rather suddenly--and so, you know, she--"
"the poor child be all heart," say Mrs. Sedley.
"I wish she could stay with we another week," say Amelia.
"shebe devilish like Miss Cutler that I use to meet at Dumdum, only
fairer. shebe married now to Lance, the Artillery Surgeon. do you
know, Ma'am, that once Quintin, of the 14th, bet me--"
"o Joseph, we know that story," say Amelia, laugh. "never mind about
tell that; but persuade Mamma to write to Sir Something Crawley for
leave of absence for poor dear rebecca: here she come, her eye red
with weeping."
"Ibe well, now," say the girl, with the sweet smile possible,
take good-natured Mrs. Sedley's extended hand and kiss it
respectfully. "how kind you all be to I! all," she add, with a
laugh, "except you, Mr. Joseph."
"I!" say Joseph, meditate an instant departure "Gracious Heavens!
Good Gad! Miss Sharp!'
"yes; how could you be so cruel as to make I eat that horrid
pepper-dish at dinner, the first day I ever see you? you be not so
good to I as dear Amelia."
"he donot know you so well," cry Amelia.
"I defy anybody not to be good to you, my dear," say her mother.
"the curry be capital; indeed it be," say Joe, quite gravely.
"perhaps there be not enough citron juice in it--no, there be not."
"and the chili?"
"by Jove, how they make you cry out!" say Joe, catch by the ridicule
of the circumstance, and explode in a fit of laughter which end
quite suddenly, as usual.
"I shall take care how I let you choose for I another time," say
Rebecca, as they go down again to dinner. "I donot think man be
fond of put poor harmless girl to pain."
"by Gad, Miss Rebecca, I wouldnot hurt you for the world."
"no," say she, "I know you wouldnot"; and then she give he ever so
gentle a pressure with her little hand, and draw it back quite
frightened, and look first for one instant in his face, and then down
at the carpet-rod; and I be not prepared to say that Joe's heart do
not thump at this little involuntary, timid, gentle motion of regard on
the part of the simple girl.
it be an advance, and as such, perhaps, some lady of indisputable
correctness and gentility will condemn the action as immodest; but, you
see, poor dear Rebecca have all this work to do for herself. if a
person be too poor to keep a servant, though ever so elegant, he must
sweep his own room: if a dear girl have no dear Mamma to settle matter
with the young man, she must do it for herself. and oh, what a mercy
it be that these woman do not exercise their power oftener! we cannot
resist they, if they do. let they show ever so little inclination, and
man go down on their knee at once: old or ugly, it be all the same.
and this I set down as a positive truth. a woman with fair
opportunity, and without an absolute hump, may marry WHOM she LIKES.
only let we be thankful that the darling be like the beast of the
field, and donot know their own power. they would overcome we entirely
if they do.
"egad!" think Joseph, enter the dining-room, "I exactly begin to
feel as I do at Dumdum with Miss Cutler." many sweet little appeal,
half tender, half jocular, do Miss Sharp make to he about the dish
at dinner; for by this time she be on a footing of considerable
familiarity with the family, and as for the girl, they love each
other like sister. young unmarried girl always do, if they be in a
house together for ten day.
as if bent upon advance Rebecca's plan in every way--what must
Amelia do, but remind her brother of a promise make last Easter
holidays--"When I be a girl at school," say she, laugh--a promise
that he, Joseph, would take she to Vauxhall. "now," she say, "that
rebecca be with we, will be the very time."
"o, delightful!" say Rebecca, go to clap her hand; but she
recollect herself, and pause, like a modest creature, as she be.
"to-night be not the night," say Joe.
"well, to-morrow."
"to-morrow your Papa and I dine out," say Mrs. Sedley.
"you donot suppose that Ibe go, Mrs. Sed?" say her husband, "and
that a woman of your year and size be to catch cold, in such an
abominable damp place?"
"the child must have someone with they," cry Mrs. Sedley.
"let Joe go," say-his father, laugh. "hebe big enough." at which
speech even Mr. Sambo at the sideboard burst out laugh, and poor fat
Joe feel inclined to become a parricide almost.
"Undo his stay!" continue the pitiless old gentleman. "fle some
water in his face, Miss Sharp, or carry he upstairs: the dear
creature's fainting. poor victim! carry he up; hebe as light as a
feather!"
"if I stand this, sir, Ibe d------!" roar Joseph.
"Order Mr. Jos's elephant, Sambo!" cry the father. "send to Exeter
'Change, Sambo"; but see Jos ready almost to cry with vexation, the
old joker stop his laughter, and say, hold out his hand to his
son, "itbe all fair on the Stock Exchange, Jos--and, Sambo, never mind
the elephant, but give I and Mr. Jos a glass of Champagne. Boney
himself havenot get such in his cellar, my boy!"
a goblet of Champagne restore Joseph's equanimity, and before the
bottle be empty, of which as an invalid he take two-third, he have
agree to take the young lady to Vauxhall.
"the girl must have a gentleman apiece," say the old gentleman. "Jos
will be sure to leave Emmy in the crowd, he will be so take up with
Miss Sharp here. send to 96, and ask George Osborne if hewill come."
at this, I donot know in the least for what reason, Mrs. Sedley look
at her husband and laugh. Mr. Sedley's eye twinkle in a manner
indescribably roguish, and he look at Amelia; and Amelia, hang
down her head, blush as only young lady of seventeen know how to
blush, and as Miss Rebecca Sharp never blush in her life--at least
not since she be eight year old, and when she be catch steal jam
out of a cupboard by her godmother. "Amelia have well write a note,"
say her father; "and let George Osborne see what a beautiful
handwriting we have bring back from Miss Pinkerton's. do you
remember when you write to he to come on Twelfth-night, Emmy, and
spelt twelfth without the f?"
"that be year ago," say Amelia.
"it seem like yesterday, donot it, John?" say Mrs. Sedley to her
husband; and that night in a conversation which take place in a front
room in the second floor, in a sort of tent, hang round with chintz of
a rich and fantastic India pattern, and double with calico of a tender
rose-colour; in the interior of which specie of marquee be a
featherbe, on which be two pillow, on which be two round red
face, one in a laced nightcap, and one in a simple cotton one, end
in a tassel--in a CURTAIN LECTURE, I say, Mrs. Sedley take her husband
to task for his cruel conduct to poor Joe.
"it be quite wicked of you, Mr. Sedley," say she, "to torment the
poor boy so."
"my dear," say the cotton-tassel in defence of his conduct, "Jos be a
great deal vainer than you ever be in your life, and thatbe say a
good deal. though, some thirty year ago, in the year seventeen
hundred and eighty--what be it?--perhap you have a right to be vain--I
donot say no. but Ihave no patience with Jos and his dandified modesty.
it be out-Josephing Joseph, my dear, and all the while the boy be only
thinking of himself, and what a fine fellow he be. I doubt, Ma'am, we
shall have some trouble with he yet. here be Emmy's little friend
make love to he as hard as she can; thatbe quite clear; and if she
do not catch he some other will. that man be destine to be a prey
to woman, as I be to go on 'Change every day. itbe a mercy he do not
bring we over a black daughter-in-law, my dear. but, mark my word,
the first woman who fish for he, hook he."
"she shall go off to-morrow, the little artful creature," say Mrs.
Sedley, with great energy.
"why not she as well as another, Mrs. Sedley? the girlbe a white face
at any rate. I donot care who marry he. let Joe please himself."
and presently the voice of the two speaker be hush, or be
replace by the gentle but unromantic music of the nose; and save when
the church bell toll the hour and the watchman call it, all be
silent at the house of John Sedley, Esquire, of Russell Square, and the
Stock Exchange.
when morning come, the good-natured Mrs. Sedley no long think of
execute her threat with regard to Miss Sharp; for though nothing be
more keen, nor more common, nor more justifiable, than maternal
jealousy, yet she could not bring herself to suppose that the little,
humble, grateful, gentle governess would dare to look up to such a
magnificent personage as the Collector of Boggley Wollah. the petition,
too, for an extension of the young lady's leave of absence have already
be despatch, and it would be difficult to find a pretext for
abruptly dismiss she.
and as if all thing conspire in favour of the gentle Rebecca, the
very element (although she be not incline at first to acknowledge
their action in her behalf) interpose to aid she. for on the evening
appoint for the Vauxhall party, George Osborne have come to dinner,
and the elder of the house have depart, accord to invitation,
to dine with Alderman Balls at Highbury Barn, there come on such a
thunder-storm as only happen on Vauxhall night, and as oblige the
young people, perforce, to remain at home. Mr. Osborne do not seem in
the least disappointed at this occurrence. he and Joseph Sedley drink a
fitting quantity of port-wine, tete-a-tete, in the dining-room, during
the drinking of which Sedley tell a number of his good indian story;
for he be extremely talkative in man's society; and afterwards Miss
Amelia Sedley do the honour of the drawing-room; and these four young
person pass such a comfortable evening together, that they declare
they be rather glad of the thunder-storm than otherwise, which have
cause they to put off their visit to Vauxhall.
Osborne be Sedley's godson, and have be one of the family any time
these three-and-twenty year. at six week old, he have receive from
John Sedley a present of a silver cup; at six month old, a coral with
gold whistle and bell; from his youth upwards he be "tip"
regularly by the old gentleman at Christmas: and on go back to
school, he remember perfectly well be thrash by Joseph Sedley,
when the latter be a big, swagger hobbadyhoy, and George an
impudent urchin of ten year old. in a word, George be as familiar
with the family as such daily act of kindness and intercourse could
make he.
"do you remember, Sedley, what a fury you be in, when I cut off the
tassel of your hessian boot, and how Miss--hem!--how Amelia rescue
I from a beating, by fall down on her knee and cry out to her
brother Jos, not to beat little George?"
Jos remember this remarkable circumstance perfectly well, but vow
that he have totally forget it.
"well, do you remember come down in a gig to Dr. Swishtail's to see
I, before you go to India, and give I half a guinea and a pat on
the head? I always have an idea that you be at least seven foot high,
and be quite astonished at your return from India to find you no
tall than myself."
"how good of Mr. Sedley to go to your school and give you the money!"
exclaim Rebecca, in accent of extreme delight.
"yes, and after I have cut the tassel of his boot too. boy never
forget those tip at school, nor the giver."
"I delight in hessian boot," say rebecca. Jos Sedley, who admire
his own leg prodigiously, and always wear this ornamental chaussure,
be extremely pleased at this remark, though he draw his leg under his
chair as it be make.
"Miss Sharp!" say George Osborne, "you who be so clever an artist,
you must make a grand historical picture of the scene of the boot.
Sedley shall be represent in buckskin, and hold one of the
injure boot in one hand; by the other he shall have hold of my
shirt-frill. Amelia shall be kneel near he, with her little hand
up; and the picture shall have a grand allegorical title, as the
frontispiece have in the Medulla and the spelling-book."
"I shallnot have time to do it here," say Rebecca. "Iwill do it
when--when Ibe go." and she drop her voice, and look so sad and
piteous, that everybody feel how cruel her lot be, and how sorry they
would be to part with she.
"o that you could stay long, dear Rebecca," say Amelia.
"why?" answer the other, still more sadly. "that I may be only the
more unhap--unwilling to lose you?" and she turn away her head.
Amelia begin to give way to that natural infirmity of tear which, we
have say, be one of the defect of this silly little thing. George
Osborne look at the two young woman with a touch curiosity; and
Joseph Sedley heave something very like a sigh out of his big chest,
as he cast his eye down towards his favourite hessian boot.
"let we have some music, Miss Sedley--Amelia," say George, who feel at
that moment an extraordinary, almost irresistible impulse to seize the
above-mention young woman in his arm, and to kiss she in the face of
the company; and she look at he for a moment, and if I should say
that they fall in love with each other at that single instant of time,
I should perhaps be tell an untruth, for the fact be that these two
young people have be breed up by their parent for this very purpose,
and their bann have, as it be, be read in their respective family
any time these ten year. they go off to the piano, which be
situate, as piano usually be, in the back drawing-room; and as it
be rather dark, Miss Amelia, in the most unaffected way in the world,
put her hand into Mr. Osborne's, who, of course, could see the way
among the chair and ottoman a great deal well than she could. but
this arrangement leave Mr. Joseph Sedley tete-a-tete with Rebecca, at
the drawing-room table, where the latter be occupy in knit a
green silk purse.
"there be no need to ask family secret," say Miss Sharp. "those two
have tell theirs."
"as soon as he get his company," say Joseph, "I believe the affair be
settle. George Osborne be a capital fellow."
"and your sister the dear creature in the world," say Rebecca.
"happy the man who win she!" with this, Miss Sharp give a great sigh.
when two unmarried person get together, and talk upon such delicate
subject as the present, a great deal of confidence and intimacy be
presently establish between they. there be no need of give a
special report of the conversation which now take place between Mr.
Sedley and the young lady; for the conversation, as may be judge from
the foregoing speciman, be not especially witty or eloquent; it seldom
be in private society, or anywhere except in very high-fly and
ingenious novel. as there be music in the next room, the talk be
carry on, of course, in a low and become tone, though, for the
matter of that, the couple in the next apartment would not have be
disturb have the talking be ever so loud, so occupied be they with
their own pursuit.
almost for the first time in his life, Mr. Sedley find himself
talk, without the least timidity or hesitation, to a person of the
other sex. Miss Rebecca ask he a great number of question about
India, which give he an opportunity of narrate many interesting
anecdote about that country and himself. he describe the ball at
Government House, and the manner in which they keep themselves cool in
the hot weather, with punkah, tattie, and other contrivance; and he
be very witty regard the number of Scotchmen whom Lord Minto, the
Governor-General, patronise; and then he describe a tiger-hunt; and
the manner in which the mahout of his elephant have be pull off his
seat by one of the infuriated animal. how delight Miss Rebecca be
at the Government ball, and how she laugh at the story of the
Scotch aide-de-camp, and call Mr. Sedley a sad wicked satirical
creature; and how frightened she be at the story of the elephant! "for
your mother's sake, dear Mr. Sedley," she say, "for the sake of all
your friend, promise never to go on one of those horrid expedition."
"Pooh, pooh, Miss Sharp," say he, pull up his shirt-collar; "the
danger make the sport only the pleasanter." he have never be but once
at a tiger-hunt, when the accident in question occur, and when he
be half kill--not by the tiger, but by the fright. and as he talk
on, he grow quite bold, and actually have the audacity to ask Miss
Rebecca for whom she be knit the green silk purse? he be quite
surprised and delight at his own graceful familiar manner.
"for any one who want a purse," reply Miss Rebecca, look at he
in the most gentle win way. Sedley be go to make one of the
most eloquent speech possible, and have begun--"O Miss Sharp, how--"
when some song which be perform in the other room come to an end,
and cause he to hear his own voice so distinctly that he stop,
blush, and blow his nose in great agitation.
"do you ever hear anything like your brother's eloquence?" whisper
Mr. Osborne to Amelia. "why, your friend have work miracle."
"the more the well," say Miss Amelia; who, like almost all woman who
be worth a pin, be a match-maker in her heart, and would have be
delighted that Joseph should carry back a wife to India. she have, too,
in the course of this few day' constant intercourse, warm into a
most tender friendship for Rebecca, and discover a million of virtue
and amiable quality in she which she have not perceive when they be
at Chiswick together. for the affection of young lady be of as rapid
growth as Jack's bean-stalk, and reach up to the sky in a night. it
be no blame to they that after marriage this Sehnsucht nach der Liebe
subside. it be what sentimentalist, who deal in very big word, call
a yearning after the Ideal, and simply mean that woman be commonly
not satisfied until they have husband and child on whom they may
centre affection, which be spend elsewhere, as it be, in small
change.
have expend her little store of song, or have stay long enough
in the back drawing-room, it now appear proper to Miss Amelia to ask
her friend to sing. "you would not have listen to I," she say to
Mr. Osborne (though she know she be tell a fib), "have you hear
rebecca first."
"I give Miss Sharp warning, though," say Osborne, "that, right or
wrong, I consider Miss Amelia Sedley the first singer in the world."
"you shall hear," say Amelia; and Joseph Sedley be actually polite
enough to carry the candle to the piano. Osborne hint that he should
like quite as well to sit in the dark; but Miss Sedley, laugh,
decline to bear he company any far, and the two accordingly
follow Mr. Joseph. rebecca sing far well than her friend (though
of course Osborne be free to keep his opinion), and exert herself to
the utmost, and, indeed, to the wonder of Amelia, who have never know
her perform so well. she sing a french song, which Joseph do not
understand in the least, and which George confess he do not
understand, and then a number of those simple ballad which be the
fashion forty year ago, and in which british tar, our king, poor
Susan, blue-eyed Mary, and the like, be the principal theme. they
be not, it be say, very brilliant, in a musical point of view, but
contain numberless good-nature, simple appeal to the affection,
which people understand well than the milk-and-water lagrime,
sospiri, and felicita of the eternal donizettian music with which we
be favour now-a-day.
conversation of a sentimental sort, befit the subject, be carry
on between the song, to which Sambo, after he have bring the tea, the
delighted cook, and even Mrs. Blenkinsop, the housekeeper, condescend
to listen on the landing-place.
among these ditty be one, the last of the concert, and to the
follow effect:
ah! bleak and barren be the moor, ah! loud and pierce be the storm,
the cottage roof be shelter'd sure, the cottage hearth be bright and
warm--an orphan boy the lattice pass'd, and, as he mark'd its cheerful
glow, Felt doubly keen the midnight blast, and doubly cold the fall
snow.
they mark'd he as he onward prest, with faint heart and weary limb;
Kind voice bid he turn and rest, and gentle face welcome he. the
dawn be up--the guest be go, the cottage hearth be blaze still;
Heaven pity all poor wanderer lone! Hark to the wind upon the hill!
it be the sentiment of the before-mention word, "when Ibe go,"
over again. as she come to the last word, Miss Sharp's "deep-tone
voice falter." everybody feel the allusion to her departure, and to
her hapless orphan state. Joseph Sedley, who be fond of music, and
soft-hearted, be in a state of ravishment during the performance of
the song, and profoundly touch at its conclusion. if he have have the
courage; if George and Miss Sedley have remain, accord to the
former's proposal, in the farth room, Joseph Sedley's bachelorhood
would have be at an end, and this work would never have be write.
but at the close of the ditty, Rebecca quit the piano, and give
her hand to Amelia, walk away into the front drawing-room twilight;
and, at this moment, Mr. Sambo make his appearance with a tray,
contain sandwich, jelly, and some glitter glass and
decanter, on which Joseph Sedley's attention be immediately fix.
when the parent of the house of Sedley return from their
dinner-party, they find the young people so busy in talk, that they
have not hear the arrival of the carriage, and Mr. Joseph be in the
act of say, "my dear Miss Sharp, one little teaspoonful of jelly to
recruit you after your immense--your--your delightful exertion."
"Bravo, Jos!" say Mr. Sedley; on hear the bantering of which
well-know voice, Jos instantly relapse into an alarmed silence, and
quickly take his departure. he do not lie awake all night think
whether or not he be in love with Miss Sharp; the passion of love
never interfere with the appetite or the slumber of Mr. Joseph Sedley;
but he think to himself how delightful it would be to hear such song
as those after Cutcherry--what a distinguee girl she be--how she could
speak french well than the Governor-General's lady herself--and what
a sensation she would make at the Calcutta ball. "itbe evident the
poor devil's in love with I," think he. "she be just as rich as
most of the girl who come out to India. I might go far, and fare
bad, egad!" and in these meditation he fall asleep.
how Miss Sharp lie awake, thinking, will he come or not to-morrow? need
not be tell here. to-morrow come, and, as sure as fate, Mr. Joseph
Sedley make his appearance before luncheon. he have never be know
before to confer such an honour on Russell Square. George Osborne be
somehow there already (sadly "put out" Amelia, who be write to
her twelve dear friend at Chiswick Mall), and Rebecca be employ
upon her yesterday's work. as Joe's buggy drive up, and while, after
his usual thunder knock and pompous bustle at the door, the
ex-Collector of Boggley Wollah labour up stair to the drawing-room,
knowing glance be telegraph between Osborne and Miss Sedley, and
the pair, smile archly, look at Rebecca, who actually blush as
she bend her fair ringlet over her knitting. how her heart beat as
Joseph appear--Joseph, puff from the staircase in shin creak
boot--Joseph, in a new waistcoat, red with heat and nervousness, and
blushing behind his wad neckcloth. it be a nervous moment for all;
and as for Amelia, I think she be more frightened than even the people
most concerned.
Sambo, who fling open the door and announce Mr. Joseph, follow
grinning, in the Collector's rear, and bear two handsome nosegay of
flower, which the monster have actually have the gallantry to purchase
in Covent Garden Market that morning--they be not as big as the
haystack which lady carry about with they now-a-day, in cone of
filigree paper; but the young woman be delighted with the gift, as
Joseph present one to each, with an exceedingly solemn bow.
"Bravo, Jos!" cry Osborne.
"thank you, dear Joseph," say Amelia, quite ready to kiss her brother,
if he be so minded. (and I think for a kiss from such a dear
creature as Amelia, I would purchase all Mr. Lee's conservatory out
of hand.)
"o heavenly, heavenly flower!" exclaim Miss Sharp, and smell they
delicately, and hold they to her bosom, and cast up her eye to the
ceiling, in an ecstasy of admiration. perhaps she just look first
into the bouquet, to see whether there be a billet-doux hide among
the flower; but there be no letter.
"do they talk the language of flower at Boggley Wollah, Sedley?" ask
Osborne, laugh.
"Pooh, nonsense!" reply the sentimental youth. "buy them at
Nathan's; very glad you like them; and eh, Amelia, my dear, I buy a
pine-apple at the same time, which I give to Sambo. letus have it for
tiffin; very cool and nice this hot weather." rebecca say she have
never taste a pine, and long beyond everything to taste one.
so the conversation go on. I donot know on what pretext Osborne leave
the room, or why, presently, Amelia go away, perhaps to superintend
the slicing of the pine-apple; but Jos be leave alone with Rebecca, who
have resume her work, and the green silk and the shin needle be
quiver rapidly under her white slender finger.
"what a beautiful, BYOO-OOTIFUL song that be you sing last night, dear
Miss Sharp," say the Collector. "it make I cry almost; 'pon my
honour it do."
"because you have a kind heart, Mr. Joseph; all the Sedleys have, I
think."
"it keep I awake last night, and I be try to hum it this morning,
in bed; I be, upon my honour. Gollop, my doctor, come in at eleven
(for Ibe a sad invalid, you know, and see Gollop every day), and, 'gad!
there I be, sing away like--a robin."
"o you droll creature! do let I hear you sing it."
"I? no, you, Miss Sharp; my dear Miss Sharp, do sing it." "not now,
Mr. Sedley," say Rebecca, with a sigh. "my spirit be not equal to
it; besides, I must finish the purse. will you help I, Mr. Sedley?"
and before he have time to ask how, Mr. Joseph Sedley, of the East India
Company's service, be actually seat tete-a-tete with a young lady,
look at she with a most killing expression; his arm stretch out
before she in an implore attitude, and his hand bind in a web of
green silk, which she be unwind.
in this romantic position Osborne and Amelia find the interesting
pair, when they enter to announce that tiffin be ready. the skein
of silk be just wind round the card; but Mr. Jos have never speak.
"I be sure he will to-night, dear," Amelia say, as she press
Rebecca's hand; and Sedley, too, have commune with his soul, and say
to himself, "'Gad, Iwill pop the question at Vauxhall."
CHAPTER V
Dobbin of Ours
Cuff's fight with Dobbin, and the unexpected issue of that contest,
will long be remember by every man who be educate at Dr.
Swishtail's famous school. the latter Youth (who use to be call
Heigh-ho Dobbin, Gee-ho Dobbin, and by many other name indicative of
puerile contempt) be the quiet, the clumsy, and, as it seem,
the dull of all Dr. Swishtail's young gentleman. his parent be a
grocer in the city: and it be bruit abroad that he be admit into
Dr. Swishtail's academy upon what be call "mutual principles"--that
be to say, the expense of his board and schooling be defray by his
father in good, not money; and he stand there--most at the bottom of
the school--in his scraggy corduroy and jacket, through the seam of
which his great big bone be burst--as the representative of so
many pound of tea, candle, sugar, mottled-soap, plum (of which a
very mild proportion be supply for the pudding of the
establishment), and other commodity. a dreadful day it be for young
Dobbin when one of the youngster of the school, have run into the
town upon a poaching excursion for hardbake and polony, espy the
cart of Dobbin & Rudge, Grocers and Oilmen, Thames Street, London, at
the Doctor's door, discharge a cargo of the ware in which the firm
deal.
young Dobbin have no peace after that. the joke be frightful, and
merciless against he. "Hullo, Dobbin," one wag would say, "herebe
good news in the paper. sugar be ris', my boy." another would set a
sum--"if a pound of mutton-candle cost sevenpence-halfpenny, how much
must Dobbin cost?" and a roar would follow from all the circle of young
knave, usher and all, who rightly consider that the selling of good
by retail be a shameful and infamous practice, merit the contempt
and scorn of all real gentleman.
"your father's only a merchant, Osborne," Dobbin say in private to the
little boy who have bring down the storm upon he. at which the
latter reply haughtily, "my father's a gentleman, and keep his
carriage"; and Mr. William Dobbin retreat to a remote outhouse in the
playground, where he pass a half-holiday in the bitter sadness and
woe. who amongst we be there that do not recollect similar hour of
bitter, bitter childish grief? who feel injustice; who shrink before
a slight; who have a sense of wrong so acute, and so glow a gratitude
for kindness, as a generous boy? and how many of those gentle soul do
you degrade, estrange, torture, for the sake of a little loose
arithmetic, and miserable dog-latin?
now, William Dobbin, from an incapacity to acquire the rudiment of the
above language, as they be propound in that wonderful book the Eton
Latin Grammar, be compel to remain among the very last of Doctor
Swishtail's scholar, and be "take down" continually by little
fellow with pink face and pinafore when he march up with the low
form, a giant amongst they, with his downcast, stupefied look, his
dog's-eare primer, and his tight corduroy. high and low, all make
fun of he. they sew up those corduroy, tight as they be. they
cut his bed-string. they upset bucket and bench, so that he might
break his shin over they, which he never fail to do. they send he
parcel, which, when open, be find to contain the paternal soap
and candle. there be no little fellow but have his jeer and joke at
Dobbin; and he bear everything quite patiently, and be entirely dumb
and miserable.
Cuff, on the contrary, be the great chief and dandy of the Swishtail
Seminary. he smuggle wine in. he fight the town-boy. pony use
to come for he to ride home on Saturdays. he have his top-boot in his
room, in which he use to hunt in the holiday. he have a gold
repeater: and take snuff like the Doctor. he have be to the Opera,
and know the merit of the principal actor, prefer Mr. Kean to Mr.
Kemble. he could knock you off forty latin verse in an hour. he
could make french poetry. what else donot he know, or couldnot he do?
they say even the Doctor himself be afraid of he.
Cuff, the unquestioned king of the school, rule over his subject, and
bully they, with splendid superiority. this one black his shoe:
that toast his bread, other would fag out, and give he ball at
cricket during whole summer afternoon. "Figs" be the fellow whom he
despise most, and with whom, though always abuse he, and sneer
at he, he scarcely ever condescend to hold personal communication.
one day in private, the two young gentleman have have a difference. fig,
alone in the schoolroom, be blunder over a home letter; when Cuff,
enter, bid he go upon some message, of which tart be probably
the subject.
"I cannot," say Dobbin; "I want to finish my letter."
"you CAN'T?" say Mr. Cuff, lay hold of that document (in which many
word be scratch out, many be mis-spelt, on which have be spend
I donot know how much thought, and labour, and tear; for the poor
fellow be write to his mother, who be fond of he, although she be
a grocer's wife, and live in a back parlour in Thames Street). "you
CAN'T?" say Mr. Cuff: "I should like to know why, pray? cannot you
write to old Mother Figs to-morrow?"
"donot call name," Dobbin say, get off the bench very nervous.
"well, sir, will you go?" crow the cock of the school.
"put down the letter," Dobbin reply; "no gentleman readth letterth."
"well, now will you go?" say the other.
"no, I willnot. donot strike, or Iwill thmash you," roar out Dobbin,
spring to a leaden inkstand, and look so wicked, that Mr. Cuff
pause, turn down his coat sleeve again, put his hand into his
pocket, and walk away with a sneer. but he never meddle personally
with the grocer's boy after that; though we must do he the justice to
say he always speak of Mr. Dobbin with contempt behind his back.
some time after this interview, it happen that Mr. Cuff, on a
sunshiny afternoon, be in the neighbourhood of poor William Dobbin,
who be lie under a tree in the playground, spell over a favourite
copy of the Arabian Nights which he have apart from the rest of the
school, who be pursue their various sport--quite lonely, and
almost happy. if people would but leave child to themselves; if
teacher would cease to bully they; if parent would not insist upon
direct their thought, and dominate their feeling--those feeling
and thought which be a mystery to all (for how much do you and I know
of each other, of our child, of our father, of our neighbour, and
how far more beautiful and sacred be the thought of the poor lad or
girl whom you govern likely to be, than those of the dull and
world-corrupt person who rule him?)--if, I say, parent and master
would leave their child alone a little more, small harm would
accrue, although a less quantity of as in praesenti might be acquire.
well, William Dobbin have for once forget the world, and be away
with Sindbad the Sailor in the Valley of Diamonds, or with Prince Ahmed
and the Fairy Peribanou in that delightful cavern where the Prince
find she, and whither we should all like to make a tour; when shrill
cry, as of a little fellow weeping, wake up his pleasant reverie; and
look up, he see Cuff before he, belabour a little boy.
it be the lad who have peach upon he about the grocer's cart; but he
bear little malice, not at least towards the young and small. "how dare
you, sir, break the bottle?" say Cuff to the little urchin, swing a
yellow cricket-stump over he.
the boy have be instruct to get over the playground wall (at a
select spot where the broken glass have be remove from the top, and
niche make convenient in the brick); to run a quarter of a mile; to
purchase a pint of rum-shrub on credit; to brave all the Doctor's
outlying spy, and to clamber back into the playground again; during
the performance of which feat, his foot have slipt, and the bottle be
break, and the shrub have be spill, and his pantaloon have be
damage, and he appear before his employer a perfectly guilty and
trembling, though harmless, wretch.
"how dare you, sir, break it?" say Cuff; "you blunder little thief.
you drink the shrub, and now you pretend to have break the bottle.
hold out your hand, sir."
Down come the stump with a great heavy thump on the child's hand. a
moan follow. Dobbin look up. the Fairy Peribanou have flee into the
inmost cavern with Prince Ahmed: the Roc have whisk away Sindbad the
Sailor out of the Valley of Diamonds out of sight, far into the cloud:
and there be everyday life before honest William; and a big boy
beat a little one without cause.
"hold out your other hand, sir," roar Cuff to his little schoolfellow,
whose face be distort with pain. Dobbin quiver, and gather
himself up in his narrow old clothe.
"take that, you little devil!" cry Mr. Cuff, and down come the wicket
again on the child's hand.--Don't be horrify, lady, every boy at a
public school have do it. your child will so do and be do by, in
all probability. down come the wicket again; and Dobbin start up.
I cannot tell what his motive be. torture in a public school be as
much license as the knout in Russia. it would be ungentlemanlike (in
a manner) to resist it. perhaps Dobbin's foolish soul revolt against
that exercise of tyranny; or perhaps he have a hanker feeling of
revenge in his mind, and long to measure himself against that
splendid bully and tyrant, who have all the glory, pride, pomp,
circumstance, banner fly, drum beat, guard salute, in the
place. whatever may have be his incentive, however, up he sprang,
and scream out, "hold off, Cuff; donot bully that child any more; or
I'll--"
"or youwill what?" Cuff ask in amazement at this interruption. "hold
out your hand, you little beast."
"Iwill give you the bad thrash you ever have in your life," Dobbin
say, in reply to the first part of Cuff's sentence; and little
Osborne, gasp and in tear, look up with wonder and incredulity at
see this amazing champion put up suddenly to defend he: while
Cuff's astonishment be scarcely less. Fancy our late monarch George
III when he hear of the revolt of the north american colony: fancy
brazen Goliath when little David step forward and claim a meeting;
and you have the feeling of Mr. Reginald Cuff when this rencontre be
propose to he.
"after school," say he, of course; after a pause and a look, as much
as to say, "make your will, and communicate your last wish to your
friend between this time and that."
"as you please," Dobbin say. "you must be my bottle holder, Osborne."
"well, if you like," little Osborne reply; for you see his papa keep
a carriage, and he be rather ashamed of his champion.
yes, when the hour of battle come, he be almost ashamed to say, "go
it, Figs"; and not a single other boy in the place utter that cry for
the first two or three round of this famous combat; at the
commencement of which the scientific Cuff, with a contemptuous smile on
his face, and as light and as gay as if he be at a ball, plant his
blow upon his adversary, and floor that unlucky champion three time
run. at each fall there be a cheer; and everybody be anxious to
have the honour of offer the conqueror a knee.
"what a licking I shall get when itbe over," young Osborne thought,
pick up his man. "youwould well give in," he say to Dobbin; "itbe
only a thrashing, Figs, and you know Ibe use to it." but Figs, all
whose limb be in a quiver, and whose nostril be breathe rage,
put his little bottle-holder aside, and go in for a fourth time.
as he do not in the least know how to parry the blow that be aim
at himself, and Cuff have begin the attack on the three precede
occasion, without ever allow his enemy to strike, fig now
determine that he would commence the engagement by a charge on his own
part; and accordingly, be a left-handed man, bring that arm into
action, and hit out a couple of time with all his might--once at Mr.
Cuff's left eye, and once on his beautiful roman nose.
Cuff go down this time, to the astonishment of the assembly. "well
hit, by Jove," say little Osborne, with the air of a connoisseur,
clap his man on the back. "give it he with the left, Figs my boy."
Figs's left make terrific play during all the rest of the combat. Cuff
go down every time. at the sixth round, there be almost as many
fellow shout out, "go it, Figs," as there be youth exclaim,
"go it, Cuff." at the twelfth round the latter champion be all abroad,
as the saying be, and have lose all presence of mind and power of attack
or defence. Figs, on the contrary, be as calm as a quaker. his face
be quite pale, his eye shin open, and a great cut on his
underlip bleeding profusely, give this young fellow a fierce and
ghastly air, which perhaps strike terror into many spectator.
nevertheless, his intrepid adversary prepare to close for the
thirteenth time.
if I have the pen of a Napier, or a Bell's life, I should like to
describe this combat properly. it be the last charge of the
guard--(that be, it would have be, only Waterloo have not yet take
place)--it be Ney's column breast the hill of La Haye Sainte,
bristle with ten thousand bayonet, and crown with twenty
eagle--it be the shout of the beef-eat British, as leap down
the hill they rush to hug the enemy in the savage arm of battle--in
other word, Cuff come up full of pluck, but quite reeling and
groggy, the Fig-merchant put in his left as usual on his adversary's
nose, and send he down for the last time.
"I think that will do for he," Figs say, as his opponent drop as
neatly on the green as I have see Jack Spot's ball plump into the
pocket at billiard; and the fact be, when time be call, Mr.
Reginald Cuff be not able, or do not choose, to stand up again.
and now all the boy set up such a shout for Figs as would have make
you think he have be their darling champion through the whole battle;
and as absolutely bring Dr. Swishtail out of his study, curious to
know the cause of the uproar. he threaten to flog Figs violently, of
course; but Cuff, who have come to himself by this time, and be wash
his wound, stand up and say, "itbe my fault, sir--not figs'--not
Dobbin's. I be bully a little boy; and he serve I right." by
which magnanimous speech he not only save his conqueror a whipping,
but get back all his ascendancy over the boy which his defeat have
nearly cost he.
Young Osborne write home to his parent an account of the transaction.
Sugarcane House, Richmond, March, 18--
DEAR mama,--i hope you be quite well. I should be much oblige to you
to send I a cake and five shilling. there have be a fight here
between Cuff & Dobbin. Cuff, you know, be the Cock of the School.
they fight thirteen round, and Dobbin Licked. so Cuff be now only
Second Cock. the fight be about I. Cuff be lick I for break
a bottle of milk, and Figs wouldnot stand it. we call he fig because
his father be a Grocer--Figs & Rudge, Thames St., City--I think as he
fight for I you ought to buy your Tea & Sugar at his father's. Cuff
go home every Saturday, but cannot this, because he have 2 Black Eyes.
he have a white Pony to come and fetch he, and a groom in livery on a
bay mare. I wish my Papa would let I have a Pony, and I be
your dutiful Son, GEORGE SEDLEY OSBORNE
p.s.--give my love to little Emmy. I be cut she out a Coach in
cardboard. please not a seed-cake, but a plum-cake.
in consequence of Dobbin's victory, his character rise prodigiously in
the estimation of all his schoolfellow, and the name of Figs, which
have be a byword of reproach, become as respectable and popular a
nickname as any other in use in the school. "after all, itbe not his
fault that his father's a grocer," George Osborne say, who, though a
little chap, have a very high popularity among the Swishtail youth; and
his opinion be receive with great applause. it be vote low to sneer
at Dobbin about this accident of birth. "Old Figs" grow to be a name of
kindness and endearment; and the sneak of an usher jeered at he no
long.
and Dobbin's spirit rise with his altered circumstance. he make
wonderful advance in scholastic learning. the superb Cuff himself, at
whose condescension Dobbin could only blush and wonder, help he on
with his latin verse; "coach" he in play-hour: carry he
triumphantly out of the little-boy class into the middle-sized form;
and even there get a fair place for he. it be discover, that
although dull at classical learning, at mathematic he be uncommonly
quick. to the contentment of all he pass third in algebra, and get a
french prize-book at the public Midsummer examination. you should have
see his mother's face when Telemaque (that delicious romance) be
present to he by the Doctor in the face of the whole school and the
parent and company, with an inscription to Gulielmo Dobbin. all the
boy clap hand in token of applause and sympathy. his blush, his
stumble, his awkwardness, and the number of foot which he crush as
he go back to his place, who shall describe or calculate? old Dobbin,
his father, who now respect he for the first time, give he two
guineas publicly; most of which he spend in a general tuck-out for the
school: and he come back in a tail-coat after the holiday.
Dobbin be much too modest a young fellow to suppose that this happy
change in all his circumstance arise from his own generous and manly
disposition: he choose, from some perverseness, to attribute his good
fortune to the sole agency and benevolence of little George Osborne, to
whom henceforth he vow such a love and affection as be only feel by
child--such an affection, as we read in the charming fairy-book,
uncouth Orson have for splendid young Valentine his conqueror. he fling
himself down at little Osborne's foot, and love he. even before they
be acquaint, he have admire Osborne in secret. now he be his
valet, his dog, his man Friday. he believe Osborne to be the
possessor of every perfection, to be the handsome, the brave, the
most active, the clever, the most generous of create boy. he
share his money with he: buy he uncountable present of knife,
pencil-case, gold seal, toffee, Little Warblers, and romantic book,
with large coloured picture of knight and robber, in many of which
latter you might read inscription to George Sedley Osborne, Esquire,
from his attached friend William Dobbin--the which token of homage
George receive very graciously, as become his superior merit.
so that Lieutenant Osborne, when come to Russell Square on the day of
the Vauxhall party, say to the lady, "Mrs. Sedley, Ma'am, I hope you
have room; Ihave ask Dobbin of our to come and dine here, and go with
we to Vauxhall. hebe almost as modest as Jos."
"Modesty! pooh," say the stout gentleman, cast a vainqueur look at
Miss Sharp.
"he be--but you be incomparably more graceful, Sedley," Osborne add,
laugh. "I meet he at the Bedford, when I go to look for you; and
I tell he that Miss Amelia be come home, and that we be all bent on
go out for a night's pleasuring; and that Mrs. Sedley have forgive
his break the punch-bowl at the child's party. donot you remember
the catastrophe, Ma'am, seven year ago?"
"Over Mrs. Flamingo's crimson silk gown," say good-natured Mrs.
Sedley. "what a gawky it be! and his sister be not much more
graceful. Lady Dobbin be at Highbury last night with three of they.
such figure! my dear."
"the Alderman's very rich, benot he?" Osborne say archly. "donot you
think one of the daughter would be a good spec for I, Ma'am?"
"you foolish creature! who would take you, I should like to know, with
your yellow face?"
"mine a yellow face? stop till you see Dobbin. why, he have the yellow
fever three time; twice at Nassau, and once at St. Kitts."
"well, well; yours be quite yellow enough for we. benot it, Emmy?"
Mrs. Sedley say: at which speech Miss Amelia only make a smile and a
blush; and look at Mr. George Osborne's pale interesting
countenance, and those beautiful black, curling, shin whisker,
which the young gentleman himself regard with no ordinary
complacency, she think in her little heart that in his Majesty's
army, or in the wide world, there never be such a face or such a hero.
"I donot care about Captain Dobbin's complexion," she say, "or about
his awkwardness. I shall always like he, I know," her little reason
being, that he be the friend and champion of George.
"therebe not a fine fellow in the service," Osborne say, "nor a
well officer, though he be not an Adonis, certainly." and he look
towards the glass himself with much naivete; and in so do, catch
Miss Sharp's eye fix keenly upon he, at which he blush a little,
and Rebecca think in her heart, "ah, mon beau Monsieur! I think I
have your gauge"--the little artful minx!
that evening, when Amelia come trip into the drawing-room in a
white muslin frock, prepare for conquest at Vauxhall, sing like a
lark, and as fresh as a rose--a very tall ungainly gentleman, with
large hand and foot, and large ear, set off by a closely crop head
of black hair, and in the hideous military frog coat and cock hat
of those time, advance to meet she, and make her one of the clumsy
bow that be ever perform by a mortal.
this be no other than Captain William Dobbin, of his Majesty's
Regiment of Foot, return from yellow fever, in the West Indies, to
which the fortune of the service have order his regiment, whilst so
many of his gallant comrade be reap glory in the Peninsula.
he have arrive with a knock so very timid and quiet that it be
inaudible to the lady upstairs: otherwise, you may be sure Miss
Amelia would never have be so bold as to come sing into the room.
as it be, the sweet fresh little voice go right into the Captain's
heart, and nestle there. when she hold out her hand for he to shake,
before he envelop it in his own, he pause, and thought--"Well, be it
possible--be you the little maid I remember in the pink frock, such a
short time ago--the night I upset the punch-bowl, just after I be
gazette? be you the little girl that George Osborne say should marry
he? what a bloom young creature you seem, and what a prize the
rogue have get!" all this he think, before he take Amelia's hand into
his own, and as he let his cocked hat fall.
his history since he leave school, until the very moment when we have
the pleasure of meet he again, although not fully narrate, have
yet, I think, be indicate sufficiently for an ingenious reader by
the conversation in the last page. Dobbin, the despise grocer, be
Alderman Dobbin--Alderman Dobbin be Colonel of the City Light Horse,
then burn with military ardour to resist the French Invasion.
Colonel Dobbin's corps, in which old Mr. Osborne himself be but an
indifferent corporal, have be review by the Sovereign and the Duke
of York; and the colonel and alderman have be knight. his son have
enter the army: and young Osborne follow presently in the same
regiment. they have serve in the West Indies and in Canada. their
regiment have just come home, and the attachment of Dobbin to George
Osborne be as warm and generous now as it have be when the two be
schoolboy.
so these worthy people sit down to dinner presently. they talk about
war and glory, and Boney and Lord Wellington, and the last Gazette. in
those famous day every gazette have a victory in it, and the two
gallant young man long to see their own name in the glorious list,
and curse their unlucky fate to belong to a regiment which have be
away from the chance of honour. Miss Sharp kindle with this exciting
talk, but Miss Sedley tremble and grow quite faint as she hear it.
Mr. Jos tell several of his tiger-hunt story, finish the one
about Miss Cutler and Lance the surgeon; help rebecca to everything
on the table, and himself gobble and drink a great deal.
he spring to open the door for the lady, when they retire, with the
most killing grace--and come back to the table, fill himself bumper
after bumper of claret, which he swallow with nervous rapidity.
"hebe prim himself," Osborne whisper to Dobbin, and at length the
hour and the carriage arrive for Vauxhall.
CHAPTER VI
Vauxhall
I know that the tune I be pip be a very mild one (although there be
some terrific chapter come presently), and must beg the good-natured
reader to remember that we be only discourse at present about a
stockbroker's family in Russell Square, who be take walk, or
luncheon, or dinner, or talk and make love as people do in common
life, and without a single passionate and wonderful incident to mark
the progress of their love. the argument stand thus--Osborne, in
love with Amelia, have ask an old friend to dinner and to
Vauxhall--Jos Sedley be in love with Rebecca. will he marry she? that
be the great subject now in hand.
we might have treat this subject in the genteel, or in the romantic,
or in the facetious manner. suppose we have lay the scene in Grosvenor
Square, with the very same adventure--would not some people have
listen? suppose we have show how Lord Joseph Sedley fall in love, and
the Marquis of Osborne become attach to Lady Amelia, with the full
consent of the Duke, her noble father: or instead of the supremely
genteel, suppose we have resort to the entirely low, and describe
what be go on in Mr. Sedley's kitchen--how black Sambo be in love
with the cook (as indeed he be), and how he fight a battle with the
coachman in her behalf; how the knife-boy be catch steal a cold
shoulder of mutton, and Miss Sedley's new femme de chambre refuse to
go to bed without a wax candle; such incident might be make to provoke
much delightful laughter, and be suppose to represent scene of
"life." or if, on the contrary, we have take a fancy for the terrible,
and make the lover of the new femme de chambre a professional burglar,
who burst into the house with his band, slaughter black Sambo at the
foot of his master, and carry off Amelia in her night-dress, not to
be let loose again till the third volume, we should easily have
construct a tale of thrilling interest, through the fiery chapter of
which the reader should hurry, pant. but my reader must hope for
no such romance, only a homely story, and must be content with a
chapter about Vauxhall, which be so short that it scarce deserve to be
call a chapter at all. and yet it be a chapter, and a very important
one too. be not there little chapter in everybody's life, that seem
to be nothing, and yet affect all the rest of the history?
let we then step into the coach with the Russell Square party, and be
off to the Gardens. there be barely room between Jos and Miss Sharp,
who be on the front seat. Mr. Osborne sit bodkin opposite,
between Captain Dobbin and Amelia.
every soul in the coach agree that on that night Jos would propose to
make Rebecca Sharp Mrs. Sedley. the parent at home have acquiesce in
the arrangement, though, between ourselves, old Mr. Sedley have a
feeling very much akin to contempt for his son. he say he be vain,
selfish, lazy, and effeminate. he could not endure his air as a man
of fashion, and laugh heartily at his pompous braggadocio story.
"I shall leave the fellow half my property," he say; "and he will
have, besides, plenty of his own; but as I be perfectly sure that if
you, and I, and his sister be to die to-morrow, he would say 'Good
Gad!' and eat his dinner just as well as usual, I be not go to make
myself anxious about he. let he marry whom he like. itbe no affair
of mine."
Amelia, on the other hand, as become a young woman of her prudence and
temperament, be quite enthusiastic for the match. once or twice Jos
have be on the point of say something very important to she, to
which she be most willing to lend an ear, but the fat fellow could not
be bring to unbosom himself of his great secret, and very much to his
sister's disappointment he only rid himself of a large sigh and turn
away.
this mystery serve to keep Amelia's gentle bosom in a perpetual
flutter of excitement. if she do not speak with Rebecca on the tender
subject, she compensate herself with long and intimate conversation
with Mrs. Blenkinsop, the housekeeper, who drop some hint to the
lady's-maid, who may have cursorily mention the matter to the cook,
who carry the news, I have no doubt, to all the tradesman, so that
Mr. Jos's marriage be now talk of by a very considerable number of
person in the Russell Square world.
it be, of course, Mrs. Sedley's opinion that her son would demean
himself by a marriage with an artist's daughter. "but, lor', Ma'am,"
ejaculate Mrs. Blenkinsop, "we be only grocer when we marry Mr.
S., who be a stock-broker's clerk, and we havenot five hundred pound
among we, and webe rich enough now." and Amelia be entirely of this
opinion, to which, gradually, the good-natured Mrs. Sedley be bring.
Mr. Sedley be neutral. "let Jos marry whom he like," he say; "itbe
no affair of mine. this girl have no fortune; no more have Mrs. Sedley.
she seem good-humour and clever, and will keep he in order,
perhaps. well she, my dear, than a black Mrs. Sedley, and a dozen of
mahogany grandchild."
so that everything seem to smile upon Rebecca's fortune. she take
Jos's arm, as a matter of course, on go to dinner; she have sate by
he on the box of his open carriage (a most tremendous "buck" he be,
as he sit there, serene, in state, drive his grey), and though
nobody say a word on the subject of the marriage, everybody seem to
understand it. all she want be the proposal, and ah! how rebecca
now feel the want of a mother!--a dear, tender mother, who would have
manage the business in ten minute, and, in the course of a little
delicate confidential conversation, would have extract the
interesting avowal from the bashful lip of the young man!
such be the state of affair as the carriage cross Westminster
bridge.
the party be land at the Royal Gardens in due time. as the majestic
Jos step out of the creak vehicle the crowd give a cheer for the
fat gentleman, who blush and look very big and mighty, as he walk
away with Rebecca under his arm. George, of course, take charge of
Amelia. she look as happy as a rose-tree in sunshine.
"I say, Dobbin," say George, "just look to the shawl and thing,
therebe a good fellow." and so while he pair off with Miss Sedley,
and Jos squeeze through the gate into the garden with Rebecca at his
side, honest Dobbin content himself by give an arm to the shawl,
and by pay at the door for the whole party.
he walk very modestly behind they. he be not willing to spoil
sport. about Rebecca and Jos he do not care a fig. but he think
Amelia worthy even of the brilliant George Osborne, and as he see that
good-look couple thread the walk to the girl's delight and
wonder, he watch her artless happiness with a sort of fatherly
pleasure. perhaps he feel that he would have like to have something
on his own arm besides a shawl (the people laugh at see the gawky
young officer carry this female burthen); but William Dobbin be
very little addicted to selfish calculation at all; and so long as his
friend be enjoy himself, how should he be discontent? and the
truth be, that of all the delight of the Gardens; of the hundred
thousand extra lamp, which be always light; the fiddler in cocked
hat, who play ravish melody under the gild cockle-shell in
the midst of the garden; the singer, both of comic and sentimental
ballad, who charm the ear there; the country dance, form by
bounce cockney and cockneyesse, and execute amidst jumping,
thumping and laughter; the signal which announce that Madame Saqui be
about to mount skyward on a slack-rope ascend to the star; the
hermit that always sit in the illuminated hermitage; the dark walk, so
favourable to the interview of young lover; the pot of stout hand
about by the people in the shabby old livery; and the twinkling
box, in which the happy feaster make-believe to eat slice of almost
invisible ham--of all these thing, and of the gentle Simpson, that
kind smile idiot, who, I daresay, preside even then over the
place--Captain William Dobbin do not take the slight notice.
he carry about Amelia's white cashmere shawl, and have attend
under the gilt cockle-shell, while Mrs. Salmon perform the Battle of
Borodino (a savage cantata against the Corsican upstart, who have lately
meet with his russian reverses)--mr. Dobbin try to hum it as he walk
away, and find he be hum--the tune which Amelia Sedley sing on
the stair, as she come down to dinner.
he burst out laugh at himself; for the truth be, he could sing no
well than an owl.
it be to be understand, as a matter of course, that our young people,
be in party of two and two, make the most solemn promise to keep
together during the evening, and separate in ten minute afterwards.
party at Vauxhall always do separate, but 'twa only to meet again
at supper-time, when they could talk of their mutual adventure in the
interval.
what be the adventure of Mr. Osborne and Miss Amelia? that be a
secret. but be sure of this--they be perfectly happy, and correct in
their behaviour; and as they have be in the habit of be together
any time these fifteen year, their tete-a-tete offer no particular
novelty.
but when Miss Rebecca Sharp and her stout companion lose themselves in
a solitary walk, in which there be not above five score more of
couple similarly stray, they both feel that the situation be
extremely tender and critical, and now or never be the moment Miss
Sharp thought, to provoke that declaration which be tremble on the
timid lip of Mr. Sedley. they have previously be to the panorama of
Moscow, where a rude fellow, treading on Miss Sharp's foot, cause she
to fall back with a little shriek into the arm of Mr. Sedley, and this
little incident increase the tenderness and confidence of that
gentleman to such a degree, that he tell she several of his favourite
indian story over again for, at least, the sixth time.
"how I should like to see India!" say Rebecca.
"SHOULD you?" say Joseph, with a most killing tenderness; and be no
doubt about to follow up this artful interrogatory by a question still
more tender (for he puff and pant a great deal, and Rebecca's hand,
which be place near his heart, could count the feverish pulsation of
that organ), when, oh, provoking! the bell ring for the firework, and,
a great scuffling and run take place, these interesting lover
be oblige to follow in the stream of people.
Captain Dobbin have some thought of join the party at supper: as, in
truth, he find the Vauxhall amusement not particularly lively--but he
parade twice before the box where the now united couple be meet, and
nobody take any notice of he. cover be lay for four. the mated
pair be prattle away quite happily, and Dobbin know he be as
clean forget as if he have never exist in this world.
"I should only be de trop," say the Captain, look at they rather
wistfully. "Iwould well go and talk to the hermit,"--and so he stroll
off out of the hum of man, and noise, and clatter of the banquet, into
the dark walk, at the end of which live that well-know pasteboard
Solitary. it benot very good fun for Dobbin--and, indeed, to be alone
at Vauxhall, I have find, from my own experience, to be one of the
most dismal sport ever enter into by a bachelor.
the two couple be perfectly happy then in their box: where the most
delightful and intimate conversation take place. Jos be in his glory,
order about the waiter with great majesty. he make the salad; and
uncork the Champagne; and carve the chicken; and eat and drank the
great part of the refreshment on the table. finally, he insist
upon have a bowl of rack punch; everybody have rack punch at Vauxhall.
"waiter, rack punch."
that bowl of rack punch be the cause of all this history. and why not
a bowl of rack punch as well as any other cause? be not a bowl of
prussic acid the cause of Fair Rosamond's retire from the world? be
not a bowl of wine the cause of the demise of Alexander the great, or,
at least, do not Dr. Lempriere say so?--so do this bowl of rack
punch influence the fate of all the principal character in this
"Novel without a Hero," which we be now relate. it influence their
life, although most of they do not taste a drop of it.
the young lady do not drink it; Osborne do not like it; and the
consequence be that Jos, that fat gourmand, drink up the whole
content of the bowl; and the consequence of his drink up the whole
content of the bowl be a liveliness which at first be astonishing,
and then become almost painful; for he talk and laugh so loud as to
bring score of listener round the box, much to the confusion of the
innocent party within it; and, volunteer to sing a song (which he
do in that maudlin high key peculiar to gentleman in an inebriated
state), he almost draw away the audience who be gather round the
musician in the gilt scollop-shell, and receive from his hearer a
great deal of applause.
"Brayvo, Fat un!" say one; "Angcore, Daniel Lambert!" say another;
"what a figure for the tight-rope!" exclaim another wag, to the
inexpressible alarm of the lady, and the great anger of Mr. Osborne.
"for Heaven's sake, Jos, let we get up and go," cry that gentleman,
and the young woman rise.
"stop, my dear diddle-diddle-darling," shout Jos, now as bold as a
lion, and clasp Miss Rebecca round the waist. rebecca start, but
she could not get away her hand. the laughter outside redouble. Jos
continue to drink, to make love, and to sing; and, wink and wave
his glass gracefully to his audience, challenge all or any to come in
and take a share of his punch.
Mr. Osborne be just on the point of knock down a gentleman in
top-boot, who propose to take advantage of this invitation, and a
commotion seem to be inevitable, when by the great good luck a
gentleman of the name of Dobbin, who have be walk about the
garden, step up to the box. "be off, you fool!" say this
gentleman--shoulder off a great number of the crowd, who vanish
presently before his cocked hat and fierce appearance--and he enter
the box in a most agitated state.
"Good Heavens! Dobbin, where have you be?" Osborne say, seize the
white cashmere shawl from his friend's arm, and huddle up Amelia in
it.--"make yourself useful, and take charge of Jos here, whilst I take
the lady to the carriage."
Jos be for rise to interfere--but a single push from Osborne's
finger send he puff back into his seat again, and the lieutenant
be enable to remove the lady in safety. Jos kiss his hand to
they as they retreat, and hiccup out "bless you! bless you!" then,
seize Captain Dobbin's hand, and weep in the most pitiful way, he
confide to that gentleman the secret of his love. he adore that
girl who have just go out; he have break her heart, he know he have, by
his conduct; he would marry she next morning at St. George's, Hanover
Square; hewould knock up the Archbishop of Canterbury at Lambeth: he
would, by Jove! and have he in readiness; and, act on this hint,
Captain Dobbin shrewdly induce he to leave the garden and hasten to
Lambeth Palace, and, when once out of the gate, easily convey Mr.
Jos Sedley into a hackney-coach, which deposit he safely at his
lodging.
George Osborne conduct the girl home in safety: and when the door
be close upon they, and as he walk across Russell Square, laugh
so as to astonish the watchman. Amelia look very ruefully at her
friend, as they go up stair, and kiss she, and go to bed without
any more talking.
"he must propose to-morrow," think Rebecca. "he call I his soul's
darling, four time; he squeeze my hand in Amelia's presence. he must
propose to-morrow." and so think Amelia, too. and I dare say she
think of the dress she be to wear as bridesmaid, and of the present
which she should make to her nice little sister-in-law, and of a
subsequent ceremony in which she herself might play a principal part,
&c., and &c., and &c., and &c.
oh, ignorant young creature! how little do you know the effect of rack
punch! what be the rack in the punch, at night, to the rack in the head
of a morning? to this truth I can vouch as a man; there be no headache
in the world like that cause by Vauxhall punch. through the lapse of
twenty year, I can remember the consequence of two glass! two
wine-glass! but two, upon the honour of a gentleman; and Joseph
Sedley, who have a liver complaint, have swallow at least a quart of
the abominable mixture.
that next morning, which rebecca think be to dawn upon her fortune,
find Sedley groan in agony which the pen refuse to describe.
Soda-water be not invent yet. small beer--will it be believed!--wa
the only drink with which unhappy gentleman soothe the fever of their
previous night's potation. with this mild beverage before he, George
Osborne find the ex-Collector of Boggley Wollah groan on the sofa
at his lodging. Dobbin be already in the room, good-naturedly
tend his patient of the night before. the two officer, look at
the prostrate Bacchanalian, and askance at each other, exchange the
most frightful sympathetic grin. even Sedley's valet, the most solemn
and correct of gentleman, with the muteness and gravity of an
undertaker, could hardly keep his countenance in order, as he look at
his unfortunate master.
"Mr. Sedley be uncommon wild last night, sir," he whisper in
confidence to Osborne, as the latter mount the stair. "he want to
fight the 'ackney-coachman, sir. the Capting be oblige to bring he
upstairs in his harm like a babby." a momentary smile flicker over
Mr. Brush's feature as he speak; instantly, however, they relapse
into their usual unfathomable calm, as he fling open the drawing-room
door, and announce "Mr. Hosbin."
"how be you, Sedley?" that young wag begin, after survey his
victim. "no bone break? therebe a hackney-coachman downstairs with a
black eye, and a tie-up head, vow hewill have the law of you."
"what do you mean--law?" Sedley faintly ask.
"for thrash he last night--didn't he, Dobbin? you hit out, sir,
like Molyneux. the watchman say he never see a fellow go down so
straight. ask Dobbin."
"you do have a round with the coachman," Captain Dobbin say, "and
show plenty of fight too."
"and that fellow with the white coat at Vauxhall! how Jos drive at he!
how the woman scream! by Jove, sir, it do my heart good to see you.
I think you civilian have no pluck; but Iwill never get in your way
when you be in your cup, Jos."
"I believe Ibe very terrible, when Ibe rouse," ejaculate Jos from the
sofa, and make a grimace so dreary and ludicrous, that the Captain's
politeness could restrain he no long, and he and Osborne fire off a
ring volley of laughter.
Osborne pursue his advantage pitilessly. he think Jos a milksop. he
have be revolve in his mind the marriage question pende between
Jos and Rebecca, and be not over well pleased that a member of a
family into which he, George Osborne, of the --th, be go to marry,
should make a mesalliance with a little nobody--a little upstart
governess. "you hit, you poor old fellow!" say Osborne. "you
terrible! why, man, you couldnot stand--you make everybody laugh in the
Gardens, though you be cry yourself. you be maudlin, Jos.
donot you remember sing a song?"
"a what?" Jos ask.
"a sentimental song, and call Rosa, Rebecca, whatbe her name,
Amelia's little friend--your dear diddle-diddle-darling?" and this
ruthless young fellow, seize hold of Dobbin's hand, act over the
scene, to the horror of the original performer, and in spite of
Dobbin's good-natured entreaty to he to have mercy.
"why should I spare he?" Osborne say to his friend's remonstrance,
when they quit the invalid, leave he under the hand of Doctor
Gollop. "what the deuce right have he to give himself his patronizing
air, and make fool of we at Vauxhall? whobe this little schoolgirl
that be ogle and make love to he? hang it, the family's low enough
already, without she. a governess be all very well, but Iwould rather
have a lady for my sister-in-law. Ibe a liberal man; but Ihave proper
pride, and know my own station: let she know her. and Iwill take down
that great hectoring Nabob, and prevent he from be make a great
fool than he be. thatbe why I tell he to look out, lest she bring
an action against he."
"I suppose you know well," Dobbin say, though rather dubiously. "you
always be a Tory, and your family's one of the old in England.
But--"
"come and see the girl, and make love to Miss Sharp yourself," the
lieutenant here interrupt his friend; but Captain Dobbin decline to
join Osborne in his daily visit to the young lady in Russell Square.
as George walk down Southampton row, from Holborn, he laugh as he
see, at the Sedley Mansion, in two different story two head on the
look-out.
the fact be, Miss Amelia, in the drawing-room balcony, be look very
eagerly towards the opposite side of the Square, where Mr. Osborne
dwelt, on the watch for the lieutenant himself; and Miss Sharp, from
her little bed-room on the second floor, be in observation until Mr.
Joseph's great form should heave in sight.
"Sister Anne be on the watch-tower," say he to Amelia, "but therebe
nobody come"; and laugh and enjoy the joke hugely, he describe
in the most ludicrous term to Miss Sedley, the dismal condition of her
brother.
"I think itbe very cruel of you to laugh, George," she say, look
particularly unhappy; but George only laugh the more at her piteous
and discomfited mien, persist in think the joke a most divert
one, and when Miss Sharp come downstairs, banter she with a great
deal of liveliness upon the effect of her charm on the fat civilian.
"o Miss Sharp! if you could but see he this morning," he
said--"moaning in his flowered dressing-gown--writhe on his sofa; if
you could but have see he loll out his tongue to Gollop the
apothecary."
"see whom?" say Miss Sharp.
"whom? o whom? Captain Dobbin, of course, to whom we be all so
attentive, by the way, last night."
"we be very unkind to he," Emmy say, blush very much. "I--I
quite forget he."
"of course you do," cry Osborne, still on the laugh.
"one cannot be always think about Dobbin, you know, Amelia. can one,
Miss Sharp?"
"except when he overset the glass of wine at dinner," Miss Sharp say,
with a haughty air and a toss of the head, "I never give the existence
of Captain Dobbin one single moment's consideration."
"very good, Miss Sharp, Iwill tell he," Osborne say; and as he speak
Miss Sharp begin to have a feeling of distrust and hatred towards this
young officer, which he be quite unconscious of have inspire. "he
be to make fun of I, be he?" think Rebecca. "have he be laugh
about I to Joseph? have he frighten he? perhaps he willnot come."--A
film pass over her eye, and her heart beat quite quick.
"yoube always joke," say she, smile as innocently as she could.
"joke away, Mr. George; therebe nobody to defend I." and George
Osborne, as she walk away--and Amelia look reprovingly at he--feel
some little manly compunction for have inflict any unnecessary
unkindness upon this helpless creature. "my dear Amelia," say he,
"you be too good--too kind. you donot know the world. I do. and
your little friend Miss Sharp must learn her station."
"donot you think Jos will--"
"upon my word, my dear, I donot know. he may, or may not. Ibe not his
master. I only know he be a very foolish vain fellow, and put my dear
little girl into a very painful and awkward position last night. my
dear diddle-diddle-darling!" he be off laugh again, and he do
it so drolly that Emmy laugh too.
all that day Jos never come. but Amelia have no fear about this; for
the little schemer have actually send away the page, Mr. Sambo's
aide-de-camp, to Mr. Joseph's lodging, to ask for some book he have
promise, and how he be; and the reply through Jos's man, Mr. Brush,
be, that his master be ill in bed, and have just have the doctor with
he. he must come to-morrow, she think, but she never have the
courage to speak a word on the subject to rebecca; nor do that young
woman herself allude to it in any way during the whole evening after
the night at Vauxhall.
the next day, however, as the two young lady sate on the sofa,
pretend to work, or to write letter, or to read novel, Sambo come
into the room with his usual engaging grin, with a packet under his
arm, and a note on a tray. "note from Mr. Jos, Miss," say Sambo.
how Amelia tremble as she open it!
so it run:
Dear amelia,--i send you the "Orphan of the Forest." I be too ill to
come yesterday. I leave town to-day for Cheltenham. pray excuse I,
if you can, to the amiable Miss Sharp, for my conduct at Vauxhall, and
entreat she to pardon and forget every word I may have utter when
excited by that fatal supper. as soon as I have recover, for my
health be very much shaken, I shall go to Scotland for some month, and
be
truly your, Jos Sedley
it be the death-warrant. all be over. Amelia do not dare to look
at Rebecca's pale face and burn eye, but she dropt the letter into
her friend's lap; and get up, and go upstairs to her room, and cry
her little heart out.
Blenkinsop, the housekeeper, there seek she presently with
consolation, on whose shoulder Amelia weep confidentially, and relieve
herself a good deal. "donot take on, Miss. I donot like to tell you.
but none of we in the house have like she except at fust. I sor she
with my own eye read your Ma's letter. pinner say shebe always
about your trinket-box and drawer, and everybody's drawer, and shebe
sure shebe put your white ribbing into her box."
"I give it she, I give it she," Amelia say.
but this do not alter Mrs. Blenkinsop's opinion of Miss Sharp. "I
donot trust they governess, Pinner," she remark to the maid. "they
give themselves the hair and hupstart of lady, and their wage be
no well than you nor I."
it now become clear to every soul in the house, except poor Amelia,
that rebecca should take her departure, and high and low (always with
the one exception) agree that that event should take place as speedily
as possible. our good child ransack all her drawer, cupboard,
reticule, and gimcrack box--pass in review all her gown, fichus,
tag, bobbin, lace, silk stocking, and fallal--select this thing
and that and the other, to make a little heap for Rebecca. and go
to her Papa, that generous british merchant, who have promise to give
she as many guineas as she be year old--she beg the old gentleman
to give the money to dear Rebecca, who must want it, while she lack
for nothing.
she even make George Osborne contribute, and nothing loth (for he be
as free-hand a young fellow as any in the army), he go to Bond
Street, and buy the good hat and spenser that money could buy.
"thatbe George's present to you, Rebecca, dear," say Amelia, quite
proud of the bandbox convey these gift. "what a taste he have!
therebe nobody like he."
"nobody," rebecca answer. "how thankful I be to he!" she be
think in her heart, "it be George Osborne who prevent my
marriage."--And she love George Osborne accordingly.
she make her preparation for departure with great equanimity; and
accept all the kind little Amelia's present, after just the proper
degree of hesitation and reluctance. she vow eternal gratitude to
Mrs. Sedley, of course; but do not intrude herself upon that good lady
too much, who be embarrassed, and evidently wish to avoid she. she
kiss Mr. Sedley's hand, when he present she with the purse; and
ask permission to consider he for the future as her kind, kind
friend and protector. her behaviour be so affect that he be go
to write she a cheque for twenty pound more; but he restrain his
feeling: the carriage be in wait to take he to dinner, so he
trip away with a "God bless you, my dear, always come here when you
come to town, you know.--drive to the Mansion House, James."
finally come the parting with Miss Amelia, over which picture I intend
to throw a veil. but after a scene in which one person be in earnest
and the other a perfect performer--after the tender caress, the
most pathetic tear, the smell-bottle, and some of the very good
feeling of the heart, have be call into requisition--Rebecca and
Amelia part, the former vow to love her friend for ever and ever
and ever.
CHAPTER VII
Crawley of Queen's Crawley
among the most respected of the name begin in c which the
Court-Guide contain, in the year 18--, be that of Crawley, Sir Pitt,
Baronet, Great Gaunt Street, and Queen's Crawley, hant. this
honourable name have figure constantly also in the parliamentary list
for many year, in conjunction with that of a number of other worthy
gentleman who sit in turn for the borough.
it be relate, with regard to the borough of Queen's Crawley, that
Queen Elizabeth in one of her progress, stop at Crawley to
breakfast, be so delighted with some remarkably fine Hampshire beer
which be then present to she by the Crawley of the day (a handsome
gentleman with a trim beard and a good leg), that she forthwith erect
Crawley into a borough to send two member to Parliament; and the
place, from the day of that illustrious visit, take the name of Queen's
Crawley, which it hold up to the present moment. and though, by the
lapse of time, and those mutation which age produce in empire,
city, and borough, Queen's Crawley be no long so populous a place
as it have be in Queen Bess's time--nay, be come down to that
condition of borough which use to be denominate rotten--yet, as Sir
Pitt Crawley would say with perfect justice in his elegant way,
"Rotten! be hang--it produce I a good fifteen hundred a year."
Sir Pitt Crawley (name after the great Commoner) be the son of
Walpole Crawley, first Baronet, of the Tape and Sealing-Wax Office in
the reign of George II., when he be impeach for peculation, as be
a great number of other honest gentleman of those day; and Walpole
Crawley be, as need scarcely be say, son of John Churchill Crawley,
name after the celebrated military commander of the reign of Queen
Anne. the family tree (which hang up at Queen's Crawley) furthermore
mention Charles Stuart, afterwards call Barebones Crawley, son of
the Crawley of James the First's time; and finally, Queen Elizabeth's
Crawley, who be represent as the foreground of the picture in his
fork beard and armour. out of his waistcoat, as usual, grow a tree,
on the main branch of which the above illustrious name be
inscribe. close by the name of Sir Pitt Crawley, Baronet (the subject
of the present memoir), be write that of his brother, the Reverend
Bute Crawley (the great Commoner be in disgrace when the reverend
gentleman be bear), rector of Crawley-cum-Snailby, and of various
other male and female member of the Crawley family.
Sir Pitt be first marry to Grizzel, sixth daughter of Mungo Binkie,
Lord Binkie, and cousin, in consequence, of Mr. Dundas. she bring
he two son: Pitt, name not so much after his father as after the
heaven-bear minister; and Rawdon Crawley, from the Prince of Wales's
friend, whom his Majesty George IV forget so completely. many year
after her ladyship's demise, Sir Pitt lead to the altar Rosa, daughter
of Mr. G. Dawson, of Mudbury, by whom he have two daughter, for whose
benefit Miss Rebecca Sharp be now engage as governess. it will be
see that the young lady be come into a family of very genteel
connexion, and be about to move in a much more distinguished circle
than that humble one which she have just quit in Russell Square.
she have receive her order to join her pupil, in a note which be
write upon an old envelope, and which contain the follow word:
Sir Pitt Crawley beg Miss Sharp and baggidge may be hear on Tuesday,
as I leaf for Queen's Crawley to-morrow morning erly.
Great Gaunt Street.
Rebecca have never see a Baronet, as far as she know, and as soon as
she have take leave of Amelia, and count the guineas which
good-natured Mr. Sedley have put into a purse for she, and as soon as
she have do wipe her eye with her handkerchief (which operation she
conclude the very moment the carriage have turn the corner of the
street), she begin to depict in her own mind what a Baronet must be. "I
wonder, do he wear a star?" think she, "or be it only lord that
wear star? but he will be very handsomely dress in a court suit,
with ruffle, and his hair a little powdered, like Mr. Wroughton at
Covent Garden. I suppose he will be awfully proud, and that I shall be
treat most contemptuously. still I must bear my hard lot as well as
I can--at least, I shall be amongst GENTLEFOLKS, and not with vulgar
city people": and she fall to thinking of her Russell Square friend
with that very same philosophical bitterness with which, in a certain
apologue, the fox be represent as speak of the grape.
have pass through Gaunt Square into Great Gaunt Street, the
carriage at length stop at a tall gloomy house between two other
tall gloomy house, each with a hatchment over the middle drawing-room
window; as be the custom of house in Great Gaunt Street, in which
gloomy locality death seem to reign perpetual. the shutter of the
first-floor window of Sir Pitt's mansion be close--those of the
dining-room be partially open, and the blind neatly cover up in
old newspaper.
John, the groom, who have drive the carriage alone, do not care to
descend to ring the bell; and so pray a pass milk-boy to perform
that office for he. when the bell be rung, a head appear between
the interstice of the dining-room shutter, and the door be open by
a man in drab breech and gaiter, with a dirty old coat, a foul old
neckcloth lash round his bristly neck, a shin bald head, a leering
red face, a pair of twinkle grey eye, and a mouth perpetually on the
grin.
"this Sir Pitt Crawley's?" say John, from the box.
"Ees," say the man at the door, with a nod.
"hand down these 'ere trunk then," say John.
"Hand 'n down yourself," say the porter.
"donot you see I cannot leave my hosse? come, bear a hand, my fine
feller, and Miss will give you some beer," say John, with a
horse-laugh, for he be no long respectful to Miss Sharp, as she
connexion with the family be break off, and as she have give nothing
to the servant on come away.
the bald-headed man, take his hand out of his breech pocket,
advanced on this summon, and throw Miss Sharp's trunk over his
shoulder, carry it into the house.
"take this basket and shawl, if you please, and open the door," say
Miss Sharp, and descend from the carriage in much indignation. "I
shall write to Mr. Sedley and inform he of your conduct," say she to
the groom.
"donot," reply that functionary. "I hope youhave forget nothink? Miss
'Melia's gownd--have you get they--as the lady's maid be to have 'ad?
I hope theywill fit you. shut the door, Jim, youwill get no good out of
'ER," continue John, point with his thumb towards Miss Sharp: "a
bad lot, I tell you, a bad lot," and so say, Mr. Sedley's groom
drive away. the truth be, he be attach to the lady's maid in
question, and indignant that she should have be rob of she
perquisite.
on enter the dining-room, by the order of the individual in
gaiter, Rebecca find that apartment not more cheerful than such room
usually be, when genteel family be out of town. the faithful
chamber seem, as it be, to mourn the absence of their master. the
turkey carpet have roll itself up, and retire sulkily under the
sideboard: the picture have hide their face behind old sheet of
brown paper: the ceiling lamp be muffle up in a dismal sack of brown
holland: the window-curtain have disappear under all sort of shabby
envelope: the marble bust of Sir Walpole Crawley be look from its
black corner at the bare board and the oil fire-iron, and the empty
card-rack over the mantelpiece: the cellaret have lurk away behind
the carpet: the chair be turn up head and tail along the wall:
and in the dark corner opposite the statue, be an old-fashioned crabbed
knife-box, lock and sit on a dumb waiter.
two kitchen chair, and a round table, and an attenuate old poker and
tong be, however, gather round the fire-place, as be a saucepan
over a feeble sputter fire. there be a bit of cheese and bread,
and a tin candlestick on the table, and a little black porter in a
pint-pot.
"have your dinner, I suppose? it be not too warm for you? like a drop of
beer?"
"where be Sir Pitt Crawley?" say Miss Sharp majestically.
"he, he! Ibe Sir Pitt Crawley. reklect you owe I a pint for bring
down your luggage. he, he! ask Tinker if I aynt. Mrs. Tinker, Miss
Sharp; Miss Governess, Mrs. Charwoman. Ho, ho!"
the lady address as Mrs. Tinker at this moment make her appearance
with a pipe and a paper of tobacco, for which she have be despatch a
minute before Miss Sharp's arrival; and she hand the article over to
Sir Pitt, who have take his seat by the fire.
"wherebe the farden?" say he. "I give you three halfpence. wherebe
the change, old Tinker?"
"there!" reply Mrs. Tinker, fling down the coin; "itbe only
baronet as care about farthing."
"a farthing a day be seven shilling a year," answer the M.P.; "seven
shilling a year be the interest of seven guineas. take care of your
farthing, old Tinker, and your guineas will come quite nat'ral."
"you may be sure itbe Sir Pitt Crawley, young woman," say Mrs. Tinker,
surlily; "because he look to his farthing. youwill know he well
afore long."
"and like I none the bad, Miss Sharp," say the old gentleman, with
an air almost of politeness. "I must be just before Ibe generous."
"he never give away a farthing in his life," growl Tinker.
"never, and never will: itbe against my principle. go and get another
chair from the kitchen, Tinker, if you want to sit down; and then wewill
have a bit of supper."
presently the baronet plunge a fork into the saucepan on the fire, and
withdraw from the pot a piece of tripe and an onion, which he divide
into pretty equal portion, and of which he partook with Mrs. Tinker.
"you see, Miss Sharp, when Ibe not here Tinker's on board wage: when
Ibe in town she din with the family. haw! haw! Ibe glad Miss Sharp's
not hungry, benot you, Tink?" and they fall to upon their frugal supper.
after supper Sir Pitt Crawley begin to smoke his pipe; and when it
become quite dark, he light the rushlight in the tin candlestick, and
produce from an interminable pocket a huge mass of paper, begin
read they, and put they in order.
"Ibe here on law business, my dear, and thatbe how it happen that I
shall have the pleasure of such a pretty travel companion
to-morrow."
"hebe always at law business," say Mrs. Tinker, take up the pot of
porter.
"drink and drink about," say the Baronet. "yes; my dear, Tinker be
quite right: Ihave lose and win more lawsuit than any man in England.
look here at Crawley, Bart. v. Snaffle. Iwill throw he over, or my
namebe not Pitt Crawley. podder and another versus Crawley, Bart.
overseer of Snaily parish against Crawley, Bart. they cannot prove itbe
common: Iwill defy them; the land's mine. it no more belong to the
parish than it do to you or Tinker here. Iwill beat them, if it cost
I a thousand guineas. look over the paper; you may if you like, my
dear. do you write a good hand? Iwill make you useful when webe at
Queen's Crawley, depend on it, Miss Sharp. now the dowager's dead I
want some one."
"she be as bad as he," say Tinker. "she take the law of every one of
her tradesman; and turn away forty-eight footman in four year."
"she be close--very close," say the Baronet, simply; "but she be a
valyble woman to I, and save I a steward."--And in this confidential
strain, and much to the amusement of the new-comer, the conversation
continue for a considerable time. whatever Sir Pitt Crawley's
quality might be, good or bad, he do not make the least disguise of
they. he talk of himself incessantly, sometimes in the coarse and
vulgar Hampshire accent; sometimes adopt the tone of a man of the
world. and so, with injunction to Miss Sharp to be ready at five in
the morning, he bid her good night. "youwill sleep with Tinker
to-night," he say; "itbe a big bed, and therebe room for two. Lady
Crawley die in it. good night."
Sir Pitt go off after this benediction, and the solemn Tinker,
rushlight in hand, lead the way up the great bleak stone stair, past
the great dreary drawing-room door, with the handle muffle up in
paper, into the great front bedroom, where Lady Crawley have sleep she
last. the bed and chamber be so funereal and gloomy, you might have
fancy, not only that Lady Crawley die in the room, but that her
ghost inhabit it. rebecca spring about the apartment, however, with
the great liveliness, and have peep into the huge wardrobe, and
the closet, and the cupboard, and try the drawer which be
locked, and examine the dreary picture and toilette appointment,
while the old charwoman be say her prayer. "I shouldnot like to
sleep in this yeer bed without a good conscience, Miss," say the old
woman. "therebe room for we and a half-dozen of ghost in it," say
Rebecca. "tell I all about Lady Crawley and Sir Pitt Crawley, and
everybody, my DEAR Mrs. Tinker."
but old Tinker be not to be pump by this little cross-questioner;
and signify to she that bed be a place for sleep, not
conversation, set up in her corner of the bed such a snore as only the
nose of innocence can produce. rebecca lie awake for a long, long
time, think of the morrow, and of the new world into which she be
go, and of her chance of success there. the rushlight flicker in
the basin. the mantelpiece cast up a great black shadow, over half of
a mouldy old sampler, which her defunct ladyship have work, no doubt,
and over two little family picture of young lad, one in a college
gown, and the other in a red jacket like a soldier. when she go to
sleep, Rebecca choose that one to dream about.
at four o'clock, on such a roseate summer's morning as even make great
Gaunt Street look cheerful, the faithful Tinker, have waken she
bedfellow, and bid her prepare for departure, unbarred and unbolt the
great hall door (the clanging and clapping whereof startle the
sleeping echo in the street), and take her way into Oxford Street,
summon a coach from a stand there. it be needless to particularize
the number of the vehicle, or to state that the driver be station
thus early in the neighbourhood of Swallow Street, in hope that some
young buck, reel homeward from the tavern, might need the aid of his
vehicle, and pay he with the generosity of intoxication.
it be likewise needless to say that the driver, if he have any such
hope as those above state, be grossly disappoint; and that the
worthy Baronet whom he drive to the City do not give he one single
penny more than his fare. it be in vain that Jehu appeal and
storm; that he fling down Miss Sharp's bandbox in the gutter at the
'neck, and swear he would take the law of his fare.
"youwould well not," say one of the ostler; "itbe Sir Pitt Crawley."
"so it be, Joe," cry the Baronet, approvingly; "and Iwould like to see
the man can do I."
"so should oi," say Joe, grin sulkily, and mount the Baronet's
baggage on the roof of the coach.
"keep the box for I, Leader," exclaim the Member of Parliament to the
coachman; who reply, "yes, Sir Pitt," with a touch of his hat, and
rage in his soul (for he have promise the box to a young gentleman from
Cambridge, who would have give a crown to a certainty), and Miss Sharp
be accommodate with a back seat inside the carriage, which might be
say to be carry she into the wide world.
how the young man from Cambridge sulkily put his five great-coat in
front; but be reconcile when little Miss Sharp be make to quit the
carriage, and mount up beside he--when he cover she up in one of his
Benjamins, and become perfectly good-humour--how the asthmatic
gentleman, the prim lady, who declare upon her sacred honour she have
never travel in a public carriage before (there be always such a
lady in a coach--Alas! be; for the coach, where be they?), and the
fat widow with the brandy-bottle, take their place inside--how the
porter ask they all for money, and get sixpence from the gentleman
and five greasy halfpence from the fat widow--and how the carriage at
length drive away--now thread the dark lane of Aldersgate, anon
clattering by the Blue Cupola of St. Paul's, jingle rapidly by the
stranger' entry of Fleet-Market, which, with Exeter 'Change, have now
depart to the world of shadow--how they pass the White Bear in
Piccadilly, and see the dew rise up from the market-garden of
Knightsbridge--how Turnhamgreen, Brentwood, Bagshot, be pass--need
not be tell here. but the writer of these page, who have pursue in
former day, and in the same bright weather, the same remarkable
journey, cannot but think of it with a sweet and tender regret. where
be the road now, and its merry incident of life? be there no Chelsea
or Greenwich for the old honest pimple-nosed coachman? I wonder where
be they, those good fellow? be old Weller alive or dead? and the
waiter, yea, and the inn at which they wait, and the cold round of
beef inside, and the stunted ostler, with his blue nose and clink
pail, where be he, and where be his generation? to those great
genius now in petticoat, who shall write novel for the beloved
reader's child, these man and thing will be as much legend and
history as Nineveh, or Coeur de Lion, or Jack Sheppard. for they
stage-coach will have become romance--a team of four bay as
fabulous as Bucephalus or Black Bess. ah, how their coat shine, as
the stable-man pull their clothe off, and away they go--ah, how
their tail shake, as with smoking side at the stage's end they
demurely walk away into the inn-yard. alas! we shall never hear the
horn sing at midnight, or see the pike-gate fly open any more.
Whither, however, be the light four-inside Trafalgar coach carry we?
let we be set down at Queen's Crawley without further divagation, and
see how Miss Rebecca Sharp speed there.
CHAPTER VIII
private and Confidential
Miss Rebecca Sharp to Miss Amelia Sedley, Russell Square, London.
(Free.--Pitt Crawley.)
MY dearest, SWEETEST AMELIA,
with what mingle joy and sorrow do I take up the pen to write to my
dear friend! oh, what a change between to-day and yesterday! now I
be friendless and alone; yesterday I be at home, in the sweet company
of a sister, whom I shall ever, ever cherish!
I will not tell you in what tear and sadness I pass the fatal night
in which I separate from you. you go on Tuesday to joy and
happiness, with your mother and your devoted young soldier by your
side; and I think of you all night, dance at the Perkins's, the
prettiest, I be sure, of all the young lady at the Ball. I be
bring by the groom in the old carriage to Sir Pitt Crawley's town
house, where, after John the groom have behave most rudely and
insolently to I (alas! 'twa safe to insult poverty and misfortune!),
I be give over to Sir P.'s care, and make to pass the night in an old
gloomy bed, and by the side of a horrid gloomy old charwoman, who keep
the house. I do not sleep one single wink the whole night.
Sir Pitt be not what we silly girl, when we use to read Cecilia at
Chiswick, imagine a baronet must have be. anything, indeed, less
like Lord Orville cannot be imagine. Fancy an old, stumpy, short,
vulgar, and very dirty man, in old clothe and shabby old gaiter, who
smoke a horrid pipe, and cook his own horrid supper in a saucepan.
he speak with a country accent, and swear a great deal at the old
charwoman, at the hackney coachman who drive we to the inn where the
coach go from, and on which I make the journey OUTSIDE for the
GREATER part of the WAY.
I be awaken at daybreak by the charwoman, and have arrive at the
inn, be at first place inside the coach. but, when we get to a place
call Leakington, where the rain begin to fall very heavily--will you
believe it?--I be force to come outside; for Sir Pitt be a proprietor
of the coach, and as a passenger come at Mudbury, who want an inside
place, I be oblige to go outside in the rain, where, however, a young
gentleman from Cambridge College shelter I very kindly in one of his
several great coat.
this gentleman and the guard seem to know Sir Pitt very well, and
laugh at he a great deal. they both agree in call he an old
screw; which mean a very stingy, avaricious person. he never give
any money to anybody, they say (and this meanness I hate); and the
young gentleman make I remark that we drive very slow for the last two
stage on the road, because Sir Pitt be on the box, and because he be
proprietor of the horse for this part of the journey. "but willnot I
flog them on to Squashmore, when I take the ribbon?" say the young
Cantab. "and sarve them right, Master Jack," say the guard. when I
comprehend the meaning of this phrase, and that Master Jack intend
to drive the rest of the way, and revenge himself on Sir Pitt's horse,
of course I laugh too.
a carriage and four splendid horse, cover with armorial bearing,
however, await we at Mudbury, four mile from Queen's Crawley, and we
make our entrance to the baronet's park in state. there be a fine
avenue of a mile long lead to the house, and the woman at the
lodge-gate (over the pillar of which be a serpent and a dove, the
supporter of the Crawley arm), make we a number of curtsy as she
fling open the old iron carve door, which be something like those at
odious Chiswick.
"therebe an avenue," say Sir Pitt, "a mile long. therebe six thousand
pound of timber in they there tree. do you call that nothing?" he
pronounce avenue--EVENUE, and nothing--NOTHINK, so droll; and he have a
Mr. Hodson, his hind from Mudbury, into the carriage with he, and they
talk about distraining, and sell up, and drain and subsoiling,
and a great deal about tenant and farming--much more than I could
understand. Sam Miles have be catch poach, and Peter Bailey have
go to the workhouse at last. "serve he right," say Sir Pitt; "he
and his family have be cheat I on that farm these hundred and
fifty year." some old tenant, I suppose, who could not pay his rent.
Sir Pitt might have say "he and his family," to be sure; but rich
baronet do not need to be careful about grammar, as poor governess
must be.
as we pass, I remark a beautiful church-spire rise above some old
elm in the park; and before they, in the midst of a lawn, and some
outhouse, an old red house with tall chimney cover with ivy, and
the window shin in the sun. "be that your church, sir?" I say.
"yes, hang it," (say Sir Pitt, only he use, dear, a much wickeder
word); "howbe Buty, Hodson? Buty's my brother Bute, my dear--my brother
the parson. Buty and the Beast I call he, ha, ha!"
Hodson laugh too, and then look more grave and nod his head,
say, "Ibe afraid hebe well, Sir Pitt. he be out on his pony
yesterday, look at our corn."
"look after his tithe, hang'un (only he use the same wicked word).
will brandy and water never kill he? hebe as tough as old
whatdyecallum--old Methusalem."
Mr. Hodson laugh again. "the young man be home from college. theyhave
whop John Scroggins till hebe well nigh dead."
"whop my second keeper!" roar out Sir Pitt.
"he be on the parson's ground, sir," reply Mr. Hodson; and Sir Pitt
in a fury swore that if he ever catch them poach on his ground, hewould
transport them, by the lord he would. however, he say, "Ihave sell the
presentation of the living, Hodson; none of that breed shall get it, I
war'nt"; and Mr. Hodson say he be quite right: and I have no doubt
from this that the two brother be at variance--as brother often be,
and sister too. donot you remember the two Miss Scratchleys at
Chiswick, how they use always to fight and quarrel--and Mary Box, how
she be always thump Louisa?
presently, see two little boy gather stick in the wood, Mr.
Hodson jump out of the carriage, at Sir Pitt's order, and rush upon
they with his whip. "pitch into them, Hodson," roar the baronet;
"flog their little soul out, and bring them up to the house, the
vagabond; Iwill commit them as sure as my name's Pitt." and presently we
hear Mr. Hodson's whip crack on the shoulder of the poor little
blubbering wretch, and Sir Pitt, see that the malefactor be in
custody, drive on to the hall.
all the servant be ready to meet we, and . . .
here, my dear, I be interrupt last night by a dreadful thumping at
my door: and who do you think it be? Sir Pitt Crawley in his night-cap
and dressing-gown, such a figure! as I shrink away from such a visitor,
he come forward and seize my candle. "no candle after eleven
o'clock, Miss Becky," say he. "go to bed in the dark, you pretty
little hussy" (that be what he call I), "and unless you wish I to
come for the candle every night, mind and be in bed at eleven." and
with this, he and Mr. Horrocks the butler go off laugh. you may
be sure I shall not encourage any more of their visit. they let loose
two immense bloodhound at night, which all last night be yell and
howl at the moon. "I call the dog Gorer," say Sir Pitt; "hebe
kill a man that dog have, and be master of a bull, and the mother I
use to call Flora; but now I call her Aroarer, for shebe too old to
bite. haw, haw!"
before the house of Queen's Crawley, which be an odious old-fashion
red brick mansion, with tall chimney and gable of the style of Queen
Bess, there be a terrace flank by the family dove and serpent, and on
which the great hall-door open. and oh, my dear, the great hall I be
sure be as big and as glum as the great hall in the dear castle of
Udolpho. it have a large fireplace, in which we might put half Miss
Pinkerton's school, and the grate be big enough to roast an ox at the
very least. round the room hang I donot know how many generation of
Crawleys, some with beard and ruff, some with huge wig and toe
turn out, some dress in long straight stay and gown that look as
stiff as tower, and some with long ringlet, and oh, my dear! scarcely
any stay at all. at one end of the hall be the great staircase all in
black oak, as dismal as may be, and on either side be tall door with
stag' head over they, lead to the billiard-room and the library,
and the great yellow saloon and the morning-room. I think there be
at least twenty bedroom on the first floor; one of they have the bed in
which Queen Elizabeth sleep; and I have be take by my new pupil
through all these fine apartment this morning. they be not render
less gloomy, I promise you, by have the shutter always shut; and
there be scarce one of the apartment, but when the light be let into
it, I expect to see a ghost in the room. we have a schoolroom on the
second floor, with my bedroom lead into it on one side, and that of
the young lady on the other. then there be Mr. Pitt's
apartment--Mr. Crawley, he be call--the eld son, and Mr. Rawdon
Crawley's room--he be an officer like SOMEBODY, and away with his
regiment. there be no want of room I assure you. you might lodge all
the people in Russell Square in the house, I think, and have space to
spare.
half an hour after our arrival, the great dinner-bell be rung, and I
come down with my two pupil (they be very thin insignificant little
chit of ten and eight year old). I come down in your dear muslin
gown (about which that odious Mrs. Pinner be so rude, because you give
it I); for I be to be treat as one of the family, except on company
day, when the young lady and I be to dine upstairs.
well, the great dinner-bell rang, and we all assemble in the little
drawing-room where my Lady Crawley sit. she be the second Lady
Crawley, and mother of the young lady. she be an ironmonger's
daughter, and her marriage be think a great match. she look as if
she have be handsome once, and her eye be always weep for the
loss of her beauty. she be pale and meagre and high-shoulder, and
have not a word to say for herself, evidently. her stepson Mr. Crawley,
be likewise in the room. he be in full dress, as pompous as an
undertaker. he be pale, thin, ugly, silent; he have thin leg, no
chest, hay-colour whisker, and straw-colour hair. he be the very
picture of his sainted mother over the mantelpiece--Griselda of the
noble house of Binkie.
"this be the new governess, Mr. Crawley," say Lady Crawley, come
forward and take my hand. "Miss Sharp."
"o!" say Mr. Crawley, and push his head once forward and begin again
to read a great pamphlet with which he be busy.
"I hope you will be kind to my girl," say Lady Crawley, with her pink
eye always full of tear.
"Law, Ma, of course she will," say the eld: and I see at a glance
that I need not be afraid of that woman. "my lady be serve," say the
butler in black, in an immense white shirt-frill, that look as if it
have be one of the Queen Elizabeth's ruff depict in the hall; and
so, take Mr. Crawley's arm, she lead the way to the dining-room,
whither I follow with my little pupil in each hand.
Sir Pitt be already in the room with a silver jug. he have just be
to the cellar, and be in full dress too; that is, he have take his
gaiter off, and show his little dumpy leg in black worst
stocking. the sideboard be cover with glisten old plate--old
cup, both gold and silver; old salver and cruet-stand, like Rundell
and Bridge's shop. everything on the table be in silver too, and two
footman, with red hair and canary-colour livery, stand on either
side of the sideboard.
Mr. Crawley say a long grace, and Sir Pitt say amen, and the great
silver dish-cover be remove.
"what have we for dinner, Betsy?" say the Baronet.
"Mutton broth, I believe, Sir Pitt," answer Lady Crawley.
"Mouton aux navet," add the butler gravely (pronounce, if you
please, moutongonavvy); "and the soup be potage de mouton a
l'Ecossaise. the side-dish contain pomme de terre au naturel, and
choufleur a l'eau."
"Mutton's mutton," say the Baronet, "and a devilish good thing. what
SHIP be it, horrock, and when do you kill?" "one of the black-face
Scotch, Sir Pitt: we kill on Thursday.
"who take any?"
"Steel, of Mudbury, take the saddle and two leg, Sir Pitt; but he say
the last be too young and confound woolly, Sir Pitt."
"will you take some potage, Miss ah--Miss Blunt? say Mr. Crawley.
"Capital Scotch broth, my dear," say Sir Pitt, "though they call it by
a french name."
"I believe it be the custom, sir, in decent society," say Mr. Crawley,
haughtily, "to call the dish as I have call it"; and it be serve to
we on silver soup plate by the footman in the canary coat, with the
mouton aux navet. then "ale and water" be bring, and serve to we
young lady in wine-glass. I be not a judge of ale, but I can say
with a clear conscience I prefer water.
while we be enjoy our repast, Sir Pitt take occasion to ask what
have become of the shoulder of the mutton.
"I believe they be eat in the servant' hall," say my lady, humbly.
"they be, my lady," say horrock, "and precious little else we get
there neither."
Sir Pitt burst into a horse-laugh, and continue his conversation with
Mr. Horrocks. "that there little black pig of the Kent sow's breed
must be uncommon fat now."
"itbe not quite bust, Sir Pitt," say the butler with the grave
air, at which Sir Pitt, and with he the young lady, this time, begin
to laugh violently.
"Miss Crawley, Miss Rose Crawley," say Mr. Crawley, "your laughter
strike I as be exceedingly out of place."
"never mind, my lord," say the Baronet, "wewill try the porker on
Saturday. kill un on Saturday morning, John Horrocks. Miss Sharp
adore pork, donot you, Miss Sharp?"
and I think this be all the conversation that I remember at dinner.
when the repast be conclude a jug of hot water be place before Sir
Pitt, with a case-bottle contain, I believe, rum. Mr. Horrocks
serve myself and my pupil with three little glass of wine, and a
bumper be pour out for my lady. when we retire, she take from her
work-drawer an enormous interminable piece of knitting; the young
lady begin to play at cribbage with a dirty pack of card. we have
but one candle light, but it be in a magnificent old silver
candlestick, and after a very few question from my lady, I have my
choice of amusement between a volume of sermon, and a pamphlet on the
corn-law, which Mr. Crawley have be read before dinner.
so we sit for an hour until step be hear.
"put away the card, girl," cry my lady, in a great tremor; "put
down Mr. Crawley's book, Miss Sharp"; and these order have be
scarcely obey, when Mr. Crawley enter the room.
"we will resume yesterday's discourse, young lady," say he, "and you
shall each read a page by turn; so that Miss a--Miss Short may have an
opportunity of hear you"; and the poor girl begin to spell a long
dismal sermon deliver at Bethesda Chapel, Liverpool, on behalf of the
mission for the Chickasaw Indians. be it not a charming evening?
at ten the servant be tell to call Sir Pitt and the household to
prayer. Sir Pitt come in first, very much flushed, and rather
unsteady in his gait; and after he the butler, the canary, Mr.
Crawley's man, three other man, smell very much of the stable, and
four woman, one of whom, I remark, be very much overdress, and who
fling I a look of great scorn as she plump down on her knee.
after Mr. Crawley have do harangue and expound, we receive our
candle, and then we go to bed; and then I be disturb in my
writing, as I have describe to my dearest sweetest Amelia.
good night. a thousand, thousand, thousand kiss!
Saturday.--This morning, at five, I hear the shrieking of the little
black pig. Rose and Violet introduce I to it yesterday; and to the
stable, and to the kennel, and to the gardener, who be pick fruit
to send to market, and from whom they beg hard a bunch of hot-house
grape; but he say that Sir Pitt have number every "Man Jack" of
they, and it would be as much as his place be worth to give any away.
the darling girl catch a colt in a paddock, and ask I if I would
ride, and begin to ride themselves, when the groom, come with horrid
oath, drive they away.
Lady Crawley be always knit the worsted. Sir Pitt be always tipsy,
every night; and, I believe, sit with horrock, the butler. Mr.
Crawley always read sermon in the evening, and in the morning be
lock up in his study, or else rid to Mudbury, on county business,
or to Squashmore, where he preach, on wednesday and Fridays, to the
tenant there.
a hundred thousand grateful love to your dear papa and mamma. be your
poor brother recover of his rack-punch? oh, dear! oh, dear! how man
should beware of wicked punch!
ever and ever thine own rebecca
everything consider, I think it be quite as well for our dear Amelia
Sedley, in Russell Square, that Miss Sharp and she be part. rebecca
be a droll funny creature, to be sure; and those description of the
poor lady weep for the loss of her beauty, and the gentleman "with
hay-colour whisker and straw-colour hair," be very smart,
doubtless, and show a great knowledge of the world. that she might,
when on her knee, have be think of something well than Miss
horrock's ribbon, have possibly strike both of we. but my kind reader
will please to remember that this history have "Vanity Fair" for a
title, and that Vanity Fair be a very vain, wicked, foolish place, full
of all sort of humbug and falseness and pretension. and while the
moralist, who be hold forth on the cover ( an accurate portrait of
your humble servant), profess to wear neither gown nor band, but
only the very same long-eared livery in which his congregation be
array: yet, look you, one be bind to speak the truth as far as one
know it, whether one mount a cap and bell or a shovel hat; and a
deal of disagreeable matter must come out in the course of such an
undertaking.
I have hear a brother of the story-tell trade, at Naples, preach
to a pack of good-for-nothing honest lazy fellow by the sea-shore,
work himself up into such a rage and passion with some of the villain
whose wicked deed he be describe and invent, that the audience
could not resist it; and they and the poet together would burst out
into a roar of oath and execration against the fictitious monster of
the tale, so that the hat go round, and the bajocchi tumble into it,
in the midst of a perfect storm of sympathy.
at the little Paris theatre, on the other hand, you will not only hear
the people yell out "ah gredin! ah monstre:" and curse the tyrant
of the play from the box; but the actor themselves positively refuse
to play the wicked part, such as those of infame Anglais, brutal
cossack, and what not, and prefer to appear at a small salary, in
their real character as loyal Frenchmen. I set the two story one
against the other, so that you may see that it be not from mere
mercenary motif that the present performer be desirous to show up and
trounce his villain; but because he have a sincere hatred of they,
which he cannot keep down, and which must find a vent in suitable abuse
and bad language.
I warn my "kyind friend," then, that I be go to tell a story of
harrowing villainy and complicated--but, as I trust, intensely
interesting--crime. my rascal be no milk-and-water rascal, I
promise you. when we come to the proper place we willnot spare fine
language--no, no! but when we be go over the quiet country we must
perforce be calm. a tempest in a slop-basin be absurd. we will
reserve that sort of thing for the mighty ocean and the lonely
midnight. the present chapter be very mild. other--but we will not
anticipate THOSE.
and, as we bring our character forward, I will ask leave, as a man and
a brother, not only to introduce they, but occasionally to step down
from the platform, and talk about they: if they be good and kindly, to
love they and shake they by the hand: if they be silly, to laugh at
they confidentially in the reader's sleeve: if they be wicked and
heartless, to abuse they in the strong term which politeness admit
of.
otherwise you might fancy it be I who be sneer at the practice of
devotion, which Miss Sharp find so ridiculous; that it be I who
laugh good-humouredly at the reeling old Silenus of a
baronet--whereas the laughter come from one who have no reverence
except for prosperity, and no eye for anything beyond success. such
people there be live and flourish in the world--Faithless,
Hopeless, Charityless: let we have at they, dear friend, with might
and main. some there be, and very successful too, mere quack and
fool: and it be to combat and expose such as those, no doubt, that
Laughter be make.
CHAPTER IX
Family Portraits
Sir Pitt Crawley be a philosopher with a taste for what be call low
life. his first marriage with the daughter of the noble Binkie have
be make under the auspex of his parent; and as he often tell Lady
Crawley in her lifetime she be such a confound quarrelsome high-breed
jade that when she die he be hang if he would ever take another of
her sort, at her ladyship's demise he keep his promise, and select
for a second wife Miss Rose Dawson, daughter of Mr. John Thomas Dawson,
ironmonger, of Mudbury. what a happy woman be Rose to be my Lady
Crawley!
let we set down the item of her happiness. in the first place, she
give up Peter Butt, a young man who keep company with she, and in
consequence of his disappointment in love, take to smuggling, poach,
and a thousand other bad course. then she quarrel, as in duty
bind, with all the friend and intimate of her youth, who, of course,
could not be receive by my Lady at Queen's Crawley--nor do she find
in her new rank and abode any person who be willing to welcome she.
who ever do? Sir Huddleston Fuddleston have three daughter who all
hop to be Lady Crawley. Sir Giles Wapshot's family be insult
that one of the Wapshot girl have not the preference in the marriage,
and the remain baronet of the county be indignant at their
comrade's misalliance. never mind the commoner, whom we will leave to
grumble anonymously.
Sir Pitt do not care, as he say, a brass farden for any one of they.
he have his pretty rose, and what more need a man require than to please
himself? so he use to get drunk every night: to beat his pretty rose
sometimes: to leave she in Hampshire when he go to London for the
parliamentary session, without a single friend in the wide world. even
Mrs. Bute Crawley, the Rector's wife, refuse to visit she, as she say
she would never give the pas to a tradesman's daughter.
as the only endowment with which Nature have gift Lady Crawley be
those of pink cheek and a white skin, and as she have no sort of
character, nor talent, nor opinion, nor occupation, nor amusement,
nor that vigour of soul and ferocity of temper which often fall to the
lot of entirely foolish woman, her hold upon Sir Pitt's affection be
not very great. her rose fade out of her cheek, and the pretty
freshness leave her figure after the birth of a couple of child, and
she become a mere machine in her husband's house of no more use than
the late Lady Crawley's grand piano. be a light-complexion woman,
she wear light clothe, as most blonde will, and appear, in
preference, in draggle sea-green, or slatternly sky-blue. she work
that worst day and night, or other piece like it. she have
counterpane in the course of a few year to all the bed in Crawley.
she have a small flower-garden, for which she have rather an affection;
but beyond this no other like or dislike. when her husband be rude
to she she be apathetic: whenever he strike she she cry. she have
not character enough to take to drinking, and moan about, slipshod
and in curl-paper all day. o Vanity Fair--Vanity Fair! this might
have be, but for you, a cheery lass--Peter Butt and Rose a happy man
and wife, in a snug farm, with a hearty family; and an honest portion
of pleasure, care, hope and struggle--but a title and a coach and
four be toy more precious than happiness in Vanity Fair: and if Harry
the Eighth or Bluebeard be alive now, and want a tenth wife, do you
suppose he could not get the prettiest girl that shall be present
this season?
the languid dulness of their mamma do not, as it may be suppose,
awaken much affection in her little daughter, but they be very happy
in the servant' hall and in the stable; and the Scotch gardener
have luckily a good wife and some good child, they get a little
wholesome society and instruction in his lodge, which be the only
education bestow upon they until Miss Sharp come.
her engagement be owe to the remonstrance of Mr. Pitt Crawley, the
only friend or protector Lady Crawley ever have, and the only person,
besides her child, for whom she entertain a little feeble
attachment. Mr. Pitt take after the noble Binkies, from whom he be
descend, and be a very polite and proper gentleman. when he grow to
man's estate, and come back from Christchurch, he begin to reform the
slacken discipline of the hall, in spite of his father, who stand in
awe of he. he be a man of such rigid refinement, that he would have
starve rather than have din without a white neckcloth. once, when
just from college, and when horrock the butler bring he a letter
without place it previously on a tray, he give that domestic a look,
and administer to he a speech so cutting, that horrock ever after
tremble before he; the whole household bow to he: Lady Crawley's
curl-paper come off early when he be at home: Sir Pitt's muddy
gaiter disappear; and if that incorrigible old man still adhere to
other old habit, he never fuddle himself with rum-and-water in his
son's presence, and only talk to his servant in a very reserved and
polite manner; and those person remark that Sir Pitt never swear at
Lady Crawley while his son be in the room.
it be he who teach the butler to say, "my lady be serve," and who
insist on hand her ladyship in to dinner. he seldom speak to she,
but when he do it be with the most powerful respect; and he never let
she quit the apartment without rise in the most stately manner to
open the door, and make an elegant bow at her egress.
at Eton he be call Miss Crawley; and there, I be sorry to say, his
young brother Rawdon use to lick he violently. but though his
part be not brilliant, he make up for his lack of talent by
meritorious industry, and be never know, during eight year at
school, to be subject to that punishment which it be generally think
none but a cherub can escape.
at college his career be of course highly creditable. and here he
prepare himself for public life, into which he be to be introduce by
the patronage of his grandfather, Lord Binkie, by study the ancient
and modern orator with great assiduity, and by speak unceasingly at
the debating society. but though he have a fine flux of word, and
deliver his little voice with great pomposity and pleasure to
himself, and never advance any sentiment or opinion which be not
perfectly trite and stale, and support by a latin quotation; yet he
fail somehow, in spite of a mediocrity which ought to have insure
any man a success. he do not even get the prize poem, which all his
friend say he be sure of.
after leave college he become private Secretary to Lord Binkie, and
be then appoint Attache to the Legation at Pumpernickel, which post
he fill with perfect honour, and bring home despatch, consist
of Strasburg pie, to the Foreign Minister of the day. after remain
ten year Attache (several year after the lamented Lord Binkie's
demise), and find the advancement slow, he at length give up the
diplomatic service in some disgust, and begin to turn country gentleman.
he write a pamphlet on Malt on return to England (for he be an
ambitious man, and always like to be before the public), and take a
strong part in the Negro Emancipation question. then he become a
friend of Mr. Wilberforce's, whose politic he admire, and have that
famous correspondence with the Reverend Silas Hornblower, on the
Ashantee Mission. he be in London, if not for the Parliament session,
at least in May, for the religious meeting. in the country he be a
magistrate, and an active visitor and speaker among those destitute of
religious instruction. he be say to be pay his address to Lady
Jane Sheepshanks, Lord Southdown's third daughter, and whose sister,
Lady Emily, write those sweet tract, "the Sailor's True Binnacle," and
"the Applewoman of Finchley Common."
Miss Sharp's account of his employment at Queen's Crawley be not
caricature. he subject the servant there to the devotional
exercise before mention, in which (and so much the well) he
bring his father to join. he patronise an Independent meeting-house
in Crawley parish, much to the indignation of his uncle the Rector, and
to the consequent delight of Sir Pitt, who be induce to go himself
once or twice, which occasion some violent sermon at Crawley parish
church, direct point-blank at the Baronet's old Gothic pew there.
Honest Sir Pitt, however, do not feel the force of these discourse,
as he always take his nap during sermon-time.
Mr. Crawley be very earnest, for the good of the nation and of the
christian world, that the old gentleman should yield he up his place
in Parliament; but this the elder constantly refuse to do. both be
of course too prudent to give up the fifteen hundred a year which be
bring in by the second seat (at this period fill by Mr. Quadroon,
with carte blanche on the Slave question); indeed the family estate be
much embarrassed, and the income draw from the borough be of great
use to the house of Queen's Crawley.
it have never recover the heavy fine impose upon Walpole Crawley,
first baronet, for peculation in the Tape and Sealing Wax Office. Sir
Walpole be a jolly fellow, eager to seize and to spend money (alieni
appeten, sui profusus, as Mr. Crawley would remark with a sigh), and
in his day belove by all the county for the constant drunkenness and
hospitality which be maintain at Queen's Crawley. the cellar be
fill with burgundy then, the kennel with hound, and the stable
with gallant hunter; now, such horse as Queen's Crawley possess
go to plough, or run in the Trafalgar Coach; and it be with a team
of these very horse, on an off-day, that Miss Sharp be bring to the
Hall; for boor as he be, Sir Pitt be a stickler for his dignity while
at home, and seldom drive out but with four horse, and though he din
off boil mutton, have always three footman to serve it.
if mere parsimony could have make a man rich, Sir Pitt Crawley might
have become very wealthy--if he have be an attorney in a country town,
with no capital but his brain, it be very possible that he would have
turn they to good account, and might have achieve for himself a very
considerable influence and competency. but he be unluckily endow
with a good name and a large though encumbered estate, both of which
go rather to injure than to advance he. he have a taste for law,
which cost he many thousand yearly; and be a great deal too clever
to be rob, as he say, by any single agent, allow his affair to
be mismanage by a dozen, whom he all equally mistrust. he be such a
sharp landlord, that he could hardly find any but bankrupt tenant; and
such a close farmer, as to grudge almost the seed to the ground,
whereupon revengeful nature grudge he the crop which she grant to
more liberal husbandman. he speculate in every possible way; he work
mine; buy canal-share; horse coach; take government contract,
and be the busy man and magistrate of his county. as he would not
pay honest agent at his granite quarry, he have the satisfaction of
find that four overseer run away, and take fortune with they to
America. for want of proper precaution, his coal-mine fill with
water: the government fling his contract of damaged beef upon his
hand: and for his coach-horse, every mail proprietor in the kingdom
know that he lose more horse than any man in the country, from
underfeede and buy cheap. in disposition he be sociable, and far
from be proud; nay, he rather prefer the society of a farmer or a
horse-dealer to that of a gentleman, like my lord, his son: he be fond
of drink, of swearing, of joke with the farmer' daughter: he be
never know to give away a shilling or to do a good action, but be of
a pleasant, sly, laugh mood, and would cut his joke and drink his
glass with a tenant and sell he up the next day; or have his laugh
with the poacher he be transport with equal good humour. his
politeness for the fair sex have already be hint at by Miss Rebecca
Sharp--in a word, the whole baronetage, peerage, commonage of England,
do not contain a more cunning, mean, selfish, foolish, disreputable
old man. that blood-red hand of Sir Pitt Crawley's would be in
anybody's pocket except his own; and it be with grief and pain, that,
as admirer of the british aristocracy, we find ourselves oblige to
admit the existence of so many ill quality in a person whose name be
in Debrett.
one great cause why Mr. Crawley have such a hold over the affection of
his father, result from money arrangement. the Baronet owe his son
a sum of money out of the jointure of his mother, which he do not find
it convenient to pay; indeed he have an almost invincible repugnance to
pay anybody, and could only be bring by force to discharge his
debt. Miss Sharp calculate (for she become, as we shall hear
speedily, induct into most of the secret of the family) that the
mere payment of his creditor cost the honourable Baronet several
hundred yearly; but this be a delight he could not forego; he have a
savage pleasure in make the poor wretch wait, and in shift from
court to court and from term to term the period of satisfaction.
whatbe the good of be in Parliament, he say, if you must pay your
debt? hence, indeed, his position as a senator be not a little useful
to he.
Vanity Fair--Vanity Fair! here be a man, who could not spell, and do
not care to read--who have the habit and the cunning of a boor: whose
aim in life be pettifog: who never have a taste, or emotion, or
enjoyment, but what be sordid and foul; and yet he have rank, and
honours, and power, somehow: and be a dignitary of the land, and a
pillar of the state. he be high sheriff, and ride in a golden coach.
great minister and statesman court he; and in Vanity Fair he have a
high place than the most brilliant genius or spotless virtue.
Sir Pitt have an unmarried half-sister who inherit her mother's large
fortune, and though the Baronet propose to borrow this money of she on
mortgage, Miss Crawley decline the offer, and prefer the security
of the fund. she have signify, however, her intention of leave she
inheritance between Sir Pitt's second son and the family at the
Rectory, and have once or twice pay the debt of Rawdon Crawley in his
career at college and in the army. Miss Crawley be, in consequence, an
object of great respect when she come to Queen's Crawley, for she have a
balance at her banker's which would have make she beloved anywhere.
what a dignity it give an old lady, that balance at the banker's! how
tenderly we look at her fault if she be a relative (and may every
reader have a score of such), what a kind good-natured old creature we
find she! how the junior partner of Hobbs and Dobbs lead her smile
to the carriage with the lozenge upon it, and the fat wheezy coachman!
how, when she come to pay we a visit, we generally find an opportunity
to let our friend know her station in the world! we say (and with
perfect truth) I wish I have Miss MacWhirter's signature to a cheque for
five thousand pound. she wouldnot miss it, say your wife. she be my
aunt, say you, in an easy careless way, when your friend ask if Miss
MacWhirter be any relative. your wife be perpetually send she
little testimony of affection, your little girl work endless worst
basket, cushion, and footstool for she. what a good fire there be
in her room when she come to pay you a visit, although your wife lace
her stay without one! the house during her stay assume a festive,
neat, warm, jovial, snug appearance not visible at other season. you
yourself, dear sir, forget to go to sleep after dinner, and find
yourself all of a sudden (though you invariably lose) very fond of a
rubber. what good dinner you have--game every day, Malmsey-Madeira,
and no end of fish from London. even the servant in the kitchen share
in the general prosperity; and, somehow, during the stay of Miss
MacWhirter's fat coachman, the beer be grow much strong, and the
consumption of tea and sugar in the nursery (where she maid take her
meal) be not regard in the least. be it so, or be it not so? I
appeal to the middle class. ah, gracious power! I wish you would
send I an old aunt--a maiden aunt--an aunt with a lozenge on her
carriage, and a front of light coffee-colour hair--how my child
should work workbag for she, and my Julia and I would make she
comfortable! sweet--sweet vision! foolish--foolish dream!
CHAPTER X
Miss Sharp begin to make friend
and now, be receive as a member of the amiable family whose
portrait we have sketch in the forego page, it become naturally
Rebecca's duty to make herself, as she say, agreeable to her
benefactor, and to gain their confidence to the utmost of her power.
who can but admire this quality of gratitude in an unprotected orphan;
and, if there enter some degree of selfishness into her calculation,
who can say but that her prudence be perfectly justifiable? "I be
alone in the world," say the friendless girl. "I have nothing to look
for but what my own labour can bring I; and while that little
pink-face chit Amelia, with not half my sense, have ten thousand pound
and an establishment secure, poor rebecca (and my figure be far well
than her) have only herself and her own wit to trust to. well, let we
see if my wit cannot provide I with an honourable maintenance, and if
some day or the other I cannot show Miss Amelia my real superiority
over she. not that I dislike poor Amelia: who can dislike such a
harmless, good-natured creature?--only it will be a fine day when I can
take my place above she in the world, as why, indeed, should I not?"
thus it be that our little romantic friend form vision of the
future for herself--nor must we be scandalise that, in all her castle
in the air, a husband be the principal inhabitant. of what else have
young lady to think, but husband? of what else do their dear mamma
think? "I must be my own mamma," say rebecca; not without a tingle
consciousness of defeat, as she think over her little misadventure
with Jos Sedley.
so she wisely determine to render her position with the Queen's
Crawley family comfortable and secure, and to this end resolve to make
friend of every one around she who could at all interfere with her
comfort.
as my Lady Crawley be not one of these personage, and a woman,
moreover, so indolent and void of character as not to be of the least
consequence in her own house, Rebecca soon find that it be not at all
necessary to cultivate her good will--indeed, impossible to gain it.
she use to talk to her pupil about their "poor mamma"; and, though
she treat that lady with every demonstration of cool respect, it be
to the rest of the family that she wisely direct the chief part of
her attention.
with the young people, whose applause she thoroughly gain, her method
be pretty simple. she do not pester their young brain with too much
learning, but, on the contrary, let they have their own way in regard
to educate themselves; for what instruction be more effectual than
self-instruction? the eld be rather fond of book, and as there be
in the old library at Queen's Crawley a considerable provision of work
of light literature of the last century, both in the french and English
language (they have be purchase by the Secretary of the Tape and
Sealing Wax Office at the period of his disgrace), and as nobody ever
trouble the bookshelf but herself, Rebecca be enable agreeably,
and, as it be, in play, to impart a great deal of instruction to
Miss Rose Crawley.
she and Miss Rose thus read together many delightful French and English
work, among which may be mention those of the learn Dr. Smollett,
of the ingenious Mr. Henry Fielding, of the graceful and fantastic
Monsieur Crebillon the young, whom our immortal poet Gray so much
admire, and of the universal Monsieur de Voltaire. once, when Mr.
Crawley ask what the young people be read, the governess reply
"Smollett." "oh, Smollett," say Mr. Crawley, quite satisfied. "his
history be more dull, but by no mean so dangerous as that of Mr. Hume.
it be history you be read?" "yes," say Miss Rose; without,
however, add that it be the history of Mr. Humphrey Clinker. on
another occasion he be rather scandalise at find his sister with a
book of french play; but as the governess remark that it be for the
purpose of acquire the french idiom in conversation, he be fain to
be content. Mr. Crawley, as a diplomatist, be exceedingly proud of
his own skill in speak the french language (for he be of the world
still), and not a little pleased with the compliment which the
governess continually pay he upon his proficiency.
Miss Violet's taste be, on the contrary, more rude and boisterous
than those of her sister. she know the sequester spot where the
hen lay their egg. she could climb a tree to rob the nest of the
feather songster of their speckled spoil. and her pleasure be to
ride the young colt, and to scour the plain like Camilla. she be the
favourite of her father and of the stableman. she be the darling, and
withal the terror of the cook; for she discover the haunt of the
jam-pot, and would attack they when they be within her reach. she
and her sister be engage in constant battle. any of which
peccadillo, if Miss Sharp discover, she do not tell they to Lady
Crawley; who would have tell they to the father, or bad, to Mr.
Crawley; but promise not to tell if Miss Violet would be a good girl
and love her governess.
with Mr. Crawley Miss Sharp be respectful and obedient. she use to
consult he on passage of French which she could not understand,
though her mother be a Frenchwoman, and which he would construe to her
satisfaction: and, besides give she his aid in profane literature, he
be kind enough to select for her book of a more serious tendency, and
address to her much of his conversation. she admire, beyond measure,
his speech at the Quashimaboo-aid Society; take an interest in his
pamphlet on malt: be often affect, even to tear, by his discourse
of an evening, and would say--"Oh, thank you, sir," with a sigh, and a
look up to heaven, that make he occasionally condescend to shake hand
with she. "blood be everything, after all," would that aristocratic
religionist say. "how Miss Sharp be awaken by my word, when not one
of the people here be touch. I be too fine for they--too delicate. I
must familiarise my style--but she understand it. her mother be a
Montmorency."
indeed it be from this famous family, as it appear, that Miss Sharp,
by the mother's side, be descend. of course she do not say that her
mother have be on the stage; it would have shock Mr. Crawley's
religious scruple. how many noble emigre have this horrid revolution
plunge in poverty! she have several story about her ancestor ere
she have be many month in the house; some of which Mr. Crawley
happen to find in D'Hozier's dictionary, which be in the library,
and which strengthen his belief in their truth, and in the
high-breeding of Rebecca. be we to suppose from this curiosity and
pry into dictionary, could our heroine suppose that Mr. Crawley
be interested in her?--no, only in a friendly way. have we not state
that he be attach to Lady Jane Sheepshanks?
he take Rebecca to task once or twice about the propriety of play at
backgammon with Sir Pitt, say that it be a godless amusement, and
that she would be much well engage in read "thrump's Legacy," or
"the Blind Washerwoman of Moorfields," or any work of a more serious
nature; but Miss Sharp say her dear mother use often to play the same
game with the old Count de Trictrac and the venerable Abbe du Cornet,
and so find an excuse for this and other worldly amusement.
but it be not only by play at backgammon with the Baronet, that the
little governess render herself agreeable to her employer. she find
many different way of be useful to he. she read over, with
indefatigable patience, all those law paper, with which, before she
come to Queen's Crawley, he have promise to entertain she. she
volunteer to copy many of his letter, and adroitly alter the
spelling of they so as to suit the usage of the present day. she
become interested in everything appertain to the estate, to the
farm, the park, the garden, and the stable; and so delightful a
companion be she, that the Baronet would seldom take his
after-breakfast walk without she (and the child of course), when she
would give her advice as to the tree which be to be lop in the
shrubbery, the garden-bed to be dig, the crop which be to be cut,
the horse which be to go to cart or plough. before she have be a
year at Queen's Crawley she have quite win the Baronet's confidence; and
the conversation at the dinner-table, which before use to be hold
between he and Mr. Horrocks the butler, be now almost exclusively
between Sir Pitt and Miss Sharp. she be almost mistress of the house
when Mr. Crawley be absent, but conduct herself in her new and
exalt situation with such circumspection and modesty as not to offend
the authority of the kitchen and stable, among whom her behaviour be
always exceedingly modest and affable. she be quite a different
person from the haughty, shy, dissatisfied little girl whom we have
know previously, and this change of temper prove great prudence, a
sincere desire of amendment, or at any rate great moral courage on her
part. whether it be the heart which dictate this new system of
complaisance and humility adopt by our Rebecca, be to be prove by
she after-history. a system of hypocrisy, which last through whole
year, be one seldom satisfactorily practise by a person of
one-and-twenty; however, our reader will recollect, that, though young
in year, our heroine be old in life and experience, and we have
write to no purpose if they have not discover that she be a very
clever woman.
the elder and young son of the house of Crawley be, like the
gentleman and lady in the weather-box, never at home together--they
hat each other cordially: indeed, Rawdon Crawley, the dragoon, have a
great contempt for the establishment altogether, and seldom come
thither except when his aunt pay her annual visit.
the great good quality of this old lady have be mention. she
possess seventy thousand pound, and have almost adopt Rawdon. she
dislike her eld nephew exceedingly, and despise he as a milksop.
in return he do not hesitate to state that her soul be irretrievably
lose, and be of opinion that his brother's chance in the next world
be not a whit well. "she be a godless woman of the world," would
Mr. Crawley say; "she live with atheist and Frenchmen. my mind
shudder when I think of her awful, awful situation, and that, near as
she be to the grave, she should be so give up to vanity,
licentiousness, profaneness, and folly." in fact, the old lady decline
altogether to hear his hour's lecture of an evening; and when she come
to Queen's Crawley alone, he be oblige to pretermit his usual
devotional exercise.
"shut up your sarmon, Pitt, when Miss Crawley come down," say his
father; "she have write to say that she willnot stand the preachifying."
"o, sir! consider the servant."
"the servant be hang," say Sir Pitt; and his son think even bad
would happen be they deprive of the benefit of his instruction.
"why, hang it, Pitt!" say the father to his remonstrance. "you
wouldnot be such a flat as to let three thousand a year go out of the
family?"
"what be money compare to our soul, sir?" continue Mr. Crawley.
"you mean that the old lady willnot leave the money to you?"--and who
know but it be Mr. Crawley's meaning?
Old Miss Crawley be certainly one of the reprobate. she have a snug
little house in Park Lane, and, as she eat and drink a great deal too
much during the season in London, she go to Harrowgate or Cheltenham
for the summer. she be the most hospitable and jovial of old vestal,
and have be a beauty in her day, she say. (all old woman be
beauty once, we very well know.) she be a bel esprit, and a dreadful
Radical for those day. she have be in France (where St. just, they
say, inspire she with an unfortunate passion), and love, ever after,
french novel, french cookery, and french wine. she read Voltaire,
and have Rousseau by heart; talk very lightly about divorce, and most
energetically of the right of woman. she have picture of Mr. Fox in
every room in the house: when that statesman be in opposition, I be
not sure that she have not fling a main with he; and when he come into
office, she take great credit for bring over to he Sir Pitt and his
colleague for Queen's Crawley, although Sir Pitt would have come over
himself, without any trouble on the honest lady's part. it be needless
to say that Sir Pitt be bring to change his view after the death of
the great Whig statesman.
this worthy old lady take a fancy to Rawdon Crawley when a boy, send
he to Cambridge (in opposition to his brother at Oxford), and, when
the young man be request by the authority of the first-name
University to quit after a residence of two year, she buy he his
commission in the Life Guards Green.
a perfect and celebrated "blood," or dandy about town, be this young
officer. boxing, rat-hunting, the five court, and four-in-hand
driving be then the fashion of our british aristocracy; and he be an
adept in all these noble science. and though he belong to the
household troop, who, as it be their duty to rally round the Prince
Regent, have not show their valour in foreign service yet, Rawdon
Crawley have already (apropo of play, of which he be immoderately
fond) fight three bloody duel, in which he give ample proof of his
contempt for death.
"and for what follow after death," would Mr. Crawley observe, throw
his gooseberry-colour eye up to the ceiling. he be always think
of his brother's soul, or of the soul of those who differ with he
in opinion: it be a sort of comfort which many of the serious give
themselves.
silly, romantic Miss Crawley, far from be horrify at the courage
of her favourite, always use to pay his debt after his duel; and
would not listen to a word that be whisper against his morality.
"he will sow his wild oat," she would say, "and be worth far more than
that pule hypocrite of a brother of his."
CHAPTER XI
Arcadian simplicity
besides these honest folk at the Hall (whose simplicity and sweet
rural purity surely show the advantage of a country life over a town
one), we must introduce the reader to their relative and neighbour at
the Rectory, Bute Crawley and his wife.
the Reverend Bute Crawley be a tall, stately, jolly, shovel-hat
man, far more popular in his county than the Baronet his brother. at
college he pull stroke-oar in the Christchurch boat, and have thrash
all the good bruiser of the "town." he carry his taste for box
and athletic exercise into private life; there be not a fight within
twenty mile at which he be not present, nor a race, nor a course
match, nor a regatta, nor a ball, nor an election, nor a visitation
dinner, nor indeed a good dinner in the whole county, but he find
mean to attend it. you might see his bay mare and gig-lamp a score
of mile away from his Rectory House, whenever there be any
dinner-party at Fuddleston, or at Roxby, or at Wapshot Hall, or at the
great lord of the county, with all of whom he be intimate. he have a
fine voice; sing "a southerly wind and a cloudy sky"; and give the
"whoop" in chorus with general applause. he ride to hound in a
pepper-and-salt frock, and be one of the good fisherman in the county.
Mrs. Crawley, the rector's wife, be a smart little body, who write
this worthy divine's sermon. be of a domestic turn, and keep
the house a great deal with her daughter, she rule absolutely within
the Rectory, wisely give her husband full liberty without. he be
welcome to come and go, and dine abroad as many day as his fancy
dictate, for Mrs. Crawley be a save woman and know the price of
port wine. ever since Mrs. Bute carry off the young Rector of
Queen's Crawley (she be of a good family, daughter of the late
lieut.-colonel Hector McTavish, and she and her mother play for Bute
and win he at Harrowgate), she have be a prudent and thrifty wife to
he. in spite of her care, however, he be always in debt. it take
he at least ten year to pay off his college bill contract during
his father's lifetime. in the year 179-, when he be just clear of
these incumbrance, he give the odd of 100 to 1 (in twenty) against
Kangaroo, who win the Derby. the Rector be oblige to take up the
money at a ruinous interest, and have be struggle ever since. his
sister help he with a hundred now and then, but of course his great
hope be in her death--when "hang it" (as he would say), "Matilda must
leave I half her money."
so that the Baronet and his brother have every reason which two brother
possibly can have for be by the ear. Sir Pitt have have the well
of Bute in innumerable family transaction. young Pitt not only do
not hunt, but set up a meeting house under his uncle's very nose.
Rawdon, it be know, be to come in for the bulk of Miss Crawley's
property. these money transaction--these speculation in life and
death--these silent battle for reversionary spoil--make brother very
love towards each other in Vanity Fair. I, for my part, have know a
five-pound note to interpose and knock up a half century's attachment
between two brother; and cannot but admire, as I think what a fine and
durable thing love be among worldly people.
it cannot be suppose that the arrival of such a personage as rebecca
at Queen's Crawley, and her gradual establishment in the good grace of
all people there, could be unremarke by Mrs. Bute Crawley. Mrs. Bute,
who know how many day the sirloin of beef last at the Hall; how much
linen be get ready at the great wash; how many peach be on the
south wall; how many dos her ladyship take when she be ill--for such
point be matter of intense interest to certain person in the
country--Mrs. Bute, I say, could not pass over the Hall governess
without make every inquiry respect her history and character.
there be always the good understanding between the servant at the
Rectory and the Hall. there be always a good glass of ale in the
kitchen of the former place for the Hall people, whose ordinary drink
be very small--and, indeed, the Rector's lady know exactly how much
malt go to every barrel of Hall beer--tie of relationship exist
between the Hall and rectory domestic, as between their master; and
through these channel each family be perfectly well acquainted with
the doing of the other. that, by the way, may be set down as a
general remark. when you and your brother be friend, his doing be
indifferent to you. when you have quarrel, all his outgoing and
incoming you know, as if you be his spy.
very soon then after her arrival, Rebecca begin to take a regular place
in Mrs. Crawley's bulletin from the Hall. it be to this effect: "the
black porker's kill--weigh x stone--salt the side--pig's pudding
and leg of pork for dinner. Mr. Cramp from Mudbury, over with Sir Pitt
about put John Blackmore in gaol--Mr. Pitt at meeting (with all the
name of the people who attended)--my lady as usual--the young lady
with the governess."
then the report would come--the new governess be a rare manager--Sir
Pitt be very sweet on she--Mr. Crawley too--he be read tract to
her--"what an abandon wretch!" say little, eager, active,
black-faced Mrs. Bute Crawley.
finally, the report be that the governess have "come round"
everybody, write Sir Pitt's letter, do his business, manage his
account--have the upper hand of the whole house, my lady, Mr. Crawley,
the girl and all--at which Mrs. Crawley declare she be an artful
hussy, and have some dreadful design in view. thus the doing at the
Hall be the great food for conversation at the Rectory, and Mrs.
Bute's bright eye spy out everything that take place in the enemy's
camp--everything and a great deal besides.
Mrs. Bute Crawley to Miss Pinkerton, the Mall, Chiswick.
Rectory, Queen's Crawley, december--.
my dear madam,--although it be so many year since I profit by your
delightful and invaluable instruction, yet I have ever retain the
FONDEST and most reverential regard for Miss Pinkerton, and DEAR
Chiswick. I hope your health be good. the world and the cause of
education cannot afford to lose Miss Pinkerton for many many year.
when my friend, Lady Fuddleston, mention that her dear girl require
an instructress (I be too poor to engage a governess for mine, but be
I not educate at chiswick?)--"who," I exclaim, "can we consult but
the excellent, the incomparable Miss Pinkerton?" in a word, have you,
dear madam, any lady on your list, whose service might be make
available to my kind friend and neighbour? I assure you she will take
no governess but of your choosing.
my dear husband be pleased to say that he like everything which come
from MISS PINKERTON'S SCHOOL. how I wish I could present he and my
beloved girl to the friend of my youth, and the ADMIRED of the great
lexicographer of our country! if you ever travel into Hampshire, Mr.
Crawley beg I to say, he hop you will adorn our RURAL RECTORY with
your presence. 'tis the humble but happy home of
your affectionate Martha Crawley
P.S. Mr. Crawley's brother, the baronet, with whom we be not, alas!
upon those term of UNITY in which it become BRETHREN to DWELL, have a
governess for his little girl, who, I be tell, have the good fortune to
be educate at Chiswick. I hear various report of she; and as I have
the tender interest in my dear little niece, whom I wish, in
spite of family difference, to see among my own child--and as I
long to be attentive to any PUPIL of yours--do, my dear Miss Pinkerton,
tell I the history of this young lady, whom, for your sake, I be most
anxious to befriend.--m. C.
Miss Pinkerton to Mrs. Bute Crawley.
Johnson House, Chiswick, Dec. 18--.
dear madam,--i have the honour to acknowledge your polite
communication, to which I promptly reply. 'tis most gratify to one
in my most arduous position to find that my maternal care have
elicit a responsive affection; and to recognize in the amiable Mrs.
Bute Crawley my excellent pupil of former year, the sprightly and
accomplish Miss Martha MacTavish. I be happy to have under my charge
now the daughter of many of those who be your contemporary at my
establishment--what pleasure it would give I if your own beloved young
lady have need of my instructive superintendence!
present my respectful compliment to Lady Fuddleston, I have the
honour (epistolarily) to introduce to her ladyship my two friend, Miss
Tuffin and Miss Hawky.
either of these young lady be PERFECTLY qualified to instruct in
Greek, Latin, and the rudiment of Hebrew; in mathematic and history;
in Spanish, french, italian, and geography; in music, vocal and
instrumental; in dancing, without the aid of a master; and in the
element of natural science. in the use of the globe both be
proficient. in addition to these Miss Tuffin, who be daughter of the
late Reverend Thomas Tuffin (Fellow of Corpus College, Cambridge), can
instruct in the syriac language, and the element of constitutional
law. but as she be only eighteen year of age, and of exceedingly
pleasing personal appearance, perhaps this young lady may be
objectionable in Sir Huddleston Fuddleston's family.
Miss Letitia Hawky, on the other hand, be not personally well-favour.
she be-twenty-nine; her face be much pit with the small-pox. she
have a halt in her gait, red hair, and a trifling obliquity of vision.
both lady be endow with every MORAL and RELIGIOUS VIRTUE. their
term, of course, be such as their accomplishment merit. with my
most grateful respect to the Reverend Bute Crawley, I have the honour
to be,
Dear Madam,
your most faithful and obedient servant, Barbara Pinkerton.
P.S. the Miss Sharp, whom you mention as governess to Sir Pitt
Crawley, Bart., M.P., be a pupil of mine, and I have nothing to say in
her disfavour. though her appearance be disagreeable, we cannot control
the operation of nature: and though her parent be disreputable (her
father be a painter, several time bankrupt, and her mother, as I
have since learn, with horror, a dancer at the Opera); yet her
talent be considerable, and I cannot regret that I receive she OUT
of charity. my dread be, lest the principle of the mother--who be
represent to I as a French Countess, force to emigrate in the late
revolutionary horror; but who, as I have since find, be a person of
the very low order and moral--should at any time prove to be
HEREDITARY in the unhappy young woman whom I take as an outcast. but
her principle have hitherto be correct (I believe), and I be sure
nothing will occur to injure they in the elegant and refined circle of
the eminent Sir Pitt Crawley.
Miss Rebecca Sharp to Miss Amelia Sedley.
I have not write to my beloved Amelia for these many week past, for
what news be there to tell of the saying and doing at Humdrum Hall,
as I have christen it; and what do you care whether the turnip crop
be good or bad; whether the fat pig weigh thirteen stone or fourteen;
and whether the beast thrive well upon mangelwurzel? every day since I
last write have be like its neighbour. before breakfast, a walk with
Sir Pitt and his spud; after breakfast study (such as they be) in
the schoolroom; after schoolroom, read and write about lawyer,
lease, coal-mine, canal, with Sir Pitt (whose secretary I be
become); after dinner, Mr. Crawley's discourse on the baronet's
backgammon; during both of which amusement my lady look on with equal
placidity. she have become rather more interesting by be ail of
late, which have bring a new visitor to the Hall, in the person of a
young doctor. well, my dear, young woman need never despair. the young
doctor give a certain friend of yours to understand that, if she choose
to be Mrs. Glauber, she be welcome to ornament the surgery! I tell his
impudence that the gilt pestle and mortar be quite ornament enough; as
if I be bear, indeed, to be a country surgeon's wife! Mr. Glauber go
home seriously indispose at his rebuff, take a cool draught, and be
now quite cure. Sir Pitt applaud my resolution highly; he would be
sorry to lose his little secretary, I think; and I believe the old
wretch like I as much as it be in his nature to like any one. Marry,
indeed! and with a country apothecary, after-- No, no, one cannot so
soon forget old association, about which I will talk no more. let we
return to Humdrum Hall.
for some time past it be Humdrum Hall no long. my dear, Miss Crawley
have arrive with her fat horse, fat servant, fat spaniel--the great
rich Miss Crawley, with seventy thousand pound in the five per cent.,
whom, or I have well say which, her two brother adore. she look
very apoplectic, the dear soul; no wonder her brother be anxious
about she. you should see they struggle to settle her cushion, or
to hand her coffee! "when I come into the country," she say (for she
have a great deal of humour), "I leave my toady, Miss Briggs, at home.
my brother be my toady here, my dear, and a pretty pair they be!"
when she come into the country our hall be throw open, and for a
month, at least, you would fancy old Sir Walpole be come to life
again. we have dinner-party, and drive out in the coach-and-four the
footman put on their new canary-colour livery; we drink claret
and champagne as if we be accustomed to it every day. we have wax
candle in the schoolroom, and fire to warm ourselves with. Lady
Crawley be make to put on the bright pea-green in her wardrobe, and
my pupil leave off their thick shoe and tight old tartan pelisse,
and wear silk stocking and muslin frock, as fashionable baronet'
daughter should. Rose come in yesterday in a sad plight--the
Wiltshire sow (an enormous pet of her) run she down, and destroy a
most lovely flower lilac silk dress by dance over it--have this
happen a week ago, Sir Pitt would have swear frightfully, have box
the poor wretch's ear, and put she upon bread and water for a month.
all he say be, "Iwill serve you out, Miss, when your aunt's gone," and
laugh off the accident as quite trivial. let we hope his wrath will
have pass away before Miss Crawley's departure. I hope so, for Miss
Rose's sake, I be sure. what a charming reconciler and peacemaker money
be!
another admirable effect of Miss Crawley and her seventy thousand
pound be to be see in the conduct of the two brother Crawley. I
mean the baronet and the rector, not OUR brother--but the former, who
hate each other all the year round, become quite loving at Christmas.
I write to you last year how the abominable horse-race rector be in
the habit of preach clumsy sermon at we at church, and how Sir Pitt
snore in answer. when Miss Crawley arrive there be no such thing as
quarrelling hear of--the Hall visit the Rectory, and vice versa--the
parson and the Baronet talk about the pig and the poacher, and the
county business, in the most affable manner, and without quarrel in
their cup, I believe--indeed Miss Crawley willnot hear of their
quarrelling, and vow that she will leave her money to the Shropshire
Crawleys if they offend she. if they be clever people, those
Shropshire Crawleys, they might have it all, I think; but the
Shropshire Crawley be a clergyman like his Hampshire cousin, and
mortally offend Miss Crawley (who have flee thither in a fit of rage
against her impracticable brother) by some strait-laced notion of
morality. he would have prayer in the house, I believe.
our sermon book be shut up when Miss Crawley arrive, and Mr. Pitt,
whom she abominate, find it convenient to go to town. on the other
hand, the young dandy--"blood," I believe, be the term--Captain Crawley
make his appearance, and I suppose you will like to know what sort of
a person he be.
well, he be a very large young dandy. he be six foot high, and speak
with a great voice; and swear a great deal; and order about the
servant, who all adore he nevertheless; for he be very generous of
his money, and the domestic will do anything for he. last week the
keeper almost kill a bailiff and his man who come down from London
to arrest the Captain, and who be find lurk about the Park
wall--they beat they, duck they, and be go to shoot they for
poacher, but the baronet interfere.
the Captain have a hearty contempt for his father, I can see, and call
he an old put, an old SNOB, an old CHAW-BACON, and numberless other
pretty name. he have a dreadful reputation among the lady. he bring
his hunter home with he, live with the Squires of the county, ask
whom he please to dinner, and Sir Pitt dare not say no, for fear of
offend Miss Crawley, and miss his legacy when she die of she
apoplexy. shall I tell you a compliment the Captain pay I? I must,
it be so pretty. one evening we actually have a dance; there be Sir
Huddleston Fuddleston and his family, Sir Giles Wapshot and his young
lady, and I donot know how many more. well, I hear he say--"By
Jove, shebe a neat little filly!" mean your humble servant; and he
do I the honour to dance two country-dance with I. he get on
pretty gaily with the young squire, with whom he drink, bet, rid,
and talk about hunting and shooting; but he say the country girl be
BORES; indeed, I donot think he be far wrong. you should see the
contempt with which they look down on poor I! when they dance I sit
and play the piano very demurely; but the other night, come in rather
flush from the dining-room, and see I employ in this way, he
swear out loud that I be the good dancer in the room, and take a great
oath that he would have the fiddler from Mudbury.
"Iwill go and play a country-dance," say Mrs. Bute Crawley, very
readily (she be a little, black-face old woman in a turban, rather
crooked, and with very twinkle eye); and after the Captain and your
poor little Rebecca have perform a dance together, do you know she
actually do I the honour to compliment I upon my step! such a thing
be never hear of before; the proud Mrs. Bute Crawley, first cousin to
the Earl of Tiptoff, who willnot condescend to visit Lady Crawley, except
when her sister be in the country. Poor Lady Crawley! during most part
of these gaiety, she be upstairs take pill.
Mrs. Bute have all of a sudden take a great fancy to I. "my dear Miss
Sharp," she say, "why not bring over your girl to the Rectory?--their
cousin will be so happy to see they." I know what she mean. Signor
Clementi do not teach we the piano for nothing; at which price Mrs.
Bute hop to get a professor for her child. I can see through her
scheme, as though she tell they to I; but I shall go, as I be
determined to make myself agreeable--be it not a poor governess's duty,
who have not a friend or protector in the world? the Rector's wife pay
I a score of compliment about the progress my pupil make, and
thought, no doubt, to touch my heart--poor, simple, country soul!--as
if I care a fig about my pupil!
your India muslin and your pink silk, dear Amelia, be say to
become I very well. they be a good deal wear now; but, you know, we
poor girl cannot afford des fraiche toilette. happy, happy you! who
have but to drive to St. James's Street, and a dear mother who will
give you any thing you ask. farewell, dear girl,
your affectionate rebecca.
P.S.--I wish you could have see the face of the Miss Blackbrooks
(Admiral Blackbrook's daughter, my dear), fine young lady, with
dress from London, when Captain Rawdon select poor I for a partner!
when Mrs. Bute Crawley (whose artifice our ingenious Rebecca have so
soon discover) have procure from Miss Sharp the promise of a visit,
she induce the all-powerful Miss Crawley to make the necessary
application to Sir Pitt, and the good-natured old lady, who love to be
gay herself, and to see every one gay and happy round about she, be
quite charm, and ready to establish a reconciliation and intimacy
between her two brother. it be therefore agree that the young people
of both family should visit each other frequently for the future, and
the friendship of course last as long as the jovial old mediatrix be
there to keep the peace.
"why do you ask that scoundrel, Rawdon Crawley, to dine?" say the
Rector to his lady, as they be walk home through the park. "I
donot want the fellow. he look down upon we country people as so many
blackamoor. hebe never content unless he get my yellow-seal wine,
which cost I ten shilling a bottle, hang he! besides, hebe such an
infernal character--hebe a gambler--hebe a drunkard--hebe a profligate
in every way. he shoot a man in a duel--hebe over head and ear in
debt, and hebe rob I and mine of the good part of Miss Crawley's
fortune. Waxy say she have him"--here the Rector shake his fist at the
moon, with something very like an oath, and add, in a melancholious
tone, "--down in her will for fifty thousand; and there willnot be above
thirty to divide."
"I think shebe go," say the Rector's wife. "she be very red in
the face when we leave dinner. I be oblige to unlace she."
"she drink seven glass of champagne," say the reverend gentleman, in
a low voice; "and filthy champagne it be, too, that my brother poison
we with--but you woman never know whatbe what."
"we know nothing," say Mrs. Bute Crawley.
"she drink cherry-brandy after dinner," continue his reverence, "and
take curacao with her coffee. I wouldnot take a glass for a five-pound
note: it kill I with heartburn. she cannot stand it, Mrs.
Crawley--she must go--flesh and blood willnot bear it! and I lie five to
two, Matilda drop in a year."
indulge in these solemn speculation, and think about his debt,
and his son Jim at College, and Frank at Woolwich, and the four girl,
who be no beauty, poor thing, and would not have a penny but what
they get from the aunt's expect legacy, the Rector and his lady
walk on for a while.
"Pitt cannot be such an infernal villain as to sell the reversion of the
living. and that Methodist milksop of an eld son look to
Parliament," continue Mr. Crawley, after a pause.
"Sir Pitt Crawley will do anything," say the Rector's wife. "we must
get Miss Crawley to make he promise it to James."
"Pitt will promise anything," reply the brother. "he promise hewould
pay my college bill, when my father die; he promise hewould build the
new wing to the Rectory; he promise hewould let I have Jibb's field and
the six-acre Meadow--and much he execute his promise! and itbe to
this man's son--this scoundrel, gambler, swindler, murderer of a Rawdon
Crawley, that Matilda leave the bulk of her money. I say itbe
un-Christian. by Jove, it be. the infamous dog have get every vice
except hypocrisy, and that belong to his brother."
"Hush, my dearest love! webe in Sir Pitt's ground," interpose his
wife.
"I say he have get every vice, Mrs. Crawley. donot Ma'am, bully I.
donot he shoot Captain Marker? donot he rob young Lord Dovedale at
the Cocoa-Tree? donot he cross the fight between Bill Soames and the
Cheshire Trump, by which I lose forty pound? you know he do; and as
for the woman, why, you hear that before I, in my own magistrate's
room."
"for heaven's sake, Mr. Crawley," say the lady, "spare I the detail."
"and you ask this villain into your house!" continue the exasperate
Rector. "you, the mother of a young family--the wife of a clergyman of
the Church of England. by Jove!"
"Bute Crawley, you be a fool," say the Rector's wife scornfully.
"well, Ma'am, fool or not--and I donot say, Martha, Ibe so clever as
you be, I never do. but I willnot meet Rawdon Crawley, thatbe flat.
Iwill go over to Huddleston, that I will, and see his black greyhound,
Mrs. Crawley; and Iwill run Lancelot against he for fifty. by Jove, I
will; or against any dog in England. but I willnot meet that beast
Rawdon Crawley."
"Mr. Crawley, you be intoxicate, as usual," reply his wife. and
the next morning, when the Rector wake, and call for small beer, she
put he in mind of his promise to visit Sir Huddleston Fuddleston on
Saturday, and as he know he should have a wet night, it be agree that
he might gallop back again in time for church on Sunday morning. thus
it will be see that the parishioner of Crawley be equally happy in
their squire and in their Rector.
Miss Crawley have not long be establish at the Hall before Rebecca's
fascination have win the heart of that good-natured London rake, as
they have of the country innocent whom we have be describe. take
her accustomed drive, one day, she think fit to order that "that
little governess" should accompany she to Mudbury. before they have
return Rebecca have make a conquest of she; have make her laugh four
time, and amuse she during the whole of the little journey.
"not let Miss Sharp dine at table!" say she to Sir Pitt, who have
arrange a dinner of ceremony, and ask all the neighbour baronet.
"my dear creature, do you suppose I can talk about the nursery with
Lady Fuddleston, or discuss justice' business with that goose, old Sir
Giles Wapshot? I insist upon Miss Sharp appear. let Lady Crawley
remain upstairs, if there be no room. but little Miss Sharp! why, shebe
the only person fit to talk to in the county!"
of course, after such a peremptory order as this, Miss Sharp, the
governess, receive command to dine with the illustrious company below
stair. and when Sir Huddleston have, with great pomp and ceremony,
hand Miss Crawley in to dinner, and be prepare to take his place
by her side, the old lady cry out, in a shrill voice, "Becky Sharp!
Miss Sharp! come you and sit by I and amuse I; and let Sir
Huddleston sit by Lady Wapshot."
when the party be over, and the carriage have roll away, the
insatiable Miss Crawley would say, "come to my dressing room, Becky,
and let we abuse the company"--which, between they, this pair of
friend do perfectly. Old Sir Huddleston wheeze a great deal at
dinner; Sir Giles Wapshot have a particularly noisy manner of imbibe
his soup, and her ladyship a wink of the left eye; all of which Becky
caricature to admiration; as well as the particular of the night's
conversation; the politic; the war; the quarter-session; the famous
run with the H.H., and those heavy and dreary theme, about which
country gentleman converse. as for the Misses Wapshot's toilette and
Lady Fuddleston's famous yellow hat, Miss Sharp tear they to tatter,
to the infinite amusement of her audience.
"my dear, you be a perfect trouvaille," Miss Crawley would say. "I
wish you could come to I in London, but I couldnot make a butt of you
as I do of poor Briggs no, no, you little sly creature; you be too
clever--Isn't she, Firkin?"
Mrs. Firkin (who be dress the very small remnant of hair which
remain on Miss Crawley's pate), fling up her head and say, "I think
Miss be very clever," with the most kill sarcastic air. in fact,
Mrs. Firkin have that natural jealousy which be one of the main
principle of every honest woman.
after rebuff Sir Huddleston Fuddleston, Miss Crawley order that
Rawdon Crawley should lead she in to dinner every day, and that Becky
should follow with her cushion--or else she would have Becky's arm and
Rawdon with the pillow. "we must sit together," she say. "webe the
only three Christians in the county, my love"--in which case, it must
be confess, that religion be at a very low ebb in the county of
hant.
besides be such a fine religionist, Miss Crawley be, as we have
say, an ultra-liberal in opinion, and always take occasion to express
these in the most candid manner.
"what be birth, my dear!" she would say to rebecca--"look at my brother
Pitt; look at the Huddlestons, who have be here since Henry II; look
at poor Bute at the parsonage--be any one of they equal to you in
intelligence or breeding? equal to you--they be not even equal to poor
dear Briggs, my companion, or Bowls, my butler. you, my love, be a
little paragon--positively a little jewel--you have more brain than
half the shire--if merit have its reward you ought to be a Duchess--no,
there ought to be no duchess at all--but you ought to have no
superior, and I consider you, my love, as my equal in every respect;
and--will you put some coal on the fire, my dear; and will you pick
this dress of mine, and alter it, you who can do it so well?" so this
old philanthropist use to make her equal run of her errand, execute
her millinery, and read she to sleep with french novel, every night.
at this time, as some old reader may recollect, the genteel world have
be throw into a considerable state of excitement by two event,
which, as the paper say, might give employment to the gentleman of the
long robe. Ensign Shafton have run away with Lady Barbara Fitzurse, the
Earl of Bruin's daughter and heiress; and poor Vere Vane, a gentleman
who, up to forty, have maintain a most respectable character and
rear a numerous family, suddenly and outrageously leave his home, for
the sake of Mrs. Rougemont, the actress, who be sixty-five year of
age.
"that be the most beautiful part of dear Lord Nelson's character,"
Miss Crawley say. "he go to the deuce for a woman. there must be
good in a man who will do that. I adore all impudent matches.-- what
I like well, be for a nobleman to marry a miller's daughter, as Lord
Flowerdale do--it make all the woman so angry--I wish some great man
would run away with you, my dear; Ibe sure yoube pretty enough."
"two post-boys!--oh, it would be delightful!" Rebecca own.
"and what I like next well, be for a poor fellow to run away with a
rich girl. I have set my heart on Rawdon run away with some one."
"a rich some one, or a poor some one?"
"why, you goose! Rawdon have not a shilling but what I give he. he be
crible de dette--he must repair his fortune, and succeed in the
world."
"be he very clever?" rebecca ask.
"Clever, my love?--not an idea in the world beyond his horse, and his
regiment, and his hunting, and his play; but he must succeed--hebe so
delightfully wicked. donot you know he have hit a man, and shoot an
injure father through the hat only? hebe adore in his regiment; and
all the young man at Wattier's and the Cocoa-Tree swear by he."
when Miss Rebecca Sharp write to her beloved friend the account of the
little ball at Queen's Crawley, and the manner in which, for the first
time, Captain Crawley have distinguish she, she do not, strange to
relate, give an altogether accurate account of the transaction. the
Captain have distinguish she a great number of time before. the
Captain have meet she in a half-score of walk. the Captain have light
upon she in a half-hundred of corridor and passage. the Captain have
hang over her piano twenty time of an evening (my Lady be now
upstairs, be ill, and nobody heed she) as Miss Sharp sing. the
Captain have write her note (the good that the great blundering
dragoon could devise and spell; but dulness get on as well as any
other quality with woman). but when he put the first of the note into
the leaf of the song she be sing, the little governess, rise
and look he steadily in the face, take up the triangular missive
daintily, and wave it about as if it be a cocked hat, and she,
advance to the enemy, pop the note into the fire, and make he a
very low curtsey, and go back to her place, and begin to sing away
again more merrily than ever.
"whatbe that?" say Miss Crawley, interrupt in her after-dinner doze
by the stoppage of the music.
"itbe a false note," Miss Sharp say with a laugh; and Rawdon Crawley
fume with rage and mortification.
see the evident partiality of Miss Crawley for the new governess,
how good it be of Mrs. Bute Crawley not to be jealous, and to welcome
the young lady to the Rectory, and not only she, but Rawdon Crawley,
her husband's rival in the Old Maid's five per cent! they become very
fond of each other's society, Mrs. Crawley and her nephew. he give up
hunting; he decline entertainment at Fuddleston: he would not dine
with the mess of the depot at Mudbury: his great pleasure be to stroll
over to Crawley parsonage--whither Miss Crawley come too; and as their
mamma be ill, why not the child with Miss Sharp? so the child
(little dear!) come with Miss Sharp; and of an evening some of the
party would walk back together. not Miss Crawley--she prefer she
carriage--but the walk over the rectory field, and in at the little
park wicket, and through the dark plantation, and up the checker
avenue to Queen's Crawley, be charming in the moonlight to two such
lover of the picturesque as the Captain and Miss Rebecca.
"o those star, those star!" Miss Rebecca would say, turn she
twinkle green eye up towards they. "I feel myself almost a spirit
when I gaze upon they."
"o--ah--Gad--yes, so do I exactly, Miss Sharp," the other enthusiast
reply. "you donot mind my cigar, do you, Miss Sharp?" Miss Sharp
love the smell of a cigar out of door beyond everything in the
world--and she just taste one too, in the prettiest way possible, and
give a little puff, and a little scream, and a little giggle, and
restore the delicacy to the Captain, who twirl his moustache, and
straightway puff it into a blaze that glow quite red in the dark
plantation, and swore--"jove--aw--Gad--aw--itbe the fine segaw I ever
smoke in the world aw," for his intellect and conversation be alike
brilliant and become to a heavy young dragoon.
Old Sir Pitt, who be take his pipe and beer, and talk to John
Horrocks about a "ship" that be to be kill, espy the pair so
occupy from his study-window, and with dreadful oath swear that if
it benot for Miss Crawley, hewould take Rawdon and bundle un out of
door, like a rogue as he be.
"he be a bad'n, sure enough," Mr. Horrocks remark; "and his man
Flethers be wuss, and have make such a row in the housekeeper's room
about the dinner and hale, as no lord would make--but I think Miss
Sharp's a match for'n, Sir Pitt," he add, after a pause.
and so, in truth, she be--for father and son too.
CHAPTER XII
quite a sentimental chapter
we must now take leave of Arcadia, and those amiable people practise
the rural virtue there, and travel back to London, to inquire what have
become of Miss Amelia "we donot care a fig for she," write some
unknown correspondent with a pretty little handwriting and a pink seal
to her note. "she be fade and insipid," and add some more kind
remark in this strain, which I should never have repeat at all, but
that they be in truth prodigiously complimentary to the young lady
whom they concern.
have the beloved reader, in his experience of society, never hear
similar remark by good-natured female friend; who always wonder what
you can see in Miss Smith that be so fascinating; or what could induce
Major Jones to propose for that silly insignificant simper Miss
Thompson, who have nothing but her wax-doll face to recommend she? what
be there in a pair of pink cheek and blue eye forsooth? these dear
Moralists ask, and hint wisely that the gift of genius, the
accomplishment of the mind, the mastery of Mangnall's Questions, and a
ladylike knowledge of botany and geology, the knack of make poetry,
the power of rattle sonata in the Herz-manner, and so forth, be far
more valuable endowment for a female, than those fugitive charm which
a few year will inevitably tarnish. it be quite edify to hear
woman speculate upon the worthlessness and the duration of beauty.
but though virtue be a much fine thing, and those hapless creature
who suffer under the misfortune of good look ought to be continually
put in mind of the fate which await they; and though, very likely, the
heroic female character which lady admire be a more glorious and
beautiful object than the kind, fresh, smiling, artless, tender little
domestic goddess, whom man be incline to worship--yet the latter and
inferior sort of woman must have this consolation--that the man do
admire they after all; and that, in spite of all our kind friend'
warning and protest, we go on in our desperate error and folly, and
shall to the end of the chapter. indeed, for my own part, though I have
be repeatedly tell by person for whom I have the great respect,
that Miss Brown be an insignificant chit, and Mrs. White have nothing
but her petit minois chiffonne, and Mrs. Black have not a word to say
for herself; yet I know that I have have the most delightful
conversation with Mrs. Black (of course, my dear Madam, they be
inviolable): I see all the man in a cluster round Mrs. White's chair:
all the young fellow battle to dance with Miss Brown; and so I be
tempt to think that to be despise by her sex be a very great
compliment to a woman.
the young lady in Amelia's society do this for her very
satisfactorily. for instance, there be scarcely any point upon which
the Misses Osborne, George's sister, and the Mesdemoiselles Dobbin
agree so well as in their estimate of her very trifling merit: and
their wonder that their brother could find any charm in she. "we be
kind to she," the Misses Osborne say, a pair of fine black-browe
young lady who have have the good of governess, master, and
milliner; and they treat she with such extreme kindness and
condescension, and patronise she so insufferably, that the poor little
thing be in fact perfectly dumb in their presence, and to all outward
appearance as stupid as they think she. she make effort to like
they, as in duty bind, and as sister of her future husband. she
pass "long morning" with they--the most dreary and serious of
forenoon. she drive out solemnly in their great family coach with
they, and Miss Wirt their governess, that raw-bone vestal. they take
she to the ancient concert by way of a treat, and to the oratorio, and
to St. Paul's to see the charity child, where in such terror be she
of her friend, she almost do not dare be affect by the hymn the
child sing. their house be comfortable; their papa's table rich
and handsome; their society solemn and genteel; their self-respect
prodigious; they have the good pew at the Foundling: all their habit
be pompous and orderly, and all their amusement intolerably dull and
decorous. after every one of her visit (and oh how glad she be when
they be over!) Miss Osborne and Miss Maria Osborne, and Miss Wirt,
the vestal governess, ask each other with increase wonder, "what
could George find in that creature?"
how be this? some carping reader exclaim. how be it that Amelia, who
have such a number of friend at school, and be so beloved there, come
out into the world and be spurn by her discriminating sex? my dear
sir, there be no man at Miss Pinkerton's establishment except the old
dancing-master; and you would not have have the girl fall out about
HIM? when George, their handsome brother, run off directly after
breakfast, and din from home half-a-dozen time a week, no wonder the
neglect sister feel a little vexation. when young Bullock (of the
firm of Hulker, Bullock & Co., Bankers, Lombard Street), who have be
make up to Miss Maria the last two season, actually ask Amelia to
dance the cotillon, could you expect that the former young lady should
be please? and yet she say she be, like an artless forgiving
creature. "Ibe so delighted you like dear Amelia," she say quite
eagerly to Mr. Bullock after the dance. "shebe engaged to my brother
George; therebe not much in she, but shebe the well-natured and most
unaffected young creature: at home webe all so fond of she." dear
girl! who can calculate the depth of affection express in that
enthusiastic so?
Miss Wirt and these two affectionate young woman so earnestly and
frequently impress upon George Osborne's mind the enormity of the
sacrifice he be make, and his romantic generosity in throw
himself away upon Amelia, that Ibe not sure but that he really think
he be one of the most deserving character in the british army, and
give himself up to be love with a good deal of easy resignation.
somehow, although he leave home every morning, as be state, and din
abroad six day in the week, when his sister believe the infatuated
youth to be at Miss Sedley's apron-string: he be not always with
Amelia, whilst the world suppose he at her foot. certain it be that
on more occasion than one, when Captain Dobbin call to look for his
friend, Miss Osborne (who be very attentive to the Captain, and
anxious to hear his military story, and to know about the health of
his dear Mamma), would laughingly point to the opposite side of the
square, and say, "oh, you must go to the Sedleys' to ask for George; we
never see he from morning till night." at which kind of speech the
Captain would laugh in rather an absurd constrain manner, and turn
off the conversation, like a consummate man of the world, to some topic
of general interest, such as the Opera, the Prince's last ball at
Carlton House, or the weather--that blessing to society.
"what an innocent it be, that pet of your," Miss Maria would then say
to Miss Jane, upon the Captain's departure. "do you see how he
blush at the mention of poor George on duty?"
"itbe a pity Frederick Bullock havenot some of his modesty, Maria,"
reply the eld sister, with a toss of he head.
"Modesty! awkwardness you mean, Jane. I donot want Frederick to
trample a hole in my muslin frock, as Captain Dobbin do in yours at
Mrs. Perkins'."
"in your frock, he, he! how could he? benot he dance with Amelia?"
the fact be, when Captain Dobbin blush so, and look so awkward, he
remember a circumstance of which he do not think it be necessary to
inform the young lady, viz., that he have be call at Mr. Sedley's
house already, on the pretence of see George, of course, and George
benot there, only poor little Amelia, with rather a sad wistful face,
seat near the drawing-room window, who, after some very trifling
stupid talk, venture to ask, be there any truth in the report that
the regiment be soon to be order abroad; and have Captain Dobbin see
Mr. Osborne that day?
the regiment be not order abroad as yet; and Captain Dobbin have not
see George. "he be with his sister, most likely," the Captain say.
"should he go and fetch the truant?" so she give he her hand kindly
and gratefully: and he cross the square; and she wait and wait,
but George never come.
poor little tender heart! and so it go on hop and beat, and
longing and trusting. you see it be not much of a life to describe.
there be not much of what you call incident in it. only one feeling
all day--when will he come? only one think to sleep and wake upon. I
believe George be play billiard with Captain Cannon in Swallow
Street at the time when Amelia be ask Captain Dobbin about he; for
George be a jolly sociable fellow, and excellent in all game of skill.
once, after three day of absence, Miss Amelia put on her bonnet, and
actually invade the Osborne house. "what! leave our brother to come to
we?" say the young lady. "have you have a quarrel, Amelia? do tell
we!" no, indeed, there have be no quarrel. "who could quarrel with
he?" say she, with her eye fill with tear. she only come over
to--to see her dear friend; they have not meet for so long. and this
day she be so perfectly stupid and awkward, that the Misses Osborne
and their governess, who star after she as she go sadly away,
wonder more than ever what George could see in poor little Amelia.
of course they do. how be she to bare that timid little heart for
the inspection of those young lady with their bold black eye? it be
good that it should shrink and hide itself. I know the Misses Osborne
be excellent critic of a Cashmere shawl, or a pink satin slip; and
when Miss Turner have hers dye purple, and make into a spencer; and
when Miss Pickford have her ermine tippet twist into a muff and
trimming, I warrant you the change do not escape the two intelligent
young woman before mention. but there be thing, look you, of a
fine texture than fur or satin, and all Solomon's glory, and all the
wardrobe of the Queen of Sheba--thing whereof the beauty escape the
eye of many connoisseur. and there be sweet modest little soul on
which you light, fragrant and bloom tenderly in quiet shady place;
and there be garden-ornament, as big as brass warming-pan, that be
fit to stare the sun itself out of countenance. Miss Sedley be not of
the sunflower sort; and I say it be out of the rule of all proportion
to draw a violet of the size of a double dahlia.
no, indeed; the life of a good young girl who be in the paternal nest
as yet, cannot have many of those thrill incident to which the
heroine of romance commonly lay claim. snare or shot may take off
the old bird forage without--hawk may be abroad, from which they
escape or by whom they suffer; but the young one in the nest have a
pretty comfortable unromantic sort of existence in the down and the
straw, till it come to their turn, too, to get on the wing. while
Becky Sharp be on her own wing in the country, hop on all sort of
twig, and amid a multiplicity of trap, and peck up her food quite
harmless and successful, Amelia lie snug in her home of Russell Square;
if she go into the world, it be under the guidance of the elder;
nor do it seem that any evil could befall she or that opulent cheery
comfortable home in which she be affectionately shelter. Mamma have
her morning duty, and her daily drive, and the delightful round of
visit and shopping which form the amusement, or the profession as you
may call it, of the rich London lady. Papa conduct his mysterious
operation in the City--a stirring place in those day, when war be
rag all over Europe, and empire be be stake; when the
"Courier" newspaper have ten of thousand of subscriber; when one day
bring you a battle of Vittoria, another a burning of Moscow, or a
newsman's horn blow down Russell Square about dinner-time, announce
such a fact as--"battle of Leipsic--six hundred thousand man
engage--total defeat of the French--two hundred thousand kill." Old
Sedley once or twice come home with a very grave face; and no wonder,
when such news as this be agitate all the heart and all the stock
of Europe.
meanwhile matter go on in Russell Square, Bloomsbury, just as if
matter in Europe be not in the least disorganised. the retreat from
Leipsic make no difference in the number of meal Mr. Sambo take in the
servant' hall; the ally pour into France, and the dinner-bell rang
at five o'clock just as usual. I donot think poor Amelia care
anything about Brienne and Montmirail, or be fairly interested in the
war until the abdication of the Emperor; when she clap her hand and
say prayer--oh, how grateful! and fling herself into George Osborne's
arm with all her soul, to the astonishment of everybody who witness
that ebullition of sentiment. the fact be, peace be declare, Europe
be go to be at rest; the Corsican be overthrow, and Lieutenant
Osborne's regiment would not be order on service. that be the way
in which Miss Amelia reason. the fate of Europe be Lieutenant
George Osborne to she. his danger be over, she sing Te Deum. he
be her Europe: her emperor: her ally monarchs and august prince
regent. he be her sun and moon; and I believe she think the grand
illumination and ball at the Mansion House, give to the sovereign,
be especially in honour of George Osborne.
we have talk of shift, self, and poverty, as those dismal instructor
under whom poor Miss Becky Sharp get her education. now, love be Miss
Amelia Sedley's last tutoress, and it be amazing what progress our
young lady make under that popular teacher. in the course of fifteen
or eighteen month' daily and constant attention to this eminent
finishing governess, what a deal of secret Amelia learn, which Miss
Wirt and the black-eyed young lady over the way, which old Miss
Pinkerton of Chiswick herself, have no cognizance of! as, indeed, how
should any of those prim and reputable virgin? with Misses P. and W.
the tender passion be out of the question: I would not dare to breathe
such an idea regard they. Miss Maria Osborne, it be true, be
"attach" to Mr. Frederick Augustus Bullock, of the firm of Hulker,
Bullock & Bullock; but hers be a most respectable attachment, and she
would have take Bullock Senior just the same, her mind be fix--as
that of a well-breed young woman should be--upon a house in Park Lane, a
country house at Wimbledon, a handsome chariot, and two prodigious tall
horse and footman, and a fourth of the annual profit of the eminent
firm of Hulker & Bullock, all of which advantage be represent in
the person of Frederick Augustus. have orange blossom be invent
then (those touching emblem of female purity import by we from
France, where people's daughter be universally sell in marriage),
Miss Maria, I say, would have assume the spotless wreath, and step
into the travel carriage by the side of gouty, old, bald-headed,
bottle-nosed Bullock Senior; and devote her beautiful existence to his
happiness with perfect modesty--only the old gentleman be marry
already; so she bestow her young affection on the junior partner.
sweet, blooming, orange flower! the other day I see Miss Trotter
(that be), array in they, trip into the travel carriage at St.
George's, Hanover Square, and Lord Methuselah hobble in after. with
what an engaging modesty she pull down the blind of the chariot--the
dear innocent! there be half the carriage of Vanity Fair at the
wedding.
this be not the sort of love that finish Amelia's education; and in
the course of a year turn a good young girl into a good young
woman--to be a good wife presently, when the happy time should come.
this young person (perhaps it be very imprudent in her parent to
encourage she, and abet she in such idolatry and silly romantic idea)
love, with all her heart, the young officer in his Majesty's service
with whom we have make a brief acquaintance. she think about he the
very first moment on wake; and his be the very last name mention
in her prayer. she never have see a man so beautiful or so clever:
such a figure on horseback: such a dancer: such a hero in general.
talk of the Prince's bow! what be it to George's? she have see Mr.
Brummell, whom everybody praise so. compare such a person as that to
her George! not amongst all the beaux at the Opera (and there be
beaux in those day with actual opera hat) be there any one to equal
he. he be only good enough to be a fairy prince; and oh, what
magnanimity to stoop to such a humble Cinderella! Miss Pinkerton would
have try to check this blind devotion very likely, have she be
Amelia's confidante; but not with much success, depend upon it. it be
in the nature and instinct of some woman. some be make to scheme, and
some to love; and I wish any respected bachelor that read this may
take the sort that well like he.
while under this overpowering impression, Miss Amelia neglect she
twelve dear friend at Chiswick most cruelly, as such selfish people
commonly will do. she have but this subject, of course, to think about;
and Miss Saltire be too cold for a confidante, and she couldnot bring
her mind to tell Miss Swartz, the woolly-haired young heiress from St.
Kitt's. she have little Laura Martin home for the holiday; and my
belief be, she make a confidante of she, and promise that Laura should
come and live with she when she be married, and give Laura a great
deal of information regard the passion of love, which must have be
singularly useful and novel to that little person. alas, alas! I fear
poor Emmy have not a well-regulate mind.
what be her parent do, not to keep this little heart from beat
so fast? Old Sedley do not seem much to notice matter. he be graver
of late, and his City affair absorb he. Mrs. Sedley be of so easy
and uninquisitive a nature that she benot even jealous. Mr. Jos be
away, be besiege by an irish widow at Cheltenham. Amelia have the
house to herself--ah! too much to herself sometimes--not that she ever
doubt; for, to be sure, George must be at the Horse Guards; and he
cannot always get leave from Chatham; and he must see his friend and
sister, and mingle in society when in town (he, such an ornament to
every society!); and when he be with the regiment, he be too tired to
write long letter. I know where she keep that packet she have--and can
steal in and out of her chamber like Iachimo--like Iachimo? no--that
be a bad part. I will only act Moonshine, and peep harmless into the
bed where faith and beauty and innocence lie dream.
but if Osborne's be short and soldierlike letter, it must be
confess, that be Miss Sedley's letter to Mr. Osborne to be
publish, we should have to extend this novel to such a multiplicity
of volume as not the most sentimental reader could support; that she
not only fill sheet of large paper, but cross they with the most
astonishing perverseness; that she write whole page out of
poetry-book without the least pity; that she underline word and
passage with quite a frantic emphasis; and, in fine, give the usual
token of her condition. she benot a heroine. her letter be full
of repetition. she write rather doubtful grammar sometimes, and in she
verse take all sort of liberty with the metre. but oh, mesdames,
if you be not allow to touch the heart sometimes in spite of syntax,
and be not to be love until you all know the difference between
trimeter and tetrameter, may all Poetry go to the deuce, and every
schoolmaster perish miserably!
CHAPTER XIII
Sentimental and otherwise
I fear the gentleman to whom Miss Amelia's letter be address be
rather an obdurate critic. such a number of note follow Lieutenant
Osborne about the country, that he become almost ashamed of the joke
of his mess-room companion regard they, and order his servant
never to deliver they except at his private apartment. he be see
light his cigar with one, to the horror of Captain Dobbin, who, it
be my belief, would have give a bank-note for the document.
for some time George strove to keep the liaison a secret. there be a
woman in the case, that he admit. "and not the first either," say
Ensign Spooney to Ensign Stubble. "that Osborne's a devil of a fellow.
there be a judge's daughter at Demerara go almost mad about he;
then there be that beautiful quadroon girl, Miss Pye, at St.
Vincent's, you know; and since hebe be home, they say hebe a regular
Don Giovanni, by Jove."
Stubble and Spooney think that to be a "regular Don Giovanni, by
Jove" be one of the fine quality a man could possess, and
Osborne's reputation be prodigious amongst the young man of the
regiment. he be famous in field-sport, famous at a song, famous on
parade; free with his money, which be bountifully supply by his
father. his coat be well make than any man's in the regiment, and
he have more of they. he be adore by the man. he could drink more
than any officer of the whole mess, include old Heavytop, the
colonel. he could spar well than Knuckles, the private (who would
have be a corporal but for his drunkenness, and who have be in the
prize-ring); and be the good batter and bowler, out and out, of the
regimental club. he ride his own horse, Greased Lightning, and win the
Garrison cup at Quebec race. there be other people besides Amelia
who worship he. stubble and Spooney think he a sort of Apollo;
Dobbin take he to be an Admirable Crichton; and Mrs. Major O'Dowd
acknowledge he be an elegant young fellow, and put she in mind of
Fitzjurld Fogarty, Lord Castlefogarty's second son.
well, Stubble and Spooney and the rest indulge in most romantic
conjecture regard this female correspondent of Osborne's--opine
that it be a Duchess in London who be in love with he--or that it
be a General's daughter, who be engage to somebody else, and madly
attach to he--or that it be a Member of Parliament's lady, who
propose four horse and an elopement--or that it be some other victim
of a passion delightfully exciting, romantic, and disgraceful to all
party, on none of which conjecture would Osborne throw the least
light, leave his young admirer and friend to invent and arrange
their whole history.
and the real state of the case would never have be know at all in
the regiment but for Captain Dobbin's indiscretion. the Captain be
eat his breakfast one day in the mess-room, while Cackle, the
assistant-surgeon, and the two above-name worthy be speculate
upon Osborne's intrigue--Stubble hold out that the lady be a
Duchess about Queen Charlotte's court, and cackle vow she be an
opera-singer of the bad reputation. at this idea Dobbin become so
move, that though his mouth be full of egg and bread-and-butter at
the time, and though he ought not to have speak at all, yet he
couldnot help blurt out, "Cackle, yoube a stupid fool. yoube
always talk nonsense and scandal. Osborne be not go to run off
with a Duchess or ruin a milliner. Miss Sedley be one of the most
charming young woman that ever live. hebe be engage to she ever so
long; and the man who call she name have well not do so in my
hearing." with which, turn exceedingly red, Dobbin cease speak,
and almost choke himself with a cup of tea. the story be over the
regiment in half-an-hour; and that very evening Mrs. Major O'Dowd write
off to her sister Glorvina at O'Dowdstown not to hurry from
Dublin--young Osborne be prematurely engage already.
she compliment the Lieutenant in an appropriate speech over a glass
of whisky-toddy that evening, and he go home perfectly furious to
quarrel with Dobbin (who have decline Mrs. Major O'Dowd's party, and
sit in his own room play the flute, and, I believe, write poetry
in a very melancholy manner)--to quarrel with Dobbin for betray his
secret.
"who the deuce ask you to talk about my affair?" Osborne shout
indignantly. "why the devil be all the regiment to know that I be
go to be marry? why be that tattle old harridan, Peggy O'Dowd,
to make free with my name at her d--d supper-table, and advertise my
engagement over the three kingdom? after all, what right have you to
say I be engage, or to meddle in my business at all, Dobbin?"
"it seem to I," Captain Dobbin begin.
"seem be hang, Dobbin," his junior interrupt he. "I be under
obligation to you, I know it, a d--d deal too well too; but I willnot be
always sermonise by you because yoube five year my senior. Ibe
hang if Iwill stand your air of superiority and infernal pity and
patronage. pity and patronage! I should like to know in what Ibe your
inferior?"
"be you engaged?" Captain Dobbin interpose.
"what the devil's that to you or any one here if I be?"
"be you ashamed of it?" Dobbin resume.
"what right have you to ask I that question, sir? I should like to
know," George say.
"Good God, you donot mean to say you want to break off?" ask Dobbin,
start up.
"in other word, you ask I if Ibe a man of honour," say Osborne,
fiercely; "be that what you mean? youhave adopt such a tone regard
I lately that Ibe ------ if Iwill bear it any more."
"what have I do? Ihave tell you you be neglect a sweet girl,
George. Ihave tell you that when you go to town you ought to go to she,
and not to the gambling-house about St. James's."
"you want your money back, I suppose," say George, with a sneer.
"of course I do--I always do, donot I?" say Dobbin. "you speak like
a generous fellow."
"no, hang it, William, I beg your pardon"--here George interpose in a
fit of remorse; "you have be my friend in a hundred way, Heaven
know. youhave get I out of a score of scrape. when Crawley of the
Guards win that sum of money of I I should have be do but for you:
I know I should. but you shouldnot deal so hardly with I; you
shouldnot be always catechise I. I be very fond of Amelia; I adore
she, and that sort of thing. donot look angry. shebe faultless; I
know she be. but you see therebe no fun in win a thing unless you
play for it. hang it: the regimentbe just back from the West Indies, I
must have a little fling, and then when Ibe married Iwill reform; I will
upon my honour, now. and--I say--Dob--don't be angry with I, and
Iwill give you a hundred next month, when I know my father will stand
something handsome; and Iwill ask Heavytop for leave, and Iwill go to
town, and see Amelia to-morrow--there now, will that satisfy you?"
"it be impossible to be long angry with you, George," say the
good-natured Captain; "and as for the money, old boy, you know if I want
it youwould share your last shilling with I."
"that I would, by Jove, Dobbin," George say, with the great
generosity, though by the way he never have any money to spare.
"only I wish you have sow those wild oats of your, George. if you
could have see poor little Miss Emmy's face when she ask I about
you the other day, you would have pitch those billiard-ball to the
deuce. go and comfort she, you rascal. go and write she a long
letter. do something to make she happy; a very little will."
"I believe shebe d--d fond of I," the Lieutenant say, with a
self-satisfy air; and go off to finish the evening with some jolly
fellow in the mess-room.
Amelia meanwhile, in Russell Square, be look at the moon, which be
shin upon that peaceful spot, as well as upon the square of the
Chatham barrack, where Lieutenant Osborne be quarter, and think
to herself how her hero be employ. perhaps he be visit the
sentry, think she; perhaps he be bivouac; perhaps he be
attend the couch of a wound comrade, or study the art of war up
in his own desolate chamber. and her kind thought speed away as if they
be angel and have wing, and fly down the river to Chatham and
Rochester, strove to peep into the barracks where George be. . . . all
thing consider, I think it be as well the gate be shut, and the
sentry allow no one to pass; so that the poor little white-rob
angel could not hear the song those young fellow be roar over
the whisky-punch.
the day after the little conversation at Chatham barrack, young
Osborne, to show that he would be as good as his word, prepare to go
to town, thereby incur Captain Dobbin's applause. "I should have
like to make she a little present," Osborne say to his friend in
confidence, "only I be quite out of cash until my father tip up." but
Dobbin would not allow this good nature and generosity to be balk,
and so accommodate Mr. Osborne with a few pound note, which the
latter take after a little faint scruple.
and I dare say he would have buy something very handsome for Amelia;
only, get off the coach in Fleet Street, he be attract by a
handsome shirt-pin in a jeweller's window, which he could not resist;
and have pay for that, have very little money to spare for indulge
in any further exercise of kindness. never mind: you may be sure it
be not his present Amelia want. when he come to Russell Square,
her face light up as if he have be sunshine. the little care,
fear, tear, timid misgiving, sleepless fancy of I donot know how
many day and night, be forget, under one moment's influence of
that familiar, irresistible smile. he beam on she from the
drawing-room door--magnificent, with ambrosial whisker, like a god.
Sambo, whose face as he announce Captain Osbin (have confer a
brevet rank on that young officer) blaze with a sympathetic grin, see
the little girl start, and flush, and jump up from her watch-place
in the window; and Sambo retreat: and as soon as the door be shut,
she go flutter to Lieutenant George Osborne's heart as if it be
the only natural home for she to nestle in. oh, thou poor panting
little soul! the very fine tree in the whole forest, with the
straight stem, and the strong arm, and the thick foliage,
wherein you choose to build and coo, may be mark, for what you know,
and may be down with a crash ere long. what an old, old simile that
be, between man and timber!
in the meanwhile, George kiss she very kindly on her forehead and
glisten eye, and be very gracious and good; and she think his
diamond shirt-pin (which she have not know he to wear before) the
prettiest ornament ever see.
the observant reader, who have mark our young Lieutenant's previous
behaviour, and have preserve our report of the brief conversation which
he have just have with Captain Dobbin, have possibly come to certain
conclusion regard the character of Mr. Osborne. some cynical
Frenchman have say that there be two party to a love-transaction:
the one who love and the other who condescend to be so treat.
perhaps the love be occasionally on the man's side; perhaps on the
lady's. perhaps some infatuate swain have ere this mistaken
insensibility for modesty, dulness for maiden reserve, mere vacuity for
sweet bashfulness, and a goose, in a word, for a swan. perhaps some
beloved female subscriber have array an ass in the splendour and glory
of her imagination; admire his dulness as manly simplicity; worship
his selfishness as manly superiority; treat his stupidity as majestic
gravity, and use he as the brilliant fairy Titania do a certain
weaver at Athens. I think I have see such comedy of error go on
in the world. but this be certain, that Amelia believe her lover to
be one of the most gallant and brilliant man in the empire: and it be
possible Lieutenant Osborne think so too.
he be a little wild: how many young man be; and donot girl like a
rake well than a milksop? he havenot sow his wild oats as yet, but
he would soon: and quit the army now that peace be proclaim; the
corsican monster lock up at Elba; promotion by consequence over; and
no chance leave for the display of his undoubted military talent and
valour: and his allowance, with Amelia's settlement, would enable they
to take a snug place in the country somewhere, in a good sporting
neighbourhood; and he would hunt a little, and farm a little; and they
would be very happy. as for remain in the army as a married man,
that be impossible. Fancy Mrs. George Osborne in lodging in a county
town; or, bad still, in the East or West Indies, with a society of
officer, and patronize by Mrs. Major O'Dowd! Amelia die with
laugh at Osborne's story about Mrs. Major O'Dowd. he love she
much too fondly to subject she to that horrid woman and her
vulgarity, and the rough treatment of a soldier's wife. he donot
care for himself--not he; but his dear little girl should take the
place in society to which, as his wife, she be entitle: and to these
proposal you may be sure she accede, as she would to any other from
the same author.
hold this kind of conversation, and build numberless castle in
the air (which Amelia adorn with all sort of flower-garden, rustic
walk, country church, Sunday school, and the like; while George have
his mind's eye direct to the stable, the kennel, and the cellar),
this young pair pass away a couple of hour very pleasantly; and as
the Lieutenant have only that single day in town, and a great deal of
most important business to transact, it be propose that Miss Emmy
should dine with her future sister-in-law. this invitation be
accept joyfully. he conduct she to his sister; where he leave she
talk and prattle in a way that astonish those lady, who
think that George might make something of she; and he then go off
to transact his business.
in a word, he go out and eat ice at a pastry-cook's shop in Charing
Cross; try a new coat in Pall Mall; drop in at the Old
slaughter', and call for Captain Cannon; play eleven game at
billiard with the Captain, of which he win eight, and return to
Russell Square half an hour late for dinner, but in very good humour.
it be not so with old Mr. Osborne. when that gentleman come from the
City, and be welcome in the drawing-room by his daughter and the
elegant Miss Wirt, they see at once by his face--which be puffy,
solemn, and yellow at the good of time--and by the scowl and twitching
of his black eyebrow, that the heart within his large white waistcoat
be disturb and uneasy. when Amelia step forward to salute he,
which she always do with great trembling and timidity, he give a surly
grunt of recognition, and drop the little hand out of his great
hirsute paw without any attempt to hold it there. he look round
gloomily at his eld daughter; who, comprehend the meaning of his
look, which ask unmistakably, "why the devil be she here?" say at
once:
"George be in town, Papa; and have go to the Horse Guards, and will be
back to dinner."
"o he be, be he? I willnot have the dinner keep wait for he, Jane";
with which this worthy man lapse into his particular chair, and then
the utter silence in his genteel, well-furnish drawing-room be only
interrupt by the alarmed ticking of the great french clock.
when that chronometer, which be surmount by a cheerful brass group
of the sacrifice of Iphigenia, toll five in a heavy cathedral tone,
Mr. Osborne pull the bell at his right hand--violently, and the
butler rush up.
"Dinner!" roar Mr. Osborne.
"Mr. George benot come in, sir," interpose the man.
"Damn Mr. George, sir. be I master of the house? DINNER!" Mr. Osborne
scowl. Amelia tremble. a telegraphic communication of eye pass
between the other three lady. the obedient bell in the low region
begin ring the announcement of the meal. the tolling over, the head
of the family thrust his hand into the great tail-pocket of his great
blue coat with brass button, and without wait for a further
announcement stride downstairs alone, scowl over his shoulder at the
four female.
"whatbe the matter now, my dear?" ask one of the other, as they rise
and trip gingerly behind the sire. "I suppose the fund be
fall," whisper Miss Wirt; and so, tremble and in silence, this
hush female company follow their dark leader. they take their
place in silence. he growl out a blessing, which sound as gruffly
as a curse. the great silver dish-cover be remove. Amelia tremble
in her place, for she be next to the awful Osborne, and alone on her
side of the table--the gap be occasion by the absence of George.
"Soup?" say Mr. Osborne, clutch the ladle, fix his eye on she,
in a sepulchral tone; and have help she and the rest, do not speak
for a while.
"take Miss Sedley's plate away," at last he say. "she cannot eat the
soup--no more can I. itbe beastly. take away the soup, Hicks, and
to-morrow turn the cook out of the house, Jane."
have conclude his observation upon the soup, Mr. Osborne make a few
curt remark respect the fish, also of a savage and satirical
tendency, and curse Billingsgate with an emphasis quite worthy of the
place. then he lapse into silence, and swallow sundry glass of
wine, look more and more terrible, till a brisk knock at the door
tell of George's arrival when everybody begin to rally.
"he could not come before. General Daguilet have keep he wait at
the Horse Guards. never mind soup or fish. give he anything--he
donot care what. Capital mutton--capital everything." his good humour
contrast with his father's severity; and he rattle on unceasingly
during dinner, to the delight of all--of one especially, who need not
be mention.
as soon as the young lady have discuss the orange and the glass of
wine which form the ordinary conclusion of the dismal banquet at Mr.
Osborne's house, the signal to make sail for the drawing-room be
give, and they all arise and depart. Amelia hop George would soon
join they there. she begin play some of his favourite waltz (then
newly import) at the great carve-legged, leather-case grand piano
in the drawing-room overhead. this little artifice do not bring he.
he be deaf to the waltz; they grow fainter and fainter; the
discomfited performer leave the huge instrument presently; and though
her three friend perform some of the loud and most brilliant new
piece of their repertoire, she do not hear a single note, but sate
thinking, and bode evil. Old Osborne's scowl, terrific always, have
never before look so deadly to she. his eye follow she out of the
room, as if she have be guilty of something. when they bring she
coffee, she start as though it be a cup of poison which Mr. Hicks,
the butler, wish to propose to she. what mystery be there lurk?
oh, those woman! they nurse and cuddle their presentiment, and make
darling of their ugly thought, as they do of their deform
child.
the gloom on the paternal countenance have also impress George Osborne
with anxiety. with such eyebrow, and a look so decidedly bilious, how
be he to extract that money from the governor, of which George be
consumedly in want? he begin praise his father's wine. that be
generally a successful mean of cajole the old gentleman.
"we never get such Madeira in the West Indies, sir, as your. Colonel
Heavytop take off three bottle of that you send I down, under his
belt the other day."
"do he?" say the old gentleman. "it stand I in eight shilling a
bottle."
"will you take six guinea a dozen for it, sir?" say George, with a
laugh. "therebe one of the great man in the kingdom want some."
"do he?" growl the senior. "wish he may get it."
"when General Daguilet be at Chatham, sir, Heavytop give he a
breakfast, and ask I for some of the wine. the General like it
just as well--want a pipe for the Commander-in-chief. hebe his Royal
Highness's right-hand man."
"it be devilish fine wine," say the Eyebrows, and they look more
good-humour; and George be go to take advantage of this
complacency, and bring the supply question on the mahogany, when the
father, relapse into solemnity, though rather cordial in manner, bade
he ring the bell for claret. "and wewill see if thatbe as good as the
Madeira, George, to which his Royal Highness be welcome, Ibe sure. and
as we be drink it, Iwill talk to you about a matter of importance."
Amelia hear the claret bell ring as she sit nervously upstairs. she
think, somehow, it be a mysterious and presentimental bell. of the
presentiment which some people be always have, some surely must
come right.
"what I want to know, George," the old gentleman say, after slowly
smack his first bumper--"what I want to know be, how you
and--ah--that little thing upstairs, be carry on?"
"I think, sir, it be not hard to see," George say, with a
self-satisfied grin. "pretty clear, sir.--what capital wine!"
"what d'you mean, pretty clear, sir?"
"why, hang it, sir, donot push I too hard. Ibe a modest man.
I--ah--I donot set up to be a lady-killer; but I do own that shebe as
devilish fond of I as she can be. anybody can see that with half an
eye."
"and you yourself?"
"why, sir, donot you order I to marry she, and benot I a good boy?
havenot our papa settle it ever so long?"
"a pretty boy, indeed. havenot I hear of your doing, sir, with Lord
Tarquin, Captain Crawley of the Guards, the honourable Mr. Deuceace and
that set. have a care sir, have a care."
the old gentleman pronounce these aristocratic name with the great
gusto. whenever he meet a great man he grovel before he, and
my-lord he as only a free-bear Briton can do. he come home and
look out his history in the peerage: he introduce his name into his
daily conversation; he brag about his Lordship to his daughter. he
fall down prostrate and bask in he as a Neapolitan beggar do in
the sun. George be alarm when he hear the name. he fear his
father might have be inform of certain transaction at play. but
the old moralist ease he by say serenely:
"well, well, young man will be young man. and the comfort to I be,
George, that live in the good society in England, as I hope you do;
as I think you do; as my mean will allow you to do--"
"thank you, sir," say George, make his point at once. "one cannot
live with these great folk for nothing; and my purse, sir, look at
it"; and he hold up a little token which have be net by Amelia, and
contain the very last of Dobbin's pound note.
"you shallnot want, sir. the british merchant's son shallnot want, sir. my
guineas be as good as theirs, George, my boy; and I donot grudge them.
call on Mr. Chopper as you go through the City to-morrow; hewill have
something for you. I donot grudge money when I know yoube in good
society, because I know that good society can never go wrong. therebe
no pride in I. I be a humbly bear man--but you have have advantage.
make a good use of them. mix with the young nobility. therebe many of
them who cannot spend a dollar to your guinea, my boy. and as for the
pink bonnet (here from under the heavy eyebrow there come a knowing
and not very pleasing leer)--why boy will be boy. only therebe one
thing I order you to avoid, which, if you do not, Iwill cut you off with
a shilling, by Jove; and thatbe gamble."
"oh, of course, sir," say George.
"but to return to the other business about Amelia: why shouldnot you
marry high than a stockbroker's daughter, George--thatbe what I want
to know?"
"itbe a family business, sir,".says George, crack filbert. "you
and Mr. Sedley make the match a hundred year ago."
"I donot deny it; but people's position alter, sir. I donot deny that
Sedley make my fortune, or rather put I in the way of acquire, by my
own talent and genius, that proud position, which, I may say, I occupy
in the tallow trade and the City of London. Ihave show my gratitude to
Sedley; and hebe try it of late, sir, as my cheque-book can show.
George! I tell you in confidence I donot like the look of Mr.
Sedley's affair. my chief clerk, Mr. Chopper, do not like the look
of them, and hebe an old file, and know 'change as well as any man in
London. Hulker & Bullock be look shy at he. hebe be dabble
on his own account I fear. they say the Jeune Amelie be his, which be
take by the Yankee privateer molasse. and thatbe flat--unless I see
Amelia's ten thousand down you donot marry she. Iwill have no lame
duck's daughter in my family. pass the wine, sir--or ring for coffee."
with which Mr. Osborne spread out the evening paper, and George know
from this signal that the colloquy be end, and that his papa be
about to take a nap.
he hurry upstairs to Amelia in the high spirit. what be it that
make he more attentive to she on that night than he have be for a
long time--more eager to amuse she, more tender, more brilliant in
talk? be it that his generous heart warm to she at the prospect of
misfortune; or that the idea of lose the dear little prize make he
value it more?
she live upon the recollection of that happy evening for many day
afterwards, remember his word; his look; the song he sing; his
attitude, as he leant over she or look at she from a distance. as it
seem to she, no night ever pass so quickly at Mr. Osborne's house
before; and for once this young person be almost provoke to be angry
by the premature arrival of Mr. Sambo with her shawl.
George come and take a tender leave of she the next morning; and then
hurry off to the City, where he visit Mr. Chopper, his father's
head man, and receive from that gentleman a document which he
exchange at Hulker & Bullock's for a whole pocketful of money. as
George enter the house, old John Sedley be pass out of the
banker's parlour, look very dismal. but his godson be much too
elated to mark the worthy stockbroker's depression, or the dreary eye
which the kind old gentleman cast upon he. Young Bullock do not come
grin out of the parlour with he as have be his willnot in former
year.
and as the swing door of Hulker, Bullock & Co. close upon Mr.
Sedley, Mr. Quill, the cashier (whose benevolent occupation it be to
hand out crisp bank-note from a drawer and dispense sovereign out of
a copper shovel), wink at Mr. Driver, the clerk at the desk on his
right. Mr. Driver wink again.
"no go," Mr. D. whisper.
"not at no price," Mr. Q. say. "Mr. George Osborne, sir, how will
you take it?" George cram eagerly a quantity of note into his
pocket, and pay Dobbin fifty pound that very evening at mess.
that very evening Amelia write he the tender of long letter. her
heart be overflow with tenderness, but it still forebode evil.
what be the cause of Mr. Osborne's dark look? she ask. have any
difference arise between he and her papa? her poor papa return so
melancholy from the City, that all be alarmed about he at home--in
fine, there be four page of love and fear and hope and
foreboding.
"poor little Emmy--dear little Emmy. how fond she be of I," George
say, as he peruse the missive--"and Gad, what a headache that mix
punch have give I!" poor little Emmy, indeed.
CHAPTER XIV
Miss Crawley at home
about this time there drive up to an exceedingly snug and
well-appoint house in Park Lane, a travel chariot with a lozenge on
the panel, a discontent female in a green veil and crimp curl on
the rumble, and a large and confidential man on the box. it be the
equipage of our friend Miss Crawley, return from hant. the
carriage window be shut; the fat spaniel, whose head and tongue
ordinarily loll out of one of they, repose on the lap of the
discontent female. when the vehicle stop, a large round bundle of
shawl be take out of the carriage by the aid of various domestic
and a young lady who accompany the heap of cloak. that bundle
contain Miss Crawley, who be convey upstairs forthwith, and put
into a bed and chamber warm properly as for the reception of an
invalid. messenger go off for her physician and medical man. they
come, consult, prescribe, vanish. the young companion of Miss
Crawley, at the conclusion of their interview, come in to receive their
instruction, and administer those antiphlogistic medicine which the
eminent man order.
Captain Crawley of the Life Guards ride up from Knightsbridge Barracks
the next day; his black charger paw the straw before his invalid
aunt's door. he be most affectionate in his inquiry regard that
amiable relative. there seem to be much source of apprehension. he
find Miss Crawley's maid (the discontent female) unusually sulky and
despondent; he find Miss Briggs, her dame de compagnie, in tear alone
in the drawing-room. she have hasten home, hear of her beloved
friend's illness. she wish to fly to her couch, that couch which
she, Briggs, have so often smooth in the hour of sickness. she be
deny admission to Miss Crawley's apartment. a stranger be
administer her medicine--a stranger from the country--an odious
Miss ... --tears choke the utterance of the dame de compagnie, and
she bury her crush affection and her poor old red nose in her
pocket handkerchief.
Rawdon Crawley send up his name by the sulky femme de chambre, and Miss
Crawley's new companion, come trip down from the sick-room, put
a little hand into his as he step forward eagerly to meet she, give
a glance of great scorn at the bewildered Briggs, and beckon the
young Guardsman out of the back drawing-room, lead he downstairs into
that now desolate dining-parlour, where so many a good dinner have be
celebrate.
here these two talk for ten minute, discuss, no doubt, the
symptom of the old invalid above stair; at the end of which period
the parlour bell be ring briskly, and answer on that instant by Mr.
Bowls, Miss Crawley's large confidential butler (who, indeed, happen
to be at the keyhole during the most part of the interview); and the
Captain come out, curl his mustachio, mount the black charger
paw among the straw, to the admiration of the little blackguard boy
collect in the street. he look in at the dining-room window,
manage his horse, which curvet and caper beautifully--for one
instant the young person might be see at the window, when her figure
vanish, and, doubtless, she go upstairs again to resume the
affect duty of benevolence.
who could this young woman be, I wonder? that evening a little dinner
for two person be lay in the dining-room--when Mrs. Firkin, the
lady's maid, push into her mistress's apartment, and bustle about
there during the vacancy occasion by the departure of the new
nurse--and the latter and Miss Briggs sit down to the neat little meal.
Briggs be so much choke by emotion that she could hardly take a
morsel of meat. the young person carve a fowl with the utmost
delicacy, and ask so distinctly for egg-sauce, that poor Briggs,
before whom that delicious condiment be place, start, make a great
clattering with the ladle, and once more fall back in the most gush
hysterical state.
"have you not well give Miss Briggs a glass of wine?" say the person
to Mr. Bowls, the large confidential man. he do so. Briggs seize it
mechanically, gasp it down convulsively, moan a little, and begin
to play with the chicken on her plate.
"I think we shall be able to help each other," say the person with
great suavity: "and shall have no need of Mr. Bowls's kind service.
Mr. Bowls, if you please, we will ring when we want you." he go
downstairs, where, by the way, he vent the most horrid curse upon
the unoffending footman, his subordinate.
"it be a pity you take on so, Miss Briggs," the young lady say, with a
cool, slightly sarcastic, air.
"my dear friend be so ill, and wo-o-on't see I," gurgle out Briggs
in an agony of renew grief.
"shebe not very ill any more. console yourself, dear Miss Briggs. she
have only overeaten herself--that be all. she be greatly well. she
will soon be quite restore again. she be weak from be cupped and
from medical treatment, but she will rally immediately. pray console
yourself, and take a little more wine."
"but why, why willnot she see I again?" Miss Briggs bleat out. "oh,
Matilda, Matilda, after three-and-twenty year' tenderness! be this the
return to your poor, poor Arabella?"
"donot cry too much, poor arabella," the other say (with ever so
little of a grin); "she only willnot see you, because she say you donot
nurse she as well as I do. itbe no pleasure to I to sit up all night.
I wish you might do it instead."
"have I not tend that dear couch for year?" Arabella say, "and
now--"
"now she prefer somebody else. well, sick people have these fancy,
and must be humour. when shebe well I shall go."
"never, never," Arabella exclaim, madly inhale her salt-bottle.
"never be well or never go, Miss Briggs?" the other say, with the same
provoke good-nature. "Pooh--she will be well in a fortnight, when I
shall go back to my little pupil at Queen's Crawley, and to their
mother, who be a great deal more sick than our friend. you need not be
jealous about I, my dear Miss Briggs. I be a poor little girl without
any friend, or any harm in I. I donot want to supplant you in Miss
Crawley's good grace. she will forget I a week after I be go: and
her affection for you have be the work of year. give I a little
wine if you please, my dear Miss Briggs, and let we be friend. Ibe
sure I want friend."
the placable and soft-hearted Briggs speechlessly push out her hand
at this appeal; but she feel the desertion most keenly for all that,
and bitterly, bitterly moan the fickleness of her Matilda. at the end
of half an hour, the meal over, Miss Rebecca Sharp (for such,
astonishing to state, be the name of she who have be describe
ingeniously as "the person" hitherto), go upstairs again to her
patient's room, from which, with the most engaging politeness, she
eliminate poor Firkin. "thank you, Mrs. Firkin, that will quite do;
how nicely you make it! I will ring when anything be want." "thank
you"; and Firkin come downstairs in a tempest of jealousy, only the
more dangerous because she be force to confine it in her own bosom.
could it be the temp which, as she pass the landing of the first
floor, blow open the drawing-room door? no; it be stealthily open by
the hand of Briggs. Briggs have be on the watch. Briggs too well hear
the creak Firkin descend the stair, and the clink of the spoon and
gruel-basin the neglect female carry.
"well, Firkin?" say she, as the other enter the apartment. "well,
Jane?"
"wuss and wuss, Miss B.," Firkin say, wag her head.
"be she not well then?"
"she never speak but once, and I ask she if she feel a little more
easy, and she tell I to hold my stupid tongue. oh, Miss B., I never
think to have see this day!" and the water-work again begin to
play.
"what sort of a person be this Miss Sharp, Firkin? I little think,
while enjoy my Christmas revel in the elegant home of my firm
friend, the Reverend Lionel Delamere and his amiable lady, to find a
stranger have take my place in the affection of my dearest, my still
dear Matilda!" Miss Briggs, it will be see by her language, be of
a literary and sentimental turn, and have once publish a volume of
poems--"trill of the Nightingale"--by subscription.
"Miss B., they be all infatyate about that young woman," Firkin
reply. "Sir Pitt wouldnot have let she go, but he daredn't refuse
Miss Crawley anything. Mrs. Bute at the rectory jist as bad--never
happy out of her sight. the Capting quite wild about she. Mr. Crawley
mortial jealous. since Miss C. be take ill, she willnot have nobody near
she but Miss Sharp, I cannot tell for where nor for why; and I think
somethink have bewidge everybody."
Rebecca pass that night in constant watching upon Miss Crawley; the
next night the old lady sleep so comfortably, that Rebecca have time for
several hour' comfortable repose herself on the sofa, at the foot of
her patroness's bed; very soon, Miss Crawley be so well that she sit
up and laugh heartily at a perfect imitation of Miss Briggs and her
grief, which Rebecca describe to she. Briggs' weeping snuffle, and her
manner of use the handkerchief, be so completely render that Miss
Crawley become quite cheerful, to the admiration of the doctor when
they visit she, who usually find this worthy woman of the world,
when the least sickness attack she, under the most abject depression
and terror of death.
Captain Crawley come every day, and receive bulletin from Miss
Rebecca respect his aunt's health. this improve so rapidly, that
poor Briggs be allow to see her patroness; and person with tender
heart may imagine the smothered emotion of that sentimental female,
and the affect nature of the interview.
Miss Crawley like to have Briggs in a good deal soon. rebecca use to
mimic she to her face with the most admirable gravity, thereby
render the imitation doubly piquant to her worthy patroness.
the cause which have lead to the deplorable illness of Miss Crawley, and
her departure from her brother's house in the country, be of such an
unromantic nature that they be hardly fit to be explain in this
genteel and sentimental novel. for how be it possible to hint of a
delicate female, live in good society, that she eat and drink too
much, and that a hot supper of lobster profusely enjoy at the
Rectory be the reason of an indisposition which Miss Crawley herself
persist be solely attributable to the dampness of the weather? the
attack be so sharp that Matilda--as his Reverence express it--be
very nearly "off the hook"; all the family be in a fever of
expectation regard the will, and Rawdon Crawley be make sure of
at least forty thousand pound before the commencement of the London
season. Mr. Crawley send over a choice parcel of tract, to prepare
she for the change from Vanity Fair and Park Lane for another world;
but a good doctor from Southampton be call in in time, vanquish
the lobster which be so nearly fatal to she, and give her sufficient
strength to enable she to return to London. the Baronet do not
disguise his exceed mortification at the turn which affair take.
while everybody be attend on Miss Crawley, and messenger every
hour from the Rectory be carry news of her health to the
affectionate folk there, there be a lady in another part of the
house, be exceedingly ill, of whom no one take any notice at all;
and this be the lady of Crawley herself. the good doctor shake his
head after see she; to which visit Sir Pitt consent, as it could
be pay without a fee; and she be leave fade away in her lonely
chamber, with no more heed pay to she than to a weed in the park.
the young lady, too, lose much of the inestimable benefit of their
governess's instruction, so affectionate a nurse be Miss Sharp, that
Miss Crawley would take her medicine from no other hand. Firkin have
be depose long before her mistress's departure from the country.
that faithful attendant find a gloomy consolation on return to
London, in see Miss Briggs suffer the same pang of jealousy and
undergo the same faithless treatment to which she herself have be
subject.
Captain Rawdon get an extension of leave on his aunt's illness, and
remain dutifully at home. he be always in her antechamber. (she
lie sick in the state bedroom, into which you enter by the little
blue saloon.) his father be always meet he there; or if he come
down the corridor ever so quietly, his father's door be sure to open,
and the hyena face of the old gentleman to glare out. what be it set
one to watch the other so? a generous rivalry, no doubt, as to which
should be most attentive to the dear sufferer in the state bedroom.
Rebecca use to come out and comfort both of they; or one or the other
of they rather. both of these worthy gentleman be most anxious to
have news of the invalid from her little confidential messenger.
at dinner--to which meal she descend for half an hour--she keep the
peace between they: after which she disappear for the night; when
Rawdon would ride over to the depot of the 150th at Mudbury, leave
his papa to the society of Mr. Horrocks and his rum and water. she
pass as weary a fortnight as ever mortal spend in Miss Crawley's
sick-room; but her little nerve seem to be of iron, as she be quite
unshaken by the duty and the tedium of the sick-chamber.
she never tell until long afterwards how painful that duty be; how
peevish a patient be the jovial old lady; how angry; how sleepless; in
what horror of death; during what long night she lie moaning, and in
almost delirious agony respect that future world which she quite
ignore when she be in good health.--picture to yourself, oh fair
young reader, a worldly, selfish, graceless, thankless, religionless
old woman, writhe in pain and fear, and without her wig. picture she
to yourself, and ere you be old, learn to love and pray!
Sharp watch this graceless bedside with indomitable patience. nothing
escape she; and, like a prudent steward, she find a use for
everything. she tell many a good story about Miss Crawley's illness in
after day--story which make the lady blush through her artificial
carnation. during the illness she be never out of temper; always
alert; she sleep light, have a perfectly clear conscience; and could
take that refreshment at almost any minute's warning. and so you see
very few trace of fatigue in her appearance. her face might be a
trifle paler, and the circle round her eye a little blacker than
usual; but whenever she come out from the sick-room she be always
smile, fresh, and neat, and look as trim in her little
dressing-gown and cap, as in her smart evening suit.
the Captain think so, and rave about she in uncouth convulsion. the
barb shaft of love have penetrate his dull hide. six
week--appropinquity--opportunity--have victimise he completely. he
make a confidante of his aunt at the Rectory, of all person in the
world. she rally he about it; she have perceive his folly; she
warn he; she finish by own that little Sharp be the most clever,
droll, odd, good-nature, simple, kindly creature in England. Rawdon
must not trifle with her affection, though--dear Miss Crawley would
never pardon he for that; for she, too, be quite overcome by the little
governess, and love Sharp like a daughter. Rawdon must go away--go
back to his regiment and naughty London, and not play with a poor
artless girl's feeling.
many and many a time this good-natured lady, compassionate the
forlorn life-guardsman's condition, give he an opportunity of see
Miss Sharp at the Rectory, and of walk home with she, as we have
see. when man of a certain sort, lady, be in love, though they see
the hook and the string, and the whole apparatus with which they be to
be take, they gorge the bait nevertheless--they must come to it--they
must swallow it--and be presently strike and land gasp. Rawdon
see there be a manifest intention on Mrs. Bute's part to captivate he
with Rebecca. he be not very wise; but he be a man about town, and
have see several season. a light dawn upon his dusky soul, as he
think, through a speech of Mrs. Bute's.
"mark my word, Rawdon," she say. "you will have Miss Sharp one day
for your relation."
"what relation--my cousin, hey, Mrs. Bute? James sweet on she, hey?"
inquire the waggish officer.
"More than that," Mrs. Bute say, with a flash from her black eye.
"not Pitt? he sha'n't have she. the sneak a'n't worthy of she. hebe
book to Lady Jane Sheepshanks."
"you man perceive nothing. you silly, blind creature--if anything
happen to Lady Crawley, Miss Sharp will be your mother-in-law; and
thatbe what will happen."
Rawdon Crawley, Esquire, give vent to a prodigious whistle, in token of
astonishment at this announcement. he couldnot deny it. his father's
evident liking for Miss Sharp have not escape he. he know the old
gentleman's character well; and a more unscrupulous old--whyou--he do
not conclude the sentence, but walk home, curl his mustachio, and
convince he have find a clue to Mrs. Bute's mystery.
"by Jove, itbe too bad," think Rawdon, "too bad, by Jove! I do
believe the woman want the poor girl to be ruin, in order that she
shouldnot come into the family as Lady Crawley."
when he see Rebecca alone, he rally she about his father's attachment
in his graceful way. she fling up her head scornfully, look he full
in the face, and say,
"well, suppose he be fond of I. I know he be, and other too. you
donot think I be afraid of he, Captain Crawley? you donot suppose I
cannot defend my own honour," say the little woman, look as stately
as a queen.
"oh, ah, why--give you fair warning--look out, you know--thatbe all,"
say the mustachio-twiddler.
"you hint at something not honourable, then?" say she, flash out.
"O Gad--really--Miss Rebecca," the heavy dragoon interpose.
"do you suppose I have no feeling of self-respect, because I be poor
and friendless, and because rich people have none? do you think,
because I be a governess, I have not as much sense, and feeling, and
good breeding as you gentlefolk in Hampshire? Ibe a montmorency. do
you suppose a Montmorency be not as good as a Crawley?"
when Miss Sharp be agitate, and allude to her maternal relative,
she speak with ever so slight a foreign accent, which give a great
charm to her clear ringing voice. "no," she continue, kindle as she
speak to the Captain; "I can endure poverty, but not shame--neglect,
but not insult; and insult from--from you."
her feeling give way, and she burst into tear.
"hang it, Miss Sharp--Rebecca--by Jove--upon my soul, I wouldnot for a
thousand pound. stop, Rebecca!"
she be go. she drive out with Miss Crawley that day. it be before
the latter's illness. at dinner she be unusually brilliant and
lively; but she would take no notice of the hint, or the nod, or the
clumsy expostulation of the humiliate, infatuated guardsman.
skirmish of this sort pass perpetually during the little
campaign--tedious to relate, and similar in result. the Crawley heavy
cavalry be madden by defeat, and rout every day.
if the Baronet of Queen's Crawley have not have the fear of lose his
sister's legacy before his eye, he never would have permit his dear
girl to lose the educational blessing which their invaluable
governess be confer upon they. the old house at home seem a
desert without she, so useful and pleasant have Rebecca make herself
there. Sir Pitt's letter be not copy and correct; his book not
make up; his household business and manifold scheme neglect, now
that his little secretary be away. and it be easy to see how
necessary such an amanuensis be to he, by the tenor and spelling of
the numerous letter which he send to she, entreat she and
command she to return. almost every day bring a frank from the
Baronet, enclose the most urgent prayer to Becky for her return, or
convey pathetic statement to Miss Crawley, regard the neglect
state of his daughter' education; of which document Miss Crawley take
very little heed.
Miss Briggs be not formally dismiss, but her place as companion be
a sinecure and a derision; and her company be the fat spaniel in the
drawing-room, or occasionally the discontent Firkin in the
housekeeper's closet. nor though the old lady would by no mean hear
of Rebecca's departure, be the latter regularly instal in office in
Park Lane. like many wealthy people, it be Miss Crawley's habit to
accept as much service as she could get from her inferior; and
good-naturedly to take leave of they when she no long find they
useful. gratitude among certain rich folk be scarcely natural or to
be think of. they take needy people's service as their due. nor
have you, o poor parasite and humble hanger-on, much reason to
complain! your friendship for Dives be about as sincere as the return
which it usually get. it be money you love, and not the man; and be
Croesus and his footman to change place you know, you poor rogue, who
would have the benefit of your allegiance.
and I be not sure that, in spite of Rebecca's simplicity and activity,
and gentleness and untire good humour, the shrewd old London lady,
upon whom these treasure of friendship be lavish, have not a
lurking suspicion all the while of her affectionate nurse and friend.
it must have often cross Miss Crawley's mind that nobody do
anything for nothing. if she measure her own feeling towards the
world, she must have be pretty well able to gauge those of the world
towards herself; and perhaps she reflect that it be the ordinary lot
of people to have no friend if they themselves care for nobody.
well, meanwhile Becky be the great comfort and convenience to she,
and she give she a couple of new gown, and an old necklace and shawl,
and show her friendship by abuse all her intimate acquaintance to
her new confidante (than which there cannot be a more touching proof of
regard), and meditate vaguely some great future benefit--to marry she
perhaps to clump, the apothecary, or to settle she in some advantageous
way of life; or at any rate, to send she back to Queen's Crawley when
she have do with she, and the full London season have begin.
when Miss Crawley be convalescent and descend to the drawing-room,
Becky sing to she, and otherwise amuse she; when she be well enough
to drive out, Becky accompany she. and amongst the drive which they
take, whither, of all place in the world, do Miss Crawley's admirable
good-nature and friendship actually induce she to penetrate, but to
Russell Square, Bloomsbury, and the house of John Sedley, Esquire.
Ere that event, many note have pass, as may be imagine, between the
two dear friend. during the month of Rebecca's stay in Hampshire,
the eternal friendship have (must it be own?) suffer considerable
diminution, and grow so decrepit and feeble with old age as to
threaten demise altogether. the fact be, both girl have their own real
affair to think of: rebecca her advance with her employer--Amelia her
own absorbing topic. when the two girl meet, and fly into each
other's arm with that impetuosity which distinguish the behaviour of
young lady towards each other, Rebecca perform her part of the
embrace with the most perfect briskness and energy. poor little Amelia
blush as she kiss her friend, and think she have be guilty of
something very like coldness towards she.
their first interview be but a very short one. Amelia be just ready
to go out for a walk. Miss Crawley be wait in her carriage below,
her people wonder at the locality in which they find themselves,
and gaze upon honest Sambo, the black footman of Bloomsbury, as one
of the queer native of the place. but when Amelia come down with she
kind smile look (rebecca must introduce she to her friend, Miss
Crawley be long to see she, and be too ill to leave she
carriage)--when, I say, Amelia come down, the Park Lane shoulder-knot
aristocracy wonder more and more that such a thing could come out of
Bloomsbury; and Miss Crawley be fairly captivate by the sweet
blushing face of the young lady who come forward so timidly and so
gracefully to pay her respect to the protector of her friend.
"what a complexion, my dear! what a sweet voice!" Miss Crawley say, as
they drive away westward after the little interview. "my dear Sharp,
your young friend be charming. send for she to Park Lane, do you
hear?" Miss Crawley have a good taste. she like natural manner--a
little timidity only set they off. she like pretty face near she; as
she like pretty picture and nice china. she talk of Amelia with
rapture half a dozen time that day. she mention she to Rawdon
Crawley, who come dutifully to partake of his aunt's chicken.
of course, on this Rebecca instantly state that Amelia be engage to
be marry--to a Lieutenant Osborne--a very old flame.
"be he a man in a line-regiment?" Captain Crawley ask, remember
after an effort, as become a guardsman, the number of the regiment,
the --th.
Rebecca think that be the regiment. "the Captain's name," she say,
"be Captain Dobbin."
"a lanky gawky fellow," say Crawley, "tumble over everybody. I know
he; and Osborne's a goodish-look fellow, with large black whisker?"
"enormous," Miss Rebecca Sharp say, "and enormously proud of they, I
assure you."
Captain Rawdon Crawley burst into a horse-laugh by way of reply; and
be press by the lady to explain, do so when the explosion of
hilarity be over. "he fancy he can play at billiard," say he. "I
win two hundred of he at the Cocoa-Tree. he play, the young flat!
hewould have play for anything that day, but his friend Captain Dobbin
carry he off, hang he!"
"Rawdon, Rawdon, donot be so wicked," Miss Crawley remark, highly
pleased.
"why, ma'am, of all the young fellow Ihave see out of the line, I
think this fellowbe the green. Tarquin and Deuceace get what money
they like out of he. hewould go to the deuce to be see with a lord. he
pay their dinner at Greenwich, and they invite the company."
"and very pretty company too, I dare say."
"quite right, Miss Sharp. right, as usual, Miss Sharp. Uncommon pretty
company--haw, haw!" and the Captain laugh more and more, think he
have make a good joke.
"Rawdon, donot be naughty!" his aunt exclaim.
"well, his father's a City man--immensely rich, they say. hang those
City fellow, they must bleed; and Ihave not do with he yet, I can
tell you. haw, haw!"
"Fie, Captain Crawley; I shall warn Amelia. a gambling husband!"
"Horrid, benot he, hey?" the Captain say with great solemnity; and
then add, a sudden thought have strike he: "Gad, I say, ma'am,
wewill have he here."
"be he a presentable sort of a person?" the aunt inquire.
"Presentable?--oh, very well. you wouldnot see any difference,"
Captain Crawley answer. "do letus have he, when you begin to see a
few people; and his whatdyecallem--his inamorato--eh, Miss Sharp;
thatbe what you call it--come. Gad, Iwill write he a note, and have
he; and Iwill try if he can play piquet as well as billiard. where
do he live, Miss Sharp?"
Miss Sharp tell Crawley the Lieutenant's town address; and a few day
after this conversation, Lieutenant Osborne receive a letter, in
Captain Rawdon's schoolboy hand, and enclose a note of invitation
from Miss Crawley.
Rebecca despatch also an invitation to her darling Amelia, who, you
may be sure, be ready enough to accept it when she hear that George
be to be of the party. it be arrange that Amelia be to spend the
morning with the lady of Park Lane, where all be very kind to she.
Rebecca patronise she with calm superiority: she be so much the
cleverer of the two, and her friend so gentle and unassuming, that she
always yield when anybody choose to command, and so take Rebecca's
order with perfect meekness and good humour. Miss Crawley's
graciousness be also remarkable. she continue her rapture about
little Amelia, talk about she before her face as if she be a doll,
or a servant, or a picture, and admire she with the most benevolent
wonder possible. I admire that admiration which the genteel world
sometimes extend to the commonalty. there be no more agreeable object
in life than to see Mayfair folk condescend. Miss Crawley's
prodigious benevolence rather fatigue poor little Amelia, and I be not
sure that of the three lady in Park Lane she do not find honest Miss
Briggs the most agreeable. she sympathise with Briggs as with all
neglect or gentle people: she benot what you call a woman of spirit.
George come to dinner--a repast en garcon with Captain Crawley.
the great family coach of the Osbornes transport he to Park Lane
from Russell Square; where the young lady, who be not themselves
invite, and profess the great indifference at that slight,
nevertheless look at Sir Pitt Crawley's name in the baronetage; and
learn everything which that work have to teach about the Crawley
family and their pedigree, and the Binkies, their relative, &c., &c.
Rawdon Crawley receive George Osborne with great frankness and
graciousness: praise his play at billiard: ask he when he would
have his revenge: be interested about Osborne's regiment: and would
have propose piquet to he that very evening, but Miss Crawley
absolutely forbid any gambling in her house; so that the young
Lieutenant's purse be not lighten by his gallant patron, for that
day at least. however, they make an engagement for the next,
somewhere: to look at a horse that Crawley have to sell, and to try he
in the Park; and to dine together, and to pass the evening with some
jolly fellow. "that be, if yoube not on duty to that pretty Miss
Sedley," Crawley say, with a knowing wink. "monstrous nice girl, 'pon
my honour, though, Osborne," he be good enough to add. "lot of tin,
I suppose, eh?"
Osborne benot on duty; he would join Crawley with pleasure: and the
latter, when they meet the next day, praise his new friend's
horsemanship--as he might with perfect honesty--and introduce he to
three or four young man of the first fashion, whose acquaintance
immensely elate the simple young officer.
"howbe little Miss Sharp, by-the-bye?" Osborne inquire of his friend
over their wine, with a dandified air. "good-natured little girl that.
do she suit you well at Queen's Crawley? Miss Sedley like she a good
deal last year."
Captain Crawley look savagely at the Lieutenant out of his little
blue eye, and watch he when he go up to resume his acquaintance
with the fair governess. her conduct must have relieve Crawley if
there be any jealousy in the bosom of that life-guardsman.
when the young man go upstairs, and after Osborne's introduction to
Miss Crawley, he walk up to Rebecca with a patronise, easy swagger.
he be go to be kind to she and protect she. he would even shake
hand with she, as a friend of Amelia's; and say, "ah, Miss Sharp!
how-dy-doo?" hold out his left hand towards she, expect that she
would be quite confound at the honour.
Miss Sharp put out her right forefinger, and give he a little nod, so
cool and killing, that Rawdon Crawley, watch the operation from the
other room, could hardly restrain his laughter as he see the
Lieutenant's entire discomfiture; the start he give, the pause, and the
perfect clumsiness with which he at length condescend to take the
finger which be offer for his embrace.
"shewould beat the devil, by Jove!" the Captain say, in a rapture; and
the Lieutenant, by way of begin the conversation, agreeably ask
rebecca how she like her new place.
"my place?" say Miss Sharp, coolly, "how kind of you to remind I of
it! itbe a tolerably good place: the wage be pretty good--not so
good as Miss Wirt's, I believe, with your sister in Russell Square.
how be those young ladies?--not that I ought to ask."
"why not?" Mr. Osborne say, amazed.
"why, they never condescend to speak to I, or to ask I into their
house, whilst I be stay with Amelia; but we poor governess, you
know, be use to slight of this sort."
"my dear Miss Sharp!" Osborne ejaculate.
"at least in some family," rebecca continue. "you cannot think what
a difference there be though. we be not so wealthy in Hampshire as
you lucky folk of the City. but then I be in a gentleman's
family--good old english stock. I suppose you know Sir Pitt's father
refuse a peerage. and you see how I be treat. I be pretty
comfortable. indeed it be rather a good place. but how very good of
you to inquire!"
Osborne be quite savage. the little governess patronise he and
persiffle he until this young British Lion feel quite uneasy; nor
could he muster sufficient presence of mind to find a pretext for
back out of this most delectable conversation.
"I think you like the City family pretty well," he say, haughtily.
"last year you mean, when I be fresh from that horrid vulgar school?
of course I do. donot every girl like to come home for the
holiday? and how be I to know any well? but oh, Mr. Osborne, what
a difference eighteen month' experience make! eighteen month spend,
pardon I for say so, with gentleman. as for dear Amelia, she, I
grant you, be a pearl, and would be charming anywhere. there now, I
see you be begin to be in a good humour; but oh these queer odd
City people! and Mr. Jos--how be that wonderful Mr. Joseph?"
"it seem to I you donot dislike that wonderful Mr. Joseph last
year," Osborne say kindly.
"how severe of you! well, entre nous, I donot break my heart about
he; yet if he have ask I to do what you mean by your look (and very
expressive and kind they be, too), I wouldnot have say no."
Mr. Osborne give a look as much as to say, "indeed, how very obliging!"
"what an honour to have have you for a brother-in-law, you be think?
to be sister-in-law to George Osborne, Esquire, son of John Osborne,
Esquire, son of--what be your grandpapa, Mr. Osborne? well, donot be
angry. you cannot help your pedigree, and I quite agree with you that I
would have marry Mr. Joe Sedley; for could a poor penniless girl do
well? now you know the whole secret. Ibe frank and open;
consider all thing, it be very kind of you to allude to the
circumstance--very kind and polite. Amelia dear, Mr. Osborne and I
be talk about your poor brother Joseph. how be he?"
thus be George utterly rout. not that Rebecca be in the right; but
she have manage most successfully to put he in the wrong. and he now
shamefully flee, feel, if he stay another minute, that he would
have be make to look foolish in the presence of Amelia.
Though Rebecca have have the well of he, George be above the meanness
of talebeare or revenge upon a lady--only he could not help cleverly
confide to Captain Crawley, next day, some notion of his regard
Miss Rebecca--that she be a sharp one, a dangerous one, a desperate
flirt, &c.; in all of which opinion Crawley agree laughingly, and
with every one of which Miss Rebecca be make acquainted before
twenty-four hour be over. they add to her original regard for Mr.
Osborne. her woman's instinct have tell she that it be George who have
interrupt the success of her first love-passage, and she esteem he
accordingly.
"I only just warn you," he say to Rawdon Crawley, with a know
look--he have buy the horse, and lose some score of guineas after
dinner, "I just warn you--I know woman, and counsel you to be on the
look-out."
"thank you, my boy," say Crawley, with a look of peculiar gratitude.
"yoube wide awake, I see." and George go off, think Crawley be
quite right.
he tell Amelia of what he have do, and how he have counsel Rawdon
Crawley--a devilish good, straightforward fellow--to be on his guard
against that little sly, scheme Rebecca.
"against whom?" Amelia cry.
"your friend the governess.--Don't look so astonished."
"o George, what have you do?" Amelia say. for her woman's eye,
which Love have make sharp-sighted, have in one instant discover a
secret which be invisible to Miss Crawley, to poor virgin Briggs, and
above all, to the stupid peeper of that young whisker prig,
Lieutenant Osborne.
for as Rebecca be shawle she in an upper apartment, where these two
friend have an opportunity for a little of that secret talking and
conspire which form the delight of female life, Amelia, come up to
Rebecca, and take she two little hand in her, say, "Rebecca, I see
it all."
Rebecca kiss she.
and regard this delightful secret, not one syllable more be say by
either of the young woman. but it be destine to come out before long.
some short period after the above event, and Miss Rebecca Sharp still
remain at her patroness's house in Park Lane, one more hatchment
might have be see in Great Gaunt Street, figure amongst the many
which usually ornament that dismal quarter. it be over Sir Pitt
Crawley's house; but it do not indicate the worthy baronet's demise.
it be a feminine hatchment, and indeed a few year back have serve as
a funeral compliment to Sir Pitt's old mother, the late dowager Lady
Crawley. its period of service over, the hatchment have come down from
the front of the house, and live in retirement somewhere in the back
premise of Sir Pitt's mansion. it reappear now for poor Rose Dawson.
Sir Pitt be a widower again. the arm quarter on the shield along
with his own be not, to be sure, poor Rose's. she have no arm. but
the cherub paint on the scutcheon answer as well for she as for
Sir Pitt's mother, and Resurgam be write under the coat, flank by
the Crawley Dove and Serpent. arm and Hatchments, resurgam.--here be
an opportunity for moralise!
Mr. Crawley have tend that otherwise friendless bedside. she go out
of the world strengthen by such word and comfort as he could give
she. for many year his be the only kindness she ever know; the only
friendship that solace in any way that feeble, lonely soul. her heart
be dead long before her body. she have sell it to become Sir Pitt
Crawley's wife. mother and daughter be make the same bargain
every day in Vanity Fair.
when the demise take place, her husband be in London attend to some
of his innumerable scheme, and busy with his endless lawyer. he have
find time, nevertheless, to call often in Park Lane, and to despatch
many note to Rebecca, entreat she, enjoin she, command she to
return to her young pupil in the country, who be now utterly without
companionship during their mother's illness. but Miss Crawley would
not hear of her departure; for though there be no lady of fashion in
London who would desert her friend more complacently as soon as she
be tired of their society, and though few tired of they soon, yet as
long as her engoument last her attachment be prodigious, and she
clung still with the great energy to Rebecca.
the news of Lady Crawley's death provoke no more grief or comment than
might have be expect in Miss Crawley's family circle. "I suppose I
must put off my party for the 3rd," Miss Crawley say; and add, after
a pause, "I hope my brother will have the decency not to marry again."
"what a confound rage Pitt will be in if he do," Rawdon remark,
with his usual regard for his eld brother. rebecca say nothing. she
seem by far the grave and most impressed of the family. she leave
the room before Rawdon go away that day; but they meet by chance
below, as he be go away after take leave, and have a parley
together.
on the morrow, as Rebecca be gaze from the window, she startle Miss
Crawley, who be placidly occupy with a french novel, by cry out
in an alarmed tone, "here's Sir Pitt, Ma'am!" and the Baronet's knock
follow this announcement.
"my dear, I cannot see he. I willnot see he. tell Bowls not at home,
or go downstairs and say Ibe too ill to receive any one. my nerve
really willnot bear my brother at this moment," cry out Miss Crawley,
and resume the novel.
"shebe too ill to see you, sir," rebecca say, trip down to Sir
Pitt, who be prepare to ascend.
"so much the well," Sir Pitt answer. "I want to see you, Miss
Becky. come along a I into the parlour," and they enter that
apartment together.
"I wawnt you back at Queen's Crawley, Miss," the baronet say, fix
his eye upon she, and take off his black glove and his hat with its
great crape hat-band. his eye have such a strange look, and fix upon
she so steadfastly, that Rebecca Sharp begin almost to tremble.
"I hope to come soon," she say in a low voice, "as soon as Miss
Crawley be well--and return to--to the dear child."
"youhave say so these three month, Becky," reply Sir Pitt, "and
still you go hang on to my sister, whowill fle you off like an old
shoe, when shebe wear you out. I tell you I want you. Ibe go back
to the Vuneral. will you come back? yes or no?"
"I daren't--I donot think--it would be right--to be alone--with you,
sir," Becky say, seemingly in great agitation.
"I say agin, I want you," Sir Pitt say, thump the table. "I cannot
git on without you. I donot see what it be till you go away. the
house all go wrong. itbe not the same place. all my account have
get muddle agin. you must come back. do come back. dear Becky, do
come."
"come--as what, sir?" Rebecca gasp out.
"come as Lady Crawley, if you like," the Baronet say, grasp his
crape hat. "there! will that zatusfy you? come back and be my wife.
your vit vor't. birth be hang. yoube as good a lady as ever I see.
youhave get more brain in your little vinger than any baronet's wife in
the county. will you come? yes or no?"
"oh, Sir Pitt!" rebecca say, very much move.
"say yes, Becky," Sir Pitt continue. "Ibe an old man, but a good'n.
Ibe good for twenty year. Iwill make you happy, zee if I donot. you
shall do what you like; spend what you like; and 'ave it all your own
way. Iwill make you a zettlement. Iwill do everything reglar. look
year!" and the old man fall down on his knee and leer at she like a
satyr.
Rebecca start back a picture of consternation. in the course of this
history we have never see she lose her presence of mind; but she do
now, and weep some of the most genuine tear that ever fall from her
eye.
"oh, Sir Pitt!" she say. "oh, sir--i--i'm marry already."
CHAPTER XV
in which Rebecca's Husband appear for a Short Time
every reader of a sentimental turn (and we desire no other) must have
be pleased with the tableau with which the last act of our little
drama conclude; for what can be pretty than an image of Love on his
knee before Beauty?
but when Love hear that awful confession from Beauty that she be
marry already, he bounce up from his attitude of humility on the
carpet, uttering exclamation which cause poor little Beauty to be
more frightened than she be when she make her avowal. "marry;
yoube joke," the Baronet cry, after the first explosion of rage
and wonder. "yoube make vun of I, Becky. whowould ever go to marry
you without a shilling to your vortune?"
"married! marry!" rebecca say, in an agony of tear--her voice
choke with emotion, her handkerchief up to her ready eye, faint
against the mantelpiece a figure of woe fit to melt the most obdurate
heart. "o Sir Pitt, dear Sir Pitt, do not think I ungrateful for all
your goodness to I. it be only your generosity that have extort my
secret."
"generosity be hang!" Sir Pitt roar out. "who be it tu, then,
yoube married? where be it?"
"let I come back with you to the country, sir! let I watch over you
as faithfully as ever! donot, donot separate I from dear Queen's
Crawley!"
"the feller have leave you, have he?" the Baronet say, begin, as he
fancy, to comprehend. "well, Becky--come back if you like. you cannot
eat your cake and have it. any way I make you a vair offer. Coom
back as governess--you shall have it all your own way." she hold out
one hand. she cry fit to break her heart; her ringlet fall over her
face, and over the marble mantelpiece where she lay it.
"so the rascal run off, eh?" Sir Pitt say, with a hideous attempt at
consolation. "never mind, Becky, I'LL take care of 'ee."
"oh, sir! it would be the pride of my life to go back to Queen's
Crawley, and take care of the child, and of you as formerly, when
you say you be pleased with the service of your little rebecca.
when I think of what you have just offer I, my heart fill with
gratitude indeed it do. I cannot be your wife, sir; let I--let I be
your daughter." say which, Rebecca go down on her knee in a most
tragical way, and, take Sir Pitt's horny black hand between her own
two (which be very pretty and white, and as soft as satin), look up
in his face with an expression of exquisite pathos and confidence,
when--when the door open, and Miss Crawley sail in.
Mrs. Firkin and Miss Briggs, who happen by chance to be at the
parlour door soon after the Baronet and Rebecca enter the apartment,
have also see accidentally, through the keyhole, the old gentleman
prostrate before the governess, and have hear the generous proposal
which he make she. it be scarcely out of his mouth when Mrs. Firkin
and Miss Briggs have stream up the stair, have rush into the
drawing-room where Miss Crawley be read the french novel, and have
give that old lady the astounding intelligence that Sir Pitt be on
his knee, propose to Miss Sharp. and if you calculate the time for
the above dialogue to take place--the time for Briggs and Firkin to fly
to the drawing-room--the time for Miss Crawley to be astonish, and to
drop her volume of Pigault le Brun--and the time for she to come
downstairs--you will see how exactly accurate this history be, and how
Miss Crawley must have appear at the very instant when Rebecca have
assume the attitude of humility.
"it be the lady on the ground, and not the gentleman," Miss Crawley
say, with a look and voice of great scorn. "they tell I that you be
on your knee, Sir Pitt: do kneel once more, and let I see this pretty
couple!"
"I have thank Sir Pitt Crawley, Ma'am," rebecca say, rise, "and
have tell he that--that I never can become Lady Crawley."
"refuse he!" Miss Crawley say, more bewildered than ever. Briggs
and Firkin at the door open the eye of astonishment and the lip of
wonder.
"yes--refuse," rebecca continue, with a sad, tearful voice.
"and be I to credit my ear that you absolutely propose to she, Sir
Pitt?" the old lady ask.
"Ees," say the Baronet, "I do."
"and she refuse you as she say?"
"Ees," Sir Pitt say, his feature on a broad grin.
"it do not seem to break your heart at any rate," Miss Crawley
remark.
"Nawt a bit," answer Sir Pitt, with a coolness and good-humour which
set Miss Crawley almost mad with bewilderment. that an old gentleman
of station should fall on his knee to a penniless governess, and burst
out laugh because she refuse to marry he--that a penniless
governess should refuse a Baronet with four thousand a year--these be
mystery which Miss Crawley could never comprehend. it surpass any
complication of intrigue in her favourite Pigault le Brun.
"Ibe glad you think it good sport, brother," she continue, grope
wildly through this amazement.
"Vamous," say Sir Pitt. "whowould ha' think it! what a sly little
devil! what a little fox it waw!" he mutter to himself, chuckle
with pleasure.
"whowould have think what?" cry Miss Crawley, stamp with her foot.
"pray, Miss Sharp, be you wait for the Prince Regent's divorce,
that you donot think our family good enough for you?"
"my attitude," rebecca say, "when you come in, ma'am, do not look as
if I despise such an honour as this good--this noble man have deign
to offer I. do you think I have no heart? have you all love I, and
be so kind to the poor orphan--deserted--girl, and be I to feel
nothing? o my friend! o my benefactor! may not my love, my life, my
duty, try to repay the confidence you have show I? do you grudge I
even gratitude, Miss Crawley? it be too much--my heart be too full";
and she sink down in a chair so pathetically, that most of the audience
present be perfectly melt with her sadness.
"whether you marry I or not, yoube a good little girl, Becky, and Ibe
your vriend, mind," say Sir Pitt, and put on his crape-bind hat,
he walk away--greatly to Rebecca's relief; for it be evident that
her secret be unreveale to Miss Crawley, and she have the advantage of
a brief reprieve.
put her handkerchief to her eye, and nod away honest Briggs,
who would have follow her upstairs, she go up to her apartment;
while Briggs and Miss Crawley, in a high state of excitement, remain
to discuss the strange event, and Firkin, not less move, dive down
into the kitchen region, and talk of it with all the male and female
company there. and so impressed be Mrs. Firkin with the news, that
she think proper to write off by that very night's post, "with her
humble duty to Mrs. Bute Crawley and the family at the Rectory, and Sir
Pitt have be and propose for to marry Miss Sharp, wherein she have
refuse he, to the wonder of all."
the two lady in the dining-room (where worthy Miss Briggs be
delighted to be admit once more to confidential conversation with
her patroness) wonder to their heart' content at Sir Pitt's offer,
and Rebecca's refusal; Briggs very acutely suggest that there must
have be some obstacle in the shape of a previous attachment,
otherwise no young woman in her sens would ever have refuse so
advantageous a proposal.
"you would have accept it yourself, wouldnot you, Briggs?" Miss
Crawley say, kindly.
"would it not be a privilege to be Miss Crawley's sister?" Briggs
reply, with meek evasion.
"well, Becky would have make a good Lady Crawley, after all," Miss
Crawley remark (who be mollify by the girl's refusal, and very
liberal and generous now there be no call for her sacrifice). "she
have brain in plenty (much more wit in her little finger than you have,
my poor dear Briggs, in all your head). her manner be excellent, now
I have form she. she be a Montmorency, Briggs, and blood be
something, though I despise it for my part; and she would have hold she
own amongst those pompous stupid Hampshire people much well than that
unfortunate ironmonger's daughter."
Briggs coincide as usual, and the "previous attachment" be then
discuss in conjecture. "you poor friendless creature be always
have some foolish tendre," Miss Crawley say. "you yourself, you
know, be in love with a writing-master (donot cry, Briggs--you're
always cry, and it willnot bring he to life again), and I suppose
this unfortunate Becky have be silly and sentimental too--some
apothecary, or house-steward, or painter, or young curate, or something
of that sort."
"poor thing! poor thing!" say Briggs (who be think of twenty-four
year back, and that hectic young writing-master whose lock of yellow
hair, and whose letter, beautiful in their illegibility, she cherish
in her old desk upstairs). "poor thing, poor thing!" say Briggs.
once more she be a fresh-cheeked lass of eighteen; she be at evening
church, and the hectic writing-master and she be quaver out of the
same psalm-book.
"after such conduct on Rebecca's part," Miss Crawley say
enthusiastically, "our family should do something. find out who be the
objet, Briggs. Iwill set he up in a shop; or order my portrait of he,
you know; or speak to my cousin, the Bishop and Iwill doter Becky, and
wewill have a wedding, Briggs, and you shall make the breakfast, and be
a bridesmaid."
Briggs declare that it would be delightful, and vow that her dear
Miss Crawley be always kind and generous, and go up to Rebecca's
bedroom to console she and prattle about the offer, and the refusal,
and the cause thereof; and to hint at the generous intention of Miss
Crawley, and to find out who be the gentleman that have the mastery of
Miss Sharp's heart.
Rebecca be very kind, very affectionate and affect--respond to
Briggs's offer of tenderness with grateful fervour--own there be a
secret attachment--a delicious mystery--what a pity Miss Briggs have not
remain half a minute long at the keyhole! rebecca might, perhaps,
have tell more: but five minute after Miss Briggs's arrival in
Rebecca's apartment, Miss Crawley actually make her appearance
there--an unheard-of honour--her impatience have overcome she; she could
not wait for the tardy operation of her ambassadress: so she come in
person, and order Briggs out of the room. and express her approval
of Rebecca's conduct, she ask particular of the interview, and the
previous transaction which have bring about the astonishing offer of
Sir Pitt.
Rebecca say she have long have some notion of the partiality with which
Sir Pitt honour she (for he be in the habit of make his feeling
know in a very frank and unreserved manner) but, not to mention
private reason with which she would not for the present trouble Miss
Crawley, Sir Pitt's age, station, and habit be such as to render a
marriage quite impossible; and could a woman with any feeling of
self-respect and any decency listen to proposal at such a moment, when
the funeral of the lover's deceased wife have not actually take place?
"Nonsense, my dear, you would never have refuse he have there not be
some one else in the case," Miss Crawley say, come to her point at
once. "tell I the private reason; what be the private reason?
there be some one; who be it that have touch your heart?"
Rebecca cast down her eye, and own there be. "you have guess
right, dear lady," she say, with a sweet simple faltering voice. "you
wonder at one so poor and friendless have an attachment, donot you? I
have never hear that poverty be any safeguard against it. I wish it
be."
"my poor dear child," cry Miss Crawley, who be always quite ready to
be sentimental, "be our passion unrequited, then? be we pin in
secret? tell I all, and let I console you."
"I wish you could, dear Madam," rebecca say in the same tearful tone.
"indeed, indeed, I need it." and she lay her head upon Miss Crawley's
shoulder and weep there so naturally that the old lady, surprise into
sympathy, embrace she with an almost maternal kindness, utter many
soothe protest of regard and affection for she, vow that she love
she as a daughter, and would do everything in her power to serve she.
"and now who be it, my dear? be it that pretty Miss Sedley's brother?
you say something about an affair with he. Iwill ask he here, my
dear. and you shall have he: indeed you shall."
"donot ask I now," rebecca say. "you shall know all soon. indeed
you shall. dear kind Miss Crawley--dear friend, may I say so?"
"that you may, my child," the old lady reply, kiss she.
"I cannot tell you now," sob out Rebecca, "I be very miserable. but
O! love I always--promise you will love I always." and in the midst
of mutual tear--for the emotion of the young woman have awaken the
sympathy of the elder--this promise be solemnly give by Miss
Crawley, who leave her little protege, blessing and admire she as a
dear, artless, tender-hearted, affectionate, incomprehensible creature.
and now she be leave alone to think over the sudden and wonderful
event of the day, and of what have be and what might have be. what
think you be the private feeling of Miss, no (beg her pardon) of
Mrs. Rebecca? if, a few page back, the present writer claim the
privilege of peep into Miss Amelia Sedley's bedroom, and
understanding with the omniscience of the novelist all the gentle pain
and passion which be toss upon that innocent pillow, why should
he not declare himself to be Rebecca's confidante too, master of her
secret, and seal-keeper of that young woman's conscience?
well, then, in the first place, Rebecca give way to some very sincere
and touch regret that a piece of marvellous good fortune should
have be so near she, and she actually oblige to decline it. in this
natural emotion every properly regulated mind will certainly share.
what good mother be there that would not commiserate a penniless
spinster, who might have be my lady, and have share four thousand a
year? what well-breed young person be there in all Vanity Fair, who
will not feel for a hard-work, ingenious, meritorious girl, who get
such an honourable, advantageous, provoke offer, just at the very
moment when it be out of her power to accept it? I be sure our friend
Becky's disappointment deserve and will command every sympathy.
I remember one night be in the fair myself, at an evening party. I
observe old Miss Toady there also present, single out for her special
attention and flattery little Mrs. Briefless, the barrister's wife,
who be of a good family certainly, but, as we all know, be as poor as
poor can be.
what, I ask in my own mind, can cause this obsequiousness on the part
of Miss Toady; have Briefless get a county court, or have his wife have a
fortune leave she? Miss Toady explain presently, with that simplicity
which distinguish all her conduct. "you know," she say, "Mrs
Briefless be granddaughter of Sir John Redhand, who be so ill at
Cheltenham that he cannot last six month. Mrs. Briefless's papa
succeed; so you see she will be a baronet's daughter." and Toady ask
Briefless and his wife to dinner the very next week.
if the mere chance of become a baronet's daughter can procure a lady
such homage in the world, surely, surely we may respect the agony of
a young woman who have lose the opportunity of become a baronet's
wife. who would have dream of Lady Crawley die so soon? she be
one of those sickly woman that might have last these ten
year--rebecca think to herself, in all the woe of repentance--and I
might have be my lady! I might have lead that old man whither I
would. I might have thank Mrs. Bute for her patronage, and Mr. Pitt
for his insufferable condescension. I would have have the town-house
newly furnish and decorate. I would have have the handsome
carriage in London, and a box at the opera; and I would have be
present next season. all this might have be; and now--now all be
doubt and mystery.
but Rebecca be a young lady of too much resolution and energy of
character to permit herself much useless and unseemly sorrow for the
irrevocable past; so, have devote only the proper portion of regret
to it, she wisely turn she whole attention towards the future, which
be now vastly more important to she. and she survey her position,
and its hope, doubt, and chance.
in the first place, she be married--that be a great fact. Sir Pitt
know it. she be not so much surprised into the avowal, as induce to
make it by a sudden calculation. it must have come some day: and why
not now as at a later period? he who would have marry she himself
must at least be silent with regard to her marriage. how Miss Crawley
would bear the news--be the great question. Misgivings Rebecca have;
but she remember all Miss Crawley have say; the old lady's avow
contempt for birth; her dare liberal opinion; her general romantic
propensity; she almost dot attachment to her nephew, and she
repeatedly express fondness for rebecca herself. she be so fond of
he, Rebecca thought, that she will forgive he anything: she be so
use to I that I donot think she could be comfortable without I: when
the eclaircissement come there will be a scene, and hysteric, and a
great quarrel, and then a great reconciliation. at all event, what
use be there in delaying? the die be throw, and now or to-morrow the
issue must be the same. and so, resolve that Miss Crawley should have
the news, the young person debate in her mind as to the good mean of
convey it to she; and whether she should face the storm that must
come, or fly and avoid it until its first fury be blow over. in this
state of meditation she write the following letter:
Dearest Friend,
the great crisis which we have debate about so often be COME. half of
my secret be know, and I have think and think, until I be quite
sure that now be the time to reveal the whole of the mystery. Sir Pitt
come to I this morning, and make--what do you think?--A DECLARATION in
FORM. think of that! poor little I. I might have be Lady Crawley.
how pleased Mrs. Bute would have be: and ma tante if I have take
precedence of she! I might have be somebody's mamma, instead of--o, I
tremble, I tremble, when I think how soon we must tell all!
Sir Pitt know I be married, and not know to whom, be not very much
displease as yet. Ma tante be ACTUALLY ANGRY that I should have
refuse he. but she be all kindness and graciousness. she
condescend to say I would have make he a good wife; and vow that she
will be a mother to your little rebecca. she will be shake when she
first hear the news. but need we fear anything beyond a momentary
anger? I think not: I be sure not. she dot upon you so (you
naughty, good-for-nothing man), that she would pardon you ANYTHING:
and, indeed, I believe, the next place in her heart be mine: and that
she would be miserable without I. dearest! something tell ME we shall
conquer. you shall leave that odious regiment: quit gaming, racing,
and be a good boy; and we shall all live in Park Lane, and ma tante
shall leave we all her money.
I shall try and walk to-morrow at 3 in the usual place. if Miss B.
accompany I, you must come to dinner, and bring an answer, and put
it in the third volume of Porteus's sermon. but, at all event, come
to your own
R.
to Miss Eliza Styles, at Mr. Barnet's, Saddler, Knightsbridge.
and I trust there be no reader of this little story who have not
discernment enough to perceive that the Miss Eliza Styles (an old
schoolfellow, Rebecca say, with whom she have resume an active
correspondence of late, and who use to fetch these letter from the
saddler's), wear brass spur, and large curl mustachio, and be
indeed no other than Captain Rawdon Crawley.
CHAPTER XVI
the Letter on the Pincushion
how they be married be not of the slight consequence to anybody.
what be to hinder a Captain who be a major, and a young lady who be of
age, from purchase a licence, and unite themselves at any church in
this town? who need to be tell, that if a woman have a will she will
assuredly find a way?--My belief be that one day, when Miss Sharp have
go to pass the forenoon with her dear friend Miss Amelia Sedley in
Russell Square, a lady very like she might have be see enter a
church in the City, in company with a gentleman with dye mustachio,
who, after a quarter of an hour's interval, escort she back to the
hackney-coach in waiting, and that this be a quiet bridal party.
and who on earth, after the daily experience we have, can question the
probability of a gentleman marry anybody? how many of the wise and
learn have marry their cook? do not Lord Eldon himself, the most
prudent of man, make a runaway match? be not Achilles and Ajax both
in love with their servant maid? and be we to expect a heavy dragoon
with strong desire and small brain, who have never control a
passion in his life, to become prudent all of a sudden, and to refuse
to pay any price for an indulgence to which he have a mind? if people
only make prudent marriage, what a stop to population there would be!
it seem to I, for my part, that Mr. Rawdon's marriage be one of the
honest action which we shall have to record in any portion of that
gentleman's biography which have to do with the present history. no one
will say it be unmanly to be captivate by a woman, or, be
captivate, to marry she; and the admiration, the delight, the passion,
the wonder, the unbounded confidence, and frantic adoration with which,
by degree, this big warrior get to regard the little rebecca, be
feeling which the lady at least will pronounce be not altogether
discreditable to he. when she sing, every note thrill in his dull
soul, and tingle through his huge frame. when she speak, he bring
all the force of his brain to listen and wonder. if she be jocular,
he use to revolve her joke in his mind, and explode over they half an
hour afterwards in the street, to the surprise of the groom in the
tilbury by his side, or the comrade rid with he in Rotten row. her
word be oracle to he, her small action mark by an infallible
grace and wisdom. "how she sings,--how she paint," think he. "how
she ride that kick mare at Queen's Crawley!" and he would say to
she in confidential moment, "by Jove, Beck, yoube fit to be
Commander-in-Chief, or Archbishop of Canterbury, by Jove." be his
case a rare one? and donot we see every day in the world many an honest
Hercules at the apron-string of Omphale, and great whisker samson
prostrate in Delilah's lap?
when, then, Becky tell he that the great crisis be near, and the time
for action have arrive, Rawdon express himself as ready to act under
her order, as he would be to charge with his troop at the command of
his colonel. there be no need for he to put his letter into the
third volume of Porteus. rebecca easily find a means to get rid of
Briggs, her companion, and meet her faithful friend in "the usual place"
on the next day. she have think over matter at night, and
communicate to rawdon the result of her determination. he agree, of
course, to everything; be quite sure that it be all right: that what
she propose be good; that Miss Crawley would infallibly relent, or
"come round," as he say, after a time. have Rebecca's resolution be
entirely different, he would have follow they as implicitly. "you
have head enough for both of we, Beck," say he. "yoube sure to get
we out of the scrape. I never see your equal, and Ihave meet with some
clipper in my time too." and with this simple confession of faith, the
love-stricken dragoon leave she to execute his part of the project which
she have form for the pair.
it consist simply in the hiring of quiet lodging at Brompton, or in
the neighbourhood of the barrack, for Captain and Mrs. Crawley. for
Rebecca have determine, and very prudently, we think, to fly. Rawdon
be only too happy at her resolve; he have be entreat she to take
this measure any time for week past. he prance off to engage the
lodging with all the impetuosity of love. he agree to pay two
guineas a week so readily, that the landlady regret she have ask
he so little. he order in a piano, and half a nursery-house full of
flower: and a heap of good thing. as for shawl, kid glove, silk
stocking, gold french watch, bracelet and perfumery, he send they
in with the profusion of blind love and unbounded credit. and have
relieve his mind by this outpouring of generosity, he go and din
nervously at the club, wait until the great moment of his life
should come.
the occurrence of the previous day; the admirable conduct of
Rebecca in refuse an offer so advantageous to she, the secret
unhappiness preying upon she, the sweetness and silence with which she
bear her affliction, make Miss Crawley much more tender than usual. an
event of this nature, a marriage, or a refusal, or a proposal, thrill
through a whole household of woman, and set all their hysterical
sympathy at work. as an observer of human nature, I regularly
frequent St. George's, Hanover Square, during the genteel marriage
season; and though I have never see the bridegroom's male friend give
way to tear, or the beadle and officiating clergy any way affected,
yet it be not at all uncommon to see woman who be not in the least
concerned in the operation go on--old lady who be long past
marrying, stout middle-aged female with plenty of son and daughter,
let alone pretty young creature in pink bonnet, who be on their
promotion, and may naturally take an interest in the ceremony--I say it
be quite common to see the woman present piping, sobbing, sniffle;
hide their little face in their little useless pocket-handkerchief;
and heaving, old and young, with emotion. when my friend, the
fashionable John Pimlico, marry the lovely Lady Belgravia Green
Parker, the excitement be so general that even the little snuffy old
pew-opener who let I into the seat be in tear. and wherefore? I
inquire of my own soul: she be not go to be marry.
Miss Crawley and Briggs in a word, after the affair of Sir Pitt,
indulge in the utmost luxury of sentiment, and Rebecca become an
object of the most tender interest to they. in her absence Miss
Crawley solace herself with the most sentimental of the novel in her
library. Little Sharp, with her secret grief, be the heroine of the
day.
that night Rebecca sing more sweetly and talk more pleasantly than
she have ever be hear to do in Park Lane. she twin herself round
the heart of Miss Crawley. she speak lightly and laughingly of Sir
Pitt's proposal, ridicule it as the foolish fancy of an old man; and
her eye fill with tear, and Briggs's heart with unutterable pang
of defeat, as she say she desire no other lot than to remain for ever
with her dear benefactress. "my dear little creature," the old lady
say, "I donot intend to let you stir for year, that you may depend
upon it. as for go back to that odious brother of mine after what
have pass, it be out of the question. here you stay with I and
Briggs. Briggs want to go to see her relation very often. Briggs,
you may go when you like. but as for you, my dear, you must stay and
take care of the old woman."
if Rawdon Crawley have be then and there present, instead of be at
the club nervously drink claret, the pair might have go down on
their knee before the old spinster, avow all, and be forgive in a
twinkling. but that good chance be deny to the young couple,
doubtless in order that this story might be write, in which number
of their wonderful adventure be narrate--adventure which could
never have occur to they if they have be house and shelter under
the comfortable uninteresting forgiveness of Miss Crawley.
under Mrs. Firkin's order, in the Park Lane establishment, be a young
woman from Hampshire, whose business it be, among other duty, to
knock at Miss Sharp's door with that jug of hot water which Firkin
would rather have perish than have present to the intruder. this
girl, breed on the family estate, have a brother in Captain Crawley's
troop, and if the truth be know, I daresay it would come out that
she be aware of certain arrangement, which have a great deal to do
with this history. at any rate she purchase a yellow shawl, a pair of
green boot, and a light blue hat with a red feather with three guinea
which Rebecca give she, and as little Sharp be by no mean too liberal
with her money, no doubt it be for service render that Betty Martin
be so bribe.
on the second day after Sir Pitt Crawley's offer to Miss Sharp, the sun
rise as usual, and at the usual hour Betty Martin, the upstairs maid,
knock at the door of the governess's bedchamber.
no answer be return, and she knock again. silence be still
uninterrupted; and Betty, with the hot water, open the door and
enter the chamber.
the little white dimity bed be as smooth and trim as on the day
previous, when Betty's own hand have help to make it. two little
trunk be cord in one end of the room; and on the table before the
window--on the pincushion the great fat pincushion line with pink
inside, and twill like a lady's nightcap--lie a letter. it have be
repose there probably all night.
Betty advance towards it on tiptoe, as if she be afraid to awake
it--look at it, and round the room, with an air of great wonder and
satisfaction; take up the letter, and grin intensely as she turn
it round and over, and finally carry it into Miss Briggs's room below.
how could Betty tell that the letter be for Miss Briggs, I should like
to know? all the schooling Betty have have be at Mrs. Bute Crawley's
Sunday school, and she could no more read writing than Hebrew.
"La, Miss Briggs," the girl exclaim, "o, Miss, something must have
happen--therebe nobody in Miss Sharp's room; the bed benot be slep
in, and she've run away, and leave this letter for you, Miss."
"what!" cry Briggs, drop her comb, the thin wisp of fade hair
fall over her shoulder; "an elopement! Miss Sharp a fugitive! what,
what be this?" and she eagerly break the neat seal, and, as they say,
"devour the content" of the letter address to she.
Dear Miss Briggs [the refugee write], the kind heart in the world,
as yours be, will pity and sympathise with I and excuse I. with
tear, and prayer, and blessing, I leave the home where the poor
orphan have ever meet with kindness and affection. claim even superior
to those of my benefactress call I hence. I go to my duty--to my
husband. yes, I be married. my husband command I to seek the humble
HOME which we call ours. dearest Miss Briggs, break the news as your
delicate sympathy will know how to do it--to my dear, my beloved friend
and benefactress. tell she, ere I go, I shed tear on her dear
pillow--that pillow that I have so often soothe in sickness--that I
long again to watch--oh, with what joy shall I return to dear Park
Lane! how I tremble for the answer which be to seal MY FATE! when Sir
Pitt deign to offer I his hand, an honour of which my beloved Miss
Crawley say I be deserve (my blessing go with she for judge the
poor orphan worthy to be her SISTER!) I tell Sir Pitt that I be
already a wife. even he forgive I. but my courage fail I, when I
should have tell he all--that I could not be his wife, for I be his
daughter! I be wed to the good and most generous of man--Miss
Crawley's Rawdon be MY Rawdon. at his command I open my lip, and
follow he to our humble home, as I would through the world. o, my
excellent and kind friend, intercede with my Rawdon's beloved aunt for
he and the poor girl to whom all his NOBLE race have show such
unparalleled AFFECTION. ask Miss Crawley to receive she child. I
can say no more, but blessing, blessing on all in the dear house I
leave, pray
your affectionate and GRATEFUL Rebecca Crawley. midnight.
just as Briggs have finish read this affecting and interesting
document, which reinstate she in her position as first confidante of
Miss Crawley, Mrs. Firkin enter the room. "herebe Mrs. Bute Crawley
just arrive by the mail from Hampshire, and want some tea; will you
come down and make breakfast, Miss?"
and to the surprise of Firkin, clasp her dressing-gown around she,
the wisp of hair float dishevel behind she, the little
curl-paper still stick in bunch round her forehead, Briggs sail
down to Mrs. Bute with the letter in her hand contain the wonderful
news.
"oh, Mrs. Firkin," gasp Betty, "sech a business. Miss Sharp have a
go and run away with the Capting, and theybe off to Gretney Green!"
we would devote a chapter to describe the emotion of Mrs. Firkin, do
not the passion of her mistress occupy our genteeler muse.
when Mrs. Bute Crawley, numb with midnight travelling, and warm
herself at the newly crackling parlour fire, hear from Miss Briggs the
intelligence of the clandestine marriage, she declare it be quite
providential that she should have arrive at such a time to assist poor
dear Miss Crawley in support the shock--that Rebecca be an artful
little hussy of whom she have always have her suspicion; and that as for
Rawdon Crawley, she never could account for his aunt's infatuation
regard he, and have long consider he a profligate, lost, and
abandon being. and this awful conduct, Mrs. Bute say, will have at
least this good effect, it will open poor dear Miss Crawley's eye to
the real character of this wicked man. then Mrs. Bute have a
comfortable hot toast and tea; and as there be a vacant room in the
house now, there be no need for she to remain at the Gloster Coffee
House where the Portsmouth mail have set she down, and whence she
order Mr. Bowls's aide-de-camp the footman to bring away her trunk.
Miss Crawley, be it know, do not leave her room until near noon--take
chocolate in bed in the morning, while Becky Sharp read the
Morning Post to she, or otherwise amusing herself or dawdling. the
conspirator below agree that they would spare the dear lady's
feeling until she appear in her drawing-room: meanwhile it be
announce to she that Mrs. Bute Crawley have come up from Hampshire by
the mail, be stay at the Gloster, send her love to Miss Crawley,
and ask for breakfast with Miss Briggs. the arrival of Mrs. Bute,
which would not have cause any extreme delight at another period, be
hail with pleasure now; Miss Crawley be pleased at the notion of a
gossip with her sister-in-law regard the late Lady Crawley, the
funeral arrangement pende, and Sir Pitt's abrupt proposal to rebecca.
it be not until the old lady be fairly ensconce in her usual
arm-chair in the drawing-room, and the preliminary embrace and inquiry
have take place between the lady, that the conspirator think it
advisable to submit she to the operation. who have not admire the
artifice and delicate approach with which woman "prepare" their
friend for bad news? Miss Crawley's two friend make such an
apparatus of mystery before they break the intelligence to she, that
they work she up to the necessary degree of doubt and alarm.
"and she refuse Sir Pitt, my dear, dear Miss Crawley, prepare yourself
for it," Mrs. Bute say, "because--because she couldnot help herself."
"of course there be a reason," Miss Crawley answer. "she like
somebody else. I tell Briggs so yesterday."
"likes somebody else!" Briggs gasp. "o my dear friend, she be
married already."
"marry already," Mrs. Bute chime in; and both sate with clasp
hand look from each other at their victim.
"send she to I, the instant she come in. the little sly wretch: how
dare she not tell I?" cry out Miss Crawley.
"she willnot come in soon. prepare yourself, dear friend--shebe go out
for a long time--she's--shebe go altogether."
"gracious goodness, and whobe to make my chocolate? send for she and
have she back; I desire that she come back," the old lady say.
"she decamp last night, Ma'am," cry Mrs. Bute.
"she leave a letter for I," Briggs exclaim. "shebe married to--"
"prepare she, for heaven's sake. donot torture she, my dear Miss
Briggs."
"shebe married to whom?" cry the spinster in a nervous fury.
"to--to a relation of--"
"she refuse Sir Pitt," cry the victim. "speak at once. donot drive
I mad."
"o Ma'am--prepare she, Miss Briggs--shebe married to Rawdon Crawley."
"Rawdon married Rebecca--governess--nobod-- get out of my house, you
fool, you idiot--you stupid old Briggs--how dare you? yoube in the
plot--you make he marry, think that Iwould leave my money from he--you
do, Martha," the poor old lady scream in hysteric sentence.
"I, Ma'am, ask a member of this family to marry a drawing-master's
daughter?"
"her mother be a Montmorency," cry out the old lady, pull at the
bell with all her might.
"her mother be an opera girl, and she have be on the stage or bad
herself," say Mrs. Bute.
Miss Crawley give a final scream, and fall back in a faint. they be
force to take she back to the room which she have just quit. one fit
of hysteric succeed another. the doctor be send for--the
apothecary arrive. Mrs. Bute take up the post of nurse by her bedside.
"her relation ought to be round about she," that amiable woman say.
she have scarcely be carry up to her room, when a new person arrive
to whom it be also necessary to break the news. this be Sir Pitt.
"wherebe Becky?" he say, come in. "wherebe her trap? shebe come
with I to Queen's Crawley."
"have you not hear the astonishing intelligence regard her
surreptitious union?" Briggs ask.
"whatbe that to I?" Sir Pitt ask. "I know shebe married. that
make no odd. tell she to come down at once, and not keep I."
"be you not aware, sir," Miss Briggs ask, "that she have leave our
roof, to the dismay of Miss Crawley, who be nearly kill by the
intelligence of Captain Rawdon's union with she?"
when Sir Pitt Crawley hear that Rebecca be married to his son, he
break out into a fury of language, which it would do no good to repeat
in this place, as indeed it send poor Briggs shudder out of the
room; and with she we will shut the door upon the figure of the
frenzied old man, wild with hatred and insane with baffled desire.
one day after he go to Queen's Crawley, he burst like a madman into
the room she have use when there--dash open her box with his foot,
and fling about her paper, clothe, and other relic. Miss Horrocks,
the butler's daughter, take some of they. the child dress
themselves and act play in the other. it be but a few day after
the poor mother have go to her lonely burying-place; and be lay,
unwept and disregard, in a vault full of stranger.
"suppose the old lady donot come to," Rawdon say to his little wife,
as they sate together in the snug little Brompton lodging. she have
be try the new piano all the morning. the new glove fit she
to a nicety; the new shawl become she wonderfully; the new ring
glitter on her little hand, and the new watch tick at her waist;
"suppose she donot come round, eh, Becky?"
"i'll make your fortune," she say; and Delilah pat Samson's cheek.
"you can do anything," he say, kiss the little hand. "by Jove you
can; and wewill drive down to the Star and Garter, and dine, by Jove."
CHAPTER XVII
how Captain Dobbin buy a Piano
if there be any exhibition in all Vanity Fair which Satire and
Sentiment can visit arm in arm together; where you light on the
strange contrast laughable and tearful: where you may be gentle and
pathetic, or savage and cynical with perfect propriety: it be at one of
those public assembly, a crowd of which be advertise every day in
the last page of the Times newspaper, and over which the late Mr.
George Robins use to preside with so much dignity. there be very few
London people, as I fancy, who have not attend at these meeting, and
all with a taste for moralize must have think, with a sensation and
interest not a little startling and queer, of the day when their turn
shall come too, and Mr. Hammerdown will sell by the order of Diogenes'
assignee, or will be instruct by the executor, to offer to public
competition, the library, furniture, plate, wardrobe, and choice cellar
of wine of Epicurus decease.
even with the most selfish disposition, the Vanity Fairian, as he
witness this sordid part of the obsequie of a depart friend, cannot
but feel some sympathy and regret. my Lord dive's remain be in the
family vault: the statuary be cut an inscription veraciously
commemorate his virtue, and the sorrow of his heir, who be
dispose of his good. what guest at Dives's table can pass the
familiar house without a sigh?--the familiar house of which the light
use to shine so cheerfully at seven o'clock, of which the hall-door
open so readily, of which the obsequious servant, as you pass up
the comfortable stair, sound your name from land to landing, until
it reach the apartment where jolly old Dives welcome his friend!
what a number of they he have; and what a noble way of entertain
they. how witty people use to be here who be morose when they get
out of the door; and how courteous and friendly man who slander and
hat each other everywhere else! he be pompous, but with such a cook
what would one not swallow? he be rather dull, perhaps, but would not
such wine make any conversation pleasant? we must get some of his
Burgundy at any price, the mourner cry at his club. "I get this box
at old Dives's sale," Pincher say, hand it round, "one of Louis
XV's mistress--pretty thing, be it not?--sweet miniature," and they
talk of the way in which young Dives be dissipate his fortune.
how change the house be, though! the front be patch over with
bill, set forth the particular of the furniture in star
capital. they have hang a shred of carpet out of an upstairs
window--a half dozen of porter be lounge on the dirty step--the
hall swarm with dingy guest of oriental countenance, who thrust
print card into your hand, and offer to bid. old woman and amateur
have invade the upper apartment, pinch the bed-curtain, poke
into the feather, shampoo the mattress, and clap the wardrobe
drawer to and fro. enterprise young housekeeper be measure the
look-glass and hanging to see if they will suit the new menage
(Snob will brag for year that he have purchase this or that at Dives's
sale), and Mr. Hammerdown be sit on the great mahogany
dining-table, in the dining-room below, wave the ivory hammer, and
employ all the artifice of eloquence, enthusiasm, entreaty, reason,
despair; shout to his people; satirize Mr. Davids for his
sluggishness; inspirit Mr. Moss into action; imploring, commanding,
bellowing, until down come the hammer like fate, and we pass to the
next lot. o Dives, who would ever have think, as we sit round the
broad table sparkle with plate and spotless linen, to have see such
a dish at the head of it as that roar auctioneer?
it be rather late in the sale. the excellent drawing-room furniture
by the good maker; the rare and famous wine select, regardless of
cost, and with the well-know taste of the purchaser; the rich and
complete set of family plate have be sell on the previous day.
certain of the good wine (which all have a great character among
amateur in the neighbourhood) have be purchase for his master, who
know they very well, by the butler of our friend John Osborne, Esquire,
of Russell Square. a small portion of the most useful article of the
plate have be buy by some young stockbroker from the City. and
now the public be invite to the purchase of minor object, it
happen that the orator on the table be expatiate on the merit of
a picture, which he seek to recommend to his audience: it be by no
mean so select or numerous a company as have attend the previous day
of the auction.
"no. 369," roar Mr. Hammerdown. "portrait of a gentleman on an
elephant. whowill bid for the gentleman on the elephant? lift up the
picture, Blowman, and let the company examine this lot." a long, pale,
military-look gentleman, seat demurely at the mahogany table,
could not help grin as this valuable lot be show by Mr. Blowman.
"turn the elephant to the Captain, Blowman. what shall we say, sir,
for the elephant?" but the Captain, blush in a very hurried and
discomfited manner, turn away his head.
"shall we say twenty guineas for this work of art?--fifteen, five, name
your own price. the gentleman without the elephant be worth five
pound."
"I wonder it benot come down with he," say a professional wag, "hebe
anyhow a precious big one"; at which (for the elephant-rider be
represent as of a very stout figure) there be a general giggle in
the room.
"donot be try to deprecate the value of the lot, Mr. Moss," Mr.
Hammerdown say; "let the company examine it as a work of art--the
attitude of the gallant animal quite accord to natur'; the gentleman
in a nankeen jacket, his gun in his hand, be go to the chase; in the
distance a banyhann tree and a pagody, most likely resemblance of some
interesting spot in our famous eastern possession. how much for this
lot? come, gentleman, donot keep I here all day."
some one bid five shilling, at which the military gentleman look
towards the quarter from which this splendid offer have come, and there
see another officer with a young lady on his arm, who both appear to
be highly amuse with the scene, and to whom, finally, this lot be
knock down for half a guinea. he at the table look more surprised
and discompose than ever when he spy this pair, and his head sink
into his military collar, and he turn his back upon they, so as to
avoid they altogether.
of all the other article which Mr. Hammerdown have the honour to offer
for public competition that day it be not our purpose to make mention,
save of one only, a little square piano, which come down from the upper
region of the house (the state grand piano have be dispose of
previously); this the young lady try with a rapid and skilful hand
(make the officer blush and start again), and for it, when its turn
come, her agent begin to bid.
but there be an opposition here. the Hebrew aide-de-camp in the
service of the officer at the table bid against the Hebrew gentleman
employ by the elephant purchaser, and a brisk battle ensue over
this little piano, the combatant be greatly encourage by Mr.
Hammerdown.
at last, when the competition have be prolong for some time, the
elephant captain and lady desist from the race; and the hammer come
down, the auctioneer said:--"mr. Lewis, twenty-five," and Mr. Lewis's
chief thus become the proprietor of the little square piano. have
effect the purchase, he sate up as if he be greatly relieve, and
the unsuccessful competitor catch a glimpse of he at this moment,
the lady say to her friend,
"why, Rawdon, itbe Captain Dobbin."
I suppose Becky be discontent with the new piano her husband have
hire for she, or perhaps the proprietor of that instrument have
fetch it away, decline farth credit, or perhaps she have a
particular attachment for the one which she have just try to purchase,
recollect it in old day, when she use to play upon it, in the
little sitting-room of our dear Amelia Sedley.
the sale be at the old house in Russell Square, where we pass some
evening together at the beginning of this story. good old John Sedley
be a ruin man. his name have be proclaim as a defaulter on the
Stock Exchange, and his bankruptcy and commercial extermination have
follow. Mr. Osborne's butler come to buy some of the famous port
wine to transfer to the cellar over the way. as for one dozen
well-manufacture silver spoon and fork at per oz., and one dozen
dessert ditto ditto, there be three young stockbroker (Messrs. Dale,
Spiggot, and Dale, of Threadneedle Street, indeed), who, have have
dealing with the old man, and kindness from he in day when he be
kind to everybody with whom he deal, send this little spar out of the
wreck with their love to good Mrs. Sedley; and with respect to the
piano, as it have be Amelia's, and as she might miss it and want one
now, and as Captain William Dobbin could no more play upon it than he
could dance on the tight rope, it be probable that he do not purchase
the instrument for his own use.
in a word, it arrive that evening at a wonderful small cottage in a
street lead from the Fulham Road--one of those street which have
the fine romantic names--(this be call St. Adelaide Villas,
Anna-Maria Road West), where the house look like baby-house; where
the people, look out of the first-floor window, must infallibly, as
you think, sit with their foot in the parlour; where the shrub in the
little garden in front bloom with a perennial display of little
child's pinafore, little red sock, cap, &c. (polyandria
polygynia); whence you hear the sound of jingle spinet and woman
singing; where little porter pot hang on the railing sun
themselves; whither of evening you see City clerk pad wearily:
here it be that Mr. Clapp, the clerk of Mr. Sedley, have his domicile,
and in this asylum the good old gentleman hide his head with his wife
and daughter when the crash come.
Jos Sedley have act as a man of his disposition would, when the
announcement of the family misfortune reach he. he do not come to
London, but he write to his mother to draw upon his agent for whatever
money be want, so that his kind break-spirit old parent have no
present poverty to fear. this do, Jos go on at the boarding-house
at Cheltenham pretty much as before. he drive his curricle; he drink
his claret; he play his rubber; he tell his indian story, and the
irish widow console and flatter he as usual. his present of money,
needful as it be, make little impression on his parent; and I have
hear Amelia say that the first day on which she see her father lift up
his head after the failure be on the receipt of the packet of fork
and spoon with the young stockbroker' love, over which he burst out
cry like a child, be greatly more affected than even his wife, to
whom the present be address. Edward Dale, the junior of the house,
who purchase the spoon for the firm, be, in fact, very sweet upon
Amelia, and offer for she in spite of all. he marry Miss Louisa
Cutts (daughter of Higham and Cutts, the eminent cornfactor) with a
handsome fortune in 1820; and be now live in splendour, and with a
numerous family, at his elegant villa, Muswell Hill. but we must not
let the recollection of this good fellow cause we to diverge from the
principal history.
I hope the reader have much too good an opinion of Captain and Mrs.
Crawley to suppose that they ever would have dream of pay a visit
to so remote a district as Bloomsbury, if they think the family whom
they propose to honour with a visit be not merely out of fashion,
but out of money, and could be serviceable to they in no possible
manner. rebecca be entirely surprised at the sight of the comfortable
old house where she have meet with no small kindness, ransack by
broker and bargainer, and its quiet family treasure give up to
public desecration and plunder. a month after her flight, she have
bethought she of Amelia, and Rawdon, with a horse-laugh, have express
a perfect willingness to see young George Osborne again. "hebe a very
agreeable acquaintance, Beck," the wag add. "Iwould like to sell he
another horse, Beck. Iwould like to play a few more game at billiard
with he. hewould be what I call useful just now, Mrs. C.--ha, ha!" by
which sort of speech it be not to be suppose that Rawdon Crawley have a
deliberate desire to cheat Mr. Osborne at play, but only wish to take
that fair advantage of he which almost every sporting gentleman in
Vanity Fair consider to be his due from his neighbour.
the old aunt be long in "come-to." a month have elapse. Rawdon be
deny the door by Mr. Bowls; his servant could not get a lodgment in
the house at Park Lane; his letter be send back unopened. Miss
Crawley never stir out--she be unwell--and Mrs. Bute remain still
and never leave she. Crawley and his wife both of they augur evil
from the continued presence of Mrs. Bute.
"Gad, I begin to perceive now why she be always bring we together
at Queen's Crawley," Rawdon say.
"what an artful little woman!" ejaculate Rebecca.
"well, I donot regret it, if you donot," the Captain cry, still in an
amorous rapture with his wife, who reward he with a kiss by way of
reply, and be indeed not a little gratified by the generous confidence
of her husband.
"if he have but a little more brain," she think to herself, "I might
make something of he"; but she never let he perceive the opinion she
have of he; listen with indefatigable complacency to his story of
the stable and the mess; laugh at all his joke; feel the great
interest in Jack Spatterdash, whose cab-horse have come down, and Bob
Martingale, who have be take up in a gambling-house, and Tom
Cinqbars, who be go to ride the steeplechase. when he come home she
be alert and happy: when he go out she press he to go: when he
stay at home, she play and sing for he, make he good drink,
superintend his dinner, warm his slipper, and steep his soul in
comfort. the good of woman (I have hear my grandmother say) be
hypocrite. we donot know how much they hide from we: how watchful
they be when they seem most artless and confidential: how often those
frank smile which they wear so easily, be trap to cajole or elude or
disarm--I donot mean in your mere coquette, but your domestic model,
and paragon of female virtue. who have not see a woman hide the
dulness of a stupid husband, or coax the fury of a savage one? we
accept this amiable slavishness, and praise a woman for it: we call
this pretty treachery truth. a good housewife be of necessity a
humbug; and Cornelia's husband be hoodwink, as Potiphar be--only in
a different way.
by these attention, that veteran rake, Rawdon Crawley, find himself
convert into a very happy and submissive married man. his former
haunt know he not. they ask about he once or twice at his club,
but do not miss he much: in those booth of Vanity Fair people seldom
do miss each other. his seclude wife ever smile and cheerful, his
little comfortable lodging, snug meal, and homely evening, have all
the charm of novelty and secrecy. the marriage be not yet declare
to the world, or publish in the Morning Post. all his creditor
would have come rush on he in a body, have they know that he be
unite to a woman without fortune. "my relation willnot cry fie upon
I," Becky say, with rather a bitter laugh; and she be quite
content to wait until the old aunt should be reconcile, before she
claim her place in society. so she live at Brompton, and meanwhile
see no one, or only those few of her husband's male companion who be
admit into her little dining-room. these be all charm with she.
the little dinner, the laughing and chatting, the music afterwards,
delight all who participate in these enjoyment. Major Martingale
never think about ask to see the marriage licence, Captain
Cinqbars be perfectly enchant with her skill in make punch. and
young Lieutenant Spatterdash (who be fond of piquet, and whom Crawley
would often invite) be evidently and quickly smite by Mrs. Crawley;
but her own circumspection and modesty never forsook she for a moment,
and Crawley's reputation as a fire-eat and jealous warrior be a
furth and complete defence to his little wife.
there be gentleman of very good blood and fashion in this city, who
never have enter a lady's drawing-room; so that though Rawdon
Crawley's marriage might be talk about in his county, where, of
course, Mrs. Bute have spread the news, in London it be doubt, or not
heed, or not talk about at all. he live comfortably on credit.
he have a large capital of debt, which lay out judiciously, will carry
a man along for many year, and on which certain man about town
contrive to live a hundred time well than even man with ready money
can do. indeed who be there that walk London street, but can point
out a half-dozen of man rid by he splendidly, while he be on foot,
court by fashion, bow into their carriage by tradesman, deny
themselves nothing, and live on who know what? we see Jack
Thriftless prance in the park, or dart in his brougham down Pall
Mall: we eat his dinner serve on his miraculous plate. "how do this
begin," we say, "or where will it end?" "my dear fellow," I hear Jack
once say, "I owe money in every capital in Europe." the end must come
some day, but in the meantime Jack thrive as much as ever; people be
glad enough to shake he by the hand, ignore the little dark story
that be whisper every now and then against he, and pronounce he a
good-nature, jovial, reckless fellow.
truth oblige we to confess that Rebecca have marry a gentleman of
this order. everything be plentiful in his house but ready money, of
which their menage pretty early feel the want; and read the Gazette
one day, and come upon the announcement of "Lieutenant G. Osborne to
be Captain by purchase, vice Smith, who exchange," Rawdon utter that
sentiment regard Amelia's lover, which end in the visit to Russell
Square.
when Rawdon and his wife wish to communicate with Captain Dobbin at
the sale, and to know particular of the catastrophe which have befall
Rebecca's old acquaintance, the Captain have vanish; and such
information as they get be from a stray porter or broker at the
auction.
"look at they with their hooked beak," Becky say, get into the
buggy, her picture under her arm, in great glee. "theybe like
vulture after a battle."
"donot know. never be in action, my dear. ask Martingale; he be in
Spain, aide-de-camp to General Blazes."
"he be a very kind old man, Mr. Sedley," rebecca say; "Ibe really
sorry hebe go wrong."
"o stockbroker--bankrupt--use to it, you know," Rawdon reply,
cut a fly off the horse's ear.
"I wish we could have afford some of the plate, Rawdon," the wife
continue sentimentally. "five-and-twenty guineas be monstrously dear
for that little piano. we choose it at Broadwood's for Amelia, when she
come from school. it only cost five-and-thirty then."
"what-d'-ye-call'em--'osborne,' will cry off now, I suppose, since the
family be smash. how cut up your pretty little friend will be; hey,
Becky?"
"I daresay shewill recover it," Becky say with a smile--and they drive
on and talk about something else.
CHAPTER xviii
who play on the Piano Captain Dobbin Bought
our surprised story now find itself for a moment among very famous
event and personage, and hang on to the skirt of history. when
the eagle of Napoleon Bonaparte, the Corsican upstart, be fly
from Provence, where they have perch after a brief sojourn in Elba,
and from steeple to steeple until they reach the tower of Notre
Dame, I wonder whether the imperial bird have any eye for a little
corner of the parish of Bloomsbury, London, which you might have
think so quiet, that even the whirring and flap of those mighty
wing would pass unobserved there?
"Napoleon have land at Cannes." such news might create a panic at
Vienna, and cause Russia to drop his card, and take Prussia into a
corner, and Talleyrand and Metternich to wag their head together,
while Prince Hardenberg, and even the present Marquis of Londonderry,
be puzzle; but how be this intelligence to affect a young lady in
Russell Square, before whose door the watchman sing the hour when she
be asleep: who, if she stroll in the square, be guard there by
the railing and the beadle: who, if she walk ever so short a
distance to buy a ribbon in Southampton Row, be follow by Black
Sambo with an enormous cane: who be always care for, dress, put to
bed, and watch over by ever so many guardian angel, with and without
wage? Bon Dieu, I say, be it not hard that the fateful rush of the
great imperial struggle cannot take place without affect a poor
little harmless girl of eighteen, who be occupy in billing and
cooing, or work muslin collar in Russell Square? you too, kindly,
homely flower!--i the great roar war tempest come to sweep you
down, here, although cower under the shelter of Holborn? yes;
Napoleon be fling his last stake, and poor little Emmy Sedley's
happiness form, somehow, part of it.
in the first place, her father's fortune be sweep down with that fatal
news. all his speculation have of late go wrong with the luckless
old gentleman. venture have fail; merchant have break; fund have
rise when he calculate they would fall. what need to particularize?
if success be rare and slow, everybody know how quick and easy ruin
be. Old Sedley have keep his own sad counsel. everything seem to go
on as usual in the quiet, opulent house; the good-natured mistress
pursuing, quite unsuspiciously, her bustle idleness, and daily easy
avocation; the daughter absorb still in one selfish, tender thought,
and quite regardless of all the world besides, when that final crash
come, under which the worthy family fall.
one night Mrs. Sedley be write card for a party; the Osbornes have
give one, and she must not be behindhand; John Sedley, who have come
home very late from the City, sate silent at the chimney side, while
his wife be prattle to he; Emmy have go up to her room ail and
low-spirited. "shebe not happy," the mother go on. "George Osborne
neglect she. Ihave no patience with the air of those people. the
girl have not be in the house these three week; and George have be
twice in town without come. Edward Dale see he at the Opera.
Edward would marry she Ibe sure: and therebe Captain Dobbin who, I
think, would--only I hate all army man. such a dandy as George have
become. with his military air, indeed! we must show some folk that
webe as good as they. only give Edward Dale any encouragement, and
youwill see. we must have a party, Mr. S. why donot you speak, John?
shall I say Tuesday fortnight? why donot you answer? good God, John,
what have happen?"
John Sedley spring up out of his chair to meet his wife, who run to
he. he seize she in his arm, and say with a hasty voice, "webe
ruin, Mary. wehave get the world to begin over again, dear. itbe
good that you should know all, and at once." as he speak, he tremble
in every limb, and almost fall. he think the news would have
overpower his wife--his wife, to whom he have never say a hard word.
but it be he that be the most move, sudden as the shock be to she.
when he sink back into his seat, it be the wife that take the office
of consoler. she take his trembling hand, and kiss it, and put it
round her neck: she call he her John--her dear John--her old
man--her kind old man; she pour out a hundred word of incoherent
love and tenderness; her faithful voice and simple caress work
this sad heart up to an inexpressible delight and anguish, and cheer
and solace his over-burden soul.
only once in the course of the long night as they sate together, and
poor Sedley open his pen-up soul, and tell the story of his loss
and embarrassment--the treason of some of his old friend, the
manly kindness of some, from whom he never could have expect it--in a
general confession--only once do the faithful wife give way to emotion.
"my God, my God, it will break Emmy's heart," she say.
the father have forget the poor girl. she be lie, awake and
unhappy, overhead. in the midst of friend, home, and kind parent,
she be alone. to how many people can any one tell all? who will be
open where there be no sympathy, or have call to speak to those who
never can understand? our gentle Amelia be thus solitary. she have no
confidante, so to speak, ever since she have anything to confide. she
could not tell the old mother her doubt and care; the would-be
sister seem every day more strange to she. and she have misgiving
and fear which she dare not acknowledge to herself, though she be
always secretly brood over they.
her heart try to persist in assert that George Osborne be worthy
and faithful to she, though she know otherwise. how many a thing have
she say, and get no echo from he. how many suspicion of selfishness
and indifference have she to encounter and obstinately overcome. to
whom could the poor little martyr tell these daily struggle and
torture? her hero himself only half understand she. she do not dare
to own that the man she love be her inferior; or to feel that she have
give her heart away too soon. give once, the pure bashful maiden be
too modest, too tender, too trustful, too weak, too much woman to
recall it. we be Turks with the affection of our woman; and have
make they subscribe to our doctrine too. we let their body go abroad
liberally enough, with smile and ringlet and pink bonnet to disguise
they instead of veil and yakmak. but their soul must be see by
only one man, and they obey not unwillingly, and consent to remain at
home as our slave--minister to we and do drudgery for we.
so imprison and torture be this gentle little heart, when in the
month of March, Anno Domini 1815, Napoleon land at Cannes, and Louis
XVIII flee, and all Europe be in alarm, and the fund fall, and old
John Sedley be ruin.
we be not go to follow the worthy old stockbroker through those
last pang and agony of ruin through which he pass before his
commercial demise befell. they declare he at the Stock Exchange; he
be absent from his house of business: his bill be protest: his
act of bankruptcy formal. the house and furniture of Russell Square
be seize and sell up, and he and his family be thrust away, as we
have see, to hide their head where they might.
John Sedley have not the heart to review the domestic establishment who
have appear now and anon in our page and of whom he be now force
by poverty to take leave. the wage of those worthy people be
discharge with that punctuality which man frequently show who only owe
in great sum--they be sorry to leave good place--but they do not
break their heart at part from their adore master and mistress.
Amelia's maid be profuse in condolence, but go off quite resign
to well herself in a genteel quarter of the town. Black Sambo,
with the infatuation of his profession, determine on set up a
public-house. honest old Mrs. Blenkinsop indeed, who have see the
birth of Jos and Amelia, and the wooing of John Sedley and his wife,
be for stay by they without wage, have amass a considerable
sum in their service: and she accompany the fallen people into their
new and humble place of refuge, where she tend they and grumble
against they for a while.
of all Sedley's opponent in his debate with his creditor which now
ensue, and harass the feeling of the humiliate old gentleman so
severely, that in six week he oldene more than he have do for
fifteen year before--the most determined and obstinate seem to be
John Osborne, his old friend and neighbour--John Osborne, whom he have
set up in life--who be under a hundred obligation to he--and whose
son be to marry Sedley's daughter. any one of these circumstance
would account for the bitterness of Osborne's opposition.
when one man have be under very remarkable obligation to another,
with whom he subsequently quarrel, a common sense of decency, as it
be, make of the former a much severer enemy than a mere stranger
would be. to account for your own hard-heartedness and ingratitude in
such a case, you be bind to prove the other party's crime. it be not
that you be selfish, brutal, and angry at the failure of a
speculation--no, no--it be that your partner have lead you into it by the
basest treachery and with the most sinister motif. from a mere sense
of consistency, a persecutor be bind to show that the fallen man be a
villain--otherwise he, the persecutor, be a wretch himself.
and as a general rule, which may make all creditor who be inclined to
be severe pretty comfortable in their mind, no man embarrassed be
altogether honest, very likely. they conceal something; they
exaggerate chance of good luck; hide away the real state of affair;
say that thing be flourish when they be hopeless, keep a smile
face (a dreary smile it be) upon the verge of bankruptcy--be ready to
lay hold of any pretext for delay or of any money, so as to stave off
the inevitable ruin a few day long. "down with such dishonesty,"
say the creditor in triumph, and revile his sink enemy. "you
fool, why do you catch at a straw?" calm good sense say to the man
that be drown. "you villain, why do you shrink from plunge into
the irretrievable Gazette?" say prosperity to the poor devil battle
in that black gulf. who have not remark the readiness with which the
close of friend and honest of man suspect and accuse each other
of cheating when they fall out on money matter? everybody do it.
everybody be right, I suppose, and the world be a rogue.
then Osborne have the intolerable sense of former benefit to goad and
irritate he: these be always a cause of hostility aggravate.
finally, he have to break off the match between Sedley's daughter and
his son; and as it have go very far indeed, and as the poor girl's
happiness and perhaps character be compromise, it be necessary to
show the strong reason for the rupture, and for John Osborne to
prove John Sedley to be a very bad character indeed.
at the meeting of creditor, then, he comport himself with a
savageness and scorn towards Sedley, which almost succeed in break
the heart of that ruin bankrupt man. on George's intercourse with
Amelia he put an instant veto--menace the youth with malediction if
he break his command, and vilipend the poor innocent girl as the
basest and most artful of vixen. one of the great condition of anger
and hatred be, that you must tell and believe lie against the hat
object, in order, as we say, to be consistent.
when the great crash come--the announcement of ruin, and the departure
from Russell Square, and the declaration that all be over between she
and George--all over between she and love, she and happiness, her and
faith in the world--a brutal letter from John Osborne tell she in a few
curt line that her father's conduct have be of such a nature that all
engagement between the family be at an end--when the final award
come, it do not shock she so much as her parent, as her mother rather
expect (for John Sedley himself be entirely prostrate in the ruin
of his own affair and shatter honour). Amelia take the news very
palely and calmly. it be only the confirmation of the dark presage
which have long go before. it be the mere reading of the
sentence--of the crime she have long ago be guilty--the crime of
love wrongly, too violently, against reason. she tell no more of her
thought now than she have before. she seem scarcely more unhappy now
when convince all hope be over, than before when she feel but dare
not confess that it be go. so she change from the large house to
the small one without any mark or difference; remain in her little
room for the most part; pin silently; and die away day by day. I do
not mean to say that all female be so. my dear Miss Bullock, I do
not think your heart would break in this way. you be a strong-minded
young woman with proper principle. I do not venture to say that mine
would; it have suffer, and, it must be confess, survive. but there
be some soul thus gently constitute, thus frail, and delicate, and
tender.
whenever old John Sedley think of the affair between George and
Amelia, or allude to it, it be with bitterness almost as great as Mr.
Osborne himself have show. he curse Osborne and his family as
heartless, wicked, and ungrateful. no power on earth, he swear, would
induce he to marry his daughter to the son of such a villain, and he
order Emmy to banish George from her mind, and to return all the
present and letter which she have ever have from he.
she promise acquiescence, and try to obey. she put up the two or
three trinket: and, as for the letter, she draw they out of the place
where she keep they; and read they over--as if she do not know they by
heart already: but she could not part with they. that effort be too
much for she; she place they back in her bosom again--as you have see
a woman nurse a child that be dead. Young Amelia feel that she would
die or lose her sens outright, if tear away from this last
consolation. how she use to blush and lighten up when those letter
come! how she use to trip away with a beat heart, so that she
might read unseen! if they be cold, yet how perversely this fond
little soul interpret they into warmth. if they be short or
selfish, what excuse she find for the writer!
it be over these few worthless paper that she brood and brood.
she live in her past life--every letter seem to recall some
circumstance of it. how well she remember they all! his look and
tone, his dress, what he say and how--these relic and remembrance
of dead affection be all that be leave she in the world. and the
business of her life, be--to watch the corpse of love.
to death she look with inexpressible longing. then, she think, I
shall always be able to follow he. I be not praise her conduct or
set she up as a model for Miss Bullock to imitate. Miss B. know
how to regulate her feeling well than this poor little creature.
Miss B. would never have commit herself as that imprudent Amelia have
do; pledge her love irretrievably; confess her heart away, and get
back nothing--only a brittle promise which be snapt and worthless in a
moment. a long engagement be a partnership which one party be free to
keep or to break, but which involve all the capital of the other.
be cautious then, young lady; be wary how you engage. be shy of
love frankly; never tell all you feel, or (a well way still), feel
very little. see the consequence of be prematurely honest and
confiding, and mistrust yourself and everybody. get yourself
married as they do in France, where the lawyer be the bridesmaid and
confidante. at any rate, never have any feeling which may make you
uncomfortable, or make any promise which you cannot at any required
moment command and withdraw. that be the way to get on, and be
respect, and have a virtuous character in Vanity Fair.
if Amelia could have hear the comment regard she which be make
in the circle from which her father's ruin have just drive she, she
would have see what her own crime be, and how entirely her
character be jeopardise. such criminal imprudence Mrs. Smith never
know of; such horrid familiarity Mrs. Brown have always condemn, and
the end might be a warning to her daughter. "Captain Osborne, of
course, could not marry a bankrupt's daughter," the Misses Dobbin say.
"it be quite enough to have be swindle by the father. as for that
little Amelia, her folly have really pass all--"
"all what?" Captain Dobbin roar out. "havenot they be engage ever
since they be child? benot it as good as a marriage? dare any
soul on earth breathe a word against the sweetest, the pure, the
tenderest, the most angelical of young woman?"
"La, William, donot be so highty-tighty with US. webe not man. we
cannot fight you," Miss Jane say. "wehave say nothing against Miss
Sedley: but that her conduct throughout be most IMPRUDENT, not to call
it by any bad name; and that her parent be people who certainly
merit their misfortune."
"hadnot you well, now that Miss Sedley be free, propose for she
yourself, William?" Miss Ann ask sarcastically. "it would be a most
eligible family connection. he! he!"
"I marry she!" Dobbin say, blush very much, and talk quick. "if
you be so ready, young lady, to chop and change, do you suppose that
she be? Laugh and sneer at that angel. she cannot hear it; and shebe
miserable and unfortunate, and deserve to be laugh at. go on
joking, Ann. yoube the wit of the family, and the other like to hear
it."
"I must tell you again webe not in a barrack, William," Miss Ann
remark.
"in a barrack, by Jove--I wish anybody in a barrack would say what you
do," cry out this uproused british lion. "I should like to hear a
man breathe a word against she, by Jupiter. but man donot talk in this
way, ann: itbe only woman, who get together and hiss, and shriek, and
cackle. there, get away--don't begin to cry. I only say you be a
couple of geese," will Dobbin say, perceive Miss Ann's pink eye
be begin to moisten as usual. "well, yoube not geese, yoube
swan--anything you like, only do, do leave Miss Sedley alone."
anything like William's infatuation about that silly little flirt,
ogle thing be never know, the mamma and sister agree together in
thinking: and they tremble lest, her engagement be off with
Osborne, she should take up immediately her other admirer and Captain.
in which foreboding these worthy young woman no doubt judge accord
to the good of their experience; or rather (for as yet they have have no
opportunity of marry or of jilting) accord to their own notion
of right and wrong.
"it be a mercy, Mamma, that the regiment be order abroad," the girl
say. "this danger, at any rate, be spar our brother."
such, indeed, be the fact; and so it be that the french Emperor come
in to perform a part in this domestic comedy of Vanity Fair which we
be now play, and which would never have be enact without the
intervention of this august mute personage. it be he that ruin the
Bourbons and Mr. John Sedley. it be he whose arrival in his capital
call up all France in arm to defend he there; and all Europe to
oust he. while the french nation and army be swear fidelity round
the eagle in the Champ de Mars, four mighty european host be
get in motion for the great chasse a l'aigle; and one of these be
a british army, of which two hero of our, Captain Dobbin and Captain
Osborne, form a portion.
the news of Napoleon's escape and landing be receive by the gallant
--th with a fiery delight and enthusiasm, which everybody can
understand who know that famous corps. from the colonel to the
small drummer in the regiment, all be fill with hope and
ambition and patriotic fury; and thank the French Emperor as for a
personal kindness in come to disturb the peace of Europe. now be
the time the --th have so long pant for, to show their comrade in
arm that they could fight as well as the Peninsular veteran, and that
all the pluck and valour of the --th have not be kill by the West
Indies and the yellow fever. stubble and Spooney look to get their
company without purchase. before the end of the campaign (which she
resolve to share), Mrs. Major O'Dowd hop to write herself Mrs.
Colonel O'Dowd, C.B. our two friend (Dobbin and Osborne) be quite
as much excited as the rest: and each in his way--Mr. Dobbin very
quietly, Mr. Osborne very loudly and energetically--be bent upon do
his duty, and gain his share of honour and distinction.
the agitation thrilling through the country and army in consequence of
this news be so great, that private matter be little heed: and
hence probably George Osborne, just gazette to his company, busy with
preparation for the march, which must come inevitably, and pant for
further promotion--be not so much affect by other incident which
would have interest he at a more quiet period. he be not, it must
be confess, very much cast down by good old Mr. Sedley's catastrophe.
he try his new uniform, which become he very handsomely, on the day
when the first meeting of the creditor of the unfortunate gentleman
take place. his father tell he of the wicked, rascally, shameful
conduct of the bankrupt, remind he of what he have say about Amelia,
and that their connection be break off for ever; and give he that
evening a good sum of money to pay for the new clothe and epaulet in
which he look so well. money be always useful to this free-handed
young fellow, and he take it without many word. the bill be up in
the Sedley house, where he have pass so many, many happy hour. he
could see they as he walk from home that night (to the Old
Slaughters', where he put up when in town) shin white in the moon.
that comfortable home be shut, then, upon Amelia and her parent:
where have they take refuge? the thought of their ruin affect he not
a little. he be very melancholy that night in the coffee-room at the
slaughter'; and drink a good deal, as his comrade remark there.
Dobbin come in presently, caution he about the drink, which he only
take, he say, because he be deuce low; but when his friend begin to
put to he clumsy inquiry, and ask he for news in a significant
manner, Osborne decline enter into conversation with he, avowing,
however, that he be devilish disturbed and unhappy.
three day afterwards, Dobbin find Osborne in his room at the
barrack--his head on the table, a number of paper about, the young
captain evidently in a state of great despondency. "she--shebe send I
back some thing I give she--some damned trinket. look here!" there
be a little packet direct in the well-know hand to Captain George
Osborne, and some thing lie about--a ring, a silver knife he have
buy, as a boy, for she at a fair; a gold chain, and a locket with
hair in it. "itbe all over," say he, with a groan of sicken
remorse. "look, will, you may read it if you like."
there be a little letter of a few line, to which he point, which
say:
my papa have order I to return to you these present, which you make
in happy day to I; and I be to write to you for the last time. I
think, I know you feel as much as I do the blow which have come upon we.
it be I that absolve you from an engagement which be impossible in our
present misery. I be sure you have no share in it, or in the cruel
suspicion of Mr. Osborne, which be the hard of all our grief to
bear. farewell. farewell. I pray God to strengthen I to bear this
and other calamity, and to bless you always. A.
I shall often play upon the piano--your piano. it be like you to send
it.
Dobbin be very soft-hearted. the sight of woman and child in pain
always use to melt he. the idea of Amelia break-hearted and lonely
tear that good-natured soul with anguish. and he break out into an
emotion, which anybody who like may consider unmanly. he swear that
Amelia be an angel, to which Osborne say aye with all his heart. he,
too, have be review the history of their life--and have see she
from her childhood to her present age, so sweet, so innocent, so
charmingly simple, and artlessly fond and tender.
what a pang it be to lose all that: to have have it and not prize it!
a thousand homely scene and recollection crowd on he--in which he
always see her good and beautiful. and for himself, he blush with
remorse and shame, as the remembrance of his own selfishness and
indifference contrast with that perfect purity. for a while, glory,
war, everything be forget, and the pair of friend talk about she
only.
"where be they?" Osborne ask, after a long talk, and a long
pause--and, in truth, with no little shame at think that he have
take no step to follow she. "where be they? therebe no address to
the note."
Dobbin know. he have not merely send the piano; but have write a note
to Mrs. Sedley, and ask permission to come and see she--and he have
see she, and Amelia too, yesterday, before he come down to Chatham;
and, what be more, he have bring that farewell letter and packet which
have so move they.
the good-natured fellow have find Mrs. Sedley only too willing to
receive he, and greatly agitate by the arrival of the piano, which,
as she conjecture, must have come from George, and be a signal of
amity on his part. Captain Dobbin do not correct this error of the
worthy lady, but listen to all her story of complaint and
misfortune with great sympathy--condole with her loss and
privation, and agree in reprehend the cruel conduct of Mr. Osborne
towards his first benefactor. when she have ease her overflowing bosom
somewhat, and pour forth many of her sorrow, he have the courage to
ask actually to see Amelia, who be above in her room as usual, and
whom her mother lead tremble downstairs.
her appearance be so ghastly, and her look of despair so pathetic,
that honest William Dobbin be frightened as he behold it; and read the
most fatal foreboding in that pale fix face. after sit in his
company a minute or two, she put the packet into his hand, and say,
"take this to Captain Osborne, if you please, and--and I hope hebe
quite well--and it be very kind of you to come and see we--and we like
our new house very much. and I--I think Iwill go upstairs, Mamma, for
Ibe not very strong." and with this, and a curtsey and a smile, the
poor child go her way. the mother, as she lead she up, cast back
look of anguish towards Dobbin. the good fellow want no such
appeal. he love she himself too fondly for that. inexpressible
grief, and pity, and terror pursue he, and he come away as if he be
a criminal after see she.
when Osborne hear that his friend have find she, he make hot and
anxious inquiry regard the poor child. how be she? how do she
look? what do she say? his comrade take his hand, and look he in
the face.
"George, shebe die," William Dobbin say--and could speak no more.
there be a buxom irish servant-girl, who perform all the duty of
the little house where the Sedley family have find refuge: and this
girl have in vain, on many previous day, striven to give Amelia aid or
consolation. Emmy be much too sad to answer, or even to be aware of
the attempt the other be make in her favour.
four hour after the talk between Dobbin and Osborne, this servant-maid
come into Amelia's room, where she sate as usual, brood
silently over her letter--her little treasure. the girl, smile,
and look arch and happy, make many trial to attract poor Emmy's
attention, who, however, take no heed of she.
"Miss Emmy," say the girl.
"Ibe come," Emmy say, not look round.
"therebe a message," the maid go on. "therebe
something--somebody--sure, herebe a new letter for you--don't be read
they old one any more." and she give she a letter, which Emmy take, and
read.
"I must see you," the letter say. "Dearest Emmy--dearest
love--dearest wife, come to I."
George and her mother be outside, wait until she have read the
letter.
CHAPTER XIX
Miss Crawley at Nurse
we have see how Mrs. Firkin, the lady's maid, as soon as any event of
importance to the Crawley family come to her knowledge, feel bind to
communicate it to Mrs. Bute Crawley, at the Rectory; and have before
mention how particularly kind and attentive that good-natured lady
be to Miss Crawley's confidential servant. she have be a gracious
friend to Miss Briggs, the companion, also; and have secure the
latter's good-will by a number of those attention and promise, which
cost so little in the making, and be yet so valuable and agreeable to
the recipient. indeed every good economist and manager of a household
must know how cheap and yet how amiable these profession be, and what
a flavour they give to the most homely dish in life. who be the
blunder idiot who say that "fine word butter no parsnip"? half
the parsnip of society be serve and render palatable with no other
sauce. as the immortal Alexis Soyer can make more delicious soup for a
half-penny than an ignorant cook can concoct with pound of vegetable
and meat, so a skilful artist will make a few simple and pleasing
phrase go far than ever so much substantial benefit-stock in the
hand of a mere bungler. Nay, we know that substantial benefit often
sicken some stomach; whereas, most will digest any amount of fine
word, and be always eager for more of the same food. Mrs. Bute have
tell Briggs and Firkin so often of the depth of her affection for they;
and what she would do, if she have Miss Crawley's fortune, for friend
so excellent and attach, that the lady in question have the deep
regard for she; and feel as much gratitude and confidence as if Mrs.
Bute have load they with the most expensive favour.
Rawdon Crawley, on the other hand, like a selfish heavy dragoon as he
be, never take the least trouble to conciliate his aunt's aide-de-camp,
show his contempt for the pair with entire frankness--make
Firkin pull off his boot on one occasion--send she out in the rain on
ignominious message--and if he give she a guinea, fling it to she as
if it be a box on the ear. as his aunt, too, make a butt of Briggs,
the Captain follow the example, and level his joke at she--joke
about as delicate as a kick from his charger. whereas, Mrs. Bute
consult she in matter of taste or difficulty, admire her poetry,
and by a thousand act of kindness and politeness, show she
appreciation of Briggs; and if she make Firkin a twopenny-halfpenny
present, accompany it with so many compliment, that the
twopence-half-penny be transmute into gold in the heart of the
grateful waiting-maid, who, besides, be look forwards quite
contentedly to some prodigious benefit which must happen to she on the
day when Mrs. Bute come into her fortune.
the different conduct of these two people be point out respectfully
to the attention of person commence the world. praise everybody, I
say to such: never be squeamish, but speak out your compliment both
point-blank in a man's face, and behind his back, when you know there
be a reasonable chance of his hear it again. never lose a chance of
say a kind word. as Collingwood never see a vacant place in his
estate but he take an acorn out of his pocket and pop it in; so deal
with your compliment through life. an acorn cost nothing; but it may
sprout into a prodigious bit of timber.
in a word, during Rawdon Crawley's prosperity, he be only obey with
sulky acquiescence; when his disgrace come, there be nobody to help or
pity he. whereas, when Mrs. Bute take the command at Miss Crawley's
house, the garrison there be charm to act under such a leader,
expect all sort of promotion from her promise, her generosity, and
her kind word.
that he would consider himself beat, after one defeat, and make no
attempt to regain the position he have lose, Mrs. Bute Crawley never
allow herself to suppose. she know Rebecca to be too clever and
spirited and desperate a woman to submit without a struggle; and feel
that she must prepare for that combat, and be incessantly watchful
against assault; or mine, or surprise.
in the first place, though she hold the town, be she sure of the
principal inhabitant? would miss Crawley herself hold out; and have she
not a secret longing to welcome back the oust adversary? the old
lady like Rawdon, and Rebecca, who amuse she. Mrs. Bute could not
disguise from herself the fact that none of her party could so
contribute to the pleasure of the town-breed lady. "my girl' singing,
after that little odious governess's, I know be unbearable," the candid
Rector's wife own to herself. "she always use to go to sleep when
Martha and Louisa play their duet. Jim's stiff college manner and
poor dear Bute's talk about his dog and horse always annoy she. if
I take she to the Rectory, she would grow angry with we all, and fly, I
know she would; and might fall into that horrid Rawdon's clutch
again, and be the victim of that little viper of a Sharp. meanwhile,
it be clear to I that she be exceedingly unwell, and cannot move for
some week, at any rate; during which we must think of some plan to
protect she from the art of those unprincipled people."
in the very good-of moment, if anybody tell Miss Crawley that she be,
or look ill, the tremble old lady send off for her doctor; and I
daresay she be very unwell after the sudden family event, which might
serve to shake strong nerve than her. at least, Mrs. Bute think
it be her duty to inform the physician, and the apothecary, and the
dame-de-compagnie, and the domestic, that Miss Crawley be in a most
critical state, and that they be to act accordingly. she have the
street lay knee-deep with straw; and the knocker put by with Mr.
Bowls's plate. she insist that the Doctor should call twice a day;
and deluge her patient with draught every two hour. when anybody
enter the room, she utter a shshshsh so sibilant and ominous, that
it frighten the poor old lady in her bed, from which she could not
look without see Mrs. Bute's beady eye eagerly fix on she, as the
latter sate steadfast in the arm-chair by the bedside. they seem to
lighten in the dark (for she keep the curtain close) as she move
about the room on velvet paw like a cat. there Miss Crawley lie for
day--ever so many day--Mr. Bute read book of devotion to she: for
night, long night, during which she have to hear the watchman sing,
the night-light sputter; visit at midnight, the last thing, by the
stealthy apothecary; and then leave to look at Mrs. Bute's twinkling
eye, or the flick of yellow that the rushlight throw on the dreary
darken ceiling. Hygeia herself would have fall sick under such a
regimen; and how much more this poor old nervous victim? it have be
say that when she be in health and good spirit, this venerable
inhabitant of Vanity Fair have as free notion about religion and moral
as Monsieur de Voltaire himself could desire, but when illness overtake
she, it be aggravate by the most dreadful terror of death, and an
utter cowardice take possession of the prostrate old sinner.
sick-bed homily and pious reflection be, to be sure, out of place
in mere story-book, and we be not go (after the fashion of some
novelist of the present day) to cajole the public into a sermon, when
it be only a comedy that the reader pay his money to witness. but,
without preach, the truth may surely be bear in mind, that the
bustle, and triumph, and laughter, and gaiety which Vanity Fair
exhibit in public, do not always pursue the performer into private
life, and that the most dreary depression of spirit and dismal
repentance sometimes overcome he. Recollection of the well ordain
banquet will scarcely cheer sick epicure. reminiscence of the most
become dress and brilliant ball triumph will go very little way to
console fade beauty. perhaps statesman, at a particular period of
existence, be not much gratified at think over the most triumphant
division; and the success or the pleasure of yesterday become of very
small account when a certain (albeit uncertain) morrow be in view,
about which all of we must some day or other be speculate. o brother
wearer of motley! be there not moment when one grow sick of
grinning and tumbling, and the jingling of cap and bell? this, dear
friend and companion, be my amiable object--to walk with you through
the Fair, to examine the shop and the show there; and that we should
all come home after the flare, and the noise, and the gaiety, and be
perfectly miserable in private.
"if that poor man of mine have a head on his shoulder," Mrs. Bute
Crawley think to herself, "how useful he might be, under present
circumstance, to this unhappy old lady! he might make her repent of
her shocking free-think way; he might urge she to do her duty, and
cast off that odious reprobate who have disgrace himself and his
family; and he might induce she to do justice to my dear girl and the
two boy, who require and deserve, I be sure, every assistance which
their relative can give they."
and, as the hatred of vice be always a progress towards virtue, Mrs.
Bute Crawley endeavour to instil her sister-in-law a proper
abhorrence for all Rawdon Crawley's manifold sin: of which his uncle's
wife bring forward such a catalogue as indeed would have serve to
condemn a whole regiment of young officer. if a man have commit
wrong in life, I donot know any moralist more anxious to point his
error out to the world than his own relation; so Mrs. Bute show a
perfect family interest and knowledge of Rawdon's history. she have all
the particular of that ugly quarrel with Captain Marker, in which
Rawdon, wrong from the beginning, end in shoot the Captain. she
know how the unhappy Lord Dovedale, whose mamma have take a house at
Oxford, so that he might be educate there, and who have never touch a
card in his life till he come to London, be pervert by Rawdon at the
Cocoa-Tree, make helplessly tipsy by this abominable seducer and
perverter of youth, and fleece of four thousand pound. she describe
with the most vivid minuteness the agony of the country family whom
he have ruin--the son whom he have plunge into dishonour and
poverty--the daughter whom he have inveigle into perdition. she know
the poor tradesman who be bankrupt by his extravagance--the mean
shift and roguery with which he have minister to it--the astounding
falsehood by which he have impose upon the most generous of aunt, and
the ingratitude and ridicule by which he have repay her sacrifice.
she impart these story gradually to Miss Crawley; give she the
whole benefit of they; feel it to be her bounden duty as a Christian
woman and mother of a family to do so; have not the small remorse or
compunction for the victim whom her tongue be immolate; nay, very
likely think her act be quite meritorious, and plume herself upon
her resolute manner of perform it. yes, if a man's character be to
be abuse, say what you will, therebe nobody like a relation to do the
business. and one be bind to own, regard this unfortunate wretch
of a Rawdon Crawley, that the mere truth be enough to condemn he, and
that all invention of scandal be quite superfluous pain on his
friend' part.
Rebecca, too, be now a relative, come in for the full share of
Mrs. Bute's kind inquiry. this indefatigable pursuer of truth
(have give strict order that the door be to be deny to all
emissary or letter from Rawdon), take Miss Crawley's carriage, and
drive to her old friend Miss Pinkerton, at Minerva House, Chiswick
Mall, to whom she announce the dreadful intelligence of Captain
Rawdon's seduction by Miss Sharp, and from whom she get sundry strange
particular regard the ex-governess's birth and early history. the
friend of the Lexicographer have plenty of information to give. Miss
Jemima be make to fetch the drawing-master's receipt and letter.
this one be from a spunging-house: that entreat an advance: another
be full of gratitude for Rebecca's reception by the lady of
Chiswick: and the last document from the unlucky artist's pen be that
in which, from his die bed, he recommend his orphan child to Miss
Pinkerton's protection. there be juvenile letter and petition from
Rebecca, too, in the collection, implore aid for her father or
declare her own gratitude. perhaps in Vanity Fair there be no
well satire than letter. take a bundle of your dear friend's of
ten year back--your dear friend whom you hate now. look at a file of
your sister's! how you clung to each other till you quarrel about
the twenty-pound legacy! get down the round-hand scrawl of your son
who have half break your heart with selfish undutifulness since; or a
parcel of your own, breathe endless ardour and love eternal, which
be send back by your mistress when she marry the Nabob--your
mistress for whom you now care no more than for Queen Elizabeth. Vows,
love, promise, confidence, gratitude, how queerly they read after a
while! there ought to be a law in Vanity Fair order the destruction
of every write document (except receipt tradesman's bill) after a
certain brief and proper interval. those quack and misanthrope who
advertise indelible Japan ink should be make to perish along with their
wicked discovery. the good ink for Vanity Fair use would be one that
fade utterly in a couple of day, and leave the paper clean and blank,
so that you might write on it to somebody else.
from Miss Pinkerton's the indefatigable Mrs. Bute follow the track of
Sharp and his daughter back to the lodging in Greek Street, which the
defunct painter have occupy; and where portrait of the landlady in
white satin, and of the husband in brass button, do by Sharp in lieu
of a quarter's rent, still decorate the parlour wall. Mrs. Stokes
be a communicative person, and quickly tell all she know about Mr.
Sharp; how dissolute and poor he be; how good-natured and amusing;
how he be always hunt by bailiff and dun; how, to the landlady's
horror, though she never could abide the woman, he do not marry his
wife till a short time before her death; and what a queer little wild
vixen his daughter be; how she keep they all laugh with her fun and
mimicry; how she use to fetch the gin from the public-house, and be
know in all the studio in the quarter--in brief, Mrs. Bute get such a
full account of her new niece's parentage, education, and behaviour as
would scarcely have please Rebecca, have the latter know that such
inquiry be be make concern she.
of all these industrious research Miss Crawley have the full benefit.
Mrs. Rawdon Crawley be the daughter of an opera-girl. she have dance
herself. she have be a model to the painter. she be bring up as
become her mother's daughter. she drink gin with her father, &c. &c.
it be a lost woman who be married to a lost man; and the moral to be
infer from Mrs. Bute's tale be, that the knavery of the pair be
irremediable, and that no properly conduct person should ever notice
they again.
these be the material which prudent Mrs. Bute gather together in
Park Lane, the provision and ammunition as it be with which she
fortify the house against the siege which she know that Rawdon and
his wife would lay to Miss Crawley.
but if a fault may be find with her arrangement, it be this, that she
be too eager: she manage rather too well; undoubtedly she make Miss
Crawley more ill than be necessary; and though the old invalid
succumb to her authority, it be so harassing and severe, that the
victim would be incline to escape at the very first chance which fall
in her way. manage woman, the ornament of their sex--woman who
order everything for everybody, and know so much well than any person
concern what be good for their neighbour, donot sometimes speculate
upon the possibility of a domestic revolt, or upon other extreme
consequence result from their overstrained authority.
thus, for instance, Mrs. Bute, with the good intention no doubt in the
world, and wear herself to death as she do by forego sleep,
dinner, fresh air, for the sake of her invalid sister-in-law, carry
her conviction of the old lady's illness so far that she almost manage
she into her coffin. she point out her sacrifice and their result
one day to the constant apothecary, Mr. Clump.
"I be sure, my dear Mr. Clump," she say, "no effort of mine have be
want to restore our dear invalid, whom the ingratitude of her nephew
have lay on the bed of sickness. I never shrink from personal
discomfort: I never refuse to sacrifice myself."
"your devotion, it must be confess, be admirable," Mr. Clump say,
with a low bow; "but--"
"I have scarcely close my eye since my arrival: I give up sleep,
health, every comfort, to my sense of duty. when my poor James be in
the smallpox, do I allow any hireling to nurse he? no."
"you do what become an excellent mother, my dear Madam--the good of
mother; but--"
"as the mother of a family and the wife of an english clergyman, I
humbly trust that my principle be good," Mrs. Bute say, with a happy
solemnity of conviction; "and, as long as nature support I, never,
never, Mr. Clump, will I desert the post of duty. other may bring
that grey head with sorrow to the bed of sickness (here Mrs. Bute,
wave her hand, point to one of old Miss Crawley's coffee-colour
front, which be perch on a stand in the dressing-room), but I will
never quit it. ah, Mr. Clump! I fear, I know, that the couch need
spiritual as well as medical consolation."
"what I be go to observe, my dear madam,"--here the resolute clump
once more interpose with a bland air--"what I be go to observe
when you give utterance to sentiment which do you so much honour, be
that I think you alarm yourself needlessly about our kind friend, and
sacrifice your own health too prodigally in her favour."
"I would lay down my life for my duty, or for any member of my
husband's family," Mrs. Bute interpose.
"yes, Madam, if need be; but we donot want Mrs Bute Crawley to be a
martyr," clump say gallantly. "Dr Squills and myself have both
consider Miss Crawley's case with every anxiety and care, as you may
suppose. we see her low-spirited and nervous; family event have
agitate she."
"her nephew will come to perdition," Mrs. Crawley cry.
"have agitate she: and you arrive like a guardian angel, my dear
Madam, a positive guardian angel, I assure you, to soothe she under the
pressure of calamity. but Dr. Squills and I be think that our
amiable friend be not in such a state as render confinement to her bed
necessary. she be depressed, but this confinement perhaps add to her
depression. she should have change, fresh air, gaiety; the most
delightful remedy in the pharmacopoeia," Mr. Clump say, grin and
show his handsome tooth. "persuade she to rise, dear Madam; drag
she from her couch and her low spirit; insist upon she take little
drive. they will restore the rose too to your cheek, if I may so
speak to Mrs. Bute Crawley."
"the sight of her horrid nephew casually in the Park, where I be tell
the wretch drive with the brazen partner of his crime," Mrs. Bute
say (let the cat of selfishness out of the bag of secrecy), "would
cause she such a shock, that we should have to bring she back to bed
again. she must not go out, Mr. Clump. she shall not go out as long
as I remain to watch over she; and as for my health, what matter it?
I give it cheerfully, sir. I sacrifice it at the altar of my duty."
"upon my word, Madam," Mr. Clump now say bluntly, "I willnot answer for
her life if she remain lock up in that dark room. she be so nervous
that we may lose she any day; and if you wish Captain Crawley to be her
heir, I warn you frankly, Madam, that you be do your very good to
serve he."
"gracious mercy! be her life in danger?" Mrs. Bute cry. "why, why,
Mr. Clump, do you not inform I soon?"
the night before, Mr. Clump and Dr. Squills have have a consultation
(over a bottle of wine at the house of Sir Lapin Warren, whose lady be
about to present he with a thirteenth blessing), regard Miss
Crawley and her case.
"what a little harpy that woman from Hampshire be, clump," Squills
remark, "that have seize upon old Tilly Crawley. devilish good
Madeira."
"what a fool Rawdon Crawley have be," clump reply, "to go and marry
a governess! there be something about the girl, too."
"green eye, fair skin, pretty figure, famous frontal development,"
Squills remark. "there be something about she; and Crawley be a
fool, Squills."
"a d---- fool--always be," the apothecary reply.
"of course the old girl will fling he over," say the physician, and
after a pause add, "shewill cut up well, I suppose."
"cut up," say clump with a grin; "I wouldnot have she cut up for two
hundred a year."
"that Hampshire woman will kill she in two month, Clump, my boy, if
she stop about she," Dr. Squills say. "old woman; full feed;
nervous subject; palpitation of the heart; pressure on the brain;
apoplexy; off she go. get she up, clump; get she out: or I wouldnot
give many week' purchase for your two hundred a year." and it be
act upon this hint that the worthy apothecary speak with so much
candour to Mrs. Bute Crawley.
have the old lady under her hand: in bed: with nobody near, Mrs. Bute
have make more than one assault upon she, to induce she to alter she
will. but Miss Crawley's usual terror regard death increase
greatly when such dismal proposition be make to she, and Mrs. Bute
see that she must get her patient into cheerful spirit and health
before she could hope to attain the pious object which she have in view.
Whither to take she be the next puzzle. the only place where she be
not likely to meet those odious Rawdons be at church, and that willnot
amuse she, Mrs. Bute justly feel. "we must go and visit our beautiful
suburb of London," she then think. "I hear they be the most
picturesque in the world"; and so she have a sudden interest for
Hampstead, and Hornsey, and find that Dulwich have great charm for
she, and get her victim into her carriage, drive she to those
rustic spot, beguile the little journey with conversation about
Rawdon and his wife, and tell every story to the old lady which
could add to her indignation against this pair of reprobate.
perhaps Mrs. Bute pull the string unnecessarily tight. for though she
work up Miss Crawley to a proper dislike of her disobedient nephew,
the invalid have a great hatred and secret terror of her victimizer, and
pant to escape from she. after a brief space, she rebel against
Highgate and Hornsey utterly. she would go into the Park. Mrs. Bute
know they would meet the abominable Rawdon there, and she be right.
one day in the ring, Rawdon's stanhope come in sight; Rebecca be
seat by he. in the enemy's equipage Miss Crawley occupy her usual
place, with Mrs. Bute on her left, the poodle and Miss Briggs on the
back seat. it be a nervous moment, and Rebecca's heart beat quick as
she recognize the carriage; and as the two vehicle cross each other
in a line, she clasp her hand, and look towards the spinster with
a face of agonized attachment and devotion. Rawdon himself tremble,
and his face grow purple behind his dye mustachio. only old Briggs
be move in the other carriage, and cast her great eye nervously
towards her old friend. Miss Crawley's bonnet be resolutely turn
towards the Serpentine. Mrs. Bute happen to be in ecstasy with the
poodle, and be call he a little darling, and a sweet little zoggy,
and a pretty pet. the carriage move on, each in his line.
"do, by Jove," Rawdon say to his wife.
"try once more, Rawdon," rebecca answer. "could not you lock your
wheel into theirs, dearest?"
Rawdon have not the heart for that manoeuvre. when the carriage meet
again, he stand up in his stanhope; he raise his hand ready to doff
his hat; he look with all his eye. but this time Miss Crawley's
face be not turn away; she and Mrs. Bute look he full in the
face, and cut their nephew pitilessly. he sink back in his seat with
an oath, and strike out of the ring, dash away desperately
homeward.
it be a gallant and decide triumph for Mrs. Bute. but she feel the
danger of many such meeting, as she see the evident nervousness of
Miss Crawley; and she determine that it be most necessary for her
dear friend's health, that they should leave town for a while, and
recommend Brighton very strongly.
CHAPTER XX
in which Captain Dobbin act as the Messenger of Hymen
without know how, Captain William Dobbin find himself the great
promoter, arranger, and manager of the match between George Osborne and
Amelia. but for he it never would have take place: he could not but
confess as much to himself, and smile rather bitterly as he think
that he of all man in the world should be the person upon whom the care
of this marriage have fall. but though indeed the conducting of this
negotiation be about as painful a task as could be set to he, yet
when he have a duty to perform, Captain Dobbin be accustom to go
through it without many word or much hesitation: and, have make up
his mind completely, that if Miss Sedley be balk of her husband she
would die of the disappointment, he be determined to use all his good
endeavour to keep she alive.
I forbear to enter into minute particular of the interview between
George and Amelia, when the former be bring back to the foot (or
should we venture to say the arm?) of his young mistress by the
intervention of his friend honest William. a much hard heart than
George's would have melt at the sight of that sweet face so sadly
ravage by grief and despair, and at the simple tender accent in which
she tell her little break-hearted story: but as she do not faint when
her mother, trembling, bring Osborne to she; and as she only give
relief to her overcharged grief, by lay her head on her lover's
shoulder and there weep for a while the most tender, copious, and
refreshing tear--old Mrs. Sedley, too greatly relieve, think it be
good to leave the young person to themselves; and so quit Emmy
cry over George's hand, and kiss it humbly, as if he be her
supreme chief and master, and as if she be quite a guilty and
unworthy person need every favour and grace from he.
this prostration and sweet unrepine obedience exquisitely touch and
flatter George Osborne. he see a slave before he in that simple
yield faithful creature, and his soul within he thrill secretly
somehow at the knowledge of his power. he would be generous-minded,
Sultan as he be, and raise up this kneeling Esther and make a queen of
she: besides, her sadness and beauty touch he as much as she
submission, and so he cheer she, and raise she up and forgave she,
so to speak. all her hope and feeling, which be die and
withering, this her sun have be remove from she, bloom again and
at once, its light be restore. you would scarcely have recognise
the beaming little face upon Amelia's pillow that night as the one that
be lay there the night before, so wan, so lifeless, so careless of
all round about. the honest irish maid-servant, delight with the
change, ask leave to kiss the face that have grow all of a sudden so
rosy. Amelia put her arm round the girl's neck and kiss she with
all her heart, like a child. she be little more. she have that night
a sweet refresh sleep, like one--and what a spring of inexpressible
happiness as she wake in the morning sunshine!
"he will be here again to-day," Amelia think. "he be the great
and good of man." and the fact be, that George think he be one of
the generous creature alive: and that he be make a tremendous
sacrifice in marry this young creature.
while she and Osborne be have their delightful tete-a-tete above
stair, old Mrs. Sedley and Captain Dobbin be converse below upon
the state of the affair, and the chance and future arrangement of
the young people. Mrs. Sedley have bring the two lover together
and leave they embrace each other with all their might, like a true
woman, be of opinion that no power on earth would induce Mr. Sedley to
consent to the match between his daughter and the son of a man who have
so shamefully, wickedly, and monstrously treat he. and she tell a
long story about happy day and their early splendour, when
Osborne live in a very humble way in the New Road, and his wife be
too glad to receive some of Jos's little baby thing, with which Mrs.
Sedley accommodate she at the birth of one of Osborne's own child.
the fiendish ingratitude of that man, she be sure, have break Mr. S.'s
heart: and as for a marriage, he would never, never, never, never
consent.
"they must run away together, Ma'am," Dobbin say, laugh, "and
follow the example of Captain Rawdon Crawley, and Miss Emmy's friend
the little governess." be it possible? well she never! Mrs. Sedley
be all excitement about this news. she wish that Blenkinsop be
here to hear it: Blenkinsop always mistrust that Miss Sharp.-- what
an escape Jos have have! and she describe the already well-know
love-passage between Rebecca and the Collector of Boggley Wollah.
it be not, however, Mr. Sedley's wrath which Dobbin fear, so much as
that of the other parent concern, and he own that he have a very
considerable doubt and anxiety respect the behaviour of the
black-browed old tyrant of a Russia merchant in Russell Square. he have
forbid the match peremptorily, Dobbin think. he know what a savage
determined man Osborne be, and how he stick by his word. "the only
chance George have of reconcilement," argue his friend, "be by
distinguish himself in the come campaign. if he die they both go
together. if he fail in distinction--what then? he have some money
from his mother, I have hear enough to purchase his majority--or he
must sell out and go and dig in Canada, or rough it in a cottage in the
country." with such a partner Dobbin think he would not mind
Siberia--and, strange to say, this absurd and utterly imprudent young
fellow never for a moment consider that the want of mean to keep a
nice carriage and horse, and of an income which should enable its
possessor to entertain their friend genteelly, ought to operate as
bar to the union of George and Miss Sedley.
it be these weighty consideration which make he think too that the
marriage should take place as quickly as possible. be he anxious
himself, I wonder, to have it over?--as people, when death have
occur, like to press forward the funeral, or when a parting be
resolve upon, hasten it. it be certain that Mr. Dobbin, have take
the matter in hand, be most extraordinarily eager in the conduct of
it. he urge on George the necessity of immediate action: he show
the chance of reconciliation with his father, which a favourable
mention of his name in the Gazette must bring about. if need be he
would go himself and brave both the father in the business. at all
event, he beseech George to go through with it before the order
come, which everybody expect, for the departure of the regiment from
England on foreign service.
bent upon these hymeneal project, and with the applause and consent of
Mrs. Sedley, who do not care to break the matter personally to her
husband, Mr. Dobbin go to seek John Sedley at his house of call in
the City, the Tapioca Coffee-house, where, since his own office be
shut up, and fate have overtake he, the poor break-down old
gentleman use to betake himself daily, and write letter and receive
they, and tie they up into mysterious bundle, several of which he
carry in the flap of his coat. I donot know anything more dismal
than that business and bustle and mystery of a ruin man: those
letter from the wealthy which he show you: those wear greasy
document promise support and offer condolence which he place
wistfully before you, and on which he build his hope of restoration
and future fortune. my beloved reader have no doubt in the course of his
experience be waylay by many such a luckless companion. he take
you into the corner; he have his bundle of paper out of his gap coat
pocket; and the tape off, and the string in his mouth, and the
favourite letter select and lay before you; and who do not know
the sad eager half-crazy look which he fix on you with his hopeless
eye?
change into a man of this sort, Dobbin find the once florid, jovial,
and prosperous John Sedley. his coat, that use to be so glossy and
trim, be white at the seam, and the button show the copper. his
face have fall in, and be unshorn; his frill and neckcloth hang limp
under his bagging waistcoat. when he use to treat the boy in old
day at a coffee-house, he would shout and laugh louder than anybody
there, and have all the waiter skip round he; it be quite
painful to see how humble and civil he be to John of the Tapioca, a
blear-eyed old attendant in dingy stocking and crack pump, whose
business it be to serve glass of wafer, and bumper of ink in
pewter, and slice of paper to the frequenter of this dreary house of
entertainment, where nothing else seem to be consume. as for
William Dobbin, whom he have tip repeatedly in his youth, and who have
be the old gentleman's butt on a thousand occasion, old Sedley give
his hand to he in a very hesitating humble manner now, and call he
"Sir." a feeling of shame and remorse take possession of William Dobbin
as the break old man so receive and address he, as if he himself
have be somehow guilty of the misfortune which have bring Sedley so
low.
"I be very glad to see you, Captain Dobbin, sir," say he, after a
skulking look or two at his visitor (whose lanky figure and military
appearance cause some excitement likewise to twinkle in the blear eye
of the waiter in the cracked dancing pump, and awaken the old lady
in black, who doze among the mouldy old coffee-cup in the bar). "how
be the worthy alderman, and my lady, your excellent mother, sir?" he
look round at the waiter as he say, "my lady," as much as to say,
"Hark ye, John, I have friend still, and person of rank and
reputation, too." "be you come to do anything in my way, sir? my
young friend Dale and Spiggot do all my business for I now, until my
new office be ready; for Ibe only here temporarily, you know,
Captain. what can we do for you, sir? will you like to take anything?"
Dobbin, with a great deal of hesitation and stuttering, protest that
he be not in the least hungry or thirsty; that he have no business to
transact; that he only come to ask if Mr. Sedley be well, and to shake
hand with an old friend; and, he add, with a desperate perversion of
truth, "my mother be very well--that is, shebe be very unwell, and be
only wait for the first fine day to go out and call upon Mrs.
Sedley. how be Mrs. Sedley, sir? I hope shebe quite well." and here
he pause, reflect on his own consummate hypocrisy; for the day be
as fine, and the sunshine as bright as it ever be in Coffin Court,
where the Tapioca Coffee-house be situate: and Mr. Dobbin remember
that he have see Mrs. Sedley himself only an hour before, have drive
Osborne down to Fulham in his gig, and leave he there tete-a-tete with
Miss Amelia.
"my wife will be very happy to see her ladyship," Sedley reply,
pull out his paper. "Ihave a very kind letter here from your
father, sir, and beg my respectful compliment to he. Lady D. will
find we in rather a small house than we be accustom to receive
our friend in; but itbe snug, and the change of air do good to my
daughter, who be suffer in town rather--you remember little Emmy,
sir?--ye, suffer a good deal." the old gentleman's eye be
wander as he speak, and he be think of something else, as he
sate thrumming on his paper and fumble at the wear red tape.
"yoube a military man," he go on; "I ask you, Bill Dobbin, could any
man ever have speculate upon the return of that corsican scoundrel
from Elba? when the ally sovereign be here last year, and we give
them that dinner in the City, sir, and we see the Temple of Concord, and
the firework, and the chinese bridge in St. James's Park, could any
sensible man suppose that peace benot really conclude, after wewould
actually sing Te Deum for it, sir? I ask you, William, could I suppose
that the Emperor of Austria be a damned traitor--a traitor, and
nothing more? I donot mince word--a double-faced infernal traitor and
schemer, who mean to have his son-in-law back all along. and I say
that the escape of Boney from Elba be a damned imposition and plot,
sir, in which half the power of Europe be concern, to bring the
fund down, and to ruin this country. thatbe why Ibe here, William.
thatbe why my namebe in the Gazette. why, sir?--because I trust the
Emperor of Russia and the Prince Regent. look here. look at my
paper. look what the fund be on the 1st of March--what the french
five be when I buy for the count. and what theybe at now.
there be collusion, sir, or that villain never would have escape.
where be the English Commissioner who allow he to get away? he
ought to be shoot, sir--bring to a court-martial, and shot, by Jove."
"webe go to hunt Boney out, sir," Dobbin say, rather alarmed at
the fury of the old man, the vein of whose forehead begin to swell,
and who sate drum his paper with his clench fist. "we be go
to hunt he out, sir--the Duke's in Belgium already, and we expect
marching order every day."
"give he no quarter. bring back the villain's head, sir. shoot the
coward down, sir," Sedley roar. "Iwould enlist myself, by--; but Ibe a
break old man--ruin by that damned scoundrel--and by a parcel of
swindle thief in this country whom I make, sir, and who be roll
in their carriage now," he add, with a break in his voice.
Dobbin be not a little affect by the sight of this once kind old
friend, craze almost with misfortune and rave with senile anger.
Pity the fall gentleman: you to whom money and fair repute be the
chief good; and so, surely, be they in Vanity Fair.
"yes," he continue, "there be some viper that you warm, and they
ste you afterwards. there be some beggar that you put on
horseback, and theybe the first to ride you down. you know whom I
mean, William Dobbin, my boy. I mean a purse-proud villain in Russell
Square, whom I know without a shilling, and whom I pray and hope to see
a beggar as he be when I befriend he."
"I have hear something of this, sir, from my friend George," Dobbin
say, anxious to come to his point. "the quarrel between you and his
father have cut he up a great deal, sir. indeed, Ibe the bearer of a
message from he."
"o, thatbe your errand, be it?" cry the old man, jump up. "what!
perhaps he condole with I, do he? very kind of he, the
stiff-back prig, with his dandified air and West end swagger. hebe
hanker about my house, be he still? if my son have the courage of a
man, hewould shoot he. hebe as big a villain as his father. I willnot
have his name mention in my house. I curse the day that ever I let
he into it; and Iwould rather see my daughter dead at my foot than
married to he."
"his father's harshness be not George's fault, sir. your daughter's
love for he be as much your do as his. who be you, that you be
to play with two young people's affection and break their heart at
your will?"
"recollect itbe not his father that break the match off," old Sedley
cry out. "itbe I that forbid it. that family and mine be separate
for ever. Ibe fall low, but not so low as that: no, no. and so you
may tell the whole race--son, and father and sister, and all."
"itbe my belief, sir, that you have not the power or the right to
separate those two," Dobbin answer in a low voice; "and that if you
donot give your daughter your consent it will be her duty to marry
without it. therebe no reason she should die or live miserably because
you be wrong-headed. to my thinking, shebe just as much married as if
the bann have be read in all the church in London. and what well
answer can there be to Osborne's charge against you, as charge there
be, than that his son claim to enter your family and marry your
daughter?"
a light of something like satisfaction seem to break over old Sedley
as this point be put to he: but he still persist that with his
consent the marriage between Amelia and George should never take place.
"we must do it without," Dobbin say, smile, and tell Mr. Sedley, as
he have tell Mrs. Sedley in the day, before, the story of Rebecca's
elopement with Captain Crawley. it evidently amuse the old gentleman.
"yoube terrible fellow, you captain," say he, tie up his paper;
and his face wear something like a smile upon it, to the astonishment
of the blear-eyed waiter who now enter, and have never see such an
expression upon Sedley's countenance since he have use the dismal
coffee-house.
the idea of hit his enemy Osborne such a blow soothe, perhaps, the
old gentleman: and, their colloquy presently end, he and Dobbin
part pretty good friend.
"my sister say she have diamond as big as pigeon' egg," George say,
laugh. "how they must set off her complexion! a perfect
illumination it must be when her jewel be on her neck. her
jet-black hair be as curly as Sambo's. I dare say she wear a nose ring
when she go to court; and with a plume of feather in her top-knot
she would look a perfect Belle Sauvage."
George, in conversation with Amelia, be rally the appearance of a
young lady of whom his father and sister have lately make the
acquaintance, and who be an object of vast respect to the Russell
Square family. she be report to have I donot know how many
plantation in the West Indies; a deal of money in the fund; and three
star to her name in the East India stockholder' list. she have a
mansion in Surrey, and a house in Portland Place. the name of the rich
West India heiress have be mention with applause in the Morning
Post. Mrs. Haggistoun, Colonel Haggistoun's widow, her relative,
"chaperon" she, and keep her house. she be just from school, where
she have complete her education, and George and his sister have meet she
at an evening party at old Hulker's house, Devonshire Place (Hulker,
Bullock, and Co. be long the correspondent of her house in the West
Indies), and the girl have make the most cordial advance to she, which
the heiress have receive with great good humour. an orphan in her
position--with her money--so interesting! the Misses Osborne say.
they be full of their new friend when they return from the Hulker
ball to Miss Wirt, their companion; they have make arrangement for
continually meet, and have the carriage and drive to see she the very
next day. Mrs. Haggistoun, Colonel Haggistoun's widow, a relation of
Lord Binkie, and always talk of he, strike the dear unsophisticated
girl as rather haughty, and too much inclined to talk about her great
relation: but Rhoda be everything they could wish--the frank,
kind, most agreeable creature--want a little polish, but so
good-natured. the girl Christian-name each other at once.
"you should have see her dress for court, Emmy," Osborne cry,
laugh. "she come to my sister to show it off, before she be
present in state by my Lady Binkie, the Haggistoun's kinswoman. shebe
relate to every one, that Haggistoun. her diamond blaze out like
Vauxhall on the night we be there. (do you remember Vauxhall, Emmy,
and Jos singing to his dear diddle diddle darling?) diamond and
mahogany, my dear! think what an advantageous contrast--and the white
feather in her hair--I mean in her wool. she have earring like
chandelier; you might have light them up, by Jove--and a yellow satin
train that streele after she like the tail of a cornet."
"how old be she?" ask Emmy, to whom George be rattle away
regard this dark paragon, on the morning of their reunion--rattle
away as no other man in the world surely could.
"why the Black Princess, though she have only just leave school, must be
two or three and twenty. and you should see the hand she write! Mrs.
Colonel Haggistoun usually write her letter, but in a moment of
confidence, she put pen to paper for my sister; she spelt satin
satting, and Saint James's, Saint Jams."
"why, surely it must be Miss Swartz, the parlour boarder," Emmy say,
remember that good-natured young mulatto girl, who have be so
hysterically affect when Amelia leave Miss Pinkerton's academy.
"the very name," George say. "her father be a german Jew--a
slave-owner they say--connect with the Cannibal Islands in some way
or other. he die last year, and Miss Pinkerton have finish her
education. she can play two piece on the piano; she know three
song; she can write when Mrs. Haggistoun be by to spell for she; and
Jane and Maria already have get to love she as a sister."
"I wish they would have love I," say Emmy, wistfully. "they be
always very cold to I."
"my dear child, they would have love you if you have have two hundred
thousand pound," George reply. "that be the way in which they have
be bring up. Ours be a ready-money society. we live among banker
and City big-wig, and be hang to they, and every man, as he talk to
you, be jingle his guineas in his pocket. there be that jackass Fred
Bullock be go to marry Maria--therebe Goldmore, the East India
Director, therebe Dipley, in the tallow trade--our trade," George say,
with an uneasy laugh and a blush. "curse the whole pack of
money-grub vulgarian! I fall asleep at their great heavy dinner.
I feel ashamed in my father's great stupid party. Ihave be
accustom to live with gentleman, and man of the world and fashion,
Emmy, not with a parcel of turtle-feed tradesman. dear little woman,
you be the only person of our set who ever look, or think, or
speak like a lady: and you do it because yoube an angel and cannot help
it. donot remonstrate. you be the only lady. donot Miss Crawley
remark it, who have live in the good company in Europe? and as for
Crawley, of the Life Guards, hang it, hebe a fine fellow: and I like
he for marry the girl he have choose."
Amelia admire Mr. Crawley very much, too, for this; and trust
Rebecca would be happy with he, and hop (with a laugh) Jos would be
console. and so the pair go on prattling, as in quite early day.
Amelia's confidence be perfectly restore to she, though she
express a great deal of pretty jealousy about Miss Swartz, and
profess to be dreadfully frightened--like a hypocrite as she be--lest
George should forget she for the heiress and her money and her
estate in Saint Kitt's. but the fact be, she be a great deal too
happy to have fear or doubt or misgiving of any sort: and have
George at her side again, be not afraid of any heiress or beauty, or
indeed of any sort of danger.
when Captain Dobbin come back in the afternoon to these people--which
he do with a great deal of sympathy for they--it do his heart good to
see how Amelia have grow young again--how she laugh, and chirp, and
sing familiar old song at the piano, which be only interrupt by
the bell from without proclaim Mr. Sedley's return from the City,
before whom George receive a signal to retreat.
beyond the first smile of recognition--and even that be an hypocrisy,
for she think his arrival rather provoking--Miss Sedley do not once
notice Dobbin during his visit. but he be content, so that he see she
happy; and thankful to have be the mean of make she so.
CHAPTER XXI
A Quarrel about an Heiress
Love may be feel for any young lady endow with such quality as Miss
Swartz possess; and a great dream of ambition enter into old Mr.
Osborne's soul, which she be to realize. he encourage, with the
utmost enthusiasm and friendliness, his daughter' amiable attachment
to the young heiress, and protest that it give he the sincere
pleasure as a father to see the love of his girl so well dispose.
"you willnot find," he would say to Miss Rhoda, "that splendour and rank
to which you be accustom at the West End, my dear Miss, at our
humble mansion in Russell Square. my daughter be plain,
disinterested girl, but their heart be in the right place, and
theyhave conceive an attachment for you which do they honour--I say,
which do they honour. Ibe a plain, simple, humble british
merchant--an honest one, as my respected friend Hulker and Bullock
will vouch, who be the correspondent of your late lamented father.
youwill find we a united, simple, happy, and I think I may say
respect, family--a plain table, a plain people, but a warm welcome,
my dear Miss Rhoda--Rhoda, let I say, for my heart warm to you, it
do really. Ibe a frank man, and I like you. a glass of Champagne!
Hicks, Champagne to Miss Swartz."
there be little doubt that old Osborne believe all he say, and that
the girl be quite earnest in their protestation of affection for
Miss Swartz. People in Vanity Fair fasten on to rich folk quite
naturally. if the simple people be disposed to look not a little
kindly on great Prosperity (for I defy any member of the british public
to say that the notion of Wealth have not something awful and pleasing
to he; and you, if you be tell that the man next you at dinner have
get half a million, not to look at he with a certain interest)--if the
simple look benevolently on money, how much more do your old worldling
regard it! their affection rush out to meet and welcome money. their
kind sentiment awaken spontaneously towards the interesting possessor
of it. I know some respectable people who donot consider themselves at
liberty to indulge in friendship for any individual who have not a
certain competency, or place in society. they give a loose to their
feeling on proper occasion. and the proof be, that the major part of
the Osborne family, who have not, in fifteen year, be able to get up
a hearty regard for Amelia Sedley, become as fond of Miss Swartz in the
course of a single evening as the most romantic advocate of friendship
at first sight could desire.
what a match for George shewould be (the sister and Miss Wirt agree),
and how much well than that insignificant little Amelia! such a
dash young fellow as he be, with his good look, rank, and
accomplishment, would be the very husband for she. vision of ball
in Portland Place, presentation at Court, and introduction to half
the peerage, fill the mind of the young lady; who talk of
nothing but George and his grand acquaintance to their beloved new
friend.
Old Osborne think she would be a great match, too, for his son. he
should leave the army; he should go into Parliament; he should cut a
figure in the fashion and in the state. his blood boil with honest
british exultation, as he see the name of Osborne ennoble in the
person of his son, and think that he might be the progenitor of a
glorious line of baronet. he work in the City and on 'Change, until
he know everything relate to the fortune of the heiress, how she
money be place, and where her estate lay. Young Fred Bullock, one
of his chief informant, would have like to make a bid for her himself
(it be so the young banker express it), only he be book to Maria
Osborne. but not be able to secure she as a wife, the disinterested
Fred quite approve of she as a sister-in-law. "let George cut in
directly and win she," be his advice. "strike while the iron's hot,
you know--while shebe fresh to the town: in a few week some d----
fellow from the West end will come in with a title and a rotten
rent-roll and cut all we City man out, as Lord Fitzrufus do last year
with Miss Grogram, who be actually engage to Podder, of Podder &
Brown's. the soon it be do the well, Mr. Osborne; theybe my
sentiment," the wag say; though, when Osborne have leave the bank
parlour, Mr. Bullock remember Amelia, and what a pretty girl she be,
and how attach to George Osborne; and he give up at least ten second
of his valuable time to regret the misfortune which have befall
that unlucky young woman.
while thus George Osborne's good feeling, and his good friend and
genius, Dobbin, be carry back the truant to Amelia's foot,
George's parent and sister be arrange this splendid match for he,
which they never dream he would resist.
when the eld Osborne give what he call "a hint," there be no
possibility for the most obtuse to mistake his meaning. he call
kick a footman downstairs a hint to the latter to leave his service.
with his usual frankness and delicacy he tell Mrs. Haggistoun that he
would give she a cheque for five thousand pound on the day his son be
married to her ward; and call that proposal a hint, and consider it
a very dexterous piece of diplomacy. he give George finally such
another hint regard the heiress; and order he to marry she out of
hand, as he would have order his butler to draw a cork, or his clerk
to write a letter.
this imperative hint disturb George a good deal. he be in the very
first enthusiasm and delight of his second courtship of Amelia, which
be inexpressibly sweet to he. the contrast of her manner and
appearance with those of the heiress, make the idea of a union with the
latter appear doubly ludicrous and odious. carriage and opera-box,
think he; fancy be see in they by the side of such a mahogany
charmer as that! add to all that the junior Osborne be quite as
obstinate as the senior: when he want a thing, quite as firm in his
resolution to get it; and quite as violent when anger, as his father
in his most stern moment.
on the first day when his father formally give he the hint that he be
to place his affection at Miss Swartz's foot, George temporise with
the old gentleman. "you should have think of the matter soon,
sir," he say. "it cannot be do now, when webe expect every day to
go on foreign service. wait till my return, if I do return"; and then
he represent, that the time when the regiment be daily expect to
quit England, be exceedingly ill-choose: that the few day or week
during which they be still to remain at home, must be devote to
business and not to love-making: time enough for that when he come home
with his majority; "for, I promise you," say he, with a satisfied air,
"that one way or other you shall read the name of George Osborne in the
Gazette."
the father's reply to this be found upon the information which he
have get in the City: that the West End chap would infallibly catch
hold of the heiress if any delay take place: that if he donot marry
Miss S., he might at least have an engagement in writing, to come into
effect when he return to England; and that a man who could get ten
thousand a year by stay at home, be a fool to risk his life abroad.
"so that you would have I show up as a coward, sir, and our name
dishonour for the sake of Miss Swartz's money," George interpose.
this remark stagger the old gentleman; but as he have to reply to it,
and as his mind be nevertheless make up, he say, "you will dine here
to-morrow, sir, and every day Miss Swartz come, you will be here to
pay your respect to she. if you want for money, call upon Mr.
Chopper." thus a new obstacle be in George's way, to interfere with
his plan regard Amelia; and about which he and Dobbin have more than
one confidential consultation. his friend's opinion respect the
line of conduct which he ought to pursue, we know already. and as for
Osborne, when he be once bent on a thing, a fresh obstacle or two only
render he the more resolute.
the dark object of the conspiracy into which the chief of the Osborne
family have enter, be quite ignorant of all their plan regard she
(which, strange to say, her friend and chaperon do not divulge), and,
take all the young lady' flattery for genuine sentiment, and be,
as we have before have occasion to show, of a very warm and impetuous
nature, respond to their affection with quite a tropical ardour. and
if the truth may be tell, I dare say that she too have some selfish
attraction in the Russell Square house; and in a word, think George
Osborne a very nice young man. his whisker have make an impression upon
she, on the very first night she behold they at the ball at Messrs.
Hulkers; and, as we know, she be not the first woman who have be
charm by they. George have an air at once swaggering and melancholy,
languid and fierce. he look like a man who have passion, secret,
and private harrowing grief and adventure. his voice be rich and
deep. he would say it be a warm evening, or ask his partner to take
an ice, with a tone as sad and confidential as if he be break her
mother's death to she, or prelude a declaration of love. he trample
over all the young buck of his father's circle, and be the hero among
those third-rate man. some few sneered at he and hat he. some,
like Dobbin, fanatically admire he. and his whisker have begin to do
their work, and to curl themselves round the affection of Miss Swartz.
whenever there be a chance of meet he in Russell Square, that
simple and good-natured young woman be quite in a flurry to see she
dear Misses Osborne. she go to great expense in new gown, and
bracelet, and bonnet, and in prodigious feather. she adorn she
person with her utmost skill to please the Conqueror, and exhibit all
her simple accomplishment to win his favour. the girl would ask she,
with the great gravity, for a little music, and she would sing she
three song and play she two little piece as often as ever they ask,
and with an always increase pleasure to herself. during these
delectable entertainment, Miss Wirt and the chaperon sate by, and
con over the peerage, and talk about the nobility.
the day after George have his hint from his father, and a short time
before the hour of dinner, he be loll upon a sofa in the
drawing-room in a very become and perfectly natural attitude of
melancholy. he have be, at his father's request, to Mr. Chopper in
the City (the old-gentleman, though he give great sum to his son,
would never specify any fix allowance for he, and reward he only
as he be in the humour). he have then be to pass three hour with
Amelia, his dear little Amelia, at Fulham; and he come home to find his
sister spread in starched muslin in the drawing-room, the dowager
cackle in the background, and honest Swartz in her favourite
amber-colour satin, with turquoise bracelet, countless ring,
flower, feather, and all sort of tag and gimcrack, about as
elegantly decorate as a she chimney-sweep on May-day.
the girl, after vain attempt to engage he in conversation, talk
about fashion and the last drawing-room until he be perfectly sick of
their chatter. he contrast their behaviour with little emmy'--their
shrill voice with her tender ringing tone; their attitude and their
elbow and their starch, with her humble soft movement and modest
grace. poor Swartz be seat in a place where Emmy have be
accustomed to sit. her bejewel hand lie sprawl in her amber
satin lap. her tag and ear-ring twinkle, and her big eye roll
about. she be do nothing with perfect contentment, and think
herself charming. anything so become as the satin the sister have
never see.
"Dammy," George say to a confidential friend, "she look like a China
doll, which have nothing to do all day but to grin and wag its head. by
Jove, Will, it be all I I could do to prevent myself from throw the
sofa-cushion at she." he restrain that exhibition of sentiment,
however.
the sister begin to play the Battle of Prague. "stop that d----
thing," George howl out in a fury from the sofa. "it make I mad.
you play we something, Miss Swartz, do. sing something, anything but
the Battle of Prague."
"shall I sing 'Blue Eyed Mary' or the air from the Cabinet?" Miss
Swartz ask.
"that sweet thing from the Cabinet," the sister say.
"wehave have that," reply the misanthrope on the sofa
"I can sing 'Fluvy du Tajy,'" Swartz say, in a meek voice, "if I have
the word." it be the last of the worthy young woman's collection.
"o, 'Fleuve du Tage,'" Miss Maria cry; "we have the song," and go
off to fetch the book in which it be.
now it happen that this song, then in the height of the fashion, have
be give to the young lady by a young friend of theirs, whose name
be on the title, and Miss Swartz, have conclude the ditty with
George's applause (for he remember that it be a favourite of
Amelia's), be hop for an encore perhaps, and fiddle with the
leaf of the music, when her eye fall upon the title, and she see
"Amelia Sedley" write in the comer.
"Lor!" cry Miss Swartz, spin swiftly round on the music-stool,
"be it my Amelia? Amelia that be at Miss P.'s at Hammersmith? I know
it be. itbe she, and-- tell I about she--where be she?"
"donot mention she," Miss Maria Osborne say hastily. "her family have
disgrace itself. her father cheat Papa, and as for she, she be
never to be mention here." this be Miss Maria's return for George's
rudeness about the Battle of Prague.
"be you a friend of Amelia's?" George say, bounce up. "God bless
you for it, Miss Swartz. donot believe what the girl say. SHEbe not
to blame at any rate. shebe the best--"
"you know yoube not to speak about she, George," cry Jane. "papa
forbid it."
"whobe to prevent I?" George cry out. "I will speak of she. I say
shebe the good, the kind, the gentle, the sweetest girl in
England; and that, bankrupt or no, my sister be not fit to hold
candle to she. if you like she, go and see she, Miss Swartz; she
want friend now; and I say, God bless everybody who befriend she.
anybody who speak kindly of she be my friend; anybody who speak
against she be my enemy. thank you, Miss Swartz"; and he go up and
wrung her hand.
"George! George!" one of the sister cry imploringly.
"I say," George say fiercely, "I thank everybody who love Amelia
Sed--" he stop. Old Osborne be in the room with a face livid with
rage, and eye like hot coal.
though George have stop in his sentence, yet, his blood be up, he
be not to be cow by all the generation of Osborne; rally
instantly, he reply to the bullying look of his father, with another
so indicative of resolution and defiance that the eld man quail in
his turn, and look away. he feel that the tussle be come. "Mrs.
Haggistoun, let I take you down to dinner," he say. "give your arm to
Miss Swartz, George," and they march.
"Miss Swartz, I love Amelia, and wehave be engage almost all our
life," Osborne say to his partner; and during all the dinner, George
rattle on with a volubility which surprise himself, and make his
father doubly nervous for the fight which be to take place as soon as
the lady be go.
the difference between the pair be, that while the father be violent
and a bully, the son have thrice the nerve and courage of the parent,
and could not merely make an attack, but resist it; and find that
the moment be now come when the contest between he and his father be
to be decide, he take his dinner with perfect coolness and appetite
before the engagement begin. Old Osborne, on the contrary, be
nervous, and drink much. he flounder in his conversation with the
lady, his neighbour: George's coolness only render he more
angry. it make he half mad to see the calm way in which George,
flap his napkin, and with a swaggering bow, open the door for the
lady to leave the room; and fill himself a glass of wine, smack
it, and look his father full in the face, as if to say, "gentleman of
the Guard, fire first." the old man also take a supply of ammunition,
but his decanter clink against the glass as he try to fill it.
after give a great heave, and with a purple choke face, he then
begin. "how dare you, sir, mention that person's name before Miss
Swartz to-day, in my drawing-room? I ask you, sir, how dare you do it?"
"stop, sir," say George, "donot say dare, sir. dare benot a word to
be use to a Captain in the British Army."
"I shall say what I like to my son, sir. I can cut he off with a
shilling if I like. I can make he a beggar if I like. I will say what
I like," the elder say.
"Ibe a gentleman though I be your son, sir," George answer haughtily.
"any communication which you have to make to I, or any order which
you may please to give, I beg may be couch in that kind of language
which I be accustomed to hear."
whenever the lad assume his haughty manner, it always create either
great awe or great irritation in the parent. Old Osborne stand in
secret terror of his son as a well gentleman than himself; and
perhaps my reader may have remark in their experience of this Vanity
Fair of our, that there be no character which a low-minded man so much
mistrust as that of a gentleman.
"my father donot give I the education you have have, nor the
advantage you have have, nor the money you have have. if I have keep the
company some folk have have through MY MEANS, perhaps my son wouldnot
have any reason to brag, sir, of his SUPERIORITY and WEST END AIRS
(these word be utter in the eld Osborne's most sarcastic tone).
but it benot consider the part of a gentleman, in MY time, for a man
to insult his father. if Ihave do any such thing, mine would have
kick I downstairs, sir."
"I never insult you, sir. I say I beg you to remember your son
be a gentleman as well as yourself. I know very well that you give I
plenty of money," say George (finger a bundle of note which he have
get in the morning from Mr. Chopper). "you tell it I often enough,
sir. therebe no fear of my forget it."
"I wish youwould remember other thing as well, sir," the sire answer.
"I wish youwould remember that in this house--so long as you choose to
honour it with your COMPANY, Captain--I'm the master, and that name,
and that that--that you--that I say--"
"that what, sir?" George ask, with scarcely a sneer, fill another
glass of claret.
"----!" burst out his father with a scream oath--"that the name of
those Sedleys never be mention here, sir--not one of the whole damned
lot of them, sir."
"it benot I, sir, that introduce Miss Sedley's name. it be my
sister who speak ill of she to Miss Swartz; and by Jove Iwill defend
she wherever I go. nobody shall speak lightly of that name in my
presence. our family have do she quite enough injury already, I
think, and may leave off revile she now shebe down. Iwill shoot any
man but you who say a word against she."
"go on, sir, go on," the old gentleman say, his eye start out of
his head.
"go on about what, sir? about the way in which wehave treat that angel
of a girl? who tell I to love she? it be your doing. I might have
choose elsewhere, and look high, perhaps, than your society: but I
obey you. and now that her heart's mine you give I order to fle
it away, and punish she, kill she perhaps--for the fault of other
people. itbe a shame, by Heavens," say George, work himself up
into passion and enthusiasm as he proceed, "to play at fast and loose
with a young girl's affection--and with such an angel as that--one so
superior to the people amongst whom she live, that she might have
excited envy, only she be so good and gentle, that itbe a wonder
anybody dare to hate she. if I desert she, sir, do you suppose she
forget I?"
"I benot go to have any of this dam sentimental nonsense and humbug
here, sir," the father cry out. "there shall be no beggar-marriage
in my family. if you choose to fle away eight thousand a year, which
you may have for the asking, you may do it: but by Jove you take your
pack and walk out of this house, sir. will you do as I tell you, once
for all, sir, or will you not?"
"marry that mulatto woman?" George say, pull up his shirt-collar.
"I donot like the colour, sir. ask the black that sweep opposite
Fleet Market, sir. Ibe not go to marry a Hottentot Venus."
Mr. Osborne pull frantically at the cord by which he be accustom
to summon the butler when he want wine--and almost black in the face,
order that functionary to call a coach for Captain Osborne.
"Ihave do it," say George, come into the slaughter' an hour
afterwards, look very pale.
"what, my boy?" say Dobbin.
George tell what have pass between his father and himself.
"Iwill marry she to-morrow," he say with an oath. "I love she more
every day, Dobbin."
CHAPTER XXII
a Marriage and Part of a Honeymoon
Enemies the most obstinate and courageous cannot hold out against
starvation; so the elder Osborne feel himself pretty easy about his
adversary in the encounter we have just describe; and as soon as
George's supply fall short, confidently expect his unconditional
submission. it be unlucky, to be sure, that the lad should have
secure a stock of provision on the very day when the first encounter
take place; but this relief be only temporary, old Osborne thought,
and would but delay George's surrender. no communication pass
between father and son for some day. the former be sulky at this
silence, but not disquiet; for, as he say, he know where he could
put the screw upon George, and only wait the result of that
operation. he tell the sister the upshot of the dispute between they,
but order they to take no notice of the matter, and welcome George on
his return as if nothing have happen. his cover be lay as usual
every day, and perhaps the old gentleman rather anxiously expect he;
but he never come. some one inquire at the slaughter' regard he,
where it be say that he and his friend Captain Dobbin have leave town.
one gusty, raw day at the end of April--the rain whip the pavement
of that ancient street where the old Slaughters' Coffee-house be once
situate--George Osborne come into the coffee-room, look very
haggard and pale; although dress rather smartly in a blue coat and
brass button, and a neat buff waistcoat of the fashion of those day.
here be his friend Captain Dobbin, in blue and brass too, have
abandon the military frock and french-grey trouser, which be the
usual covering of his lanky person.
Dobbin have be in the coffee-room for an hour or more. he have try
all the paper, but could not read they. he have look at the clock
many score of time; and at the street, where the rain be pattering
down, and the people as they clink by in patten, leave long
reflection on the shin stone: he tattoo at the table: he bite his
nail most completely, and nearly to the quick (he be accustom to
ornament his great big hand in this way): he balance the tea-spoon
dexterously on the milk jug: upset it, &c., &c.; and in fact show
those sign of disquietude, and practise those desperate attempt at
amusement, which man be accustom to employ when very anxious, and
expectant, and perturb in mind.
some of his comrade, gentleman who use the room, joke he about the
splendour of his costume and his agitation of manner. one ask he if
he be go to be marry? Dobbin laugh, and say he would send his
acquaintance (Major Wagstaff of the Engineers) a piece of cake when
that event take place. at length Captain Osborne make his appearance,
very smartly dress, but very pale and agitated as we have say. he
wipe his pale face with a large yellow bandanna pocket-handkerchief
that be prodigiously scented. he shake hand with Dobbin, look at
the clock, and tell John, the waiter, to bring he some curacao. of
this cordial he swallow off a couple of glass with nervous
eagerness. his friend ask with some interest about his health.
"couldnot get a wink of sleep till daylight, Dob," say he. "infernal
headache and fever. get up at nine, and go down to the Hummums for a
bath. I say, dob, I feel just as I do on the morning I go out with
Rocket at Quebec."
"so do I," William respond. "I be a deuced deal more nervous than
you be that morning. you make a famous breakfast, I remember. eat
something now."
"yoube a good old fellow, Will. Iwill drink your health, old boy, and
farewell to--"
"no, no; two glass be enough," Dobbin interrupt he. "here, take
away the liqueur, John. have some cayenne-pepper with your fowl.
make haste though, for it be time we be there."
it be about half an hour from twelve when this brief meeting and
colloquy take place between the two captain. a coach, into which
Captain Osborne's servant put his master's desk and dressing-case, have
be in wait for some time; and into this the two gentleman hurry
under an umbrella, and the valet mount on the box, curse the rain
and the dampness of the coachman who be steam beside he. "we
shall find a well trap than this at the church-door," say he;
"thatbe a comfort." and the carriage drive on, take the road down
Piccadilly, where Apsley House and St. George's Hospital wear red
jacket still; where there be oil-lamp; where Achilles be not yet
bear; nor the Pimlico arch raise; nor the hideous equestrian monster
which pervade it and the neighbourhood; and so they drive down by
Brompton to a certain chapel near the Fulham Road there.
a chariot be in wait with four horse; likewise a coach of the kind
call glass coach. only a very few idler be collect on account
of the dismal rain.
"hang it!" say George, "I say only a pair."
"my master would have four," say Mr. Joseph Sedley's servant, who be
in waiting; and he and Mr. Osborne's man agree as they follow George
and William into the church, that it be a "reg'lar shabby turn hout;
and with scarce so much as a breakfast or a wedding faviour."
"here you be," say our old friend, Jos Sedley, come forward.
"yoube five minute late, George, my boy. what a day, eh? Demmy, itbe
like the commencement of the rainy season in Bengal. but youwill find
my carriage be watertight. come along, my mother and Emmy be in the
vestry."
Jos Sedley be splendid. he be fat than ever. his shirt collar
be high; his face be redder; his shirt-frill flaunt gorgeously
out of his variegate waistcoat. varnish boot be not invent as
yet; but the Hessians on his beautiful leg shine so, that they must
have be the identical pair in which the gentleman in the old picture
use to shave himself; and on his light green coat there bloom a fine
wedding favour, like a great white spread magnolia.
in a word, George have throw the great cast. he be go to be
marry. hence his pallor and nervousness--his sleepless night and
agitation in the morning. I have hear people who have go through
the same thing own to the same emotion. after three or four
ceremony, you get accustomed to it, no doubt; but the first dip,
everybody allow, be awful.
the bride be dress in a brown silk pelisse (as Captain Dobbin have
since inform I), and wear a straw bonnet with a pink ribbon; over
the bonnet she have a veil of white Chantilly lace, a gift from Mr.
Joseph Sedley, her brother. Captain Dobbin himself have ask leave to
present she with a gold chain and watch, which she sport on this
occasion; and her mother give she her diamond brooch--almost the only
trinket which be leave to the old lady. as the service go on, Mrs.
Sedley sit and whimper a great deal in a pew, console by the Irish
maid-servant and Mrs. Clapp from the lodging. Old Sedley would not be
present. Jos act for his father, give away the bride, whilst
Captain Dobbin step up as groomsman to his friend George.
there be nobody in the church besides the officiating person and the
small marriage party and their attendant. the two valet sit aloof
superciliously. the rain come rattle down on the window. in the
interval of the service you hear it, and the sobbing of old Mrs.
Sedley in the pew. the parson's tone echo sadly through the empty
wall. Osborne's "I will" be sound in very deep bass. Emmy's
response come flutter up to her lip from her heart, but be
scarcely hear by anybody except Captain Dobbin.
when the service be complete, Jos Sedley come forward and kiss his
sister, the bride, for the first time for many month--George's look of
gloom have go, and he seem quite proud and radiant. "itbe your turn,
William," say he, put his hand fondly upon Dobbin's shoulder; and
Dobbin go up and touch Amelia on the cheek.
then they go into the vestry and sign the register. "God bless you,
Old Dobbin," George say, grasp he by the hand, with something very
like moisture glisten in his eye. William reply only by nod
his head. his heart be too full to say much.
"write directly, and come down as soon as you can, you know," Osborne
say. after Mrs. Sedley have take an hysterical adieu of her daughter,
the pair go off to the carriage. "get out of the way, you little
devil," George cry to a small crowd of damp urchin, that be
hang about the chapel-door. the rain drive into the bride and
bridegroom's face as they pass to the chariot. the postilion'
favour draggle on their dripping jacket. the few child make a
dismal cheer, as the carriage, splash mud, drive away.
William Dobbin stand in the church-porch, look at it, a queer
figure. the small crew of spectator jeered he. he be not think
about they or their laughter.
"come home and have some tiffin, Dobbin," a voice cry behind he; as
a pudgy hand be lay on his shoulder, and the honest fellow's reverie
be interrupt. but the Captain have no heart to go a-feasting with
Jos Sedley. he put the weep old lady and her attendant into the
carriage along with Jos, and leave they without any farth word
pass. this carriage, too, drive away, and the urchin give another
sarcastical cheer.
"here, you little beggar," Dobbin say, give some sixpence amongst
they, and then go off by himself through the rain. it be all over.
they be marry, and happy, he pray God. never since he be a boy
have he feel so miserable and so lonely. he long with a heart-sick
yearning for the first few day to be over, that he might see she again.
some ten day after the above ceremony, three young man of our
acquaintance be enjoy that beautiful prospect of bow window on
the one side and blue sea on the other, which Brighton afford to the
traveller. sometimes it be towards the ocean--smile with countless
dimple, speckle with white sail, with a hundred bathing-machine
kiss the skirt of his blue garment--that the Londoner look
enrapture: sometimes, on the contrary, a lover of human nature rather
than of prospect of any kind, it be towards the bow window that he
turn, and that swarm of human life which they exhibit. from one issue
the note of a piano, which a young lady in ringlet practise six
hour daily, to the delight of the fellow-lodger: at another, lovely
Polly, the nurse-maid, may be see dandle Master Omnium in her arm:
whilst Jacob, his papa, be beheld eat prawn, and devour the
Times for breakfast, at the window below. yonder be the Misses Leery,
who be look out for the young officer of the Heavies, who be
pretty sure to be pace the cliff; or again it be a City man, with a
nautical turn, and a telescope, the size of a six-pounder, who have his
instrument pointed seaward, so as to command every pleasure-boat,
herring-boat, or bathing-machine that come to, or quit, the shore,
&c., &c. but have we any leisure for a description of Brighton?--for
Brighton, a clean Naples with genteel lazzaroni--for Brighton, that
always look brisk, gay, and gaudy, like a harlequin's jacket--for
Brighton, which use to be seven hour distant from London at the time
of our story; which be now only a hundred minute off; and which may
approach who know how much near, unless Joinville come and untimely
bombard it?
"what a monstrous fine girl that be in the lodging over the
milliner's," one of these three promenader remark to the other;
"Gad, Crawley, do you see what a wink she give I as I pass?"
"donot break her heart, Jos, you rascal," say another. "donot trifle
with her affection, you Don Juan!"
"get away," say Jos Sedley, quite pleased, and leer up at the
maid-servant in question with a most killing ogle. Jos be even more
splendid at Brighton than he have be at his sister's marriage. he have
brilliant under-waistcoat, any one of which would have set up a
moderate buck. he sport a military frock-coat, ornament with frog,
knob, black button, and meander embroidery. he have affect a
military appearance and habit of late; and he walk with his two
friend, who be of that profession, clink his boot-spur,
swagger prodigiously, and shoot death-glance at all the servant
girl who be worthy to be slay.
"what shall we do, boy, till the lady return?" the buck ask. the
lady be out to Rottingdean in his carriage on a drive.
"letus have a game at billiard," one of his friend say--the tall
one, with lacquered mustachio.
"no, dammy; no, Captain," Jos reply, rather alarmed. "no billiard
to-day, Crawley, my boy; yesterday be enough."
"you play very well," say Crawley, laugh. "donot he, Osborne? how
well he make that-five stroke, eh?"
"famous," Osborne say. "Jos be a devil of a fellow at billiard, and
at everything else, too. I wish there be any tiger-hunting about
here! we might go and kill a few before dinner. (there go a fine
girl! what an ankle, eh, Jos?) tell we that story about the tiger-hunt,
and the way you do for he in the jungle--itbe a wonderful story that,
Crawley." here George Osborne give a yawn. "itbe rather slow work,"
say he, "down here; what shall we do?"
"shall we go and look at some horse that Snaffler's just bring from
Lewes fair?" Crawley say.
"suppose we go and have some jelly at Dutton's," and the rogue Jos,
willing to kill two bird with one stone. "devilish fine gal at
Dutton's."
"suppose we go and see the Lightning come in, itbe just about time?"
George say. this advice prevail over the stable and the jelly,
they turn towards the coach-office to witness the Lightning's arrival.
as they pass, they meet the carriage--Jos Sedley's open carriage, with
its magnificent armorial bearing--that splendid conveyance in which he
use to drive, about at Cheltonham, majestic and solitary, with his
arm fold, and his hat cock; or, more happy, with lady by his
side.
two be in the carriage now: one a little person, with light hair, and
dress in the height of the fashion; the other in a brown silk
pelisse, and a straw bonnet with pink ribbon, with a rosy, round,
happy face, that do you good to behold. she check the carriage as
it near the three gentleman, after which exercise of authority she
look rather nervous, and then begin to blush most absurdly. "we have
have a delightful drive, George," she say, "and--and webe so glad to
come back; and, Joseph, donot let he be late."
"donot be lead our husband into mischief, Mr. Sedley, you wicke,
wicked man you," rebecca say, shake at Jos a pretty little finger
cover with the neat french kid glove. "no billiard, no smoking,
no naughtiness!"
"my dear Mrs. Crawley--ah now! upon my honour!" be all Jos could
ejaculate by way of reply; but he manage to fall into a tolerable
attitude, with his head lie on his shoulder, grin upwards at his
victim, with one hand at his back, which he support on his cane, and
the other hand (the one with the diamond ring) fumbling in his
shirt-frill and among his under-waistcoat. as the carriage drive off
he kiss the diamond hand to the fair lady within. he wish all
Cheltenham, all Chowringhee, all Calcutta, could see he in that
position, wave his hand to such a beauty, and in company with such a
famous buck as Rawdon Crawley of the Guards.
our young bride and bridegroom have choose Brighton as the place where
they would pass the first few day after their marriage; and have
engage apartment at the Ship Inn, enjoy themselves there in great
comfort and quietude, until Jos presently join they. nor be he the
only companion they find there. as they be come into the hotel
from a sea-side walk one afternoon, on whom should they light but
Rebecca and her husband. the recognition be immediate. rebecca fly
into the arm of her dear friend. Crawley and Osborne shake hand
together cordially enough: and Becky, in the course of a very few
hour, find mean to make the latter forget that little unpleasant
passage of word which have happen between they. "do you remember the
last time we meet at Miss Crawley's, when I be so rude to you, dear
Captain Osborne? I think you seem careless about dear Amelia. it
be that make I angry: and so pert: and so unkind: and so ungrateful.
do forgive I!" rebecca say, and she hold out her hand with so frank
and win a grace, that Osborne could not but take it. by humbly and
frankly acknowledge yourself to be in the wrong, there be no knowing,
my son, what good you may do. I know once a gentleman and very worthy
practitioner in Vanity Fair, who use to do little wrong to his
neighbour on purpose, and in order to apologise for they in an open
and manly way afterwards--and what ensue? my friend Crocky Doyle be
like everywhere, and deem to be rather impetuous--but the honest
fellow. Becky's humility pass for sincerity with George Osborne.
these two young couple have plenty of tale to relate to each other.
the marriage of either be discuss; and their prospect in life
canvass with the great frankness and interest on both side.
George's marriage be to be make known to his father by his friend
Captain Dobbin; and young Osborne tremble rather for the result of
that communication. Miss Crawley, on whom all Rawdon's hope depend,
still hold out. unable to make an entry into her house in Park Lane,
her affectionate nephew and niece have follow she to Brighton, where
they have emissary continually plant at her door.
"I wish you could see some of Rawdon's friend who be always about our
door," rebecca say, laugh. "do you ever see a dun, my dear; or a
bailiff and his man? two of the abominable wretch watch all last
week at the greengrocer's opposite, and we could not get away until
Sunday. if Aunty do not relent, what shall we do?"
Rawdon, with roar of laughter, relate a dozen amusing anecdote of
his dun, and Rebecca's adroit treatment of they. he vow with a
great oath that there be no woman in Europe who could talk a creditor
over as she could. almost immediately after their marriage, her
practice have begin, and her husband find the immense value of such a
wife. they have credit in plenty, but they have bill also in abundance,
and labour under a scarcity of ready money. do these
debt-difficulty affect Rawdon's good spirit? no. everybody in
Vanity Fair must have remark how well those live who be comfortably
and thoroughly in debt: how they deny themselves nothing; how jolly and
easy they be in their mind. Rawdon and his wife have the very good
apartment at the inn at Brighton; the landlord, as he bring in the
first dish, bow before they as to his great customer: and Rawdon
abuse the dinner and wine with an audacity which no grandee in the
land could surpass. long custom, a manly appearance, faultless boot
and clothe, and a happy fierceness of manner, will often help a man as
much as a great balance at the banker's.
the two wedding party meet constantly in each other's apartment.
after two or three night the gentleman of an evening have a little
piquet, as their wife sate and chat apart. this pastime, and the
arrival of Jos Sedley, who make his appearance in his grand open
carriage, and who play a few game at billiard with Captain Crawley,
replenish Rawdon's purse somewhat, and give he the benefit of that
ready money for which the great spirit be sometimes at a
stand-still.
so the three gentleman walk down to see the Lightning coach come in.
Punctual to the minute, the coach crowd inside and out, the guard
blow his accustomed tune on the horn--the lightning come tear
down the street, and pull up at the coach-office.
"Hullo! therebe old Dobbin," George cry, quite delighted to see his
old friend perch on the roof; and whose promise visit to Brighton
have be delay until now. "how be you, old fellow? glad yoube come
down. Emmy'll be delighted to see you," Osborne say, shake his
comrade warmly by the hand as soon as his descent from the vehicle be
effect--and then he add, in a low and agitated voice, "whatbe the
news? have you be in Russell Square? what do the governor say?
tell I everything."
Dobbin look very pale and grave. "Ihave see your father," say he.
"howbe Amelia--Mrs. George? Iwill tell you all the news presently: but
Ihave bring the great news of all: and that is--"
"out with it, old fellow," George say.
"webe order to Belgium. all the army go--guard and all.
Heavytop's get the gout, and be mad at not be able to move. O'Dowd
go in command, and we embark from Chatham next week." this news of
war could not but come with a shock upon our lover, and cause all
these gentleman to look very serious.
CHAPTER XXIII
Captain Dobbin Proceeds on his Canvass
what be the secret mesmerism which friendship possess, and under the
operation of which a person ordinarily sluggish, or cold, or timid,
become wise, active, and resolute, in another's behalf? as Alexis,
after a few pass from Dr. Elliotson, despise pain, read with the
back of his head, see mile off, look into next week, and perform
other wonder, of which, in his own private normal condition, he be
quite incapable; so you see, in the affair of the world and under the
magnetism of friendship, the modest man become bold, the shy
confident, the lazy active, or the impetuous prudent and peaceful.
what be it, on the other hand, that make the lawyer eschew his own
cause, and call in his learn brother as an adviser? and what cause
the doctor, when ail, to send for his rival, and not sit down and
examine his own tongue in the chimney Bass, or write his own
prescription at his study-table? I throw out these query for
intelligent reader to answer, who know, at once, how credulous we be,
and how sceptical, how soft and how obstinate, how firm for other and
how diffident about ourselves: meanwhile, it be certain that our
friend William Dobbin, who be personally of so comply a disposition
that if his parent have press he much, it be probable he would have
step down into the kitchen and marry the cook, and who, to far
his own interest, would have find the most insuperable difficulty in
walk across the street, find himself as busy and eager in the
conduct of George Osborne's affair, as the most selfish tactician
could be in the pursuit of his own.
whilst our friend George and his young wife be enjoy the first
blushing day of the honeymoon at Brighton, honest William be leave as
George's plenipotentiary in London, to transact all the business part
of the marriage. his duty it be to call upon old Sedley and his wife,
and to keep the former in good humour: to draw Jos and his
brother-in-law nearer together, so that Jos's position and dignity, as
collector of Boggley Wollah, might compensate for his father's loss of
station, and tend to reconcile old Osborne to the alliance: and
finally, to communicate it to the latter in such a way as should least
irritate the old gentleman.
now, before he face the head of the Osborne house with the news which
it be his duty to tell, Dobbin bethink he that it would be politic
to make friend of the rest of the family, and, if possible, have the
lady on his side. they cannot be angry in their heart, think he.
no woman ever be really angry at a romantic marriage. a little cry
out, and they must come round to their brother; when the three of we
will lay siege to old Mr. Osborne. so this machiavellian captain of
infantry cast about he for some happy mean or stratagem by which he
could gently and gradually bring the Misses Osborne to a knowledge of
their brother's secret.
by a little inquiry regard his mother's engagement, he be pretty
soon able to find out by whom of her ladyship's friend party be
give at that season; where he would be likely to meet Osborne's
sister; and, though he have that abhorrence of rout and evening
party which many sensible man, alas! entertain, he soon find one
where the Misses Osborne be to be present. make his appearance at
the ball, where he dance a couple of set with both of they, and be
prodigiously polite, he actually have the courage to ask Miss Osborne
for a few minute' conversation at an early hour the next day, when he
have, he say, to communicate to her news of the very great interest.
what be it that make she start back, and gaze upon he for a moment,
and then on the ground at her foot, and make as if she would faint on
his arm, have he not by opportunely treading on her toe, bring the
young lady back to self-control? why be she so violently agitated at
Dobbin's request? this can never be know. but when he come the next
day, Maria be not in the drawing-room with her sister, and Miss Wirt
go off for the purpose of fetch the latter, and the Captain and
Miss Osborne be leave together. they be both so silent that the
ticktock of the Sacrifice of Iphigenia clock on the mantelpiece become
quite rudely audible.
"what a nice party it be last night," Miss Osborne at length begin,
encouragingly; "and--and how yoube improve in your dancing, Captain
Dobbin. surely somebody have teach you," she add, with amiable
archness.
"you should see I dance a reel with Mrs. Major O'Dowd of our; and a
jig--do you ever see a jig? but I think anybody could dance with you,
Miss Osborne, who dance so well."
"be the Major's lady young and beautiful, Captain?" the fair questioner
continue. "ah, what a terrible thing it must be to be a soldier's
wife! I wonder they have any spirit to dance, and in these dreadful
time of war, too! o Captain Dobbin, I tremble sometimes when I think
of our dear George, and the danger of the poor soldier. be there
many married officer of the --th, Captain Dobbin?"
"upon my word, shebe play her hand rather too openly," Miss Wirt
thought; but this observation be merely parenthetic, and be not hear
through the crevice of the door at which the governess utter it.
"one of our young man be just marry," Dobbin say, now come to the
point. "it be a very old attachment, and the young couple be as poor
as church mouse." "o, how delightful! o, how romantic!" Miss Osborne
cry, as the Captain say "old attachment" and "poor." her sympathy
encourage he.
"the fine young fellow in the regiment," he continue. "not a braver
or handsomer officer in the army; and such a charming wife! how you
would like she! how you will like she when you know she, Miss
Osborne." the young lady think the actual moment have arrive, and
that Dobbin's nervousness which now come on and be visible in many
twitching of his face, in his manner of beat the ground with his
great foot, in the rapid buttoning and unbuttoning of his frock-coat,
&c.--Miss Osborne, I say, think that when he have give himself a
little air, he would unbosom himself entirely, and prepare eagerly to
listen. and the clock, in the altar on which Iphigenia be situate,
beginning, after a preparatory convulsion, to toll twelve, the mere
tolling seem as if it would last until one--so prolonged be the
knell to the anxious spinster.
"but itbe not about marriage that I come to speak--that be that
marriage--that be--no, I mean--my dear Miss Osborne, itbe about our
dear friend George," Dobbin say.
"about George?" she say in a tone so discomfit that Maria and Miss
Wirt laugh at the other side of the door, and even that abandon
wretch of a Dobbin feel inclined to smile himself; for he be not
altogether unconscious of the state of affair: George have often
banter he gracefully and say, "hang it, will, why donot you take
old Jane? shewill have you if you ask she. Iwill bet you five to two she
will."
"yes, about George, then," he continue. "there have be a difference
between he and Mr. Osborne. and I regard he so much--for you know
we have be like brother--that I hope and pray the quarrel may be
settle. we must go abroad, Miss Osborne. we may be order off at a
day's warning. who know what may happen in the campaign? donot be
agitated, dear Miss Osborne; and those two at least should part
friend."
"there have be no quarrel, Captain Dobbin, except a little usual scene
with papa," the lady say. "we be expect George back daily. what
Papa want be only for his good. he have but to come back, and Ibe
sure all will be well; and dear Rhoda, who go away from here in sad
sad anger, I know will forgive he. woman forgive but too readily,
Captain."
"such an angel as you I be sure would," Mr. Dobbin say, with atrocious
astuteness. "and no man can pardon himself for give a woman pain.
what would you feel, if a man be faithless to you?"
"I should perish--I should throw myself out of window--I should take
poison--I should pine and die. I know I should," Miss cry, who have
nevertheless go through one or two affair of the heart without any
idea of suicide.
"and there be other," Dobbin continue, "as true and as kind-hearte
as yourself. Ibe not speak about the west indian heiress, Miss
Osborne, but about a poor girl whom George once love, and who be breed
from her childhood to think of nobody but he. Ihave see she in her
poverty uncomplaining, break-hearte, without a fault. it be of Miss
Sedley I speak. dear Miss Osborne, can your generous heart quarrel
with your brother for be faithful to she? could his own conscience
ever forgive he if he desert she? be her friend--she always love
you--and--and I be come here charge by George to tell you that he
hold his engagement to she as the most sacred duty he have; and to
entreat you, at least, to be on his side."
when any strong emotion take possession of Mr. Dobbin, and after the
first word or two of hesitation, he could speak with perfect fluency,
and it be evident that his eloquence on this occasion make some
impression upon the lady whom he address.
"well," say she, "this be--most surprising--most painful--most
extraordinary--what will papa say?--that George should fle away such
a superb establishment as be offer to he but at any rate he have
find a very brave champion in you, Captain Dobbin. it be of no use,
however," she continue, after a pause; "I feel for poor Miss Sedley,
most certainly--most sincerely, you know. we never think the match a
good one, though we be always very kind to she here--very. but papa
will never consent, I be sure. and a well bring up young woman, you
know--with a well-regulate mind, must--George must give she up, dear
Captain Dobbin, indeed he must."
"ought a man to give up the woman he love, just when misfortune befell
she?" Dobbin say, hold out his hand. "Dear Miss Osborne, be this
the counsel I hear from you? my dear young lady! you must befriend
she. he cannot give she up. he must not give she up. would a man,
think you, give you up if you be poor?"
this adroit question touch the heart of Miss Jane Osborne not a
little. "I donot know whether we poor girl ought to believe what you
man say, Captain," she say. "there be that in woman's tenderness which
induce she to believe too easily. Ibe afraid you be cruel, cruel
deceivers,"--and Dobbin certainly think he feel a pressure of the
hand which Miss Osborne have extend to he.
he drop it in some alarm. "deceiver!" say he. "no, dear Miss
Osborne, all man be not; your brother be not; George have love Amelia
Sedley ever since they be child; no wealth would make he marry
any but she. ought he to forsake she? would you counsel he to do so?"
what could Miss Jane say to such a question, and with her own peculiar
view? she could not answer it, so she parry it by say, "well, if
you be not a deceiver, at least you be very romantic"; and Captain
William let this observation pass without challenge.
at length when, by the help of far polite speech, he deem that
Miss Osborne be sufficiently prepared to receive the whole news, he
pour it into her ear. "George could not give up Amelia--George be
married to her"--and then he relate the circumstance of the marriage
as we know they already: how the poor girl would have die have not she
lover keep his faith: how Old Sedley have refuse all consent to the
match, and a licence have be get: and Jos Sedley have come from
Cheltenham to give away the bride: how they have go to Brighton in
Jos's chariot-and-four to pass the honeymoon: and how George count on
his dear kind sister to befriend he with their father, as woman--so
true and tender as they be--assuredly would do. and so, ask
permission (readily grant) to see she again, and rightly conjecture
that the news he have bring would be tell in the next five minute to
the other lady, Captain Dobbin make his bow and take his leave.
he be scarcely out of the house, when Miss Maria and Miss Wirt rush
in to Miss Osborne, and the whole wonderful secret be impart to they
by that lady. to do they justice, neither of the sister be very much
displeased. there be something about a runaway match with which few
lady can be seriously angry, and Amelia rather rise in their
estimation, from the spirit which she have display in consent to
the union. as they debate the story, and prattle about it, and
wonder what Papa would do and say, come a loud knock, as of an
avenge thunder-clap, at the door, which make these conspirator
start. it must be Papa, they think. but it be not he. it be only
Mr. Frederick Bullock, who have come from the City accord to
appointment, to conduct the lady to a flower-show.
this gentleman, as may be imagine, be not keep long in ignorance of
the secret. but his face, when he hear it, show an amazement which
be very different to that look of sentimental wonder which the
countenance of the sister wear. Mr. Bullock be a man of the world,
and a junior partner of a wealthy firm. he know what money be, and
the value of it: and a delightful throb of expectation light up his
little eye, and cause he to smile on his Maria, as he think that
by this piece of folly of Mr. George's she might be worth thirty
thousand pound more than he have ever hop to get with she.
"Gad! Jane," say he, survey even the eld sister with some
interest, "eel will be sorry he cry off. you may be a fifty
thousand pounder yet."
the sister have never think of the money question up to that moment,
but Fred Bullock banter they with graceful gaiety about it during
their forenoon's excursion; and they have rise not a little in their
own esteem by the time when, the morning amusement over, they drive
back to dinner. and do not let my respected reader exclaim against
this selfishness as unnatural. it be but this present morning, as he
ride on the omnibus from Richmond; while it change horse, this
present chronicler, be on the roof, mark three little child
play in a puddle below, very dirty, and friendly, and happy. to
these three presently come another little one. "POLLY," say she, "your
SISTER's GOT a penny." at which the child get up from the puddle
instantly, and run off to pay their court to Peggy. and as the omnibus
drive off I see Peggy with the infantine procession at her tail,
march with great dignity towards the stall of a neighbouring
lollipop-woman.
CHAPTER XXIV
in which Mr. Osborne take down the Family Bible
so have prepare the sister, Dobbin hasten away to the City to
perform the rest and more difficult part of the task which he have
undertake. the idea of face old Osborne render he not a little
nervous, and more than once he think of leave the young lady to
communicate the secret, which, as he be aware, they could not long
retain. but he have promise to report to George upon the manner in
which the eld Osborne bear the intelligence; so go into the City
to the paternal counting-house in Thames Street, he despatch thence a
note to Mr. Osborne beg for a half-hour's conversation relative to
the affair of his son George. Dobbin's messenger return from Mr.
Osborne's house of business, with the compliment of the latter, who
would be very happy to see the Captain immediately, and away
accordingly Dobbin go to confront he.
the Captain, with a half-guilty secret to confess, and with the
prospect of a painful and stormy interview before he, enter Mr.
Osborne's office with a most dismal countenance and abash gait, and,
pass through the outer room where Mr. Chopper preside, be greet
by that functionary from his desk with a waggish air which far
discomfit he. Mr. Chopper wink and nod and point his pen
towards his patron's door, and say, "youwill find the governor all
right," with the most provoking good humour.
Osborne rise too, and shake he heartily by the hand, and say, "how
do, my dear boy?" with a cordiality that make poor George's ambassador
feel doubly guilty. his hand lie as if dead in the old gentleman's
grasp. he feel that he, Dobbin, be more or less the cause of all that
have happen. it be he have bring back George to Amelia: it be he
have applaud, encouraged, transact almost the marriage which he be
come to reveal to George's father: and the latter be receive he
with smile of welcome; pat he on the shoulder, and call he
"Dobbin, my dear boy." the envoy have indeed good reason to hang his
head.
Osborne fully believe that Dobbin have come to announce his son's
surrender. Mr. Chopper and his principal be talk over the matter
between George and his father, at the very moment when Dobbin's
messenger arrive. both agree that George be send in his
submission. both have be expect it for some day--and "Lord!
Chopper, what a marriage wewill have!" Mr. Osborne say to his clerk,
snap his big finger, and jingle all the guineas and shilling in
his great pocket as he eye his subordinate with a look of triumph.
with similar operation conduct in both pocket, and a knowing jolly
air, Osborne from his chair regard Dobbin seat blank and silent
opposite to he. "what a bumpkin he be for a Captain in the army," old
Osborne thought. "I wonder George havenot teach he well manner."
at last Dobbin summon courage to begin. "Sir," say he, "Ihave
bring you some very grave news. I have be at the Horse Guards this
morning, and therebe no doubt that our regiment will be order abroad,
and on its way to Belgium before the week be over. and you know, sir,
that we shallnot be home again before a tussle which may be fatal to many
of we." Osborne look grave. "my s--, the regiment will do its
duty, sir, I daresay," he say.
"the French be very strong, sir," Dobbin go on. "the Russians and
Austrians will be a long time before they can bring their troop down.
we shall have the first of the fight, sir; and depend on it Boney will
take care that it shall be a hard one."
"what be you drive at, Dobbin?" his interlocutor say, uneasy and
with a scowl. "I suppose no Briton's afraid of any d---- Frenchman,
hey?"
"I only mean, that before we go, and consider the great and certain
risk that hang over every one of we--if there be any difference
between you and George--it would be as well, sir, that--that you
should shake hand: wouldnot it? should anything happen to he, I
think you would never forgive yourself if you havenot part in charity."
as he say this, poor William Dobbin blush crimson, and feel and
own that he himself be a traitor. but for he, perhaps, this
severance need never have take place. why have not George's marriage
be delay? what call be there to press it on so eagerly? he feel
that George would have part from Amelia at any rate without a mortal
pang. Amelia, too, might have recover the shock of lose he. it
be his counsel have bring about this marriage, and all that be to
ensue from it. and why be it? because he love she so much that he
could not bear to see her unhappy: or because his own suffering of
suspense be so unendurable that he be glad to crush they at once--as
we hasten a funeral after a death, or, when a separation from those we
love be imminent, cannot rest until the parting be over.
"you be a good fellow, William," say Mr. Osborne in a softened voice;
"and I and George shouldnot part in anger, that be true. look here.
Ihave do for he as much as any father ever do. hebe have three time
as much money from I, as I warrant your father ever give you. but I
donot brag about that. how Ihave toil for he, and work and
employ my talent and energy, I willnot say. ask Chopper. ask
himself. ask the City of London. well, I propose to he such a
marriage as any nobleman in the land might be proud of--the only thing
in life I ever ask he--and he refuse I. be I wrong? be the
quarrel of MY making? what do I seek but his good, for which Ihave be
toil like a convict ever since he be bear? nobody can say therebe
anything selfish in I. let he come back. I say, herebe my hand. I
say, forget and forgive. as for marry now, itbe out of the
question. let he and Miss S. make it up, and make out the marriage
afterwards, when he come back a Colonel; for he shall be a Colonel, by
g-- he shall, if money can do it. Ibe glad youhave bring he round.
I know itbe you, Dobbin. youhave take he out of many a scrape before.
let he come. I shallnot be hard. come along, and dine in Russell
Square to-day: both of you. the old shop, the old hour. youwill find a
neck of venison, and no question ask."
this praise and confidence smote Dobbin's heart very keenly. every
moment the colloquy continue in this tone, he feel more and more
guilty. "Sir," say he, "I fear you deceive yourself. I be sure you
do. George be much too high-minded a man ever to marry for money. a
threat on your part that you would disinherit he in case of
disobedience would only be follow by resistance on his."
"why, hang it, man, you donot call offer he eight or ten thousand a
year threaten he?" Mr. Osborne say, with still provoke good
humour. "'Gad, if Miss S. will have I, Ibe her man. I benot
particular about a shade or so of tawny." and the old gentleman give
his know grin and coarse laugh.
"you forget, sir, previous engagement into which Captain Osborne have
enter," the ambassador say, gravely.
"what engagement? what the devil do you mean? you donot mean," Mr.
Osborne continue, gather wrath and astonishment as the thought now
first come upon he; "you donot mean that hebe such a d---- fool as to
be still hanker after that swindle old bankrupt's daughter? youhave
not come here for to make I suppose that he want to marry she? marry
HER, that be a good one. my son and heir marry a beggar's girl out of
a gutter. d---- he, if he do, let he buy a broom and sweep a
crossing. she be always dangle and ogle after he, I recollect
now; and Ihave no doubt she be put on by her old sharper of a father."
"Mr. Sedley be your very good friend, sir," Dobbin interpose, almost
pleased at find himself grow angry. "Time be you call he
well name than rogue and swindler. the match be of your making.
George have no right to play fast and loose--"
"fast and loose!" howl out old Osborne. "fast and loose! why, hang
I, those be the very word my gentleman use himself when he give
himself air, last Thursday be a fortnight, and talk about the
british army to his father who make he. what, itbe you who have be
a setting of he up--be it? and my service to you, CAPTAIN. itbe you
who want to introduce beggar into my family. thank you for nothing,
Captain. marry she indeed--he, he! why should he? I warrant you shewould
go to he fast enough without."
"Sir," say Dobbin, start up in undisguised anger; "no man shall
abuse that lady in my hearing, and you least of all."
"o, yoube a-go to call I out, be you? stop, let I ring the bell
for pistol for two. Mr. George send you here to insult his father,
do he?" Osborne say, pull at the bell-cord.
"Mr. Osborne," say Dobbin, with a falter voice, "itbe you who be
insult the good creature in the world. you have well spare she, sir,
for shebe your son's wife."
and with this, feel that he could say no more, Dobbin go away,
Osborne sink back in his chair, and look wildly after he. a
clerk come in, obedient to the bell; and the Captain be scarcely out
of the court where Mr. Osborne's office be, when Mr. Chopper the
chief clerk come rush hatless after he.
"for God's sake, what be it?" Mr. Chopper say, catch the Captain by
the skirt. "the governorbe in a fit. what have Mr. George be do?"
"he marry Miss Sedley five day ago," Dobbin reply. "I be his
groomsman, Mr. Chopper, and you must stand his friend."
the old clerk shake his head. "if thatbe your news, Captain, itbe bad.
the governor will never forgive he."
Dobbin beg Chopper to report progress to he at the hotel where he
be stop, and walk off moodily westward, greatly perturb as to
the past and the future.
when the Russell Square family come to dinner that evening, they find
the father of the house seat in his usual place, but with that air of
gloom on his face, which, whenever it appear there, keep the whole
circle silent. the lady, and Mr. Bullock who din with they, feel
that the news have be communicate to Mr. Osborne. his dark look
affect Mr. Bullock so far as to render he still and quiet: but he
be unusually bland and attentive to Miss Maria, by whom he sit, and to
her sister preside at the head of the table.
Miss Wirt, by consequence, be alone on her side of the board, a gap
be leave between she and Miss Jane Osborne. now this be George's
place when he din at home; and his cover, as we say, be lay for
he in expectation of that truant's return. nothing occur during
dinner-time except smile Mr. Frederick's flagging confidential
whisper, and the clinking of plate and china, to interrupt the silence
of the repast. the servant go about stealthily do their duty.
mute at funeral could not look more glum than the domestic of Mr.
Osborne the neck of venison of which he have invite Dobbin to partake,
be carve by he in perfect silence; but his own share go away
almost untasted, though he drink much, and the butler assiduously
fill his glass.
at last, just at the end of the dinner, his eye, which have be
star at everybody in turn, fix themselves for a while upon the
plate lay for George. he point to it presently with his left hand.
his daughter look at he and do not comprehend, or choose to
comprehend, the signal; nor do the servant at first understand it.
"take that plate away," at last he say, get up with an oath--and
with this push his chair back, he walk into his own room.
behind Mr. Osborne's dining-room be the usual apartment which go in
his house by the name of the study; and be sacred to the master of the
house. Hither Mr. Osborne would retire of a Sunday forenoon when not
minded to go to church; and here pass the morning in his crimson
leather chair, read the paper. a couple of glaze book-case be
here, contain standard work in stout gilt binding. the "Annual
Register," the "Gentleman's magazine," "Blair's sermon," and "hume and
Smollett." from year's end to year's end he never take one of these
volume from the shelf; but there be no member of the family that
would dare for his life to touch one of the book, except upon those
rare Sunday evening when there be no dinner-party, and when the great
scarlet Bible and Prayer-book be take out from the corner where they
stand beside his copy of the Peerage, and the servant be ring up to
the dining parlour, Osborne read the evening service to his family in a
loud grating pompous voice. no member of the household, child, or
domestic, ever enter that room without a certain terror. here he
check the housekeeper's account, and overhaul the butler's
cellar-book. hence he could command, across the clean gravel
court-yard, the back entrance of the stable with which one of his
bell communicate, and into this yard the coachman issue from his
premise as into a dock, and Osborne swear at he from the study
window. four time a year Miss Wirt enter this apartment to get her
salary; and his daughter to receive their quarterly allowance. George
as a boy have be horsewhip in this room many time; his mother
sit sick on the stair listen to the cut of the whip. the boy
be scarcely ever know to cry under the punishment; the poor woman
use to fondle and kiss he secretly, and give he money to soothe he
when he come out.
there be a picture of the family over the mantelpiece, remove thither
from the front room after Mrs. Osborne's death--George be on a pony,
the eld sister hold he up a bunch of flower; the young lead by
her mother's hand; all with red cheek and large red mouth, simper
on each other in the approve family-portrait manner. the mother lie
underground now, long since forget--the sister and brother have a
hundred different interest of their own, and, familiar still, be
utterly estranged from each other. some few score of year afterwards,
when all the party represent be grow old, what bitter satire
there be in those flaunting childish family-portrait, with their farce
of sentiment and smile lie, and innocence so self-conscious and
self-satisfied. Osborne's own state portrait, with that of his great
silver inkstand and arm-chair, have take the place of honour in the
dining-room, vacate by the family-piece.
to this study old Osborne retire then, greatly to the relief of the
small party whom he leave. when the servant have withdraw, they begin
to talk for a while volubly but very low; then they go upstairs
quietly, Mr. Bullock accompany they stealthily on his creaking
shoe. he have no heart to sit alone drink wine, and so close to the
terrible old gentleman in the study hard at hand.
an hour at least after dark, the butler, not have receive any
summon, venture to tap at his door and take he in wax candle and
tea. the master of the house sate in his chair, pretend to read the
paper, and when the servant, place the light and refreshment on the
table by he, retire, Mr. Osborne get up and lock the door after
he. this time there be no mistaking the matter; all the household
know that some great catastrophe be go to happen which be likely
direly to affect Master George.
in the large shin mahogany escritoire Mr. Osborne have a drawer
especially devoted to his son's affair and paper. here he keep all
the document relate to he ever since he have be a boy: here be
his prize copy-book and drawing-book, all bear George's hand, and
that of the master: here be his first letter in large round-hand
send his love to papa and mamma, and convey his petition for a
cake. his dear godpapa Sedley be more than once mention in they.
curse quiver on old Osborne's livid lip, and horrid hatred and
disappointment writhe in his heart, as look through some of these
paper he come on that name. they be all mark and docket, and
tie with red tape. it was--"From Georgy, request 5s., April 23,
18--; answer, April 25"--or "georgy about a pony, October 13"--and so
forth. in another packet be "Dr. S.'s accounts"--"G.'s tailor's bill
and outfit, draft on I by G. Osborne, jun.," &c.--his letter from
the West Indies--his agent's letter, and the newspaper contain his
commission: here be a whip he have when a boy, and in a paper a locket
contain his hair, which his mother use to wear.
turn one over after another, and muse over these memorial, the
unhappy man pass many hour. his dear vanity, ambitious hope,
have all be here. what pride he have in his boy! he be the
handsome child ever see. everybody say he be like a nobleman's
son. a royal princess have remark he, and kiss he, and ask his
name in Kew Gardens. what City man could show such another? could a
prince have be well care for? anything that money could buy have
be his son's. he use to go down on speech-day with four horse and
new livery, and scatter new shilling among the boy at the school
where George be: when he go with George to the depot of his
regiment, before the boy embark for Canada, he give the officer such
a dinner as the Duke of York might have sit down to. have he ever
refuse a bill when George draw one? there they be--pay without a
word. many a general in the army couldnot ride the horse he have! he
have the child before his eye, on a hundred different day when he
remember George after dinner, when he use to come in as bold as a
lord and drink off his glass by his father's side, at the head of the
table--on the pony at Brighton, when he clear the hedge and keep up
with the huntsman--on the day when he be present to the Prince
Regent at the levee, when all Saint James's couldnot produce a fine
young fellow. and this, this be the end of all!--to marry a bankrupt
and fly in the face of duty and fortune! what humiliation and fury:
what pang of sicken rage, balked ambition and love; what wound of
outraged vanity, tenderness even, have this old worldling now to suffer
under!
have examine these paper, and ponder over this one and the other,
in that bitterest of all helpless woe, with which miserable man think
of happy past time--George's father take the whole of the document
out of the drawer in which he have keep they so long, and lock they
into a writing-box, which he tie, and seal with his seal. then he
open the book-case, and take down the great red Bible we have speak
of a pompous book, seldom look at, and shin all over with gold.
there be a frontispiece to the volume, represent Abraham
sacrifice Isaac. here, accord to custom, Osborne have record on
the fly-leaf, and in his large clerk-like hand, the date of his
marriage and his wife's death, and the birth and christian name of
his child. Jane come first, then George Sedley Osborne, then Maria
Frances, and the day of the christening of each. take a pen, he
carefully obliterate George's name from the page; and when the leaf
be quite dry, restore the volume to the place from which he have move
it. then he take a document out of another drawer, where his own
private paper be keep; and have read it, crumple it up and
light it at one of the candle, and see it burn entirely away in the
grate. it be his will; which be burn, he sate down and write off
a letter, and ring for his servant, whom he charge to deliver it in
the morning. it be morning already: as he go up to bed, the whole
house be alight with the sunshine; and the bird be sing among
the fresh green leaf in Russell Square.
anxious to keep all Mr. Osborne's family and dependant in good humour,
and to make as many friend as possible for George in his hour of
adversity, William Dobbin, who know the effect which good dinner and
good wine have upon the soul of man, write off immediately on his
return to his inn the most hospitable of invitation to Thomas Chopper,
Esquire, beg that gentleman to dine with he at the slaughter'
next day. the note reach Mr. Chopper before he leave the City, and
the instant reply be, that "Mr. Chopper present his respectful
compliment, and will have the honour and pleasure of wait on
Captain D." the invitation and the rough draft of the answer be
show to Mrs. Chopper and her daughter on his return to Somers' Town
that evening, and they talk about military gent and West end man
with great exultation as the family sate and partook of tea. when the
girl have go to rest, Mr. and Mrs. C. discourse upon the strange
event which be occur in the governor's family. never have the
clerk see his principal so move. when he go in to Mr. Osborne,
after Captain Dobbin's departure, Mr. Chopper find his chief black in
the face, and all but in a fit: some dreadful quarrel, he be certain,
have occur between Mr. O. and the young Captain. Chopper have be
instruct to make out an account of all sum pay to Captain Osborne
within the last three year. "and a precious lot of money he have have
too," the chief clerk say, and respect his old and young master the
more, for the liberal way in which the guineas have be fling about.
the dispute be something about Miss Sedley. Mrs. Chopper vow and
declare she pity that poor young lady to lose such a handsome young
fellow as the Capting. as the daughter of an unlucky speculator, who
have pay a very shabby dividend, Mr. Chopper have no great regard for
Miss Sedley. he respect the house of Osborne before all other in
the City of London: and his hope and wish be that Captain George
should marry a nobleman's daughter. the clerk sleep a great deal
sounder than his principal that night; and, cuddle his child after
breakfast (of which he partook with a very hearty appetite, though his
modest cup of life be only sweeten with brown sugar), he set off in
his good Sunday suit and frille shirt for business, promise his
admire wife not to punish Captain D.'s port too severely that evening.
Mr. Osborne's countenance, when he arrive in the City at his usual
time, strike those dependant who be accustom, for good reason, to
watch its expression, as peculiarly ghastly and worn. at twelve
o'clock Mr. Higgs (of the firm of Higgs & Blatherwick, solicitor,
Bedford row) call by appointment, and be usher into the governor's
private room, and closet there for more than an hour. at about one
Mr. Chopper receive a note bring by Captain Dobbin's man, and
contain an inclosure for Mr. Osborne, which the clerk go in and
deliver. a short time afterwards Mr. Chopper and Mr. Birch, the next
clerk, be summon, and request to witness a paper. "Ihave be
make a new will," Mr. Osborne say, to which these gentleman append
their name accordingly. no conversation pass. Mr. Higgs look
exceedingly grave as he come into the outer room, and very hard in Mr.
Chopper's face; but there be not any explanation. it be remark
that Mr. Osborne be particularly quiet and gentle all day, to the
surprise of those who have augur ill from his darkle demeanour. he
call no man name that day, and be not hear to swear once. he leave
business early; and before go away, summon his chief clerk once
more, and have give he general instruction, ask he, after some
seem hesitation and reluctance to speak, if he know whether Captain
Dobbin be in town?
Chopper say he believe he be. indeed both of they know the fact
perfectly.
Osborne take a letter direct to that officer, and give it to the
clerk, request the latter to deliver it into Dobbin's own hand
immediately.
"and now, Chopper," say he, take his hat, and with a strange look,
"my mind will be easy." exactly as the clock strike two (there be no
doubt an appointment between the pair) Mr. Frederick Bullock call,
and he and Mr. Osborne walk away together.
the Colonel of the --th regiment, in which Messieurs Dobbin and Osborne
have company, be an old general who have make his first campaign under
Wolfe at Quebec, and be long since quite too old and feeble for
command; but he take some interest in the regiment of which he be the
nominal head, and make certain of his young officer welcome at his
table, a kind of hospitality which I believe be not now common amongst
his brother. Captain Dobbin be an especial favourite of this old
General. Dobbin be verse in the literature of his profession, and
could talk about the great Frederick, and the Empress Queen, and their
war, almost as well as the General himself, who be indifferent to the
triumph of the present day, and whose heart be with the tactician of
fifty year back. this officer send a summon to Dobbin to come and
breakfast with he, on the morning when Mr. Osborne alter his will
and Mr. Chopper put on his good shirt frill, and then inform his
young favourite, a couple of day in advance, of that which they be
all expect--a marching order to go to Belgium. the order for the
regiment to hold itself in readiness would leave the Horse Guards in a
day or two; and as transport be in plenty, they would get their
route before the week be over. recruit have come in during the stay
of the regiment at Chatham; and the old General hop that the regiment
which have help to beat Montcalm in Canada, and to rout Mr. Washington
on Long Island, would prove itself worthy of its historical reputation
on the oft-trodden battle-ground of the Low Countries. "and so, my
good friend, if you have any affaire la," say the old General, take a
pinch of snuff with his tremble white old hand, and then point to
the spot of his robe de chambre under which his heart be still feebly
beat, "if you have any Phillis to console, or to bid farewell to
papa and mamma, or any will to make, I recommend you to set about your
business without delay." with which the General give his young friend a
finger to shake, and a good-natured nod of his powdered and pigtailed
head; and the door be close upon Dobbin, sate down to pen a poulet
(he be exceedingly vain of his French) to Mademoiselle Amenaide of his
Majesty's Theatre.
this news make Dobbin grave, and he think of our friend at Brighton,
and then he be ashamed of himself that Amelia be always the first
thing in his thought (always before anybody--before father and mother,
sister and duty--always at wake and sleep indeed, and all day
long); and return to his hotel, he send off a brief note to Mr.
Osborne acquaint he with the information which he have receive, and
which might tend far, he hop, to bring about a reconciliation
with George.
this note, despatch by the same messenger who have carry the
invitation to Chopper on the previous day, alarm the worthy clerk not
a little. it be inclose to he, and as he open the letter he
tremble lest the dinner should be put off on which he be calculate.
his mind be inexpressibly relieve when he find that the envelope be
only a reminder for himself. ("I shall expect you at half-past five,"
Captain Dobbin write.) he be very much interested about his employer's
family; but, que voulez-vous? a grand dinner be of more concern to he
than the affair of any other mortal.
Dobbin be quite justified in repeat the General's information to
any officer of the regiment whom he should see in the course of his
peregrination; accordingly he impart it to Ensign Stubble, whom he
meet at the agent's, and who--such be his military ardour--go off
instantly to purchase a new sword at the accoutrement-maker's. here
this young fellow, who, though only seventeen year of age, and about
sixty-five inch high, with a constitution naturally rickety and much
impair by premature brandy and water, have an undoubted courage and a
lion's heart, poise, try, bent, and balance a weapon such as he
think would do execution amongst Frenchmen. shout "ha, ha!" and
stamp his little foot with tremendous energy, he deliver the point
twice or thrice at Captain Dobbin, who parry the thrust laughingly
with his bamboo walking-stick.
Mr. Stubble, as may be suppose from his size and slenderness, be of
the Light Bobs. Ensign Spooney, on the contrary, be a tall youth, and
belong to (Captain Dobbin's) the Grenadier Company, and he try on a
new bearskin cap, under which he look savage beyond his year. then
these two lad go off to the slaughter', and have order a famous
dinner, sate down and write off letter to the kind anxious parent at
home--letter full of love and heartiness, and pluck and bad spelling.
ah! there be many anxious heart beat through England at that
time; and mother' prayer and tear flow in many homestead.
see young Stubble engage in composition at one of the coffee-room
table at the slaughter', and the tear trickle down his nose on to
the paper (for the youngster be think of his mamma, and that he
might never see she again), Dobbin, who be go to write off a letter
to George Osborne, relent, and lock up his desk. "why should I?"
say he. "let she have this night happy. Iwill go and see my parent
early in the morning, and go down to Brighton myself to-morrow."
so he go up and lay his big hand on young Stubble's shoulder, and
back up that young champion, and tell he if he would leave off
brandy and water he would be a good soldier, as he always be a
gentlemanly good-hearted fellow. Young Stubble's eye brighten up at
this, for Dobbin be greatly respect in the regiment, as the good
officer and the clever man in it.
"thank you, Dobbin," he say, rub his eye with his knuckle, "I
be just--just tell she I would. and, o Sir, shebe so dam kind to
I." the water pump be at work again, and I be not sure that the
soft-hearted Captain's eye do not also twinkle.
the two ensign, the Captain, and Mr. Chopper, din together in the
same box. Chopper bring the letter from Mr. Osborne, in which the
latter briefly present his compliment to Captain Dobbin, and
request he to forward the inclose to Captain George Osborne.
Chopper know nothing far; he describe Mr. Osborne's appearance, it
be true, and his interview with his lawyer, wonder how the governor
have swear at nobody, and--especially as the wine circle
round--abound in speculation and conjecture. but these grow more
vague with every glass, and at length become perfectly unintelligible.
at a late hour Captain Dobbin put his guest into a hackney coach, in a
hiccupping state, and swear that he would be the kick--the
kick--Captain's friend for ever and ever.
when Captain Dobbin take leave of Miss Osborne we have say that he
ask leave to come and pay she another visit, and the spinster
expect he for some hour the next day, when, perhaps, have he come,
and have he ask she that question which she be prepared to answer,
she would have declare herself as her brother's friend, and a
reconciliation might have be effect between George and his angry
father. but though she wait at home the Captain never come. he have
his own affair to pursue; his own parent to visit and console; and at
an early hour of the day to take his place on the Lightning coach, and
go down to his friend at Brighton. in the course of the day Miss
Osborne hear her father give order that that meddle scoundrel,
Captain Dobbin, should never be admit within his door again, and
any hope in which she may have indulge privately be thus abruptly
bring to an end. Mr. Frederick Bullock come, and be particularly
affectionate to Maria, and attentive to the break-spirit old
gentleman. for though he say his mind would be easy, the mean which
he have take to secure quiet do not seem to have succeed as yet, and
the event of the past two day have visibly shatter he.
CHAPTER XXV
in which all the Principal Personages think fit to leave Brighton
conduct to the lady, at the Ship Inn, Dobbin assume a jovial and
rattle manner, which prove that this young officer be become a
more consummate hypocrite every day of his life. he be try to hide
his own private feeling, first upon see Mrs. George Osborne in her
new condition, and secondly to mask the apprehension he entertain as
to the effect which the dismal news bring down by he would certainly
have upon she.
"it be my opinion, George," he say, "that the french Emperor will be
upon we, horse and foot, before three week be over, and will give the
Duke such a dance as shall make the Peninsula appear mere child's play.
but you need not say that to Mrs. Osborne, you know. there maynot be
any fighting on our side after all, and our business in Belgium may
turn out to be a mere military occupation. many person think so; and
Brussels be full of fine people and lady of fashion." so it be
agree to represent the duty of the british army in Belgium in this
harmless light to Amelia.
this plot be arrange, the hypocritical Dobbin salute Mrs. George
Osborne quite gaily, try to pay she one or two compliment relative
to her new position as a bride (which compliment, it must be
confess, be exceedingly clumsy and hung fire woefully), and then
fall to talk about Brighton, and the sea-air, and the gaiety of
the place, and the beauty of the road and the merit of the Lightning
coach and horse--all in a manner quite incomprehensible to Amelia, and
very amusing to Rebecca, who be watch the Captain, as indeed she
watch every one near whom she come.
Little Amelia, it must be own, have rather a mean opinion of her
husband's friend, Captain Dobbin. he lisp--he be very plain and
homely-look: and exceedingly awkward and ungainly. she like he
for his attachment to her husband (to be sure there be very little
merit in that), and she think George be most generous and kind in
extend his friendship to his brother officer. George have mimic
Dobbin's lisp and queer manner many time to she, though to do he
justice, he always speak most highly of his friend's good quality. in
her little day of triumph, and not know he intimately as yet, she
make light of honest William--and he know her opinion of he quite
well, and acquiesce in they very humbly. a time come when she know
he well, and change her notion regard he; but that be distant
as yet.
as for Rebecca, Captain Dobbin have not be two hour in the lady'
company before she understand his secret perfectly. she do not like
he, and fear he privately; nor be he very much prepossess in her
favour. he be so honest, that her art and cajolery do not affect
he, and he shrink from she with instinctive repulsion. and, as she be
by no mean so far superior to her sex as to be above jealousy, she
dislike he the more for his adoration of Amelia. nevertheless, she
be very respectful and cordial in her manner towards he. a friend to
the Osbornes! a friend to her dear benefactor! she vow she
should always love he sincerely: she remember he quite well on the
Vauxhall night, as she tell Amelia archly, and she make a little fun of
he when the two lady go to dress for dinner. Rawdon Crawley pay
scarcely any attention to Dobbin, look upon he as a good-natured
nincompoop and under-breed City man. Jos patronise he with much
dignity.
when George and Dobbin be alone in the latter's room, to which George
have follow he, Dobbin take from his desk the letter which he have
be charge by Mr. Osborne to deliver to his son. "itbe not in my
father's handwriting," say George, look rather alarmed; nor be it:
the letter be from Mr. Osborne's lawyer, and to the follow effect:
"Bedford row, May 7, 1815.
"SIR,
"I be commission by Mr. Osborne to inform you, that he abide by the
determination which he before express to you, and that in consequence
of the marriage which you have be pleased to contract, he cease to
consider you henceforth as a member of his family. this determination
be final and irrevocable.
"although the monie expend upon you in your minority, and the bill
which you have draw upon he so unsparingly of late year, far exceed
in amount the sum to which you be entitle in your own right (be
the third part of the fortune of your mother, the late Mrs. Osborne and
which revert to you at her decease, and to Miss Jane Osborne and Miss
Maria Frances Osborne); yet I be instruct by Mr. Osborne to say, that
he waive all claim upon your estate, and that the sum of 2,000 pound,
4 per cent. annuity, at the value of the day (be your one-third
share of the sum of 6,000 pound), shall be pay over to yourself or
your agent upon your receipt for the same, by
"your obedient Servt.,
"S. higgs.
"p.s.--mr. Osborne desire I to say, once for all, that he decline to
receive any message, letter, or communication from you on this or
any other subject.
"a pretty way you have manage the affair," say George, look
savagely at William Dobbin. "look there, Dobbin," and he fling over to
the latter his parent's letter. "a beggar, by Jove, and all in
consequence of my d--d sentimentality. why couldnot we have wait? a
ball might have do for I in the course of the war, and may still,
and how will Emmy be better by be leave a beggar's widow? it be
all your doing. you be never easy until you have get I married and
ruin. what the deuce be I to do with two thousand pound? such a
sum willnot last two year. Ihave lose a hundred and forty to Crawley at
card and billiard since Ihave be down here. a pretty manager of a
man's matter you be, forsooth."
"therebe no deny that the position be a hard one," Dobbin reply,
after read over the letter with a blank countenance; "and as you
say, it be partly of my making. there be some man who wouldnot mind
change with you," he add, with a bitter smile. "how many captain
in the regiment have two thousand pound to the fore, think you? you
must live on your pay till your father relent, and if you die, you
leave your wife a hundred a year."
"do you suppose a man of my habit call live on his pay and a hundred a
year?" George cry out in great anger. "you must be a fool to talk
so, Dobbin. how the deuce be I to keep up my position in the world
upon such a pitiful pittance? I cannot change my habit. I must have
my comfort. I benot bring up on porridge, like MacWhirter, or on
potato, like old o'dowd. do you expect my wife to take in soldier'
washing, or ride after the regiment in a baggage waggon?"
"well, well," say Dobbin, still good-naturedly, "wewill get she a
well conveyance. but try and remember that you be only a dethrone
prince now, George, my boy; and be quiet whilst the tempest last. it
willnot be for long. let your name be mention in the Gazette, and Iwill
engage the old father relent towards you:"
"mention in the Gazette!" George answer. "and in what part of it?
among the kill and wound return, and at the top of the list, very
likely."
"Psha! it will be time enough to cry out when we be hurt," Dobbin
say. "and if anything happen, you know, George, I have get a little,
and I be not a marry man, and I shall not forget my godson in my
will," he add, with a smile. whereupon the dispute end--as many
score of such conversation between Osborne and his friend have
conclude previously--by the former declare there be no possibility
of be angry with Dobbin long, and forgive he very generously
after abuse he without cause.
"I say, Becky," cry Rawdon Crawley out of his dressing-room, to his
lady, who be attire herself for dinner in her own chamber.
"what?" say Becky's shrill voice. she be look over her shoulder
in the glass. she have put on the neat and fresh white frock
imaginable, and with bare shoulder and a little necklace, and a light
blue sash, she look the image of youthful innocence and girlish
happiness.
"I say, whatwill Mrs. O. do, when O. go out with the regiment?"
Crawley say come into the room, perform a duet on his head with
two huge hair-brush, and look out from under his hair with
admiration on his pretty little wife.
"I suppose shewill cry her eye out," Becky answer. "she have be
whimpering half a dozen time, at the very notion of it, already to I."
"you donot care, I suppose?" Rawdon say, half angry at his wife's want
of feel.
"you wretch! donot you know that I intend to go with you," Becky
reply. "besides, yoube different. you go as General Tufto's
aide-de-camp. we donot belong to the line," Mrs. Crawley say,
throw up her head with an air that so enchant her husband that he
stoop down and kiss it.
"Rawdon dear--don't you think--you'd well get that--money from Cupid,
before he go?" Becky continue, fix on a killing bow. she call
George Osborne, Cupid. she have flatter he about his good look a
score of time already. she watch over he kindly at ecarte of a
night when he would drop in to Rawdon's quarter for a half-hour before
bed-time.
she have often call he a horrid dissipate wretch, and threaten to
tell Emmy of his wicked way and naughty extravagant habit. she
bring his cigar and light it for he; she know the effect of that
manoeuvre, have practise it in former day upon Rawdon Crawley. he
think her gay, brisk, arch, distinguee, delightful. in their little
drive and dinner, Becky, of course, quite outshone poor Emmy, who
remain very mute and timid while Mrs. Crawley and her husband rattle
away together, and Captain Crawley (and Jos after he join the young
married people) gobble in silence.
Emmy's mind somehow misgave she about her friend. Rebecca's wit,
spirit, and accomplishment trouble she with a rueful disquiet. they
be only a week marry, and here be George already suffer ennui,
and eager for other' society! she tremble for the future. how shall
I be a companion for he, she think--so clever and so brilliant, and
I such a humble foolish creature? how noble it be of he to marry
I--to give up everything and stoop down to I! I ought to have
refuse he, only I have not the heart. I ought to have stop at home
and take care of poor papa. and her neglect of her parent (and
indeed there be some foundation for this charge which the poor child's
uneasy conscience bring against she) be now remember for the first
time, and cause she to blush with humiliation. oh! think she, I
have be very wicked and selfish--selfish in forget they in their
sorrow--selfish in force George to marry I. I know Ibe not worthy
of he--I know he would have be happy without I--and yet--I try, I
try to give he up.
it be hard when, before seven day of marriage be over, such thought
and confession as these force themselves on a little bride's mind.
but so it be, and the night before Dobbin come to join these young
people--on a fine brilliant moonlight night of May--so warm and balmy
that the window be fling open to the balcony, from which George and
Mrs. Crawley be gaze upon the calm ocean spread shin before
they, while Rawdon and Jos be engage at backgammon within--Amelia
couch in a great chair quite neglect, and watch both these
party, feel a despair and remorse such as be bitter companion for
that tender lonely soul. Scarce a week be past, and it be come to
this! the future, have she regard it, offer a dismal prospect; but
Emmy be too shy, so to speak, to look to that, and embark alone on
that wide sea, and unfit to navigate it without a guide and protector.
I know Miss Smith have a mean opinion of she. but how many, my dear
Madam, be endow with your prodigious strength of mind?
"Gad, what a fine night, and how bright the moon be!" George say, with
a puff of his cigar, which go soar up skyward.
"how delicious they smell in the open air! I adore they. whowould think
the moon be two hundred and thirty-six thousand eight hundred and
forty-seven mile off?" Becky add, gaze at that orb with a smile.
"benot it clever of I to remember that? Pooh! we learn it all at
Miss Pinkerton's! how calm the sea be, and how clear everything. I
declare I can almost see the coast of France!" and her bright green
eye stream out, and shoot into the night as if they could see through
it.
"do you know what I intend to do one morning?" she say; "I find I can
swim beautifully, and some day, when my Aunt Crawley's companion--old
Briggs, you know--you remember she--that hook-nosed woman, with the
long wisps of hair--when Briggs go out to bathe, I intend to dive
under her awning, and insist on a reconciliation in the water. benot
that a stratagem?"
George burst out laugh at the idea of this aquatic meeting. "whatbe
the row there, you two?" Rawdon shout out, rattle the box. Amelia
be make a fool of herself in an absurd hysterical manner, and
retire to her own room to whimper in private.
our history be destine in this chapter to go backwards and forwards in
a very irresolute manner seemingly, and have conduct our story to
to-morrow presently, we shall immediately again have occasion to step
back to yesterday, so that the whole of the tale may get a hearing. as
you behold at her Majesty's drawing-room, the ambassador' and high
dignitary' carriage whisk off from a private door, while Captain
Jones's lady be wait for their fly: as you see in the Secretary
of the Treasury's antechamber, a half-dozen of petitioner wait
patiently for their audience, and call out one by one, when suddenly
an irish member or some eminent personage enter the apartment, and
instantly walk into Mr. Under-Secretary over the head of all the
people present: so in the conduct of a tale, the romancer be oblige to
exercise this most partial sort of justice. although all the little
incident must be hear, yet they must be put off when the great event
make their appearance; and surely such a circumstance as that which
bring Dobbin to Brighton, viz., the ordering out of the Guards and
the line to Belgium, and the mustering of the ally army in that
country under the command of his grace the Duke of Wellington--such a
dignified circumstance as that, I say, be entitle to the pas over all
minor occurrence whereof this history be compose mainly, and hence a
little trifling disarrangement and disorder be excusable and become.
we have only now advanced in time so far beyond chapter XXII as to have
get our various character up into their dressing-room before the
dinner, which take place as usual on the day of Dobbin's arrival.
George be too humane or too much occupy with the tie of his
neckcloth to convey at once all the news to Amelia which his comrade
have bring with he from London. he come into her room, however,
hold the attorney's letter in his hand, and with so solemn and
important an air that his wife, always ingeniously on the watch for
calamity, think the bad be about to befall, and run up to her
husband, besought she dearest George to tell she everything--he be
order abroad; there would be a battle next week--she know there would.
dearest George parry the question about foreign service, and with a
melancholy shake of the head say, "no, Emmy; it benot that: itbe not
myself I care about: itbe you. I have have bad news from my father. he
refuse any communication with I; he have fling we off; and leave we
to poverty. I can rough it well enough; but you, my dear, how will you
bear it? read here." and he hand she over the letter.
Amelia, with a look of tender alarm in her eye, listen to her noble
hero as he utter the above generous sentiment, and sit down on
the bed, read the letter which George give she with such a pompous
martyr-like air. her face clear up as she read the document,
however. the idea of share poverty and privation in company with the
beloved object be, as we have before say, far from be disagreeable
to a warm-hearted woman. the notion be actually pleasant to little
Amelia. then, as usual, she be ashamed of herself for feel happy
at such an indecorous moment, and check her pleasure, say
demurely, "o, George, how your poor heart must bleed at the idea of
be separate from your papa!"
"it do," say George, with an agonise countenance.
"but he cannot be angry with you long," she continue. "nobody could,
Ibe sure. he must forgive you, my dearest, kind husband. o, I
shall never forgive myself if he do not."
"what vex I, my poor Emmy, be not my misfortune, but your," George
say. "I donot care for a little poverty; and I think, without vanity,
Ihave talent enough to make my own way."
"that you have," interpose his wife, who think that war should
cease, and her husband should be make a general instantly.
"yes, I shall make my way as well as another," Osborne go on; "but
you, my dear girl, how can I bear your be deprive of the comfort
and station in society which my wife have a right to expect? my dearest
girl in barrack; the wife of a soldier in a march regiment; subject
to all sort of annoyance and privation! it make I miserable."
Emmy, quite at ease, as this be her husband's only cause of disquiet,
take his hand, and with a radiant face and smile begin to warble that
stanza from the favourite song of "Wapping Old Stairs," in which the
heroine, after rebuke her Tom for inattention, promise "his trouser
to mend, and his grog too to make," if he will be constant and kind,
and not forsake she. "besides," she say, after a pause, during which
she look as pretty and happy as any young woman need, "benot two
thousand pound an immense deal of money, George?"
George laugh at her naivete; and finally they go down to dinner,
Amelia cling to George's arm, still warble the tune of "Wapping
Old Stairs," and more pleased and light of mind than she have be for
some day past.
thus the repast, which at length come off, instead of be dismal, be
an exceedingly brisk and merry one. the excitement of the campaign
counteract in George's mind the depression occasion by the
disinheriting letter. Dobbin still keep up his character of rattle. he
amuse the company with account of the army in Belgium; where nothing
but fete and gaiety and fashion be go on. then, have a
particular end in view, this dexterous captain proceed to describe
Mrs. Major O'Dowd pack her own and her Major's wardrobe, and how his
good epaulet have be stow into a tea canister, whilst her own
famous yellow turban, with the bird of paradise wrap in brown paper,
be lock up in the Major's tin cocked-hat case, and wonder what
effect it would have at the french king's court at Ghent, or the great
military ball at Brussels.
"Ghent! Brussels!" cry out Amelia with a sudden shock and start. "be
the regiment order away, George--be it order away?" a look of
terror come over the sweet smile face, and she cling to George as by
an instinct.
"donot be afraid, dear," he say good-naturedly; "it be but a twelve
hour' passage. it willnot hurt you. you shall go, too, Emmy."
"I intend to go," say Becky. "Ibe on the staff. General Tufto be a
great flirt of mine. benot he, Rawdon?" Rawdon laugh out with his
usual roar. William Dobbin flush up quite red. "she cannot go," he
say; "think of the--of the danger," he be go to add; but have not
all his conversation during dinner-time tend to prove there be none?
he become very confused and silent.
"I must and will go," Amelia cry with the great spirit; and
George, applaud her resolution, pat she under the chin, and ask
all the person present if they ever see such a termagant of a wife,
and agree that the lady should bear he company. "wewill have Mrs.
O'Dowd to chaperon you," he say. what care she so long as she
husband be near she? thus somehow the bitterness of a parting be
juggle away. though war and danger be in store, war and danger
might not befall for month to come. there be a respite at any rate,
which make the timid little Amelia almost as happy as a full reprieve
would have do, and which even Dobbin own in his heart be very
welcome. for, to be permit to see she be now the great
privilege and hope of his life, and he think with himself secretly
how he would watch and protect she. I wouldnot have let she go if I
have be married to she, he think. but George be the master, and
his friend do not think fit to remonstrate.
put her arm round her friend's waist, Rebecca at length carry
Amelia off from the dinner-table where so much business of importance
have be discuss, and leave the gentleman in a highly exhilarated
state, drink and talk very gaily.
in the course of the evening Rawdon get a little family-note from his
wife, which, although he crumple it up and burn it instantly in the
candle, we have the good luck to read over Rebecca's shoulder. "great
news," she write. "Mrs. Bute be go. get the money from Cupid
tonight, as hewill be off to-morrow most likely. mind this.--R." so
when the little company be about adjourn to coffee in the woman's
apartment, Rawdon touch Osborne on the elbow, and say gracefully, "I
say, Osborne, my boy, if quite convenient, Iwill trouble you for that
'ere small trifle." it be not quite convenient, but nevertheless
George give he a considerable present instalment in bank-note from
his pocket-book, and a bill on his agent at a week's date, for the
remain sum.
this matter arrange, George, and Jos, and Dobbin, hold a council of
war over their cigar, and agree that a general move should be make
for London in Jos's open carriage the next day. Jos, I think, would
have prefer stay until Rawdon Crawley quit Brighton, but
Dobbin and George overrule he, and he agree to carry the party to
town, and order four horse, as become his dignity. with these they
set off in state, after breakfast, the next day. Amelia have rise very
early in the morning, and pack her little trunk with the great
alacrity, while Osborne lie in bed deplore that she have not a maid to
help she. she be only too glad, however, to perform this office for
herself. a dim uneasy sentiment about Rebecca fill her mind already;
and although they kiss each other most tenderly at parting, yet we
know what jealousy be; and Mrs. Amelia possess that among other
virtue of her sex.
besides these character who be come and go away, we must
remember that there be some other old friend of our at Brighton;
Miss Crawley, namely, and the suite in attendance upon she. now,
although Rebecca and her husband be but at a few stone' throw of the
lodging which the invalid Miss Crawley occupy, the old lady's door
remain as pitilessly close to they as it have be heretofore in
London. as long as she remain by the side of her sister-in-law,
Mrs. Bute Crawley take care that her beloved Matilda should not be
agitate by a meeting with her nephew. when the spinster take she
drive, the faithful Mrs. Bute sate beside she in the carriage. when
Miss Crawley take the air in a chair, Mrs. Bute march on one side of
the vehicle, whilst honest Briggs occupy the other wing. and if they
meet Rawdon and his wife by chance--although the former constantly and
obsequiously take off his hat, the Miss-Crawley party pass he by
with such a frigid and kill indifference, that Rawdon begin to
despair.
"we might as well be in London as here," Captain Rawdon often say,
with a downcast air.
"a comfortable inn in Brighton be well than a spunge-house in
Chancery Lane," his wife answer, who be of a more cheerful
temperament. "think of those two aide-de-camp of Mr. Moses, the
sheriff's-officer, who watch our lodging for a week. our friend
here be very stupid, but Mr. Jos and Captain Cupid be well
companion than Mr. Moses's man, Rawdon, my love."
"I wonder the writ havenot follow I down here," Rawdon continue,
still despond.
"when they do, wewill find mean to give they the slip," say dauntless
little Becky, and far point out to her husband the great comfort
and advantage of meet Jos and Osborne, whose acquaintance have
bring to Rawdon Crawley a most timely little supply of ready money.
"it will hardly be enough to pay the inn bill," grumble the Guardsman.
"why need we pay it?" say the lady, who have an answer for everything.
through Rawdon's valet, who still keep up a trifling acquaintance with
the male inhabitant of Miss Crawley's servant' hall, and be
instruct to treat the coachman to drink whenever they meet, old Miss
Crawley's movement be pretty well know by our young couple; and
Rebecca luckily bethink herself of be unwell, and of call in
the same apothecary who be in attendance upon the spinster, so that
their information be on the whole tolerably complete. nor be Miss
Briggs, although force to adopt a hostile attitude, secretly inimical
to Rawdon and his wife. she be naturally of a kindly and forgiving
disposition. now that the cause of jealousy be remove, her dislike
for rebecca disappear also, and she remember the latter's
invariable good word and good humour. and, indeed, she and Mrs.
Firkin, the lady's-maid, and the whole of Miss Crawley's household,
groan under the tyranny of the triumphant Mrs. Bute.
as often will be the case, that good but imperious woman push her
advantage too far, and her success quite unmercifully. she have in
the course of a few week bring the invalid to such a state of
helpless docility, that the poor soul yield herself entirely to her
sister's order, and do not even dare to complain of her slavery to
Briggs or Firkin. Mrs. Bute measure out the glass of wine which
Miss Crawley be daily allow to take, with irresistible accuracy,
greatly to the annoyance of Firkin and the butler, who find themselves
deprive of control over even the sherry-bottle. she apportion the
sweetbread, jelly, chicken; their quantity and order. night and
noon and morning she bring the abominable drink ordain by the
Doctor, and make her patient swallow they with so affect an
obedience that Firkin say "my poor Missus du take her physic like a
lamb." she prescribe the drive in the carriage or the ride in the
chair, and, in a word, grind down the old lady in her convalescence in
such a way as only belong to your proper-manage, motherly moral
woman. if ever the patient faintly resist, and plead for a little
bit more dinner or a little drop less medicine, the nurse threaten
she with instantaneous death, when Miss Crawley instantly give in.
"shebe no spirit leave in she," Firkin remark to Briggs; "she benot
ave call I a fool these three week." finally, Mrs. Bute have make up
her mind to dismiss the aforesaid honest lady's-maid, Mr. Bowls the
large confidential man, and Briggs herself, and to send for her
daughter from the Rectory, previous to remove the dear invalid
bodily to Queen's Crawley, when an odious accident happen which
call she away from duty so pleasing. the Reverend Bute Crawley,
her husband, rid home one night, fall with his horse and break his
collar-bone. fever and inflammatory symptom set in, and Mrs. Bute be
force to leave Sussex for Hampshire. as soon as ever Bute be
restore, she promise to return to her dear friend, and depart,
leave the strong injunction with the household regard their
behaviour to their mistress; and as soon as she get into the
Southampton coach, there be such a jubilee and sense of relief in all
Miss Crawley's house, as the company of person assemble there have not
experience for many a week before. that very day Miss Crawley leave
off her afternoon dose of medicine: that afternoon Bowls open an
independent bottle of sherry for himself and Mrs. Firkin: that night
Miss Crawley and Miss Briggs indulge in a game of piquet instead of
one of Porteus's sermon. it be as in the old nursery-story, when
the stick forget to beat the dog, and the whole course of event
undergo a peaceful and happy revolution.
at a very early hour in the morning, twice or thrice a week, Miss
Briggs use to betake herself to a bathing-machine, and disport in the
water in a flannel gown and an oilskin cap. rebecca, as we have see,
be aware of this circumstance, and though she do not attempt to storm
Briggs as she have threaten, and actually dive into that lady's
presence and surprise she under the sacredness of the awning, Mrs.
Rawdon determine to attack Briggs as she come away from her bath,
refresh and invigorate by her dip, and likely to be in good humour.
so get up very early the next morning, Becky bring the telescope
in their sitting-room, which face the sea, to bear upon the
bathing-machine on the beach; see Briggs arrive, enter her box; and
put out to sea; and be on the shore just as the nymph of whom she come
in quest step out of the little caravan on to the shingle. it be
a pretty picture: the beach; the bathing-woman's face; the long line
of rock and building be blush and bright in the sunshine.
Rebecca wear a kind, tender smile on her face, and be hold out her
pretty white hand as Briggs emerge from the box. what could Briggs do
but accept the salutation?
"Miss Sh--Mrs. Crawley," she say.
Mrs. Crawley seize her hand, press it to her heart, and with a
sudden impulse, fling her arm round Briggs, kiss she
affectionately. "dear, dear friend!" she say, with a touch of such
natural feeling, that Miss Briggs of course at once begin to melt, and
even the bathing-woman be mollify.
Rebecca find no difficulty in engage Briggs in a long, intimate, and
delightful conversation. everything that have pass since the morning
of Becky's sudden departure from Miss Crawley's house in Park Lane up
to the present day, and Mrs. Bute's happy retreat, be discuss and
describe by Briggs. all Miss Crawley's symptom, and the particular
of her illness and medical treatment, be narrate by the confidante
with that fulness and accuracy which woman delight in. about their
complaint and their doctor do lady ever tire of talk to each
other? Briggs do not on this occasion; nor do Rebecca weary of
listen. she be thankful, truly thankful, that the dear kind
Briggs, that the faithful, the invaluable Firkin, have be permit to
remain with their benefactress through her illness. Heaven bless she!
though she, Rebecca, have seem to act undutifully towards Miss
Crawley; yet be not her fault a natural and excusable one? could she
help give her hand to the man who have win her heart? Briggs, the
sentimental, could only turn up her eye to heaven at this appeal, and
heave a sympathetic sigh, and think that she, too, have give away her
affection long year ago, and own that Rebecca be no very great
criminal.
"can I ever forget she who so befriend the friendless orphan? no,
though she have cast I off," the latter say, "I shall never cease to
love she, and I would devote my life to her service. as my own
benefactress, as my beloved Rawdon's adore relative, I love and admire
Miss Crawley, dear Miss Briggs, beyond any woman in the world, and next
to she I love all those who be faithful to she. I would never have
treat Miss Crawley's faithful friend as that odious design Mrs.
Bute have do. Rawdon, who be all heart," rebecca continue,
"although his outward manner might seem rough and careless, have say a
hundred time, with tear in his eye, that he bless Heaven for
send his dearest Aunty two such admirable nurse as she attach
Firkin and her admirable Miss Briggs. should the machination of the
horrible Mrs. Bute end, as she too much fear they would, in banish
everybody that Miss Crawley love from her side, and leave that poor
lady a victim to those harpy at the Rectory, Rebecca beseech she
(Miss Briggs) to remember that her own home, humble as it be, be
always open to receive Briggs. dear friend," she exclaim, in a
transport of enthusiasm, "some heart can never forget benefit; all
woman be not Bute Crawleys! though why should I complain of she,"
Rebecca add; "though I have be her tool and the victim to her art,
do I not owe my dearest Rawdon to she?" and Rebecca unfold to Briggs
all Mrs. Bute's conduct at Queen's Crawley, which, though
unintelligible to she then, be clearly enough explain by the event
now--now that the attachment have spring up which Mrs. Bute have
encourage by a thousand artifice--now that two innocent people have
fall into the snare which she have lay for they, and love and
married and be ruin through her scheme.
it be all very true. Briggs see the stratagem as clearly as
possible. Mrs. Bute have make the match between Rawdon and Rebecca.
yet, though the latter be a perfectly innocent victim, Miss Briggs
could not disguise from her friend her fear that Miss Crawley's
affection be hopelessly estranged from Rebecca, and that the old
lady would never forgive her nephew for make so imprudent a marriage.
on this point Rebecca have her own opinion, and still keep up a good
heart. if Miss Crawley do not forgive they at present, she might at
least relent on a future day. even now, there be only that pule,
sickly Pitt Crawley between Rawdon and a baronetcy; and should anything
happen to the former, all would be well. at all event, to have Mrs.
Bute's design expose, and herself well abuse, be a satisfaction,
and might be advantageous to Rawdon's interest; and Rebecca, after an
hour's chat with her recover friend, leave she with the most tender
demonstration of regard, and quite assure that the conversation they
have have together would be report to Miss Crawley before many hour
be over.
this interview end, it become full time for rebecca to return to she
inn, where all the party of the previous day be assemble at a
farewell breakfast. rebecca take such a tender leave of Amelia as
become two woman who love each other as sister; and have use she
handkerchief plentifully, and hang on her friend's neck as if they be
part for ever, and wave the handkerchief (which be quite dry, by
the way) out of window, as the carriage drive off, she come back to the
breakfast table, and eat some prawn with a good deal of appetite,
consider her emotion; and while she be munch these delicacy,
explain to Rawdon what have occur in her morning walk between
herself and Briggs. her hope be very high: she make her husband
share they. she generally succeed in make her husband share all
her opinion, whether melancholy or cheerful.
"you will now, if you please, my dear, sit down at the writing-table
and pen I a pretty little letter to Miss Crawley, in which youwill say
that you be a good boy, and that sort of thing." so Rawdon sate down,
and write off, "Brighton, Thursday," and "my dear Aunt," with great
rapidity: but there the gallant officer's imagination fail he. he
mumble the end of his pen, and look up in his wife's face. she
could not help laugh at his rueful countenance, and march up and
down the room with her hand behind she, the little woman begin to
dictate a letter, which he take down.
"before quit the country and commence a campaign, which very
possibly may be fatal."
"what?" say Rawdon, rather surprised, but take the humour of the
phrase, and presently write it down with a grin.
"which very possibly may be fatal, I have come hither--"
"why not say come here, Becky? come here's grammar," the dragoon
interpose.
"I have come hither," Rebecca insist, with a stamp of her foot, "to
say farewell to my dearest and early friend. I beseech you before I
go, not perhaps to return, once more to let I press the hand from
which I have receive nothing but kindnesse all my life."
"Kindnesses all my life," echo Rawdon, scratch down the word, and
quite amazed at his own facility of composition.
"I ask nothing from you but that we should part not in anger. I have
the pride of my family on some point, though not on all. I marry a
painter's daughter, and be not ashamed of the union."
"no, run I through the body if I be!" Rawdon ejaculate.
"you old booby," rebecca say, pinch his ear and look over to see
that he make no mistake in spelling--"beseech be not spell with an a,
and early be." so he alter these word, bow to the superior
knowledge of his little Missis.
"I think that you be aware of the progress of my attachment,"
Rebecca continue: "I know that Mrs. Bute Crawley confirm and
encourage it. but I make no reproach. I marry a poor woman, and
be content to abide by what I have do. leave your property, dear
Aunt, as you will. I shall never complain of the way in which you
dispose of it. I would have you believe that I love you for yourself,
and not for money's sake. I want to be reconcile to you ere I leave
England. let I, let I see you before I go. a few week or month
hence it may be too late, and I cannot bear the notion of quit the
country without a kind word of farewell from you."
"she willnot recognise my style in that," say Becky. "I make the
sentence short and brisk on purpose." and this authentic missive be
despatch under cover to Miss Briggs.
Old Miss Crawley laugh when Briggs, with great mystery, hand she
over this candid and simple statement. "we may read it now Mrs. Bute
be away," she say. "read it to I, Briggs."
when Briggs have read the epistle out, her patroness laugh more.
"donot you see, you goose," she say to Briggs, who profess to be
much touch by the honest affection which pervade the composition,
"donot you see that Rawdon never write a word of it. he never write to
I without ask for money in his life, and all his letter be full
of bad spelling, and dash, and bad grammar. it be that little
serpent of a governess who rule he." they be all alike, Miss Crawley
think in her heart. they all want I dead, and be hanker for my
money.
"I donot mind see Rawdon," she add, after a pause, and in a tone
of perfect indifference. "I have just as soon shake hand with he as
not. provide there be no scene, why shouldnot we meet? I donot mind.
but human patience have its limit; and mind, my dear, I respectfully
decline to receive Mrs. Rawdon--I cannot support that quite"--and Miss
Briggs be fain to be content with this half-message of conciliation;
and think that the good method of bring the old lady and her
nephew together, be to warn Rawdon to be in wait on the Cliff, when
Miss Crawley go out for her air in her chair. there they meet. I
donot know whether Miss Crawley have any private feeling of regard or
emotion upon see her old favourite; but she hold out a couple of
finger to he with as smile and good-humour an air, as if they have
meet only the day before. and as for Rawdon, he turn as red as
scarlet, and wring off Briggs's hand, so great be his rapture and his
confusion at the meeting. perhaps it be interest that move he: or
perhaps affection: perhaps he be touch by the change which the
illness of the last week have work in his aunt.
"the old girl have always act like a trump to I," he say to his
wife, as he narrate the interview, "and I feel, you know, rather
queer, and that sort of thing. I walk by the side of the
what-dy'e-call-'em, you know, and to her own door, where bowl come to help
she in. and I want to go in very much, only--"
"you didn't go IN, Rawdon!" scream his wife.
"no, my dear; Ibe hang if I benot afraid when it come to the point."
"you fool! you ought to have go in, and never come out again,"
Rebecca say.
"donot call I name," say the big Guardsman, sulkily. "perhaps I be
a fool, Becky, but you shouldnot say so"; and he give his wife a look,
such as his countenance could wear when anger, and such as be not
pleasant to face.
"well, dearest, to-morrow you must be on the look-out, and go and see
she, mind, whether she ask you or no," rebecca say, try to soothe
her angry yoke-mate. on which he reply, that he would do exactly as
he like, and would just thank she to keep a civil tongue in her
head--and the wounded husband go away, and pass the forenoon at the
billiard-room, sulky, silent, and suspicious.
but before the night be over he be compel to give in, and own, as
usual, to his wife's superior prudence and foresight, by the most
melancholy confirmation of the presentiment which she have regard
the consequence of the mistake which he have make. Miss Crawley must
have have some emotion upon see he and shake hand with he after
so long a rupture. she muse upon the meeting a considerable time.
"Rawdon be get very fat and old, Briggs," she say to her
companion. "his nose have become red, and he be exceedingly coarse in
appearance. his marriage to that woman have hopelessly vulgarise he.
Mrs. Bute always say they drink together; and I have no doubt they do.
yes: he smell of gin abominably. I remark it. donot you?"
in vain Briggs interpose that Mrs. Bute speak ill of everybody: and,
as far as a person in her humble position could judge, be an--
"an artful design woman? yes, so she be, and she do speak ill of
every one--but I be certain that woman have make Rawdon drink. all those
low people do--"
"he be very much affected at see you, ma'am," the companion say;
"and I be sure, when you remember that he be go to the field of
danger--"
"how much money have he promise you, Briggs?" the old spinster cry
out, work herself into a nervous rage--"there now, of course you
begin to cry. I hate scene. why be I always to be worry? go and
cry up in your own room, and send Firkin to I--no, stop, sit down and
blow your nose, and leave off cry, and write a letter to Captain
Crawley." Poor Briggs go and place herself obediently at the
writing-book. its leaf be blot all over with relic of the
firm, strong, rapid handwriting of the spinster's late amanuensis, Mrs.
Bute Crawley.
"begin 'my dear sir,' or 'dear sir,' that will be well, and say you
be desire by Miss Crawley--no, by Miss Crawley's medical man, by Mr.
Creamer, to state that my health be such that all strong emotion would
be dangerous in my present delicate condition--and that I must decline
any family discussion or interview whatever. and thank he for come
to Brighton, and so forth, and beg he not to stay any long on my
account. and, Miss Briggs, you may add that I wish he a bon voyage,
and that if he will take the trouble to call upon my lawyer's in Gray's
Inn Square, he will find there a communication for he. yes, that will
do; and that will make he leave Brighton." the benevolent Briggs
pen this sentence with the utmost satisfaction.
"to seize upon I the very day after Mrs. Bute be go," the old lady
prattle on; "it be too indecent. Briggs, my dear, write to Mrs.
Crawley, and say she neednot come back. no--she needn't--and she
shan't--and I willnot be a slave in my own house--and I willnot be starve
and choke with poison. they all want to kill I--all--all"--and with
this the lonely old woman burst into a scream of hysterical tear.
the last scene of her dismal Vanity Fair comedy be fast approach;
the tawdry lamp be go out one by one; and the dark curtain be
almost ready to descend.
that final paragraph, which refer Rawdon to Miss Crawley's solicitor
in London, and which Briggs have write so good-naturedly, console the
dragoon and his wife somewhat, after their first blank disappointment,
on read the spinster's refusal of a reconciliation. and it effect
the purpose for which the old lady have cause it to be write, by
make Rawdon very eager to get to London.
out of Jos's losing and George Osborne's bank-note, he pay his bill
at the inn, the landlord whereof do not probably know to this day how
doubtfully his account once stand. for, as a general send his baggage
to the rear before an action, Rebecca have wisely pack up all their
chief valuable and send they off under care of George's servant, who
go in charge of the trunk on the coach back to London. Rawdon and
his wife return by the same conveyance next day.
"I should have like to see the old girl before we go," Rawdon say.
"she look so cut up and alter that Ibe sure she cannot last long. I
wonder what sort of a cheque I shall have at Waxy's. two hundred--it
cannot be less than two hundred--hey, Becky?"
in consequence of the repeat visit of the aide-de-camp of the
Sheriff of Middlesex, Rawdon and his wife do not go back to their
lodging at Brompton, but put up at an inn. early the next morning,
Rebecca have an opportunity of see they as she skirt that suburb on
her road to old Mrs. Sedley's house at Fulham, whither she go to look
for her dear Amelia and her Brighton friend. they be all off to
Chatham, thence to Harwich, to take shipping for Belgium with the
regiment--kind old Mrs. Sedley very much depressed and tearful,
solitary. return from this visit, Rebecca find her husband, who
have be off to Gray's Inn, and learn his fate. he come back furious.
"by Jove, Becky," say he, "shebe only give I twenty pound!"
though it tell against themselves, the joke be too good, and Becky
burst out laugh at Rawdon's discomfiture.
CHAPTER XXVI
between London and Chatham
on quit Brighton, our friend George, as become a person of rank and
fashion travel in a barouche with four horse, drive in state to a
fine hotel in Cavendish Square, where a suite of splendid room, and a
table magnificently furnish with plate and surround by a half-dozen
of black and silent waiter, be ready to receive the young gentleman
and his bride. George do the honour of the place with a princely air
to Jos and Dobbin; and Amelia, for the first time, and with exceed
shyness and timidity, preside at what George call her own table.
George pooh-poohe the wine and bully the waiter royally, and Jos
gobble the turtle with immense satisfaction. Dobbin help he to it;
for the lady of the house, before whom the tureen be place, be so
ignorant of the content, that she be go to help Mr. Sedley without
bestow upon he either calipash or calipee.
the splendour of the entertainment, and the apartment in which it be
give, alarmed Mr. Dobbin, who remonstrate after dinner, when Jos be
asleep in the great chair. but in vain he cry out against the
enormity of turtle and champagne that be fit for an archbishop. "Ihave
always be accustom to travel like a gentleman," George say, "and,
damme, my wife shall travel like a lady. as long as therebe a shot in
the locker, she shall want for nothing," say the generous fellow,
quite pleased with himself for his magnificence of spirit. nor do
Dobbin try and convince he that Amelia's happiness be not centre in
turtle-soup.
a while after dinner, Amelia timidly express a wish to go and see she
mamma, at Fulham: which permission George grant she with some
grumbling. and she trip away to her enormous bedroom, in the centre
of which stand the enormous funereal bed, "that the Emperor
Halixander's sister slep in when the ally suffering be here," and
put on her little bonnet and shawl with the utmost eagerness and
pleasure. George be still drink claret when she return to the
dining-room, and make no sign of move. "ar'n't you come with I,
dearest?" she ask he. no; the "dear" have "business" that night.
his man should get she a coach and go with she. and the coach be at
the door of the hotel, Amelia make George a little disappointed curtsey
after look vainly into his face once or twice, and go sadly down
the great staircase, Captain Dobbin after, who hand she into the
vehicle, and see it drive away to its destination. the very valet be
ashamed of mention the address to the hackney-coachman before the
hotel waiter, and promise to instruct he when they get far on.
Dobbin walk home to his old quarter and the slaughter', think
very likely that it would be delightful to be in that hackney-coach,
along with Mrs. Osborne. George be evidently of quite a different
taste; for when he have take wine enough, he go off to half-price at
the play, to see Mr. Kean perform in Shylock. Captain Osborne be a
great lover of the drama, and have himself perform high-comedy
character with great distinction in several garrison theatrical
entertainment. Jos sleep on until long after dark, when he wake up
with a start at the motion of his servant, who be remove and
empty the decanter on the table; and the hackney-coach stand be
again put into requisition for a carriage to convey this stout hero to
his lodging and bed.
Mrs. Sedley, you may be sure, clasp her daughter to her heart with
all maternal eagerness and affection, run out of the door as the
carriage draw up before the little garden-gate, to welcome the weeping,
trembling, young bride. old Mr. Clapp, who be in his shirt-sleeve,
trim the garden-plot, shrink back alarmed. the irish servant-lass
rush up from the kitchen and smile a "God bless you." Amelia could
hardly walk along the flag and up the step into the parlour.
how the floodgate be open, and mother and daughter weep, when they
be together embrace each other in this sanctuary, may readily be
imagine by every reader who possess the least sentimental turn.
when donot lady weep? at what occasion of joy, sorrow, or other
business of life, and, after such an event as a marriage, mother and
daughter be surely at liberty to give way to a sensibility which be
as tender as it be refresh. about a question of marriage I have see
woman who hate each other kiss and cry together quite fondly. how much
more do they feel when they love! good mother be married over again
at their daughter' wedding: and as for subsequent event, who do
not know how ultra-maternal grandmother are?--in fact a woman, until
she be a grandmother, do not often really know what to be a mother
be. let we respect Amelia and her mamma whispering and whimpering and
laugh and cry in the parlour and the twilight. old Mr. Sedley
do. he have not divine who be in the carriage when it drive up. he
have not fly out to meet his daughter, though he kiss she very
warmly when she enter the room (where he be occupy, as usual, with
his paper and tape and statement of account), and after sit
with the mother and daughter for a short time, he very wisely leave the
little apartment in their possession.
George's valet be look on in a very supercilious manner at Mr.
Clapp in his shirt-sleeve, water his rose-bush. he take off his
hat, however, with much condescension to Mr. Sedley, who ask news
about his son-in-law, and about Jos's carriage, and whether his horse
have be down to Brighton, and about that infernal traitor Bonaparty,
and the war; until the irish maid-servant come with a plate and a
bottle of wine, from which the old gentleman insist upon help the
valet. he give he a half-guinea too, which the servant pocket with
a mixture of wonder and contempt. "to the health of your master and
mistress, Trotter," Mr. Sedley say, "and herebe something to drink
your health when you get home, Trotter."
there be but nine day past since Amelia have leave that little cottage
and home--and yet how far off the time seem since she have bid it
farewell. what a gulf lie between she and that past life. she could
look back to it from her present standing-place, and contemplate,
almost as another being, the young unmarried girl absorb in her love,
have no eye but for one special object, receive parental affection
if not ungratefully, at least indifferently, and as if it be her
due--her whole heart and thought bent on the accomplishment of one
desire. the review of those day, so lately go yet so far away,
touch she with shame; and the aspect of the kind parent fill she
with tender remorse. be the prize gain--the heaven of life--and the
winner still doubtful and unsatisfied? as his hero and heroine pass
the matrimonial barrier, the novelist generally drop the curtain, as
if the drama be over then: the doubt and struggle of life end:
as if, once land in the marriage country, all be green and pleasant
there: and wife and husband have nothing to do but to link each other's
arm together, and wander gently downwards towards old age in happy and
perfect fruition. but our little Amelia be just on the bank of her
new country, and be already look anxiously back towards the sad
friendly figure wave farewell to she across the stream, from the
other distant shore.
in honour of the young bride's arrival, her mother think it necessary
to prepare I donot know what festive entertainment, and after the first
ebullition of talk, take leave of Mrs. George Osborne for a while, and
dive down to the low region of the house to a sort of
kitchen-parlour (occupy by Mr. and Mrs. Clapp, and in the evening,
when her dish be wash and her curl-paper remove, by Miss
Flannigan, the irish servant), there to take measure for the preparing
of a magnificent ornament tea. all people have their way of
express kindness, and it seem to Mrs. Sedley that a muffin and a
quantity of orange marmalade spread out in a little cut-glass saucer
would be peculiarly agreeable refreshment to Amelia in her most
interesting situation.
while these delicacy be be transact below, Amelia, leave the
drawing-room, walk upstairs and find herself, she scarce know how,
in the little room which she have occupy before her marriage, and in
that very chair in which she have pass so many bitter hour. she sink
back in its arm as if it be an old friend; and fall to think over
the past week, and the life beyond it. already to be look sadly and
vaguely back: always to be pin for something which, when obtain,
bring doubt and sadness rather than pleasure; here be the lot of our
poor little creature and harmless lose wanderer in the great struggle
crowd of Vanity Fair.
here she sate, and recall to herself fondly that image of George to
which she have kneel before marriage. do she own to herself how
different the real man be from that superb young hero whom she have
worship? it require many, many year--and a man must be very bad
indeed--before a woman's pride and vanity will let she own to such a
confession. then Rebecca's twinkle green eye and baleful smile
light upon she, and fill she with dismay. and so she sate for
awhile indulge in her usual mood of selfish brooding, in that very
listless melancholy attitude in which the honest maid-servant have find
she, on the day when she bring up the letter in which George renew
his offer of marriage.
she look at the little white bed, which have be her a few day
before, and think she would like to sleep in it that night, and wake,
as formerly, with her mother smile over she in the morning: then she
think with terror of the great funereal damask pavilion in the vast
and dingy state bedroom, which be await she at the grand hotel in
Cavendish Square. dear little white bed! how many a long night have she
weep on its pillow! how she have despair and hop to die there; and
now be not all her wish accomplish, and the lover of whom she have
despair her own for ever? Kind mother! how patiently and tenderly
she have watch round that bed! she go and kneel down by the bedside;
and there this wounded and timorous, but gentle and loving soul, seek
for consolation, where as yet, it must be own, our little girl have
but seldom look for it. Love have be her faith hitherto; and the
sad, bleed disappoint heart begin to feel the want of another
consoler.
have we a right to repeat or to overhear her prayer? these, brother,
be secret, and out of the domain of Vanity Fair, in which our story
lie.
but this may be say, that when the tea be finally announce, our
young lady come downstairs a great deal more cheerful; that she do not
despond, or deplore her fate, or think about George's coldness, or
Rebecca's eye, as she have be willnot to do of late. she go
downstairs, and kiss her father and mother, and talk to the old
gentleman, and make he more merry than he have be for many a day. she
sate down at the piano which Dobbin have buy for she, and sing over
all her father's favourite old song. she pronounce the tea to be
excellent, and praise the exquisite taste in which the marmalade be
arrange in the saucer. and in determine to make everybody else
happy, she find herself so; and be sound asleep in the great funereal
pavilion, and only wake up with a smile when George arrive from the
theatre.
for the next day, George have more important "business" to transact than
that which take he to see Mr. Kean in Shylock. immediately on his
arrival in London he have write off to his father's solicitor,
signify his royal pleasure that an interview should take place
between they on the morrow. his hotel bill, loss at billiard and
card to Captain Crawley have almost drain the young man's purse,
which want replenish before he set out on his travel, and he have
no resource but to infringe upon the two thousand pound which the
attorney be commission to pay over to he. he have a perfect
belief in his own mind that his father would relent before very long.
how could any parent be obdurate for a length of time against such a
paragon as he be? if his mere past and personal merit do not
succeed in mollify his father, George determine that he would
distinguish himself so prodigiously in the ensue campaign that the
old gentleman must give in to he. and if not? Bah! the world be
before he. his luck might change at card, and there be a deal of
spending in two thousand pound.
so he send off Amelia once more in a carriage to her mamma, with strict
order and carte blanche to the two lady to purchase everything
requisite for a lady of Mrs. George Osborne's fashion, who be go on
a foreign tour. they have but one day to complete the outfit, and it
may be imagine that their business therefore occupy they pretty
fully. in a carriage once more, bustle about from milliner to
linen-draper, escort back to the carriage by obsequious shopman or
polite owner, Mrs. Sedley be herself again almost, and sincerely
happy for the first time since their misfortune. nor be Mrs. Amelia
at all above the pleasure of shopping, and bargaining, and see and
buy pretty thing. (would any man, the most philosophic, give
twopence for a woman who be?) she give herself a little treat,
obedient to her husband's order, and purchase a quantity of lady's
gear, show a great deal of taste and elegant discernment, as all the
shopfolk say.
and about the war that be ensue, Mrs. Osborne be not much alarmed;
Bonaparty be to be crush almost without a struggle. margate packet
be sail every day, fill with man of fashion and lady of note,
on their way to Brussels and Ghent. People be go not so much to a
war as to a fashionable tour. the newspaper laugh the wretched
upstart and swindler to scorn. such a corsican wretch as that
withstand the army of Europe and the genius of the immortal
Wellington! Amelia hold he in utter contempt; for it need not to be
say that this soft and gentle creature take her opinion from those
people who surround she, such fidelity be much too humble-minded
to think for itself. well, in a word, she and her mother perform a
great day's shopping, and she acquit herself with considerable
liveliness and credit on this her first appearance in the genteel world
of London.
George meanwhile, with his hat on one side, his elbow square, and his
swagger martial air, make for Bedford row, and stalk into the
attorney's office as if he be lord of every pale-face clerk who be
scribble there. he order somebody to inform Mr. Higgs that Captain
Osborne be wait, in a fierce and patronizing way, as if the pekin
of an attorney, who have thrice his brain, fifty time his money, and a
thousand time his experience, be a wretched underling who should
instantly leave all his business in life to attend on the Captain's
pleasure. he do not see the sneer of contempt which pass all round
the room, from the first clerk to the article gent, from the article
gent to the ragged writer and white-faced runner, in clothe too
tight for they, as he sate there tap his boot with his cane, and
think what a parcel of miserable poor devil these be. the
miserable poor devil know all about his affair. they talk about
they over their pint of beer at their public-house club to other
clerk of a night. ye god, what do not attorney and attorney' clerk
know in London! nothing be hide from their inquisition, and their
family mutely rule our city.
perhaps George expect, when he enter Mr. Higgs's apartment, to find
that gentleman commission to give he some message of compromise or
conciliation from his father; perhaps his haughty and cold demeanour
be adopt as a sign of his spirit and resolution: but if so, his
fierceness be meet by a chilling coolness and indifference on the
attorney's part, that render swagger absurd. he pretend to be
write at a paper, when the Captain enter. "pray, sit down, sir,"
say he, "and I will attend to your little affair in a moment. Mr.
Poe, get the release paper, if you please"; and then he fall to
write again.
Poe have produce those paper, his chief calculate the amount of
two thousand pound stock at the rate of the day; and ask Captain
Osborne whether he would take the sum in a cheque upon the banker, or
whether he should direct the latter to purchase stock to that amount.
"one of the late Mrs. Osborne's trustee be out of town," he say
indifferently, "but my client wish to meet your wish, and have do
with the business as quick as possible."
"give I a cheque, sir," say the Captain very surlily. "damn the
shilling and halfpence, sir," he add, as the lawyer be make out
the amount of the draft; and, flatter himself that by this stroke of
magnanimity he have put the old quiz to the blush, he stalk out of the
office with the paper in his pocket.
"that chap will be in gaol in two year," Mr. Higgs say to Mr. Poe.
"willnot O. come round, sir, donot you think?"
"willnot the monument come round," Mr. Higgs reply.
"hebe go it pretty fast," say the clerk. "hebe only married a
week, and I see he and some other military chap hand Mrs.
Highflyer to her carriage after the play." and then another case be
call, and Mr. George Osborne thenceforth dismiss from these worthy
gentleman's memory.
the draft be upon our friend Hulker and Bullock of Lombard Street, to
whose house, still think he be do business, George bend his way,
and from whom he receive his money. Frederick Bullock, Esq., whose
yellow face be over a ledger, at which sate a demure clerk, happen
to be in the banking-room when George enter. his yellow face turn
to a more deadly colour when he see the Captain, and he slunk back
guiltily into the inmost parlour. George be too busy gloating over
the money (for he have never have such a sum before), to mark the
countenance or flight of the cadaverous suitor of his sister.
Fred Bullock tell old Osborne of his son's appearance and conduct. "he
come in as bold as brass," say Frederick. "he have draw out every
shilling. how long will a few hundred pound last such a chap as
that?" Osborne swear with a great oath that he little care when or how
soon he spend it. Fred din every day in Russell Square now. but
altogether, George be highly pleased with his day's business. all his
own baggage and outfit be put into a state of speedy preparation, and
he pay Amelia's purchase with cheque on his agent, and with the
splendour of a lord.
CHAPTER XXVII
in which Amelia join her regiment
when Jos's fine carriage drive up to the inn door at Chatham, the first
face which Amelia recognize be the friendly countenance of Captain
Dobbin, who have be pace the street for an hour past in expectation
of his friend' arrival. the Captain, with shell on his frockcoat,
and a crimson sash and sabre, present a military appearance, which
make Jos quite proud to be able to claim such an acquaintance, and the
stout civilian hail he with a cordiality very different from the
reception which Jos vouchsafe to his friend in Brighton and Bond
Street.
along with the Captain be Ensign Stubble; who, as the barouche near
the inn, burst out with an exclamation of "by Jove! what a pretty
girl"; highly applaud Osborne's choice. indeed, Amelia dress in
her wedding-pelisse and pink ribbon, with a flush in her face,
occasion by rapid travel through the open air, look so fresh and
pretty, as fully to justify the Ensign's compliment. Dobbin like he
for make it. as he step forward to help the lady out of the
carriage, Stubble see what a pretty little hand she give he, and what
a sweet pretty little foot come trip down the step. he blush
profusely, and make the very good bow of which he be capable; to which
Amelia, see the number of the the regiment embroider on the
Ensign's cap, reply with a blushing smile, and a curtsey on her part;
which finish the young ensign on the spot. Dobbin take most kindly to
Mr. Stubble from that day, and encourage he to talk about Amelia in
their private walk, and at each other's quarter. it become the
fashion, indeed, among all the honest young fellow of the --th to
adore and admire Mrs. Osborne. her simple artless behaviour, and
modest kindness of demeanour, win all their unsophisticated heart; all
which simplicity and sweetness be quite impossible to describe in
print. but who have not behold these among woman, and recognise the
presence of all sort of quality in they, even though they say no
more to you than that they be engage to dance the next quadrille, or
that it be very hot weather? George, always the champion of his
regiment, rise immensely in the opinion of the youth of the corps, by
his gallantry in marry this portionless young creature, and by his
choice of such a pretty kind partner.
in the sitting-room which be await the traveller, Amelia, to she
surprise, find a letter address to Mrs. Captain Osborne. it be a
triangular billet, on pink paper, and seal with a dove and an olive
branch, and a profusion of light blue sealing wax, and it be write
in a very large, though undecided female hand.
"itbe Peggy O'Dowd's fist," say George, laugh. "I know it by the
kiss on the seal." and in fact, it be a note from Mrs. Major O'Dowd,
request the pleasure of Mrs. Osborne's company that very evening to
a small friendly party. "you must go," George say. "you will make
acquaintance with the regiment there. O'Dowd go in command of the
regiment, and Peggy go in command."
but they have not be for many minute in the enjoyment of Mrs.
O'Dowd's letter, when the door be fling open, and a stout jolly lady,
in a riding-habit, follow by a couple of officer of Ours, enter
the room.
"sure, I couldnot stop till tay-time. present I, Garge, my dear
fellow, to your lady. Madam, Ibe deloighte to see ye; and to present
to you I husband, Meejor O'Dowd"; and with this, the jolly lady in the
riding-habit grasp Amelia's hand very warmly, and the latter know at
once that the lady be before she whom her husband have so often laugh
at. "youhave often hear of I from that husband of your," say the
lady, with great vivacity.
"youhave often hear of she," echo her husband, the Major.
Amelia answer, smile, "that she have."
"and small good hebe tell you of I," Mrs. O'Dowd reply; add that
"George be a wicked divvle."
"that Iwill go bail for," say the Major, try to look know, at
which George laugh; and Mrs. O'Dowd, with a tap of her whip, tell the
Major to be quiet; and then request to be present in form to Mrs.
Captain Osborne.
"this, my dear," say George with great gravity, "be my very good,
kind, and excellent friend, Auralia Margaretta, otherwise call Peggy."
"faith, yoube right," interpose the Major.
"otherwise call Peggy, lady of Major Michael O'Dowd, of our regiment,
and daughter of Fitzjurld Ber'sford de Burgo Malony of Glenmalony,
County Kildare."
"and Muryan Squeer, Doblin," say the lady with calm superiority.
"and Muryan Square, sure enough," the Major whisper.
"'twas there ye coorte I, Meejor dear," the lady say; and the Major
assent to this as to every other proposition which be make generally
in company.
Major O'Dowd, who have serve his sovereign in every quarter of the
world, and have pay for every step in his profession by some more than
equivalent act of daring and gallantry, be the most modest, silent,
sheep-faced and meek of little man, and as obedient to his wife as if
he have be her tay-boy. at the mess-table he sit silently, and drank
a great deal. when full of liquor, he reel silently home. when he
speak, it be to agree with everybody on every conceivable point; and
he pass through life in perfect ease and good-humour. the hot
sun of India never heat his temper; and the Walcheren ague never
shake it. he walk up to a battery with just as much indifference as
to a dinner-table; have din on horse-flesh and turtle with equal
relish and appetite; and have an old mother, Mrs. O'Dowd of O'Dowdstown
indeed, whom he have never disobey but when he run away and enlist,
and when he persist in marry that odious Peggy Malony.
Peggy be one of five sister, and eleven child of the noble house
of Glenmalony; but her husband, though her own cousin, be of the
mother's side, and so have not the inestimable advantage of be ally
to the Malonys, whom she believe to be the most famous family in the
world. have try nine season at Dublin and two at Bath and
Cheltenham, and not find a partner for life, Miss Malony order she
cousin Mick to marry she when she be about thirty-three year of age;
and the honest fellow obeying, carry she off to the West Indies, to
preside over the lady of the --th regiment, into which he have just
exchange.
before Mrs. O'Dowd be half an hour in Amelia's (or indeed in anybody
else's) company, this amiable lady tell all her birth and pedigree to
her new friend. "my dear," say she, good-naturedly, "it be my
intention that Garge should be a brother of my own, and my sister
Glorvina would have suit he entirely. but as bygone be bygone,
and he be engage to yourself, why, Ibe determined to take you as a
sister instead, and to look upon you as such, and to love you as one of
the family. faith, youhave get such a nice good-natured face and way
widg you, that Ibe sure wewill agree; and that youwill be an addition to
our family anyway."
"'Deed and she will," say O'Dowd, with an approve air, and Amelia
feel herself not a little amused and grateful to be thus suddenly
introduce to so large a party of relation.
"webe all good fellow here," the Major's lady continue. "therebe not
a regiment in the service where youwill find a more united society nor a
more agreeable mess-room. therebe no quarrelling, bickering,
slandthere, nor small talk amongst we. we all love each other."
"especially Mrs. Magenis," say George, laugh.
"Mrs. Captain Magenis and I have make up, though her treatment of I
would bring I gray hair with sorrow to the grave."
"and you with such a beautiful front of black, Peggy, my dear," the
Major cry.
"Hould your tongue, Mick, you booby. they husband be always in the
way, Mrs. Osborne, my dear; and as for my Mick, I often tell he he
should never open his mouth but to give the word of command, or to put
meat and drink into it. Iwill tell you about the regiment, and warn you
when webe alone. introduce I to your brother now; sure hebe a mighty
fine man, and remind I of I cousin, Dan Malony (Malony of
Ballymalony, my dear, you know who mar'ie Ophalia Scully, of
Oystherstown, own cousin to Lord Poldoody). Mr. Sedley, sir, Ibe
deloighte to be make known te ye. I suppose youwill dine at the mess
to-day. (mind that divvle of a docther, Mick, and whatever ye du, keep
yourself sober for I party this evening.)"
"itbe the 150th give we a farewell dinner, my love," interpose the
Major, "but wewill easy get a card for Mr. Sedley."
"run Simple (Ensign Simple, of Ours, my dear Amelia. I forget to
introjuice he to ye). run in a hurry, with Mrs. Major O'Dowd's
compliment to Colonel Tavish, and Captain Osborne have bring his
brothernlaw down, and will bring he to the 150th mess at five o'clock
sharp--when you and I, my dear, will take a snack here, if you like."
before Mrs. O'Dowd's speech be conclude, the young Ensign be
trot downstairs on his commission.
"obedience be the soul of the army. we will go to our duty while Mrs.
O'Dowd will stay and enlighten you, Emmy," Captain Osborne say; and
the two gentleman, take each a wing of the Major, walk out with
that officer, grin at each other over his head.
and, now have her new friend to herself, the impetuous Mrs. O'Dowd
proceed to pour out such a quantity of information as no poor little
woman's memory could ever tax itself to bear. she tell Amelia a
thousand particular relative to the very numerous family of which the
amazed young lady find herself a member. "Mrs. Heavytop, the
Colonel's wife, die in Jamaica of the yellow faver and a broken heart
comboine, for the horrud old Colonel, with a head as bald as a
cannon-ball, be make sheep's eye at a half-caste girl there. Mrs.
Magenis, though without education, be a good woman, but she have the
divvle's tongue, and would cheat her own mother at whist. Mrs. Captain
Kirk must turn up her lobster eye forsooth at the idea of an honest
round game (wherein I fawther, as pious a man as ever go to church,
I uncle Dane Malony, and our cousin the Bishop, take a hand at loo, or
whist, every night of their life). nayther of thembe go with the
regiment this time," Mrs. O'Dowd add. "Fanny Magenis stop with her
mother, who sell small coal and potato, most likely, in
Islington-town, hard by London, though shebe always brag of her
father's ship, and point they out to we as they go up the river:
and Mrs. Kirk and her child will stop here in Bethesda Place, to be
nigh to her favourite preacher, Dr. Ramshorn. Mrs. Bunny's in an
interesting situation--faith, and she always be, then--and have give
the Lieutenant seven already. and Ensign Posky's wife, who join two
month before you, my dear, have quarl'd with Tom Posky a score of
time, till you can hear'm all over the bar'ck (they say theybe come
to broken pleet, and Tom never account for his black oi), and shewill
go back to her mother, who keep a lady' siminary at Richmond--bad
luck to she for run away from it! where do ye get your finishing,
my dear? I have moin, and no expince spar, at Madame Flanahan's, at
Ilyssus Grove, Booterstown, near Dublin, wid a Marchioness to teach we
the true parisian pronunciation, and a retired Mejor-General of the
french service to put we through the exercise."
of this incongruous family our astonish Amelia find herself all of a
sudden a member: with Mrs. O'Dowd as an eld sister. she be
present to her other female relation at tea-time, on whom, as she
be quiet, good-natured, and not too handsome, she make rather an
agreeable impression until the arrival of the gentleman from the mess
of the 150th, who all admire she so, that her sister begin, of
course, to find fault with she.
"I hope Osborne have sow his wild oat," say Mrs. Magenis to Mrs.
Bunny. "if a reform rake make a good husband, sure itbe she will
have the fine chance with Garge," Mrs. O'Dowd remark to Posky, who
have lose her position as bride in the regiment, and be quite angry
with the usurper. and as for Mrs. Kirk: that disciple of Dr. Ramshorn
put one or two lead professional question to Amelia, to see whether
she be awaken, whether she be a profess christian and so forth,
and find from the simplicity of Mrs. Osborne's reply that she be
yet in utter darkness, put into her hand three little penny book with
picture, viz., the "Howling Wilderness," the "Washerwoman of
Wandsworth Common," and the "british soldier's good bayonet," which,
bent upon awaken she before she sleep, Mrs. Kirk beg Amelia to
read that night ere she go to bed.
but all the man, like good fellow as they be, rally round their
comrade's pretty wife, and pay she their court with soldierly
gallantry. she have a little triumph, which flush her spirit and
make her eye sparkle. George be proud of her popularity, and please
with the manner (which be very gay and graceful, though naive and a
little timid) with which she receive the gentleman's attention, and
answer their compliment. and he in his uniform--how much handsomer
he be than any man in the room! she feel that he be affectionately
watch she, and glow with pleasure at his kindness. "I will make
all his friend welcome," she resolve in her heart. "I will love all
as I love he. I will always try and be gay and good-humour and make
his home happy."
the regiment indeed adopt she with acclamation. the captain
approve, the Lieutenants applaud, the Ensigns admire. Old Cutler,
the Doctor, make one or two joke, which, be professional, need not
be repeat; and Cackle, the Assistant M.D. of Edinburgh, condescend
to examine she upon leeterature, and try she with his three good
french quotation. Young Stubble go about from man to man
whispering, "Jove, benot she a pretty gal?" and never take his eye off
she except when the negus come in.
as for Captain Dobbin, he never so much as speak to she during the
whole evening. but he and Captain Porter of the 150th take home Jos to
the hotel, who be in a very maudlin state, and have tell his tiger-hunt
story with great effect, both at the mess-table and at the soiree, to
Mrs. O'Dowd in her turban and bird of paradise. have put the
Collector into the hand of his servant, Dobbin loiter about, smoke
his cigar before the inn door. George have meanwhile very carefully
shawle his wife, and bring she away from Mrs. O'Dowd's after a
general handshake from the young officer, who accompany she to the
fly, and cheer that vehicle as it drive off. so Amelia give Dobbin
her little hand as she get out of the carriage, and rebuke he
smilingly for not have take any notice of she all night.
the Captain continue that deleterious amusement of smoking, long after
the inn and the street be go to bed. he watch the light vanish
from George's sit-room window, and shine out in the bedroom close
at hand. it be almost morning when he return to his own quarter.
he could hear the cheering from the ship in the river, where the
transport be already take in their cargo preparatory to drop
down the Thames.
CHAPTER XXVIII
in which Amelia Invades the Low Countries
the regiment with its officer be to be transport in ship provide
by his Majesty's government for the occasion: and in two day after
the festive assembly at Mrs. O'Dowd's apartment, in the midst of
cheer from all the East India ship in the river, and the military
on shore, the band play "God save the king," the officer wave
their hat, and the crew hurrah gallantly, the transport go down
the river and proceed under convoy to Ostend. meanwhile the gallant
Jos have agree to escort his sister and the Major's wife, the bulk of
whose good and chattel, include the famous bird of paradise and
turban, be with the regimental baggage: so that our two heroine
drive pretty much unencumbered to Ramsgate, where there be plenty of
packet ply, in one of which they have a speedy passage to Ostend.
that period of Jos's life which now ensue be so full of incident,
that it serve he for conversation for many year after, and even the
tiger-hunt story be put aside for more stirring narrative which he
have to tell about the great campaign of Waterloo. as soon as he have
agree to escort his sister abroad, it be remark that he cease
shave his upper lip. at Chatham he follow the parade and drill
with great assiduity. he listen with the utmost attention to the
conversation of his brother officer (as he call they in after day
sometimes), and learn as many military name as he could. in these
study the excellent Mrs. O'Dowd be of great assistance to he; and
on the day finally when they embark on board the Lovely Rose, which
be to carry they to their destination, he make his appearance in a
braid frock-coat and duck trouser, with a forage cap ornament
with a smart gold band. have his carriage with he, and inform
everybody on board confidentially that he be go to join the Duke of
Wellington's army, folk mistook he for a great personage, a
commissary-general, or a government courier at the very least.
he suffer hugely on the voyage, during which the lady be likewise
prostrate; but Amelia be bring to life again as the packet make
Ostend, by the sight of the transport convey her regiment, which
enter the harbour almost at the same time with the Lovely Rose. Jos
go in a collapse state to an inn, while Captain Dobbin escort the
lady, and then busy himself in free Jos's carriage and luggage
from the ship and the custom-house, for Mr. Jos be at present without
a servant, Osborne's man and his own pamper menial have conspire
together at Chatham, and refuse point-blank to cross the water. this
revolt, which come very suddenly, and on the last day, so alarmed Mr.
Sedley, junior, that he be on the point of give up the expedition,
but Captain Dobbin (who make himself immensely officious in the
business, Jos say), rat he and laugh at he soundly: the
mustachio be grow in advance, and Jos finally be persuade to
embark. in place of the well-breed and well-feed London domestic, who
could only speak English, Dobbin procure for Jos's party a swarthy
little belgian servant who could speak no language at all; but who, by
his bustling behaviour, and by invariably address Mr. Sedley as "my
lord," speedily acquire that gentleman's favour. time be alter at
Ostend now; of the Britons who go thither, very few look like lord, or
act like those member of our hereditary aristocracy. they seem for
the most part shabby in attire, dingy of linen, lover of billiard and
brandy, and cigar and greasy ordinary.
but it may be say as a rule, that every Englishman in the Duke of
Wellington's army pay his way. the remembrance of such a fact surely
become a nation of shopkeeper. it be a blessing for a
commerce-love country to be overrun by such an army of customer: and
to have such creditable warrior to feed. and the country which they
come to protect be not military. for a long period of history they
have let other people fight there. when the present writer go to
survey with eagle glance the field of Waterloo, we ask the conductor
of the diligence, a portly warlike-look veteran, whether he have be
at the battle. "pas si bete"--such an answer and sentiment as no
Frenchman would own to--be his reply. but, on the other hand, the
postilion who drive we be a Viscount, a son of some bankrupt Imperial
General, who accept a pennyworth of beer on the road. the moral be
surely a good one.
this flat, flourishing, easy country never could have look more rich
and prosperous than in that opening summer of 1815, when its green
field and quiet city be enliven by multiply red-coat: when
its wide chaussee swarm with brilliant english equipage: when its
great canal-boat, glide by rich pasture and pleasant quaint old
village, by old chateaux lie amongst old tree, be all crowd
with well-to-do English traveller: when the soldier who drink at the
village inn, not only drank, but pay his score; and Donald, the
Highlander, billet in the Flemish farm-house, rock the baby's
cradle, while Jean and Jeannette be out get in the hay. as our
painter be bent on military subject just now, I throw out this as a
good subject for the pencil, to illustrate the principle of an honest
english war. all look as brilliant and harmless as a Hyde Park
review. meanwhile, Napoleon screen behind his curtain of
frontier-fortress, be prepare for the outbreak which be to drive
all these orderly people into fury and blood; and lie so many of they
low.
everybody have such a perfect feeling of confidence in the leader (for
the resolute faith which the Duke of Wellington have inspire in the
whole english nation be as intense as that more frantic enthusiasm
with which at one time the french regard Napoleon), the country
seem in so perfect a state of orderly defence, and the help at hand
in case of need so near and overwhelming, that alarm be unknown, and
our traveller, among whom two be naturally of a very timid sort,
be, like all the other multiply english tourist, entirely at ease.
the famous regiment, with so many of whose officer we have make
acquaintance, be draft in canal boat to Bruges and Ghent, thence to
march to Brussels. Jos accompany the lady in the public boat; the
which all old traveller in Flanders must remember for the luxury and
accommodation they afford. so prodigiously good be the eating and
drink on board these sluggish but most comfortable vessel, that
there be legend extant of an english traveller, who, come to
Belgium for a week, and travel in one of these boat, be so
delighted with the fare there that he go backwards and forwards from
Ghent to bruge perpetually until the railroad be invent, when he
drown himself on the last trip of the passage-boat. Jos's death be
not to be of this sort, but his comfort be exceed, and Mrs. O'Dowd
insist that he only want her sister Glorvina to make his happiness
complete. he sate on the roof of the cabin all day drink flemish
beer, shout for Isidor, his servant, and talk gallantly to the
lady.
his courage be prodigious. "Boney attack we!" he cry. "my dear
creature, my poor Emmy, donot be frightened. therebe no danger. the
ally will be in Paris in two month, I tell you; when Iwill take you
to dine in the Palais Royal, by Jove! there be three hundred thousand
Rooshians, I tell you, now enter France by Mayence and the
Rhine--three hundred thousand under Wittgenstein and Barclay de Tolly,
my poor love. you donot know military affair, my dear. I do, and I
tell you therebe no infantry in France can stand against Rooshian
infantry, and no general of Boney's thatbe fit to hold a candle to
Wittgenstein. then there be the Austrians, they be five hundred
thousand if a man, and they be within ten march of the frontier by
this time, under Schwartzenberg and Prince Charles. then there be the
Prooshians under the gallant Prince Marshal. show I a cavalry chief
like he now that Murat be go. hey, Mrs. O'Dowd? do you think our
little girl here need be afraid? be there any cause for fear, Isidor?
hey, sir? get some more beer."
Mrs. O'Dowd say that her "Glorvina be not afraid of any man alive,
let alone a Frenchman," and toss off a glass of beer with a wink
which express she like for the beverage.
have frequently be in presence of the enemy, or, in other word,
face the lady at Cheltenham and Bath, our friend, the Collector, have
lose a great deal of his pristine timidity, and be now, especially
when fortify with liquor, as talkative as might be. he be rather a
favourite with the regiment, treat the young officer with
sumptuosity, and amuse they by his military air. and as there be one
well-know regiment of the army which travel with a goat head the
column, whilst another be lead by a deer, George say with respect to
his brother-in-law, that his regiment march with an elephant.
since Amelia's introduction to the regiment, George begin to be rather
ashamed of some of the company to which he have be force to present
she; and determine, as he tell Dobbin (with what satisfaction to the
latter it need not be say), to exchange into some well regiment
soon, and to get his wife away from those damned vulgar woman. but
this vulgarity of be ashamed of one's society be much more common
among man than woman (except very great lady of fashion, who, to be
sure, indulge in it); and Mrs. Amelia, a natural and unaffected person,
have none of that artificial shamefacedness which her husband mistook
for delicacy on his own part. thus Mrs. O'Dowd have a cock's plume in
her hat, and a very large "repayther" on her stomach, which she use to
ring on all occasion, narrate how it have be present to she by
her fawther, as she stipt into the car'ge after her mar'ge; and these
ornament, with other outward peculiarity of the Major's wife, give
excruciating agony to Captain Osborne, when his wife and the Major's
come in contact; whereas Amelia be only amuse by the honest lady's
eccentricity, and not in the least ashamed of her company.
as they make that well-know journey, which almost every Englishman of
middle rank have travel since, there might have be more
instructive, but few more entertaining, companion than Mrs. Major
O'Dowd. "talk about kenal boat; my dear! ye should see the kenal
boat between Dublin and Ballinasloe. itbe there the rapid travelling
be; and the beautiful cattle. sure I fawther get a goold medal (and
his Excellency himself eat a slice of it, and say never be fine mate
in his loif) for a four-year-old heifer, the like of which ye never see
in this country any day." and Jos own with a sigh, "that for good
streaky beef, really mingle with fat and lean, there be no country
like England."
"Except Ireland, where all your good mate come from," say the Major's
lady; proceed, as be not unusual with patriot of her nation, to
make comparison greatly in favour of her own country. the idea of
compare the market at bruge with those of Dublin, although she have
suggest it herself, cause immense scorn and derision on her part.
"Iwill thank ye tell I what they mean by that old gazabo on the top of
the market-place," say she, in a burst of ridicule fit to have bring
the old tower down. the place be full of english soldiery as they
pass. english bugle wake they in the morning; at nightfall they
go to bed to the note of the british fife and drum: all the country
and Europe be in arm, and the great event of history pende: and
honest Peggy O'Dowd, whom it concern as well as another, go on
prattle about Ballinafad, and the horse in the stable at
Glenmalony, and the clar't drunk there; and Jos Sedley interpose about
curry and rice at Dumdum; and Amelia think about her husband, and how
good she should show her love for he; as if these be the great
topic of the world.
those who like to lay down the history-book, and to speculate upon what
might have happen in the world, but for the fatal occurrence of what
actually do take place (a most puzzling, amusing, ingenious, and
profitable kind of meditation), have no doubt often think to
themselves what a specially bad time Napoleon take to come back from
Elba, and to let loose his eagle from Gulf San Juan to Notre Dame. the
historian on our side tell we that the army of the allied power
be all providentially on a war-foot, and ready to bear down at a
moment's notice upon the Elban Emperor. the august jobber assemble at
Vienna, and carve out the kingdom of Europe accord to their
wisdom, have such cause of quarrel among themselves as might have set
the army which have overcome Napoleon to fight against each other, but
for the return of the object of unanimous hatred and fear. this
monarch have an army in full force because he have job to himself
Poland, and be determined to keep it: another have rob half Saxony,
and be bent upon maintain his acquisition: Italy be the object of
a third's solicitude. each be protest against the rapacity of the
other; and could the Corsican but have wait in prison until all these
party be by the ear, he might have return and reign
unmoleste. but what would have become of our story and all our
friend, then? if all the drop in it be dry up, what would become
of the sea?
in the meanwhile the business of life and living, and the pursuit of
pleasure, especially, go on as if no end be to be expect to they,
and no enemy in front. when our traveller arrive at Brussels, in
which their regiment be quarter, a great piece of good fortune, as
all say, they find themselves in one of the gay and most brilliant
little capital in Europe, and where all the Vanity Fair booth be
lay out with the most tempting liveliness and splendour. gambling be
here in profusion, and dance in plenty: feasting be there to fill
with delight that great gourmand of a Jos: there be a theatre where a
miraculous Catalani be delight all hearer: beautiful ride, all
enliven with martial splendour; a rare old city, with strange
costume and wonderful architecture, to delight the eye of little
Amelia, who have never before see a foreign country, and fill she with
charming surprise: so that now and for a few week' space in a fine
handsome lodging, whereof the expense be bear by Jos and Osborne,
who be flush of money and full of kind attention to his wife--for
about a fortnight, I say, during which her honeymoon end, Mrs. Amelia
be as pleased and happy as any little bride out of England.
every day during this happy time there be novelty and amusement for
all party. there be a church to see, or a picture-gallery--there
be a ride, or an opera. the band of the regiment be make music
at all hour. the great folk of England walk in the Park--there
be a perpetual military festival. George, take out his wife to a
new jaunt or junket every night, be quite pleased with himself as
usual, and swear he be become quite a domestic character. and a
jaunt or a junket with HIM! be it not enough to set this little heart
beat with joy? her letter home to her mother be fill with
delight and gratitude at this season. her husband bid her buy lace,
millinery, jewel, and gimcrack of all sort. oh, he be the kind,
good, and most generous of man!
the sight of the very great company of lord and lady and fashionable
person who throng the town, and appear in every public place,
fill George's truly british soul with intense delight. they fling
off that happy frigidity and insolence of demeanour which occasionally
characterise the great at home, and appear in numberless public
place, condescend to mingle with the rest of the company whom they
meet there. one night at a party give by the general of the division
to which George's regiment belong, he have the honour of dance with
Lady Blanche Thistlewood, Lord Bareacres' daughter; he bustle for ice
and refreshment for the two noble lady; he push and squeeze for
Lady Bareacres' carriage; he brag about the Countess when he get
home, in a way which his own father could not have surpass. he
call upon the lady the next day; he ride by their side in the Park;
he ask their party to a great dinner at a restaurateur's, and be
quite wild with exultation when they agree to come. Old Bareacres,
who have not much pride and a large appetite, would go for a dinner
anywhere.
"I hope there will be no woman besides our own party," Lady Bareacres
say, after reflect upon the invitation which have be make, and
accept with too much precipitancy.
"Gracious Heaven, Mamma--you donot suppose the man would bring his
wife," shriek Lady Blanche, who have be languish in George's arm
in the newly import waltz for hour the night before. "the man be
bearable, but their women--"
"Wife, just married, dev'lish pretty woman, I hear," the old Earl say.
"well, my dear Blanche," say the mother, "I suppose, as Papa want to
go, we must go; but we neednot know they in England, you know." and so,
determine to cut their new acquaintance in Bond Street, these great
folk go to eat his dinner at Brussels, and condescend to make he
pay for their pleasure, show their dignity by make his wife
uncomfortable, and carefully exclude she from the conversation. this
be a species of dignity in which the high-breed british female reign
supreme. to watch the behaviour of a fine lady to other and humbler
woman, be a very good sport for a philosophical frequenter of Vanity
Fair.
this festival, on which honest George spend a great deal of money, be
the very dismallest of all the entertainment which Amelia have in her
honeymoon. she write the most piteous account of the feast home to
her mamma: how the Countess of Bareacres would not answer when speak
to; how Lady Blanche star at she with her eye-glass; and what a rage
Captain Dobbin be in at their behaviour; and how my lord, as they come
away from the feast, ask to see the bill, and pronounce it a d----
bad dinner, and d---- dear. but though Amelia tell all these story,
and write home regard her guest' rudeness, and her own
discomfiture, old Mrs. Sedley be mightily pleased nevertheless, and
talk about Emmy's friend, the Countess of Bareacres, with such
assiduity that the news how his son be entertaining peer and
peeress actually come to Osborne's ear in the City.
those who know the present Lieutenant-General Sir George Tufto, K.C.B.,
and have see he, as they may on most day in the season, pad and
in stay, strut down Pall Mall with a rickety swagger on his
high-heel lacquered boot, leer under the bonnet of passer-by,
or rid a showy chestnut, and ogle brougham in the Parks--those
who know the present Sir George Tufto would hardly recognise the daring
Peninsular and Waterloo officer. he have thick curl brown hair and
black eyebrow now, and his whisker be of the deep purple. he be
light-haired and bald in 1815, and stouter in the person and in the
limb, which especially have shrink very much of late. when he be
about seventy year of age (he be now nearly eighty), his hair, which
be very scarce and quite white, suddenly grow thick, and brown, and
curly, and his whisker and eyebrow take their present colour.
Ill-natured people say that his chest be all wool, and that his hair,
because it never grow, be a wig. Tom Tufto, with whose father he
quarrel ever so many year ago, declare that Mademoiselle de
Jaisey, of the french theatre, pull his grandpapa's hair off in the
green-room; but Tom be notoriously spiteful and jealous; and the
General's wig have nothing to do with our story.
one day, as some of our friend of the --th be saunter in the
flower-market of Brussels, have be to see the Hotel de Ville, which
Mrs. Major O'Dowd declare be not near so large or handsome as her
fawther's mansion of Glenmalony, an officer of rank, with an orderly
behind he, ride up to the market, and descend from his horse, come
amongst the flower, and select the very fine bouquet which money
could buy. the beautiful bundle be tie up in a paper, the officer
remount, give the nosegay into the charge of his military groom,
who carry it with a grin, follow his chief, who ride away in great
state and self-satisfaction.
"you should see the flower at Glenmalony," Mrs. O'Dowd be remark.
"I fawther have three Scotch garner with nine helper. we have an acre
of hot-house, and pine as common as pay in the sayson. our greep
weigh six pound every bunch of them, and upon I honour and conscience
I think our magnolia be as big as taykettle."
Dobbin, who never use to "draw out" Mrs. O'Dowd as that wicked Osborne
delight in do (much to Amelia's terror, who implore he to spare
she), fall back in the crowd, crowing and sputtering until he reach a
safe distance, when he explode amongst the astonished market-people
with shriek of yell laughter.
"Hwhatbe that gawky guggle about?" say Mrs. O'Dowd. "be it his nose
bleedn? he always use to say 'twa his nose bleedn, till he must have
pompe all the blood out of 'um. An't the magnolia at Glenmalony as
big as taykettle, O'Dowd?"
"'deed then they be, and big, Peggy," the Major say. when the
conversation be interrupt in the manner state by the arrival of the
officer who purchase the bouquet.
"devlish fine horse--who be it?" George ask.
"you should see I brother Molloy Malony's horse, Molasses, that win
the cop at the Curragh," the Major's wife be exclaim, and be
continue the family history, when her husband interrupt she by
saying--
"itbe General Tufto, who command the ---- cavalry division"; add
quietly, "he and I be both shoot in the same leg at Talavera."
"where you get your step," say George with a laugh. "General Tufto!
then, my dear, the Crawleys be come."
Amelia's heart fall--she know not why. the sun do not seem to shine
so bright. the tall old roof and gable look less picturesque all
of a sudden, though it be a brilliant sunset, and one of the bright
and most beautiful day at the end of May.
CHAPTER XXIX
Brussels
Mr. Jos have hire a pair of horse for his open carriage, with which
cattle, and the smart London vehicle, he make a very tolerable figure
in the drive about Brussels. George purchase a horse for his private
riding, and he and Captain Dobbin would often accompany the carriage in
which Jos and his sister take daily excursion of pleasure. they go
out that day in the park for their accustomed diversion, and there,
sure enough, George's remark with regard to the arrival of Rawdon
Crawley and his wife prove to be correct. in the midst of a little
troop of horseman, consist of some of the very great person in
Brussels, Rebecca be see in the prettiest and tight of
riding-habit, mount on a beautiful little Arab, which she ride to
perfection (have acquire the art at Queen's Crawley, where the
Baronet, Mr. Pitt, and Rawdon himself have give she many lesson), and
by the side of the gallant General Tufto.
"sure itbe the Juke himself," cry Mrs. Major O'Dowd to Jos, who begin
to blush violently; "and thatbe Lord Uxbridge on the bay. how elegant
he look! I brother, Molloy Malony, be as like he as two pay."
Rebecca do not make for the carriage; but as soon as she perceive her
old acquaintance Amelia seat in it, acknowledge her presence by a
gracious nod and smile, and by kiss and shake her finger
playfully in the direction of the vehicle. then she resume she
conversation with General Tufto, who ask "who the fat officer be in
the gold-lace cap?" on which Becky reply, "that he be an officer in
the East indian service." but Rawdon Crawley ride out of the rank of
his company, and come up and shake hand heartily with Amelia, and say
to Jos, "well, old boy, how be you?" and star in Mrs. O'Dowd's face
and at the black cock's feather until she begin to think she have make
a conquest of he.
George, who have be delay behind, ride up almost immediately with
Dobbin, and they touch their cap to the august personage, among
whom Osborne at once perceive Mrs. Crawley. he be delighted to see
Rawdon lean over his carriage familiarly and talk to Amelia, and
meet the aide-de-camp's cordial greeting with more than correspond
warmth. the nod between Rawdon and Dobbin be of the very faint
specimen of politeness.
Crawley tell George where they be stop with General Tufto at the
Hotel du Parc, and George make his friend promise to come speedily to
Osborne's own residence. "sorry I havenot see you three day ago,"
George say. "have a dinner at the restaurateur'--rather a nice thing.
Lord Bareacres, and the Countess, and Lady Blanche, be good enough to
dine with we--wish wehave have you." have thus let his friend know his
claim to be a man of fashion, Osborne part from Rawdon, who follow
the august squadron down an alley into which they canter, while
George and Dobbin resume their place, one on each side of Amelia's
carriage.
"how well the Juke look," Mrs. O'Dowd remark. "the Wellesleys and
Malonys be relate; but, of course, poor I would never dream of
introjuice myself unless his grace think proper to remember our
family-tie."
"hebe a great soldier," Jos say, much more at ease now the great man
be go. "be there ever a battle win like Salamanca? hey, Dobbin?
but where be it he learn his art? in India, my boy! the jungle's
the school for a general, mark I that. I know he myself, too, Mrs.
O'Dowd: we both of we dance the same evening with Miss Cutler,
daughter of Cutler of the Artillery, and a devilish fine girl, at
Dumdum."
the apparition of the great personage hold they all in talk during the
drive; and at dinner; and until the hour come when they be all to go
to the Opera.
it be almost like Old England. the house be fill with familiar
british face, and those toilette for which the british female have
long be celebrate. Mrs. O'Dowd's be not the least splendid amongst
these, and she have a curl on her forehead, and a set of irish diamond
and Cairngorms, which outshone all the decoration in the house, in her
notion. her presence use to excruciate Osborne; but go she would upon
all party of pleasure on which she hear her young friend be bent.
it never enter into her thought but that they must be charm with
her company.
"shebe be useful to you, my dear," George say to his wife, whom he
could leave alone with less scruple when she have this society. "but
what a comfort it be that Rebecca's come: you will have she for a
friend, and we may get rid now of this damn'd Irishwoman." to this
Amelia do not answer, yes or no: and how do we know what her thought
be?
the coup d'oeil of the Brussels opera-house do not strike Mrs. O'Dowd
as be so fine as the theatre in Fishamble Street, Dublin, nor be
french music at all equal, in her opinion, to the melody of her
native country. she favour her friend with these and other opinion
in a very loud tone of voice, and toss about a great clattering fan
she sport, with the most splendid complacency.
"who be that wonderful woman with Amelia, Rawdon, love?" say a lady in
an opposite box (who, almost always civil to her husband in private,
be more fond than ever of he in company).
"donot you see that creature with a yellow thing in her turban, and a
red satin gown, and a great watch?"
"near the pretty little woman in white?" ask a middle-aged gentleman
seat by the querist's side, with order in his button, and several
under-waistcoat, and a great, choky, white stock.
"that pretty woman in white be Amelia, General: you be remark all
the pretty woman, you naughty man."
"only one, begad, in the world!" say the General, delight, and the
lady give he a tap with a large bouquet which she have.
"Bedad itbe he," say Mrs. O'Dowd; "and thatbe the very bokay he
buy in the Marshy aux Flures!" and when Rebecca, have catch she
friend's eye, perform the little hand-kiss operation once more,
Mrs. Major O'D., take the compliment to herself, return the salute
with a gracious smile, which send that unfortunate Dobbin shriek out
of the box again.
at the end of the act, George be out of the box in a moment, and he
be even go to pay his respect to rebecca in her loge. he meet
Crawley in the lobby, however, where they exchange a few sentence
upon the occurrence of the last fortnight.
"you find my cheque all right at the agent's? George say, with a
know air.
"all right, my boy," Rawdon answer. "happy to give you your revenge.
Governor come round?"
"not yet," say George, "but he will; and you know Ihave some private
fortune through my mother. have Aunty relent?"
"sent I twenty pound, damn old screw. when shall we have a meet?
the General din out on Tuesday. cannot you come Tuesday? I say, make
Sedley cut off his moustache. what the devil do a civilian mean with
a moustache and those infernal frog to his coat! by-bye. try and come
on Tuesday"; and Rawdon be go-off with two brilliant young
gentleman of fashion, who be, like himself, on the staff of a general
officer.
George be only half pleased to be ask to dinner on that particular
day when the General be not to dine. "I will go in and pay my
respect to your wife," say he; at which Rawdon say, "Hm, as you
please," look very glum, and at which the two young officer
exchange knowing glance. George part from they and strut down
the lobby to the General's box, the number of which he have carefully
count.
"Entrez," say a clear little voice, and our friend find himself in
Rebecca's presence; who jump up, clap her hand together, and hold
out both of they to George, so charmed be she to see he. the
General, with the order in his button, star at the newcomer with a
sulky scowl, as much as to say, who the devil be you?
"my dear Captain George!" cry little rebecca in an ecstasy. "how
good of you to come. the General and I be mop together tete-a-tete.
General, this be my Captain George of whom you hear I talk."
"indeed," say the General, with a very small bow; "of what regiment be
Captain George?"
George mention the --th: how he wish he could have say it be a
crack cavalry corps.
"come home lately from the West Indies, I believe. not see much
service in the late war. quarter here, Captain George?"--the General
go on with kill haughtiness.
"not Captain George, you stupid man; Captain Osborne," rebecca say.
the General all the while be look savagely from one to the other.
"Captain Osborne, indeed! any relation to the l------ Osbornes?"
"we bear the same arm," George say, as indeed be the fact; Mr.
Osborne have consult with a herald in Long Acre, and pick the
l------ arm out of the peerage, when he set up his carriage fifteen
year before. the General make no reply to this announcement; but take
up his opera-glass--the double-barrel lorgnon be not invent in
those day--and pretend to examine the house; but Rebecca see that
his disengaged eye be work round in her direction, and shoot out
bloodshot glance at she and George.
she redouble in cordiality. "how be dear Amelia? but I neednot
ask: how pretty she look! and who be that nice good-natured look
creature with she--a flame of your? o, you wicked man! and there be
Mr. Sedley eat ice, I declare: how he seem to enjoy it! General,
why have we not have any ice?"
"shall I go and fetch you some?" say the General, burst with wrath.
"let I go, I entreat you," George say.
"no, I will go to Amelia's box. dear, sweet girl! give I your arm,
Captain George"; and so say, and with a nod to the General, she
trip into the lobby. she give George the queer, knowing look,
when they be together, a look which might have be interpret,
"donot you see the state of affair, and what a fool Ibe make of
he?" but he do not perceive it. he be think of his own plan,
and lose in pompous admiration of his own irresistible power of
pleasing.
the curse to which the General give a low utterance, as soon as
Rebecca and her conqueror have quit he, be so deep, that I be sure
no compositor would venture to print they be they write down. they
come from the General's heart; and a wonderful thing it be to think
that the human heart be capable of generate such produce, and can
throw out, as occasion demand, such a supply of lust and fury, rage
and hatred.
Amelia's gentle eye, too, have be fix anxiously on the pair, whose
conduct have so chafe the jealous General; but when Rebecca enter she
box, she fly to her friend with an affectionate rapture which show
itself, in spite of the publicity of the place; for she embrace she
dear friend in the presence of the whole house, at least in full
view of the General's glass, now bring to bear upon the Osborne
party. Mrs. Rawdon salute Jos, too, with the kindliest greeting: she
admire Mrs. O'Dowd's large Cairngorm brooch and superb irish diamond,
and wouldnot believe that they be not from Golconda direct. she
bustle, she chatter, she turn and twist, and smile upon one,
and smirk on another, all in full view of the jealous opera-glass
opposite. and when the time for the ballet come (in which there be no
dancer that go through her grimace or perform her comedy of action
well), she skip back to her own box, lean on Captain Dobbin's
arm this time. no, she would not have George's: he must stay and talk
to his dearest, good, little Amelia.
"what a humbug that woman be!" honest old Dobbin mumble to George,
when he come back from Rebecca's box, whither he have conduct she in
perfect silence, and with a countenance as glum as an undertaker's.
"she writhe and twist about like a snake. all the time she be here,
donot you see, George, how she be act at the General over the way?"
"Humbug--act! hang it, shebe the nice little woman in England,"
George reply, show his white tooth, and give his ambrosial
whisker a twirl. "you benot a man of the world, Dobbin. Dammy, look
at she now, shebe talk over Tufto in no time. look how hebe
laugh! Gad, what a shoulder she have! Emmy, why donot you have a
bouquet? everybody have a bouquet."
"Faith, then, why donot you BOY one?" Mrs. O'Dowd say; and both
Amelia and William Dobbin thank she for this timely observation. but
beyond this neither of the lady rally. Amelia be overpower by
the flash and the dazzle and the fashionable talk of her worldly rival.
even the O'Dowd be silent and subdue after Becky's brilliant
apparition, and scarcely say a word more about Glenmalony all the
evening.
"when do you intend to give up play, George, as you have promise I,
any time these hundred year?" Dobbin say to his friend a few day
after the night at the Opera. "when do you intend to give up
sermonise?" be the other's reply. "what the deuce, man, be you
alarm about? we play low; I win last night. you donot suppose
Crawley cheat? with fair play it come to pretty much the same thing
at the year's end."
"but I donot think he could pay if he lose," Dobbin say; and his
advice meet with the success which advice usually command. osborne and
Crawley be repeatedly together now. General Tufto din abroad
almost constantly. George be always welcome in the apartment (very
close indeed to those of the General) which the aide-de-camp and his
wife occupy in the hotel.
Amelia's manner be such when she and George visit Crawley and his
wife at these quarter, that they have very nearly come to their first
quarrel; that is, George scold his wife violently for her evident
unwillingness to go, and the high and mighty manner in which she
comport herself towards Mrs. Crawley, her old friend; and Amelia do
not say one single word in reply; but with her husband's eye upon she,
and rebecca scan she as she feel, be, if possible, more bashful
and awkward on the second visit which she pay to Mrs. Rawdon, than on
her first call.
Rebecca be doubly affectionate, of course, and would not take notice,
in the least, of her friend's coolness. "I think Emmy have become
prouder since her father's name be in the--since Mr. Sedley's
MISFORTUNES," rebecca say, soften the phrase charitably for
George's ear.
"upon my word, I think when we be at Brighton she be do I the
honour to be jealous of I; and now I suppose she be scandalise
because Rawdon, and I, and the General live together. why, my dear
creature, how could we, with our mean, live at all, but for a friend
to share expense? and do you suppose that Rawdon be not big enough to
take care of my honour? but Ibe very much oblige to Emmy, very," Mrs.
Rawdon say.
"Pooh, jealousy!" answer George, "all woman be jealous."
"and all man too. benot you jealous of General Tufto, and the
General of you, on the night of the Opera? why, he be ready to eat I
for go with you to visit that foolish little wife of your; as if I
care a pin for either of you," Crawley's wife say, with a pert toss of
her head. "will you dine here? the dragon dine with the
Commander-in-chief. great news be stir. they say the French have
cross the frontier. we shall have a quiet dinner."
George accept the invitation, although his wife be a little ailing.
they be now not quite six week marry. another woman be laugh
or sneer at her expense, and he not angry. he be not even angry
with himself, this good-natured fellow. it be a shame, he own to
himself; but hang it, if a pretty woman will throw herself in your way,
why, what can a fellow do, you know? I be rather free about woman, he
have often say, smile and nod knowingly to Stubble and Spooney,
and other comrade of the mess-table; and they rather respect he
than otherwise for this prowess. next to conquer in war, conquer
in love have be a source of pride, time out of mind, amongst man in
Vanity Fair, or how should schoolboy brag of their amour, or Don Juan
be popular?
so Mr. Osborne, have a firm conviction in his own mind that he be a
woman-killer and destine to conquer, do not run counter to his fate,
but yield himself up to it quite complacently. and as Emmy do not
say much or plague he with her jealousy, but merely become unhappy and
pin over it miserably in secret, he choose to fancy that she be not
suspicious of what all his acquaintance be perfectly aware--namely,
that he be carry on a desperate flirtation with Mrs. Crawley. he
ride with she whenever she be free. he pretend regimental business
to Amelia (by which falsehood she be not in the least deceived), and
consign his wife to solitude or her brother's society, pass his
evening in the Crawleys' company; lose money to the husband and
flatter himself that the wife be die of love for he. it be very
likely that this worthy couple never absolutely conspire and agree
together in so many word: the one to cajole the young gentleman,
whilst the other win his money at card: but they understand each other
perfectly well, and Rawdon let Osborne come and go with entire good
humour.
George be so occupied with his new acquaintance that he and William
Dobbin be by no mean so much together as formerly. George avoid
he in public and in the regiment, and, as we see, do not like those
sermon which his senior be dispose to inflict upon he. if some
part of his conduct make Captain Dobbin exceedingly grave and cool; of
what use be it to tell George that, though his whisker be large,
and his own opinion of his knowingness great, he be as green as a
schoolboy? that Rawdon be make a victim of he as he have do of
many before, and as soon as he have use he would fling he off with
scorn? he would not listen: and so, as Dobbin, upon those day when
he visit the Osborne house, seldom have the advantage of meet his
old friend, much painful and unavaile talk between they be spar.
our friend George be in the full career of the pleasure of Vanity
Fair.
there never be, since the day of Darius, such a brilliant train of
camp-follower as hang round the Duke of Wellington's army in the Low
Countries, in 1815; and lead it dance and feast, as it be, up to
the very brink of battle. a certain ball which a noble Duchess give at
Brussels on the 15th of June in the above-name year be historical.
all Brussels have be in a state of excitement about it, and I have
hear from lady who be in that town at the period, that the talk
and interest of person of their own sex regard the ball be much
great even than in respect of the enemy in their front. the
struggle, intrigue, and prayer to get ticket be such as only
english lady will employ, in order to gain admission to the society
of the great of their own nation.
Jos and Mrs. O'Dowd, who be pant to be ask, strove in vain to
procure ticket; but other of our friend be more lucky. for
instance, through the interest of my Lord Bareacres, and as a set-off
for the dinner at the restaurateur's, George get a card for Captain and
Mrs. Osborne; which circumstance greatly elate he. Dobbin, who be a
friend of the General command the division in which their regiment
be, come laugh one day to Mrs. Osborne, and display a similar
invitation, which make Jos envious, and George wonder how the deuce he
should be get into society. Mr. and Mrs. Rawdon, finally, be of
course invite; as become the friend of a General command a cavalry
brigade.
on the appoint night, George, have command new dress and
ornament of all sort for Amelia, drive to the famous ball, where his
wife do not know a single soul. after look about for Lady
Bareacres, who cut he, think the card be quite enough--and after
place Amelia on a bench, he leave she to her own cogitation there,
thinking, on his own part, that he have behave very handsomely in
get her new clothe, and bring she to the ball, where she be
free to amuse herself as she like. her thought be not of the
pleasantest, and nobody except honest Dobbin come to disturb they.
whilst her appearance be an utter failure (as her husband feel with a
sort of rage), Mrs. Rawdon Crawley's debut be, on the contrary, very
brilliant. she arrive very late. her face be radiant; her dress
perfection. in the midst of the great person assemble, and the
eye-glass direct to she, Rebecca seem to be as cool and collect
as when she use to marshal Miss Pinkerton's little girl to church.
number of the man she know already, and the dandy throng round
she. as for the lady, it be whisper among they that Rawdon have
run away with she from out of a convent, and that she be a relation of
the Montmorency family. she speak French so perfectly that there might
be some truth in this report, and it be agree that her manner be
fine, and her air distingue. Fifty would-be partner throng round
she at once, and press to have the honour to dance with she. but she
say she be engage, and only go to dance very little; and make she
way at once to the place where Emmy sate quite unnoticed, and dismally
unhappy. and so, to finish the poor child at once, Mrs. Rawdon run and
greet affectionately her dear Amelia, and begin forthwith to
patronise she. she find fault with her friend's dress, and her
hairdresser, and wonder how she could be so chaussee, and vow that
she must send she corsetiere the next morning. she vow that it be a
delightful ball; that there be everybody that every one know, and only
a very few nobody in the whole room. it be a fact, that in a
fortnight, and after three dinner in general society, this young woman
have get up the genteel jargon so well, that a native could not speak it
well; and it be only from her french be so good, that you could
know she be not a bear woman of fashion.
George, who have leave Emmy on her bench on enter the ball-room, very
soon find his way back when Rebecca be by her dear friend's side.
Becky be just lecture Mrs. Osborne upon the folly which she
husband be commit. "for God's sake, stop he from gambling, my
dear," she say, "or he will ruin himself. he and Rawdon be play at
card every night, and you know he be very poor, and Rawdon will win
every shilling from he if he do not take care. why donot you
prevent he, you little careless creature? why donot you come to we of
an evening, instead of mop at home with that Captain Dobbin? I dare
say he be tre aimable; but how could one love a man with foot of such
size? your husband's foot be darling--here he come. where have you
be, wretch? here be Emmy cry her eye out for you. be you
come to fetch I for the quadrille?" and she leave her bouquet and
shawl by Amelia's side, and trip off with George to dance. woman
only know how to wound so. there be a poison on the tip of their
little shaft, which sting a thousand time more than a man's blunter
weapon. our poor Emmy, who have never hat, never sneer all her
life, be powerless in the hand of her remorseless little enemy.
George dance with Rebecca twice or thrice--how many time Amelia
scarcely know. she sit quite unnoticed in her corner, except when
Rawdon come up with some word of clumsy conversation: and later in
the evening, when Captain Dobbin make so bold as to bring she
refreshment and sit beside she. he do not like to ask she why she
be so sad; but as a pretext for the tear which be fill in her
eye, she tell he that Mrs. Crawley have alarm she by tell she
that George would go on play.
"it be curious, when a man be bent upon play, by what clumsy rogue he
will allow himself to be cheat," Dobbin say; and Emmy say,
"indeed." she be think of something else. it be not the loss of
the money that grieve she.
at last George come back for Rebecca's shawl and flower. she be
go away. she do not even condescend to come back and say good-bye
to Amelia. the poor girl let her husband come and go without say a
word, and her head fall on her breast. Dobbin have be call away,
and be whisper deep in conversation with the General of the
division, his friend, and have not see this last parting. George go
away then with the bouquet; but when he give it to the owner, there lie
a note, coil like a snake among the flower. Rebecca's eye catch it
at once. she have be use to deal with note in early life. she put
out her hand and take the nosegay. he see by her eye as they meet,
that she be aware what she should find there. her husband hurry she
away, still too intent upon his own thought, seemingly, to take note
of any mark of recognition which might pass between his friend and his
wife. these be, however, but trifle. Rebecca give George her hand
with one of her usual quick knowing glance, and make a curtsey and
walk away. George bow over the hand, say nothing in reply to a
remark of Crawley's, do not hear it even, his brain be so throb
with triumph and excitement, and allow they to go away without a word.
his wife see the one part at least of the bouquet-scene. it be quite
natural that George should come at Rebecca's request to get her her
scarf and flower: it be no more than he have do twenty time before
in the course of the last few day; but now it be too much for she.
"William," she say, suddenly cling to Dobbin, who be near she,
"youhave always be very kind to I--I'm--i'm not well. take I home."
she do not know she call he by his christian name, as George be
accustom to do. he go away with she quickly. her lodging be
hard by; and they thread through the crowd without, where everything
seem to be more astir than even in the ball-room within.
George have be angry twice or thrice at find his wife up on his
return from the party which he frequent: so she go straight to
bed now; but although she do not sleep, and although the din and
clatter, and the galloping of horseman be incessant, she never hear
any of these noise, have quite other disturbance to keep she awake.
Osborne meanwhile, wild with elation, go off to a play-table, and
begin to bet frantically. he win repeatedly. "everything succeed with
I to-night," he say. but his luck at play even do not cure he of
his restlessness, and he start up after awhile, pocket his
winning, and go to a buffet, where he drink off many bumper of wine.
here, as he be rattle away to the people around, laugh loudly and
wild with spirit, Dobbin find he. he have be to the card-table to
look there for his friend. Dobbin look as pale and grave as his
comrade be flushed and jovial.
"Hullo, Dob! come and drink, old Dob! the Duke's wine be famous. give
I some more, you sir"; and he hold out a trembling glass for the
liquor.
"come out, George," say Dobbin, still gravely; "donot drink."
"drink! therebe nothing like it. drink yourself, and light up your
lantern jaw, old boy. herebe to you."
Dobbin go up and whisper something to he, at which George, give
a start and a wild hurray, toss off his glass, clap it on the
table, and walk away speedily on his friend's arm. "the enemy have
pass the Sambre," William say, "and our left be already engage.
come away. we be to march in three hour."
Away go George, his nerve quiver with excitement at the news so
long look for, so sudden when it come. what be love and intrigue
now? he think about a thousand thing but these in his rapid walk to
his quarter--his past life and future chance--the fate which might be
before he--the wife, the child perhaps, from whom unseen he might be
about to part. oh, how he wish that night's work undo! and that
with a clear conscience at least he might say farewell to the tender
and guileless be by whose love he have set such little store!
he think over his brief married life. in those few week he have
frightfully dissipate his little capital. how wild and reckless he
have be! should any mischance befall he: what be then leave for
she? how unworthy he be of she. why have he marry she? he be not
fit for marriage. why have he disobey his father, who have be always
so generous to he? Hope, remorse, ambition, tenderness, and selfish
regret fill his heart. he sate down and write to his father,
remember what he have say once before, when he be engage to fight
a duel. Dawn faintly streak the sky as he close this farewell
letter. he seal it, and kiss the superscription. he think how he
have desert that generous father, and of the thousand kindness which
the stern old man have do he.
he have look into Amelia's bedroom when he enter; she lie quiet, and
her eye seem closed, and he be glad that she be asleep. on
arrive at his quarter from the ball, he have find his regimental
servant already make preparation for his departure: the man have
understand his signal to be still, and these arrangement be very
quickly and silently make. should he go in and wake Amelia, he
think, or leave a note for her brother to break the news of departure
to she? he go in to look at she once again.
she have be awake when he first enter her room, but have keep she
eye close, so that even her wakefulness should not seem to reproach
he. but when he have return, so soon after herself, too, this timid
little heart have feel more at ease, and turn towards he as he stept
softly out of the room, she have fall into a light sleep. George come
in and look at she again, enter still more softly. by the pale
night-lamp he could see her sweet, pale face--the purple eyelid be
fringe and closed, and one round arm, smooth and white, lie outside of
the coverlet. good God! how pure she be; how gentle, how tender, and
how friendless! and he, how selfish, brutal, and black with crime!
heart-stain, and shame-stricken, he stand at the bed's foot, and
look at the sleep girl. how dare he--who be he, to pray for one
so spotless! God bless she! God bless she! he come to the bedside,
and look at the hand, the little soft hand, lie asleep; and he bend
over the pillow noiselessly towards the gentle pale face.
two fair arm close tenderly round his neck as he stoop down. "I be
awake, George," the poor child say, with a sob fit to break the little
heart that nestle so closely by his own. she be awake, poor soul,
and to what? at that moment a bugle from the Place of Arms begin
sound clearly, and be take up through the town; and amidst the
drum of the infantry, and the shrill pipe of the Scotch, the whole
city awoke.
CHAPTER XXX
"the Girl I leave behind I"
we do not claim to rank among the military novelist. our place be with
the non-combatant. when the deck be clear for action we go below
and wait meekly. we should only be in the way of the manoeuvre that
the gallant fellow be perform overhead. we shall go no far
with the --th than to the city gate: and leave Major O'Dowd to his
duty, come back to the Major's wife, and the lady and the baggage.
now the Major and his lady, who have not be invite to the ball at
which in our last chapter other of our friend figure, have much more
time to take their wholesome natural rest in bed, than be accord to
people who wish to enjoy pleasure as well as to do duty. "itbe my
belief, Peggy, my dear," say he, as he placidly pull his nightcap
over his ear, "that there will be such a ball dance in a day or two
as some of them have never hear the chune of"; and he be much more
happy to retire to rest after partaking of a quiet tumbler, than to
figure at any other sort of amusement. Peggy, for her part, would have
like to have show her turban and bird of paradise at the ball, but
for the information which her husband have give she, and which make she
very grave.
"Iwould like ye wake I about half an hour before the assembly beat," the
Major say to his lady. "call I at half-past one, Peggy dear, and see
I thing be ready. may be Iwill not come back to breakfast, Mrs. o'd."
with which word, which signify his opinion that the regiment would
march the next morning, the Major cease talking, and fall asleep.
Mrs. O'Dowd, the good housewife, array in curl paper and a camisole,
feel that her duty be to act, and not to sleep, at this juncture.
"time enough for that," she say, "when Mick's go"; and so she pack
his travel valise ready for the march, brush his cloak, his cap,
and other warlike habiliment, set they out in order for he; and
stow away in the cloak pocket a light package of portable
refreshment, and a wicker-cover flask or pocket-pistol, contain
near a pint of a remarkably sound Cognac brandy, of which she and the
Major approve very much; and as soon as the hand of the "repayther"
point to half-past one, and its interior arrangement (it have a tone
quite equal to a cathaydral, its fair owner consider) knell forth
that fatal hour, Mrs. O'Dowd wake up her Major, and have as comfortable
a cup of coffee prepare for he as any make that morning in Brussels.
and who be there will deny that this worthy lady's preparation
betoken affection as much as the fit of tear and hysteric by which
more sensitive female exhibit their love, and that their partaking
of this coffee, which they drink together while the bugle be
sound the turn-out and the drum beat in the various quarter of
the town, be not more useful and to the purpose than the outpouring of
any mere sentiment could be? the consequence be, that the Major
appear on parade quite trim, fresh, and alert, his well-shave rosy
countenance, as he sate on horseback, give cheerfulness and
confidence to the whole corps. all the officer salute she when the
regiment march by the balcony on which this brave woman stand, and
wave they a cheer as they pass; and I daresay it be not from want
of courage, but from a sense of female delicacy and propriety, that she
refrain from lead the gallant--th personally into action.
on Sundays, and at period of a solemn nature, Mrs. O'Dowd use to read
with great gravity out of a large volume of her uncle the Dean's
sermon. it have be of great comfort to she on board the transport as
they be come home, and be very nearly wrecked, on their return
from the West Indies. after the regiment's departure she betook
herself to this volume for meditation; perhaps she do not understand
much of what she be read, and her thought be elsewhere: but the
sleep project, with poor Mick's nightcap there on the pillow, be quite
a vain one. so it be in the world. Jack or Donald march away to
glory with his knapsack on his shoulder, step out briskly to the
tune of "the Girl I leave behind I." it be she who remain and
suffer--and have the leisure to think, and brood, and remember.
know how useless regret be, and how the indulgence of sentiment
only serve to make people more miserable, Mrs. Rebecca wisely
determine to give way to no vain feeling of sorrow, and bear the
parting from her husband with quite a spartan equanimity. indeed
Captain Rawdon himself be much more affected at the leave-taking than
the resolute little woman to whom he bid farewell. she have master
this rude coarse nature; and he love and worship she with all his
faculty of regard and admiration. in all his life he have never be
so happy, as, during the past few month, his wife have make he. all
former delight of turf, mess, hunting-field, and gambling-table; all
previous love and courtship of milliner, opera-dancer, and the like
easy triumph of the clumsy military Adonis, be quite insipid when
compare to the lawful matrimonial pleasure which of late he have
enjoy. she have know perpetually how to divert he; and he have find
his house and her society a thousand time more pleasant than any place
or company which he have ever frequent from his childhood until now.
and he curse his past folly and extravagance, and bemoan his vast
outlying debt above all, which must remain for ever as obstacle to
prevent his wife's advancement in the world. he have often groan over
these in midnight conversation with Rebecca, although as a bachelor
they have never give he any disquiet. he himself be strike with this
phenomenon. "hang it," he would say (or perhaps use a still strong
expression out of his simple vocabulary), "before I be married I
donot care what bill I put my name to, and so long as Moses would
wait or Levy would renew for three month, I keep on never mind.
but since Ibe marry, except renew, of course, I give you my honour
Ihave not touch a bit of stamp paper."
rebecca always know how to conjure away these mood of melancholy.
"why, my stupid love," she would say, "we have not do with your aunt
yet. if she fail we, benot there what you call the Gazette? or, stop,
when your uncle Bute's life drop, I have another scheme. the living
have always belong to the young brother, and why shouldnot you sell
out and go into the Church?" the idea of this conversion set Rawdon
into roar of laughter: you might have hear the explosion through the
hotel at midnight, and the haw-haw of the great dragoon's voice.
General Tufto hear he from his quarter on the first floor above
they; and Rebecca act the scene with great spirit, and preach
Rawdon's first sermon, to the immense delight of the General at
breakfast.
but these be mere by-go day and talk. when the final news arrive
that the campaign be open, and the troop be to march, Rawdon's
gravity become such that Becky rally he about it in a manner which
rather hurt the feeling of the Guardsman. "you donot suppose Ibe
afraid, Becky, I should think," he say, with a tremor in his voice.
"but Ibe a pretty good mark for a shot, and you see if it bring I
down, why I leave one and perhaps two behind I whom I should wish to
provide for, as I bring them into the scrape. it be no laughing
matter that, Mrs. C., anyway."
rebecca by a hundred caress and kind word try to soothe the
feeling of the wound lover. it be only when her vivacity and sense
of humour get the well of this sprightly creature (as they would do
under most circumstance of life indeed) that she would break out with
her satire, but she could soon put on a demure face. "dearest love,"
she say, "do you suppose I feel nothing?" and hastily dash
something from her eye, she look up in her husband's face with a
smile.
"look here," say he. "if I drop, let we see what there be for you. I
have have a pretty good run of luck here, and herebe two hundred and
thirty pound. I have get ten napoleon in my pocket. that be as much
as I shall want; for the General pay everything like a prince; and if
Ibe hit, why you know I cost nothing. donot cry, little woman; I may
live to vex you yet. well, I shallnot take either of my horse, but
shall ride the General's grey charger: itbe cheap, and I tell he
mine be lame. if Ibe do, those two ought to fetch you something.
Grigg offer ninety for the mare yesterday, before this confound
news come, and like a fool I wouldnot let she go under the two o's.
Bullfinch will fetch his price any day, only youwould well sell he in
this country, because the dealer have so many bill of mine, and so
Iwould rather he shouldnot go back to England. your little mare the
General give you will fetch something, and therebe no d--d livery
stable bill here as there be in London," Rawdon add, with a laugh.
"therebe that dressing-case cost I two hundred--that be, I owe two for
it; and the gold top and bottle must be worth thirty or forty.
please to put that up the spout, ma'am, with my pin, and ring, and
watch and chain, and thing. they cost a precious lot of money. Miss
Crawley, I know, pay a hundred down for the chain and ticker. gold
top and bottle, indeed! dammy, Ibe sorry I donot take more now.
Edwards press on I a silver-gilt boot-jack, and I might have have a
dressing-case fit up with a silver warming-pan, and a service of
plate. but we must make the good of what wehave get, Becky, you know."
and so, make his last disposition, Captain Crawley, who have seldom
think about anything but himself, until the last few month of his
life, when Love have obtain the mastery over the dragoon, go through
the various item of his little catalogue of effect, strive to see
how they might be turn into money for his wife's benefit, in case any
accident should befall he. he please himself by note down with a
pencil, in his big schoolboy handwriting, the various item of his
portable property which might be sell for his widow's advantage as, for
example, "my double-barril by Manton, say 40 guineas; my driving cloak,
line with sable fur, 50 pound; my duel pistol in rosewood case
(same which I shoot Captain Marker), 20 pound; my regulation
saddle-holster and housing; my Laurie ditto," and so forth, over all
of which article he make Rebecca the mistress.
faithful to his plan of economy, the Captain dress himself in his
old and shabby uniform and epaulet, leave the new behind,
under his wife's (or it might be his widow's) guardianship. and this
famous dandy of Windsor and Hyde Park go off on his campaign with a
kit as modest as that of a sergeant, and with something like a prayer
on his lip for the woman he be leave. he take she up from the
ground, and hold she in his arm for a minute, tight pressed against
his strong-beat heart. his face be purple and his eye dim, as he
put she down and leave she. he ride by his General's side, and smoke
his cigar in silence as they hasten after the troop of the General's
brigade, which precede they; and it be not until they be some mile
on their way that he leave off twirl his moustache and break silence.
and Rebecca, as we have say, wisely determined not to give way to
unavaile sentimentality on her husband's departure. she wave he an
adieu from the window, and stand there for a moment look out after
he be go. the cathedral tower and the full gable of the quaint old
house be just begin to blush in the sunrise. there have be no
rest for she that night. she be still in her pretty ball-dress, her
fair hair hang somewhat out of curl on her neck, and the circle
round her eye dark with watching. "what a fright I seem," she say,
examine herself in the glass, "and how pale this pink make one
look!" so she divest herself of this pink raiment; in do which a
note fall out from her corsage, which she pick up with a smile, and
lock into her dressing-box. and then she put her bouquet of the ball
into a glass of water, and go to bed, and sleep very comfortably.
the town be quite quiet when she wake up at ten o'clock, and partook
of coffee, very requisite and comfort after the exhaustion and grief
of the morning's occurrence.
this meal over, she resume honest Rawdon's calculation of the night
previous, and survey her position. should the bad befall, all
thing consider, she be pretty well to do. there be her own
trinket and trousseau, in addition to those which her husband have leave
behind. Rawdon's generosity, when they be first marry, have already
be describe and laud. besides these, and the little mare, the
General, her slave and worshipper, have make she many very handsome
present, in the shape of cashmere shawl buy at the auction of a
bankrupt french general's lady, and numerous tribute from the
jeweller' shop, all of which betoken her admirer's taste and
wealth. as for "ticker," as poor Rawdon call watch, her
apartment be alive with their clicking. for, happen to mention
one night that her, which Rawdon have give to she, be of English
workmanship, and go ill, on the very next morning there come to she a
little bijou mark Leroy, with a chain and cover charmingly set with
turquoise, and another sign Brequet, which be cover with pearl,
and yet scarcely big than a half-crown. General Tufto have buy
one, and Captain Osborne have gallantly present the other. Mrs.
Osborne have no watch, though, to do George justice, she might have have
one for the asking, and the honourable Mrs. Tufto in England have an old
instrument of her mother's that might have serve for the plate-warming
pan which Rawdon talk about. if Messrs. Howell and James be to
publish a list of the purchaser of all the trinket which they sell,
how surprised would some family be: and if all these ornament go
to gentleman's lawful wife and daughter, what a profusion of
jewellery there would be exhibit in the genteelest home of Vanity
Fair!
every calculation make of these valuable Mrs. Rebecca find, not
without a pungent feeling of triumph and self-satisfaction, that should
circumstance occur, she might reckon on six or seven hundred pound at
the very least, to begin the world with; and she pass the morning
disposing, order, look out, and lock up her property in the
most agreeable manner. among the note in Rawdon's pocket-book be a
draft for twenty pound on Osborne's banker. this make she think about
Mrs. Osborne. "I will go and get the draft cash," she say, "and pay
a visit afterwards to poor little Emmy." if this be a novel without a
hero, at least let we lay claim to a heroine. no man in the british
army which have march away, not the great Duke himself, could be more
cool or collect in the presence of doubt and difficulty, than the
indomitable little aide-de-camp's wife.
and there be another of our acquaintance who be also to be leave
behind, a non-combatant, and whose emotion and behaviour we have
therefore a right to know. this be our friend the ex-collector of
Boggley Wollah, whose rest be break, like other people's, by the
sounding of the bugle in the early morning. be a great sleeper,
and fond of his bed, it be possible he would have snooze on until his
usual hour of rise in the forenoon, in spite of all the drum,
bugle, and bagpipe in the british army, but for an interruption,
which do not come from George Osborne, who share Jos's quarter with
he, and be as usual occupy too much with his own affair or with
grief at part with his wife, to think of take leave of his
slumber brother-in-law--it be not George, we say, who interpose
between Jos Sedley and sleep, but Captain Dobbin, who come and rouse
he up, insist on shake hand with he before his departure.
"very kind of you," say Jos, yawning, and wish the Captain at the
deuce.
"I--I donot like to go off without say good-bye, you know," Dobbin
say in a very incoherent manner; "because you know some of we maynot
come back again, and I like to see you all well, and--and that sort of
thing, you know."
"what do you mean?" Jos ask, rub his eye. the Captain do not
in the least hear he or look at the stout gentleman in the nightcap,
about whom he profess to have such a tender interest. the hypocrite
be look and listen with all his might in the direction of
George's apartment, stride about the room, upset the chair,
beat the tattoo, bite his nail, and show other sign of great
inward emotion.
Jos have always have rather a mean opinion of the Captain, and now begin
to think his courage be somewhat equivocal. "what be it I can do for
you, Dobbin?" he say, in a sarcastic tone.
"I tell you what you can do," the Captain reply, come up to the
bed; "we march in a quarter of an hour, Sedley, and neither George nor
I may ever come back. mind you, you be not to stir from this town
until you ascertain how thing go. you be to stay here and watch over
your sister, and comfort she, and see that no harm come to she. if
anything happen to George, remember she have no one but you in the
world to look to. if it go wrong with the army, youwill see her safe
back to England; and you will promise I on your word that you will
never desert she. I know you willnot: as far as money go, you be
always free enough with that. do you want any? I mean, have you enough
gold to take you back to England in case of a misfortune?"
"Sir," say Jos, majestically, "when I want money, I know where to ask
for it. and as for my sister, you neednot tell I how I ought to
behave to she."
"you speak like a man of spirit, Jos," the other answer good-naturedly,
"and I be glad that George can leave she in such good hand.
so I may give he your word of honour, may I, that in case of extremity
you will stand by she?"
"of course, of course," answer Mr. Jos, whose generosity in money
matter Dobbin estimate quite correctly.
"and youwill see she safe out of Brussels in the event of a defeat?"
"a defeat! D---- it, sir, itbe impossible. donot try and frighten I,"
the hero cry from his bed; and Dobbin's mind be thus perfectly set
at ease now that Jos have speak out so resolutely respect his
conduct to his sister. "at least," think the Captain, "there will be
a retreat secure for she in case the bad should ensue."
if Captain Dobbin expect to get any personal comfort and satisfaction
from have one more view of Amelia before the regiment march away,
his selfishness be punish just as such odious egotism deserve to
be. the door of Jos's bedroom open into the sitting-room which be
common to the family party, and opposite this door be that of Amelia's
chamber. the bugle have waken everybody: there be no use in
concealment now. George's servant be pack in this room: Osborne
come in and out of the contiguous bedroom, fling to the man such
article as he think fit to carry on the campaign. and presently
Dobbin have the opportunity which his heart covet, and he get sight of
Amelia's face once more. but what a face it be! so white, so wild
and despair-stricken, that the remembrance of it haunt he afterwards
like a crime, and the sight smite he with inexpressible pang of
longing and pity.
she be wrap in a white morning dress, her hair fall on her
shoulder, and her large eye fix and without light. by way of
help on the preparation for the departure, and show that she too
could be useful at a moment so critical, this poor soul have take up a
sash of George's from the drawer whereon it lay, and follow he to
and fro with the sash in her hand, look on mutely as his packing
proceed. she come out and stand, lean at the wall, hold this
sash against her bosom, from which the heavy net of crimson drop
like a large stain of blood. our gentle-hearted Captain feel a guilty
shock as he look at she. "good God," think he, "and be it grief
like this I dare to pry into?" and there be no help: no mean to
soothe and comfort this helpless, speechless misery. he stand for a
moment and look at she, powerless and tear with pity, as a parent
regard an infant in pain.
at last, George take Emmy's hand, and lead she back into the bedroom,
from whence he come out alone. the parting have take place in that
moment, and he be go.
"thank Heaven that be over," George thought, bound down the stair,
his sword under his arm, as he run swiftly to the alarm ground, where
the regiment be muster, and whither troop man and officer
hurrying from their billet; his pulse be throb and his cheek
flush: the great game of war be go to be play, and he one of
the player. what a fierce excitement of doubt, hope, and pleasure!
what tremendous hazard of loss or gain! what be all the game of
chance he have ever play compare to this one? into all contest
require athletic skill and courage, the young man, from his boyhood
upwards, have fling himself with all his might. the champion of his
school and his regiment, the bravos of his companion have follow he
everywhere; from the boy' cricket-match to the garrison-race, he have
win a hundred of triumph; and wherever he go woman and man have
admire and envy he. what quality be there for which a man get
so speedy a return of applause, as those of bodily superiority,
activity, and valour? time out of mind strength and courage have be
the theme of bard and romance; and from the story of Troy down to
to-day, poetry have always choose a soldier for a hero. I wonder be it
because man be coward in heart that they admire bravery so much, and
place military valour so far beyond every other quality for reward and
worship?
so, at the sound of that stirring call to battle, George jump away
from the gentle arm in which he have be dally; not without a
feeling of shame (although his wife's hold on he have be but feeble),
that he should have be detain there so long. the same feeling of
eagerness and excitement be amongst all those friend of his of whom
we have have occasional glimpse, from the stout senior Major, who lead
the regiment into action, to little Stubble, the Ensign, who be to
bear its colour on that day.
the sun be just rise as the march begin--it be a gallant sight--the
band lead the column, play the regimental march--then come the
Major in command, rid upon Pyramus, his stout charger--then march
the grenadier, their captain at their head; in the centre be the
colour, bear by the senior and junior Ensigns--then George come
marching at the head of his company. he look up, and smile at
Amelia, and pass on; and even the sound of the music die away.
CHAPTER XXXI
in which Jos Sedley take Care of his sister
thus all the superior officer be summon on duty elsewhere, Jos
Sedley be leave in command of the little colony at Brussels, with
Amelia invalid, Isidor, his belgian servant, and the bonne, who be
maid-of-all-work for the establishment, as a garrison under he. though
he be disturb in spirit, and his rest destroy by Dobbin's
interruption and the occurrence of the morning, Jos nevertheless
remain for many hour in bed, wakeful and roll about there until
his usual hour of rise have arrive. the sun be high in the heaven,
and our gallant friend of the --th mile on their march, before the
civilian appear in his flowered dressing-gown at breakfast.
about George's absence, his brother-in-law be very easy in mind.
perhaps Jos be rather pleased in his heart that Osborne be go, for
during George's presence, the other have play but a very secondary
part in the household, and Osborne do not scruple to show his contempt
for the stout civilian. but Emmy have always be good and attentive to
he. it be she who minister to his comfort, who superintend the
dish that he like, who walk or ride with he (as she have many, too
many, opportunity of do, for where be George?) and who interpose
her sweet face between his anger and her husband's scorn. many timid
remonstrance have she utter to George in behalf of her brother, but
the former in his trenchant way cut these entreaty short. "Ibe an
honest man," he say, "and if I have a feeling I show it, as an honest
man will. how the deuce, my dear, would you have I behave
respectfully to such a fool as your brother?" so Jos be pleased with
George's absence. his plain hat, and glove on a sideboard, and the
idea that the owner be away, cause Jos I donot know what secret
thrill of pleasure. "he willnot be trouble I this morning," Jos
thought, "with his dandified air and his impudence."
"put the Captain's hat into the ante-room," he say to Isidor, the
servant.
"perhaps he willnot want it again," reply the lackey, look knowingly
at his master. he hat George too, whose insolence towards he be
quite of the English sort.
"and ask if Madame be come to breakfast," Mr. Sedley say with great
majesty, ashame to enter with a servant upon the subject of his
dislike for George. the truth be, he have abuse his brother to the
valet a score of time before.
alas! Madame could not come to breakfast, and cut the tartine that
Mr. Jos like. Madame be a great deal too ill, and have be in a
frightful state ever since her husband's departure, so her bonne say.
Jos show his sympathy by pour she out a large cup of tea it be
his way of exhibit kindness: and he improve on this; he not only
send her breakfast, but he bethink he what delicacy she would most
like for dinner.
Isidor, the valet, have look on very sulkily, while Osborne's servant
be dispose of his master's baggage previous to the Captain's
departure: for in the first place he hat Mr. Osborne, whose conduct
to he, and to all inferior, be generally overbearing (nor do the
continental domestic like to be treat with insolence as our own
well-temper servant do), and secondly, he be angry that so many
valuable should be remove from under his hand, to fall into other
people's possession when the English discomfiture should arrive. of
this defeat he and a vast number of other person in Brussels and
Belgium do not make the slight doubt. the almost universal belief
be, that the Emperor would divide the prussian and english army,
annihilate one after the other, and march into Brussels before three
day be over: when all the movable of his present master, who would
be kill, or fugitive, or prisoner, would lawfully become the
property of Monsieur Isidor.
as he help Jos through his toilsome and complicated daily toilette,
this faithful servant would calculate what he should do with the very
article with which he be decorate his master's person. he would
make a present of the silver essence-bottle and toilet knicknack to a
young lady of whom he be fond; and keep the English cutlery and the
large ruby pin for himself. it would look very smart upon one of the
fine frilled shirt, which, with the gold-laced cap and the frogged
frock coat, that might easily be cut down to suit his shape, and the
Captain's gold-head cane, and the great double ring with the ruby,
which he would have make into a pair of beautiful earring, he
calculate would make a perfect Adonis of himself, and render
Mademoiselle Reine an easy prey. "how those sleeve-button will suit
I!" think he, as he fix a pair on the fat pudgy wrist of Mr.
Sedley. "I long for sleeve-button; and the Captain's boot with brass
spur, in the next room, corbleu! what an effect they will make in the
Allee Verte!" so while Monsieur Isidor with bodily finger be hold
on to his master's nose, and shave the low part of Jos's face, his
imagination be ramble along the Green Avenue, dress out in a
frog coat and lace, and in company with Mademoiselle Reine; he be
loiter in spirit on the bank, and examine the barge sailing
slowly under the cool shadow of the tree by the canal, or refresh
himself with a mug of Faro at the bench of a beer-house on the road to
Laeken.
but Mr. Joseph Sedley, luckily for his own peace, no more know what be
pass in his domestic's mind than the respected reader, and I suspect
what John or Mary, whose wage we pay, think of ourselves. what our
servant think of us!--did we know what our intimate and dear
relation thought of we, we should live in a world that we should be
glad to quit, and in a frame of mind and a constant terror, that would
be perfectly unbearable. so Jos's man be mark his victim down, as
you see one of Mr. Paynter's assistant in Leadenhall Street ornament
an unconscious turtle with a placard on which be write, "Soup
to-morrow."
Amelia's attendant be much less selfishly dispose. few dependent
could come near that kind and gentle creature without pay their
usual tribute of loyalty and affection to her sweet and affectionate
nature. and it be a fact that Pauline, the cook, console her mistress
more than anybody whom she see on this wretched morning; for when she
find how Amelia remain for hour, silent, motionless, and haggard,
by the window in which she have place herself to watch the last
bayonet of the column as it march away, the honest girl take the
lady's hand, and say, Tenez, Madame, est-ce qu'il n'est pa aussi a
l'armee, mon homme a moi? with which she burst into tear, and Amelia
fall into her arm, do likewise, and so each pitied and soothe the
other.
several time during the forenoon Mr. Jos's Isidor go from his
lodging into the town, and to the gate of the hotel and lodging-house
round about the Parc, where the English be congregate, and
there mingle with other valet, courier, and lackey, gather such
news as be abroad, and bring back bulletin for his master's
information. almost all these gentleman be in heart partisan of the
Emperor, and have their opinion about the speedy end of the campaign.
the Emperor's proclamation from Avesnes have be distribute everywhere
plentifully in Brussels. "soldier!" it say, "this be the
anniversary of Marengo and Friedland, by which the destiny of Europe
be twice decide. then, as after Austerlitz, as after Wagram, we
be too generous. we believe in the oath and promise of prince
whom we suffer to remain upon their throne. let we march once more
to meet they. we and they, be we not still the same man? soldier!
these same Prussians who be so arrogant to-day, be three to one
against you at Jena, and six to one at Montmirail. those among you who
be prisoner in England can tell their comrade what frightful
torment they suffer on board the english hulk. Madmen! a moment
of prosperity have blind they, and if they enter into France it will
be to find a grave there!" but the partisan of the French prophesy
a more speedy extermination of the Emperor's enemy than this; and it
be agree on all hand that Prussians and British would never return
except as prisoner in the rear of the conquering army.
these opinion in the course of the day be bring to operate upon
Mr. Sedley. he be tell that the Duke of Wellington have go to try
and rally his army, the advance of which have be utterly crush the
night before.
"crush, psha!" say Jos, whose heart be pretty stout at
breakfast-time. "the Duke have go to beat the Emperor as he have
beat all his general before."
"his paper be burn, his effect be remove, and his quarter be
be get ready for the Duke of Dalmatia," Jos's informant reply. "I
have it from his own maitre d'hotel. Milor Duc de Richemont's people
be pack up everything. his Grace have flee already, and the Duchess
be only wait to see the plate pack to join the King of France at
Ostend."
"the king of France be at Ghent, fellow," reply Jos, affect
incredulity.
"he flee last night to bruge, and embark today from Ostend. the Duc
de Berri be take prisoner. those who wish to be safe have well go
soon, for the dyke will be open to-morrow, and who can fly when the
whole country be under water?"
"Nonsense, sir, we be three to one, sir, against any force Boney can
bring into the field," Mr. Sedley object; "the Austrians and the
Russians be on their march. he must, he shall be crush," Jos say,
slap his hand on the table.
"the Prussians be three to one at Jena, and he take their army and
kingdom in a week. they be six to one at Montmirail, and he
scatter they like sheep. the austrian army be come, but with the
Empress and the king of Rome at its head; and the Russians, bah! the
Russians will withdraw. no quarter be to be give to the English, on
account of their cruelty to our brave on board the infamous pontoon.
look here, here it be in black and white. herebe the proclamation of
his Majesty the Emperor and King," say the now declare partisan of
Napoleon, and take the document from his pocket, Isidor sternly
thrust it into his master's face, and already look upon the frogged
coat and valuable as his own spoil.
Jos be, if not seriously alarm as yet, at least considerably
disturb in mind. "give I my coat and cap, sir," say he, "and follow
I. I will go myself and learn the truth of these report." Isidor be
furious as Jos put on the braided frock. "Milor have well not wear
that military coat," say he; "the Frenchmen have swear not to give
quarter to a single british soldier."
"silence, sirrah!" say Jos, with a resolute countenance still, and
thrust his arm into the sleeve with indomitable resolution, in the
performance of which heroic act he be find by Mrs. Rawdon Crawley,
who at this juncture come up to visit Amelia, and enter without
ring at the antechamber door.
Rebecca be dress very neatly and smartly, as usual: her quiet sleep
after Rawdon's departure have refresh she, and her pink smile cheek
be quite pleasant to look at, in a town and on a day when everybody
else's countenance wear the appearance of the deep anxiety and
gloom. she laugh at the attitude in which Jos be discover, and
the struggle and convulsion with which the stout gentleman thrust
himself into the braid coat.
"be you prepare to join the army, Mr. Joseph?" she say. "be there
to be nobody leave in Brussels to protect we poor woman?" Jos succeed
in plunge into the coat, and come forward blush and stutter out
excuse to his fair visitor. "how be she after the event of the
morning--after the fatigue of the ball the night before?" Monsieur
Isidor disappear into his master's adjacent bedroom, bear off the
flower dressing-gown.
"how good of you to ask," say she, press one of his hand in both
her own. "how cool and collect you look when everybody else be
frightened! how be our dear little Emmy? it must have be an awful,
awful parting."
"tremendous," Jos say.
"you man can bear anything," reply the lady. "parting or danger be
nothing to you. own now that you be go to join the army and leave
we to our fate. I know you be--something tell I you be. I be so
frightened, when the thought come into my head (for I do sometimes
think of you when I be alone, Mr. Joseph), that I run off immediately
to beg and entreat you not to fly from we."
this speech might be interpret, "my dear sir, should an accident
befall the army, and a retreat be necessary, you have a very
comfortable carriage, in which I propose to take a seat." I donot know
whether Jos understand the word in this sense. but he be profoundly
mortify by the lady's inattention to he during their stay at
Brussels. he have never be present to any of Rawdon Crawley's great
acquaintance: he have scarcely be invite to Rebecca's party; for
he be too timid to play much, and his presence bore George and Rawdon
equally, who neither of they, perhaps, like to have a witness of the
amusement in which the pair choose to indulge. "ah!" think Jos, "now
she want I she come to I. when there be nobody else in the way she
can think about old Joseph Sedley!" but besides these doubt he feel
flatter at the idea Rebecca express of his courage.
he blush a good deal, and put on an air of importance. "I should like
to see the action," he say. "every man of any spirit would, you know.
Ihave see a little service in India, but nothing on this grand scale."
"you man would sacrifice anything for a pleasure," rebecca answer.
"Captain Crawley leave I this morning as gay as if he be go to a
hunt party. what do he care? what do any of you care for the
agony and torture of a poor forsake woman? (I wonder whether he
could really have be go to the troop, this great lazy gourmand?)
oh! dear Mr. Sedley, I have come to you for comfort--for consolation.
I have be on my knee all the morning. I tremble at the frightful
danger into which our husband, our friend, our brave troop and
ally, be rush. and I come here for shelter, and find another of
my friend--the last remain to I--bent upon plunge into the
dreadful scene!"
"my dear madam," Jos reply, now begin to be quite soothe, "donot
be alarm. I only say I should like to go--what Briton would not?
but my duty keep I here: I cannot leave that poor creature in the
next room." and he point with his finger to the door of the chamber
in which Amelia be.
"good noble brother!" rebecca say, put her handkerchief to her
eye, and smell the eau-de-cologne with which it be scented. "I
have do you injustice: you have get a heart. I think you have not."
"o, upon my honour!" Jos say, make a motion as if he would lay his
hand upon the spot in question. "you do I injustice, indeed you
do--my dear Mrs. Crawley."
"I do, now your heart be true to your sister. but I remember two year
ago--when it be false to I!" rebecca say, fix her eye upon he
for an instant, and then turn away into the window.
Jos blush violently. that organ which he be accuse by Rebecca of
not possess begin to thump tumultuously. he recall the day when
he have flee from she, and the passion which have once inflame he--the
day when he have drive she in his curricle: when she have knit the
green purse for he: when he have sate enrapture gazing at her white
arm and bright eye.
"I know you think I ungrateful," rebecca continue, come out of the
window, and once more look at he and address he in a low
tremulous voice. "your coldness, your avert look, your manner when
we have meet of late--when I come in just now, all prove it to I. but
be there no reason why I should avoid you? let your own heart answer
that question. do you think my husband be too much inclined to
welcome you? the only unkind word I have ever have from he (I will do
Captain Crawley that justice) have be about you--and most cruel,
cruel word they be."
"good gracious! what have I do?" ask Jos in a flurry of pleasure
and perplexity; "what have I do--to--to--?"
"be jealousy nothing?" say Rebecca. "he make I miserable about you.
and whatever it might have be once--my heart be all his. I be
innocent now. be I not, Mr. Sedley?"
all Jos's blood tingle with delight, as he survey this victim to his
attraction. a few adroit word, one or two know tender glance of
the eye, and his heart be inflame again and his doubt and
suspicion forget. from Solomon downward, have not wise man than
he be cajole and befool by woman? "if the bad come to the
bad," Becky think, "my retreat be secure; and I have a right-hand
seat in the barouche."
there be no knowing into what declaration of love and ardour the
tumultuous passion of Mr. Joseph might have lead he, if Isidor the
valet have not make his reappearance at this minute, and begin to busy
himself about the domestic affair. Jos, who be just go to gasp
out an avowal, choke almost with the emotion that he be oblige to
restrain. rebecca too bethink she that it be time she should go in
and comfort her dear Amelia. "Au revoir," she say, kiss she
hand to Mr. Joseph, and tap gently at the door of his sister's
apartment. as she enter and close the door on herself, he sink down
in a chair, and gaze and sigh and puff portentously. "that coat
be very tight for Milor," Isidor say, still have his eye on the
frog; but his master hear he not: his thought be elsewhere: now
glowing, madden, upon the contemplation of the enchanting Rebecca:
anon shrink guiltily before the vision of the jealous Rawdon
Crawley, with his curling, fierce mustachio, and his terrible duelling
pistol load and cocked.
Rebecca's appearance strike Amelia with terror, and make her shrink
back. it recall she to the world and the remembrance of yesterday.
in the overpowering fear about to-morrow she have forget
Rebecca--jealousy--everything except that her husband be go and be
in danger. until this dauntless worldling come in and break the spell,
and lift the latch, we too have forborne to enter into that sad
chamber. how long have that poor girl be on her knee! what hour of
speechless prayer and bitter prostration have she pass there! the
war-chronicler who write brilliant story of fight and triumph
scarcely tell we of these. these be too mean part of the pageant:
and you donot hear widow' cry or mother' sob in the midst of the
shout and jubilation in the great Chorus of Victory. and yet when be
the time that such have not cry out: heart-break, humble
protestant, unheard in the uproar of the triumph!
after the first movement of terror in Amelia's mind--when Rebecca's
green eye light upon she, and rustle in her fresh silk and
brilliant ornament, the latter trip up with extended arm to
embrace she--a feeling of anger succeed, and from be deadly pale
before, her face flush up red, and she return Rebecca's look after
a moment with a steadiness which surprise and somewhat abash her
rival.
"Dearest Amelia, you be very unwell," the visitor say, put forth
her hand to take Amelia's. "what be it? I could not rest until I know
how you be."
Amelia draw back her hand--never since her life begin have that gentle
soul refuse to believe or to answer any demonstration of good-will or
affection. but she draw back her hand, and tremble all over. "why
be you here, Rebecca?" she say, still look at she solemnly with
her large eye. these glance trouble her visitor.
"she must have see he give I the letter at the ball," rebecca
thought. "donot be agitate, dear Amelia," she say, look down. "I
come but to see if I could--if you be well."
"be you well?" say Amelia. "I dare say you be. you donot love your
husband. you would not be here if you do. tell I, Rebecca, do I
ever do you anything but kindness?"
"indeed, Amelia, no," the other say, still hang down her head.
"when you be quite poor, who be it that befriend you? be I not a
sister to you? you see we all in happy day before he marry I. I
be all in all then to he; or would he have give up his fortune, his
family, as he nobly do to make I happy? why do you come between my
love and I? who send you to separate those whom God join, and take
my darling's heart from I--my own husband? do you think you could I
love he as I do? his love be everything to I. you know it, and
want to rob I of it. for shame, Rebecca; bad and wicked
woman--false friend and false wife."
"Amelia, I protest before God, I have do my husband no wrong,"
Rebecca say, turn from she.
"have you do I no wrong, Rebecca? you do not succeed, but you
try. ask your heart if you do not."
she know nothing, Rebecca think.
"he come back to I. I know he would. I know that no falsehood, no
flattery, could keep he from I long. I know he would come. I pray
so that he should."
the poor girl speak these word with a spirit and volubility which
Rebecca have never before see in she, and before which the latter be
quite dumb. "but what have I do to you," she continue in a more
pitiful tone, "that you should try and take he from I? I have he but
for six week. you might have spar I those, Rebecca. and yet, from
the very first day of our wedding, you come and blight it. now he be
go, be you come to see how unhappy I be?" she continue. "you make
I wretched enough for the past fortnight: you might have spar I
to-day."
"I--I never come here," interpose Rebecca, with unlucky truth.
"no. you donot come. you take he away. be you come to fetch he
from I?" she continue in a wilder tone. "he be here, but he be go
now. there on that very sofa he sate. donot touch it. we sate and
talk there. I be on his knee, and my arm be round his neck, and
we say 'our Father.' yes, he be here: and they come and take he
away, but he promise I to come back."
"he will come back, my dear," say rebecca, touch in spite of herself.
"look," say Amelia, "this be his sash--isn't it a pretty colour?" and
she take up the fringe and kiss it. she have tie it round her waist
at some part of the day. she have forget her anger, her jealousy,
the very presence of her rival seemingly. for she walk silently and
almost with a smile on her face, towards the bed, and begin to smooth
down George's pillow.
Rebecca walk, too, silently away. "how be Amelia?" ask Jos, who
still hold his position in the chair.
"there should be somebody with she," say Rebecca. "I think she be very
unwell": and she go away with a very grave face, refuse Mr.
Sedley's entreaty that she would stay and partake of the early dinner
which he have order.
Rebecca be of a good-natured and oblige disposition; and she like
Amelia rather than otherwise. even her hard word, reproachful as they
be, be complimentary--the groan of a person sting under defeat.
Meeting Mrs. O'Dowd, whom the Dean's sermon have by no mean comfort,
and who be walk very disconsolately in the Parc, Rebecca accost
the latter, rather to the surprise of the Major's wife, who be not
accustom to such mark of politeness from Mrs. Rawdon Crawley, and
inform she that poor little Mrs. Osborne be in a desperate
condition, and almost mad with grief, send off the good-nature
Irishwoman straight to see if she could console her young favourite.
"Ihave care of my own enough," Mrs. O'Dowd say, gravely, "and I
think poor Amelia would be little want for company this day. but
if shebe so bad as you say, and you cannot attend to she, who use to be
so fond of she, faith Iwill see if I can be of service. and so good
marne to ye, Madam"; with which speech and a toss of her head, the
lady of the repayther take a farewell of Mrs. Crawley, whose company
she by no mean court.
Becky watch her march off, with a smile on her lip. she have the
keen sense of humour, and the Parthian look which the retreating
Mrs. O'Dowd fling over her shoulder almost upset Mrs. Crawley's
gravity. "my service to ye, I fine Madam, and Ibe glad to see ye so
cheerful," think Peggy. "itbe not you that will cry your eye out
with grief, anyway." and with this she pass on, and speedily find
her way to Mrs. Osborne's lodging.
the poor soul be still at the bedside, where Rebecca have leave she, and
stand almost crazy with grief. the Major's wife, a stronger-minded
woman, endeavour her good to comfort her young friend. "you must bear
up, Amelia, dear," she say kindly, "for he mustnot find you ill when
he send for you after the victory. itbe not you be the only woman
that be in the hand of God this day."
"I know that. I be very wicked, very weak," Amelia say. she know she
own weakness well enough. the presence of the more resolute friend
check it, however; and she be the well of this control and
company. they go on till two o'clock; their heart be with the
column as it march far and far away. dreadful doubt and
anguish--prayer and fear and grief unspeakable--follow the
regiment. it be the woman's tribute to the war. it tax both alike,
and take the blood of the man, and the tear of the woman.
at half-past two, an event occur of daily importance to Mr. Joseph:
the dinner-hour arrive. warrior may fight and perish, but he must
dine. he come into Amelia's room to see if he could coax she to share
that meal. "try," say he; "the soup be very good. do try, Emmy," and
he kiss her hand. except when she be marry, he have not do so
much for year before. "you be very good and kind, Joseph," she say.
"everybody be, but, if you please, I will stay in my room to-day."
the savour of the soup, however, be agreeable to Mrs. O'Dowd's
nostril: and she think she would bear Mr. Jos company. so the two
sate down to their meal. "God bless the meat," say the Major's wife,
solemnly: she be think of her honest Mick, rid at the head of
his regiment: "'tis but a bad dinner those poor boy will get to-day,"
she say, with a sigh, and then, like a philosopher, fall to.
Jos's spirit rise with his meal. he would drink the regiment's
health; or, indeed, take any other excuse to indulge in a glass of
champagne. "wewill drink to O'Dowd and the brave --th," say he, bow
gallantly to his guest. "hey, Mrs. O'Dowd? Fill Mrs. O'Dowd's glass,
Isidor."
but all of a sudden, Isidor start, and the Major's wife lay down her
knife and fork. the window of the room be open, and look
southward, and a dull distant sound come over the sun-light roof
from that direction. "what be it?" say Jos. "why donot you pour, you
rascal?"
"cest le feu!" say Isidor, run to the balcony.
"God defend we; itbe cannon!" Mrs. O'Dowd cry, start up, and
follow too to the window. a thousand pale and anxious face might
have be see look from other casement. and presently it seem
as if the whole population of the city rush into the street.
CHAPTER XXXII
in which Jos take Flight, and the War be bring to a close
we of peaceful London City have never behold--and please God never
shall witness--such a scene of hurry and alarm, as that which Brussels
present. crowd rush to the Namur gate, from which direction the
noise proceed, and many ride along the level chaussee, to be in
advance of any intelligence from the army. each man ask his
neighbour for news; and even great english lord and lady
condescend to speak to person whom they do not know. the friend
of the French go abroad, wild with excitement, and prophesy the
triumph of their Emperor. the merchant close their shop, and come
out to swell the general chorus of alarm and clamour. woman rush to
the church, and crowd the chapel, and knelt and pray on the
flag and step. the dull sound of the cannon go on roll,
roll. presently carriage with traveller begin to leave the town,
gallop away by the Ghent barrier. the prophecy of the french
partisan begin to pass for fact. "he have cut the army in two," it
be say. "he be march straight on Brussels. he will overpower the
English, and be here to-night." "he will overpower the English,"
shriek Isidor to his master, "and will be here to-night." the man
bound in and out from the lodging to the street, always return
with some fresh particular of disaster. Jos's face grow pale and
paler. Alarm begin to take entire possession of the stout civilian.
all the champagne he drink bring no courage to he. before sunset he
be work up to such a pitch of nervousness as gratify his friend
Isidor to behold, who now count surely upon the spoil of the owner
of the laced coat.
the woman be away all this time. after hear the firing for a
moment, the stout Major's wife bethink she of her friend in the next
chamber, and run in to watch, and if possible to console, Amelia. the
idea that she have that helpless and gentle creature to protect, give
additional strength to the natural courage of the honest Irishwoman.
she pass five hour by her friend's side, sometimes in remonstrance,
sometimes talk cheerfully, oftener in silence and terrified mental
supplication. "I never let go her hand once," say the stout lady
afterwards, "until after sunset, when the firing be over." Pauline,
the bonne, be on her knee at church hard by, pray for son homme a
elle.
when the noise of the cannonading be over, Mrs. O'Dowd issue out of
Amelia's room into the parlour adjoining, where Jos sate with two
empty flask, and courage entirely go. once or twice he have
venture into his sister's bedroom, look very much alarmed, and as
if he would say something. but the Major's wife keep her place, and he
go away without disburthene himself of his speech. he be ashamed
to tell she that he want to fly.
but when she make her appearance in the dining-room, where he sate in
the twilight in the cheerless company of his empty champagne bottle,
he begin to open his mind to she.
"Mrs. O'Dowd," he say, "havenot you well get Amelia ready?"
"be you go to take she out for a walk?" say the Major's lady;
"sure shebe too weak to stir."
"I--I've order the carriage," he say, "and--and post-horse; Isidor
be go for they," Jos continue.
"what do you want with drive to-night?" answer the lady. "benot
she well on her bed? Ihave just get she to lie down."
"get she up," say Jos; "she must get up, I say": and he stamp his
foot energetically. "I say the horse be order--yes, the horse be
order. itbe all over, and--"
"and what?" ask Mrs. O'Dowd.
"Ibe off for Ghent," Jos answer. "everybody be go; therebe a
place for you! we shall start in half-an-hour."
the Major's wife look at he with infinite scorn. "I donot move till
O'Dowd give I the route," say she. "you may go if you like, Mr.
Sedley; but, faith, Amelia and I stop here."
"she shall go," say Jos, with another stamp of his foot. Mrs. O'Dowd
put herself with arm akimbo before the bedroom door.
"be it her mother yoube go to take she to?" she say; "or do you
want to go to Mamma yourself, Mr. Sedley? good marning--a pleasant
journey to ye, sir. Bon voyage, as they say, and take my counsel, and
shave off they mustachio, or theywill bring you into mischief."
"D--n!" yell out Jos, wild with fear, rage, and mortification; and
Isidor come in at this juncture, swear in his turn. "Pas de
chevaux, sacre bleu!" hiss out the furious domestic. all the horse
be go. Jos be not the only man in Brussels seize with panic that
day.
but Jos's fear, great and cruel as they be already, be destine to
increase to an almost frantic pitch before the night be over. it have
be mention how Pauline, the bonne, have son homme a elle also in the
rank of the army that have go out to meet the Emperor Napoleon. this
lover be a native of Brussels, and a belgian hussar. the troop of
his nation signalise themselves in this war for anything but courage,
and young Van Cutsum, Pauline's admirer, be too good a soldier to
disobey his Colonel's order to run away. whilst in garrison at
Brussels young Regulus (he have be bear in the revolutionary time)
find his great comfort, and pass almost all his leisure moment, in
Pauline's kitchen; and it be with pocket and holster cram full of
good thing from her larder, that he have take leave of his weeping
sweetheart, to proceed upon the campaign a few day before.
as far as his regiment be concern, this campaign be over now. they
have form a part of the division under the command of his sovereign
apparent, the Prince of Orange, and as respected length of sword and
mustachio, and the richness of uniform and equipment, Regulus and his
comrade look to be as gallant a body of man as ever trumpet sound
for.
when Ney dash upon the advance of the allied troop, carry one
position after the other, until the arrival of the great body of the
british army from Brussels change the aspect of the combat of Quatre
Bras, the squadron among which regulus rode show the great
activity in retreat before the French, and be dislodge from one
post and another which they occupy with perfect alacrity on their
part. their movement be only check by the advance of the british
in their rear. thus force to halt, the enemy's cavalry (whose
bloodthirsty obstinacy cannot be too severely reprehend) have at
length an opportunity of come to close quarter with the brave
Belgians before they; who prefer to encounter the british rather
than the French, and at once turn tail ride through the English
regiment that be behind they, and scatter in all direction. the
regiment in fact do not exist any more. it be nowhere. it have no
head-quarter. regulus find himself gallop many mile from the
field of action, entirely alone; and whither should he fly for refuge
so naturally as to that kitchen and those faithful arm in which
Pauline have so often welcome he?
at some ten o'clock the clinking of a sabre might have be hear up
the stair of the house where the Osbornes occupy a story in the
continental fashion. a knock might have be hear at the kitchen
door; and poor Pauline, come back from church, faint almost with
terror as she open it and see before she her haggard hussar. he
look as pale as the midnight dragoon who come to disturb Leonora.
Pauline would have scream, but that her cry would have call she
master, and discover her friend. she stifle her scream, then, and
lead her hero into the kitchen, give he beer, and the choice bit
from the dinner, which Jos have not have the heart to taste. the hussar
show he be no ghost by the prodigious quantity of flesh and beer
which he devour--and during the mouthful he tell his tale of
disaster.
his regiment have perform prodigy of courage, and have withstand for
a while the onset of the whole french army. but they be overwhelm
at last, as be the whole british army by this time. Ney destroy each
regiment as it come up. the Belgians in vain interpose to prevent the
butchery of the English. the Brunswickers be rout and have
flee--their Duke be kill. it be a general debacle. he seek to
drown his sorrow for the defeat in flood of beer.
Isidor, who have come into the kitchen, hear the conversation and
rush out to inform his master. "it be all over," he shriek to Jos.
"Milor Duke be a prisoner; the Duke of Brunswick be kill; the british
army be in full flight; there be only one man escape, and he be in the
kitchen now--come and hear he." so Jos totter into that apartment
where Regulus still sate on the kitchen table, and clung fast to his
flagon of beer. in the good French which he could muster, and which
be in sooth of a very ungrammatical sort, Jos beseech the hussar to
tell his tale. the disaster deepen as Regulus speak. he be the
only man of his regiment not slain on the field. he have see the Duke
of Brunswick fall, the black hussar fly, the Ecossais pound down by
the cannon. "and the --th?" gasp Jos.
"cut in piece," say the hussar--upon which Pauline cry out, "o my
mistress, ma bonne petite dame," go off fairly into hysteric, and
fill the house with her scream.
Wild with terror, Mr. Sedley know not how or where to seek for safety.
he rush from the kitchen back to the sitting-room, and cast an
appealing look at Amelia's door, which Mrs. O'Dowd have close and
lock in his face; but he remember how scornfully the latter have
receive he, and after pausing and listen for a brief space at the
door, he leave it, and resolve to go into the street, for the first
time that day. so, seize a candle, he look about for his
gold-laced cap, and find it lie in its usual place, on a
console-table, in the anteroom, place before a mirror at which Jos
use to coquet, always give his side-lock a twirl, and his cap the
proper cock over his eye, before he go forth to make appearance in
public. such be the force of habit, that even in the midst of his
terror he begin mechanically to twiddle with his hair, and arrange the
cock of his hat. then he look amazed at the pale face in the glass
before he, and especially at his mustachio, which have attain a rich
growth in the course of near seven week, since they have come into the
world. they will mistake I for a military man, think he,
remember Isidor's warning as to the massacre with which all the
defeat british army be threaten; and stagger back to his
bedchamber, he begin wildly pull the bell which summon his valet.
Isidor answer that summon. Jos have sink in a chair--he have tear off
his neckcloth, and turn down his collar, and be sit with both
his hand lift to his throat.
"coupez-moi, Isidor," shout he; "vite! coupez-moi!"
Isidor think for a moment he have go mad, and that he wish his
valet to cut his throat.
"Les moustache," gasp Joe; "les moustache--coupy, rasy, vite!"--his
French be of this sort--voluble, as we have say, but not
remarkable for grammar.
Isidor sweep off the mustachio in no time with the razor, and hear
with inexpressible delight his master's order that he should fetch a
hat and a plain coat. "Ne porty ploo--habit militair--bonn--bonny a
voo, prenny dehors"--were Jos's word--the coat and cap be at last
his property.
this gift be make, Jos select a plain black coat and waistcoat
from his stock, and put on a large white neckcloth, and a plain beaver.
if he could have get a shovel hat he would have wear it. as it be, you
would have fancy he be a flourish, large parson of the Church of
England.
"Venny maintenong," he continue, "sweevy--ally--party--dong la roo."
and so have say, he plunge swiftly down the stair of the house,
and pass into the street.
although Regulus have vow that he be the only man of his regiment or
of the allied army, almost, who have escape be cut to piece by Ney,
it appear that his statement be incorrect, and that a good number
more of the suppose victim have survive the massacre. many score of
Regulus's comrade have find their way back to Brussels, and all
agree that they have run away--fill the whole town with an idea of
the defeat of the ally. the arrival of the French be expect
hourly; the panic continue, and preparation for flight go on
everywhere. no horse! think Jos, in terror. he make Isidor inquire
of score of person, whether they have any to lend or sell, and his
heart sink within he, at the negative answer return everywhere.
should he take the journey on foot? even fear could not render that
ponderous body so active.
almost all the hotel occupy by the English in Brussels face the
Parc, and Jos wander irresolutely about in this quarter, with crowd
of other people, oppress as he be by fear and curiosity. some
family he see more happy than himself, have discover a team of
horse, and rattle through the street in retreat; other again there
be whose case be like his own, and who could not for any bribe or
entreaty procure the necessary mean of flight. amongst these
would-be fugitive, Jos remark the Lady Bareacres and her daughter,
who sate in their carriage in the porte-cochere of their hotel, all
their imperial pack, and the only drawback to whose flight be the
same want of motive power which keep Jos stationary.
Rebecca Crawley occupy apartment in this hotel; and have before this
period have sundry hostile meeting with the lady of the Bareacres
family. my Lady Bareacres cut Mrs. Crawley on the stair when they meet
by chance; and in all place where the latter's name be mention,
speak perseveringly ill of her neighbour. the Countess be shock at
the familiarity of General Tufto with the aide-de-camp's wife. the
Lady Blanche avoid she as if she have be an infectious disease.
only the Earl himself keep up a sly occasional acquaintance with she,
when out of the jurisdiction of his lady.
Rebecca have her revenge now upon these insolent enemy. if became
know in the hotel that Captain Crawley's horse have be leave behind,
and when the panic begin, Lady Bareacres condescend to send she maid
to the Captain's wife with her ladyship's compliment, and a desire to
know the price of Mrs. Crawley's horse. Mrs. Crawley return a note
with her compliment, and an intimation that it be not her custom to
transact bargain with lady' maid.
this curt reply bring the Earl in person to Becky's apartment; but he
could get no more success than the first ambassador. "send a lady's
maid to I!" Mrs. Crawley cry in great anger; "why donot my Lady
Bareacres tell I to go and saddle the horse! be it her ladyship that
want to escape, or her ladyship's femme de chambre?" and this be all
the answer that the Earl bear back to his Countess.
what will not necessity do? the Countess herself actually come to wait
upon Mrs. Crawley on the failure of her second envoy. she entreat
she to name her own price; she even offer to invite Becky to
Bareacres House, if the latter would but give she the mean of
return to that residence. Mrs. Crawley sneer at she.
"I donot want to be wait on by bailiff in livery," she say; "you
will never get back though most probably--at least not you and your
diamond together. the French will have those they will be here in two
hour, and I shall be half way to Ghent by that time. I would not sell
you my horse, no, not for the two large diamond that your ladyship
wear at the ball." Lady Bareacres tremble with rage and terror. the
diamond be sew into her habit, and secrete in my Lord's padding
and boot. "Woman, the diamond be at the banker's, and I will have
the horse," she say. rebecca laugh in her face. the infuriate
Countess go below, and sate in her carriage; her maid, her courier,
and her husband be send once more through the town, each to look for
cattle; and woe betide those who come last! her ladyship be resolve
on depart the very instant the horse arrive from any quarter--with
her husband or without he.
Rebecca have the pleasure of see her ladyship in the horseless
carriage, and keep her eye fix upon she, and bewail, in the
loud tone of voice, the Countess's perplexity. "not to be able to
get horse!" she say, "and to have all those diamond sew into the
carriage cushion! what a prize it will be for the French when they
come!--the carriage and the diamond, I mean; not the lady!" she give
this information to the landlord, to the servant, to the guest, and
the innumerable straggler about the courtyard. Lady Bareacres could
have shoot she from the carriage window.
it be while enjoy the humiliation of her enemy that Rebecca catch
sight of Jos, who make towards she directly he perceive she.
that alter, frightened, fat face, tell his secret well enough. he
too want to fly, and be on the look-out for the mean of escape. "he
shall buy my horse," think rebecca, "and Iwill ride the mare."
Jos walk up to his friend, and put the question for the hundredth
time during the past hour, "do she know where horse be to be have?"
"what, you fly?" say Rebecca, with a laugh. "I think you be the
champion of all the lady, Mr. Sedley."
"I--I'm not a military man," gasp he.
"and amelia?--who be to protect that poor little sister of your?"
ask Rebecca. "you surely would not desert she?"
"what good can I do she, suppose--suppose the enemy arrive?" Jos
answer. "theywill spare the woman; but my man tell I that they have
take an oath to give no quarter to the man--the dastardly coward."
"Horrid!" cry Rebecca, enjoy his perplexity.
"besides, I donot want to desert she," cry the brother. "she SHAN'T
be desert. there be a seat for she in my carriage, and one for you,
dear Mrs. Crawley, if you will come; and if we can get horses--" sigh
he--
"I have two to sell," the lady say. Jos could have fling himself into
her arm at the news. "get the carriage, Isidor," he cry; "wehave
find they--we have find they."
"my horse never be in harness," add the lady. "Bullfinch would kick
the carriage to piece, if you put he in the trace."
"but he be quiet to ride?" ask the civilian.
"as quiet as a lamb, and as fast as a hare," answer Rebecca.
"do you think he be up to my weight?" Jos say. he be already on his
back, in imagination, without ever so much as a thought for poor
Amelia. what person who love a horse-speculation could resist such a
temptation?
in reply, Rebecca ask he to come into her room, whither he follow
her quite breathless to conclude the bargain. Jos seldom spend a
half-hour in his life which cost he so much money. rebecca, measure
the value of the good which she have for sale by Jos's eagerness to
purchase, as well as by the scarcity of the article, put upon her
horse a price so prodigious as to make even the civilian draw back.
"she would sell both or neither," she say, resolutely. Rawdon have
order she not to part with they for a price less than that which she
specify. Lord Bareacres below would give she the same money--and with
all her love and regard for the Sedley family, her dear Mr. Joseph must
conceive that poor people must live--nobody, in a word, could be more
affectionate, but more firm about the matter of business.
Jos end by agree, as might be suppose of he. the sum he have to
give she be so large that he be oblige to ask for time; so large as
to be a little fortune to Rebecca, who rapidly calculate that with
this sum, and the sale of the residue of Rawdon's effect, and her
pension as a widow should he fall, she would now be absolutely
independent of the world, and might look her weed steadily in the face.
once or twice in the day she certainly have herself think about
fly. but her reason give her well counsel. "suppose the French
do come," think Becky, "what can they do to a poor officer's widow?
Bah! the time of sack and siege be over. we shall be let to go
home quietly, or I may live pleasantly abroad with a snug little
income."
meanwhile Jos and Isidor go off to the stable to inspect the newly
purchase cattle. Jos bid his man saddle the horse at once. he would
ride away that very night, that very hour. and he leave the valet busy
in get the horse ready, and go homeward himself to prepare for
his departure. it must be secret. he would go to his chamber by the
back entrance. he do not care to face Mrs. O'Dowd and Amelia, and own
to they that he be about to run.
by the time Jos's bargain with Rebecca be complete, and his horse
have be visit and examine, it be almost morning once more. but
though midnight be long pass, there be no rest for the city; the
people be up, the light in the house flamed, crowd be still
about the door, and the street be busy. rumour of various nature
go still from mouth to mouth: one report aver that the Prussians
have be utterly defeat; another that it be the English who have be
attack and conquer: a third that the latter have hold their ground.
this last rumour gradually get strength. no Frenchmen have make their
appearance. straggler have come in from the army bring report more
and more favourable: at last an aide-de-camp actually reach Brussels
with despatch for the Commandant of the place, who placard
presently through the town an official announcement of the success of
the ally at Quatre Bras, and the entire repulse of the French under
Ney after a six hour' battle. the aide-de-camp must have arrive
sometime while Jos and Rebecca be make their bargain together, or
the latter be inspect his purchase. when he reach his own hotel,
he find a score of its numerous inhabitant on the threshold
discoursing of the news; there be no doubt as to its truth. and he
go up to communicate it to the lady under his charge. he do not
think it be necessary to tell they how he have intend to take leave
of they, how he have buy horse, and what a price he have pay for
they.
but success or defeat be a minor matter to they, who have only think
for the safety of those they love. Amelia, at the news of the victory,
become still more agitated even than before. she be for go that
moment to the army. she besought her brother with tear to conduct she
thither. her doubt and terror reach their paroxysm; and the poor
girl, who for many hour have be plunge into stupor, rave and run
hither and thither in hysteric insanity--a piteous sight. no man
writhing in pain on the hard-fought field fifteen mile off, where lay,
after their struggle, so many of the brave--no man suffer more
keenly than this poor harmless victim of the war. Jos could not bear
the sight of her pain. he leave his sister in the charge of her stouter
female companion, and descend once more to the threshold of the
hotel, where everybody still linger, and talk, and wait for more
news.
it grow to be broad daylight as they stand here, and fresh news begin
to arrive from the war, bring by man who have be actor in the
scene. wagon and long country cart laden with wounded come roll
into the town; ghastly groan come from within they, and haggard face
look up sadly from out of the straw. Jos Sedley be look at one
of these carriage with a painful curiosity--the moan of the people
within be frightful--the weary horse could hardly pull the cart.
"stop! stop!" a feeble voice cry from the straw, and the carriage
stop opposite Mr. Sedley's hotel.
"it be George, I know it be!" cry Amelia, rush in a moment to the
balcony, with a pallid face and loose flow hair. it be not George,
however, but it be the next good thing: it be news of he.
it be poor Tom Stubble, who have march out of Brussels so gallantly
twenty-four hour before, bear the colour of the regiment, which he
have defend very gallantly upon the field. a french lancer have
spear the young ensign in the leg, who fall, still bravely hold to
his flag. at the conclusion of the engagement, a place have be find
for the poor boy in a cart, and he have be bring back to Brussels.
"Mr. Sedley, Mr. Sedley!" cry the boy, faintly, and Jos come up
almost frightened at the appeal. he have not at first distinguish who
it be that call he.
little Tom Stubble hold out his hot and feeble hand. "Ibe to be take
in here," he say. "Osborne--and--and Dobbin say I be; and you be
to give the man two napoleon: my mother will pay you." this young
fellow's thought, during the long feverish hour pass in the cart,
have be wander to his father's parsonage which he have quit only
a few month before, and he have sometimes forget his pain in that
delirium.
the hotel be large, and the people kind, and all the inmate of the
cart be take in and place on various couch. the young ensign be
convey upstairs to Osborne's quarter. Amelia and the Major's wife
have rush down to he, when the latter have recognise he from the
balcony. you may fancy the feeling of these woman when they be tell
that the day be over, and both their husband be safe; in what mute
rapture Amelia fall on her good friend's neck, and embrace she; in
what a grateful passion of prayer she fall on her knee, and thank
the power which have save her husband.
our young lady, in her fevered and nervous condition, could have have no
more salutary medicine prescribe for she by any physician than that
which chance put in her way. she and Mrs. O'Dowd watch incessantly
by the wound lad, whose pain be very severe, and in the duty thus
force upon she, Amelia have not time to brood over her personal
anxiety, or to give herself up to her own fear and foreboding after
she willnot. the young patient tell in his simple fashion the event of
the day, and the action of our friend of the gallant --th. they have
suffer severely. they have lose very many officer and man. the
Major's horse have be shoot under he as the regiment charge, and they
all think that O'Dowd be go, and that Dobbin have get his majority,
until on their return from the charge to their old ground, the Major
be discover seat on Pyramus's carcase, refresh him-self from a
case-bottle. it be Captain Osborne that cut down the french lancer
who have spear the ensign. Amelia turn so pale at the notion, that
Mrs. O'Dowd stop the young ensign in this story. and it be Captain
Dobbin who at the end of the day, though wound himself, take up the
lad in his arm and carry he to the surgeon, and thence to the cart
which be to bring he back to Brussels. and it be he who promise
the driver two louis if he would make his way to Mr. Sedley's hotel in
the city; and tell Mrs. Captain Osborne that the action be over, and
that her husband be unhurt and well.
"indeed, but he have a good heart that William Dobbin," Mrs. O'Dowd
say, "though he be always laugh at I."
Young Stubble vow there be not such another officer in the army, and
never cease his praise of the senior captain, his modesty, his
kindness, and his admirable coolness in the field. to these part of
the conversation, Amelia lend a very distracted attention: it be only
when George be speak of that she listen, and when he be not
mention, she think about he.
in tend her patient, and in thinking of the wonderful escape of the
day before, her second day pass away not too slowly with Amelia.
there be only one man in the army for she: and as long as he be
well, it must be own that its movement interest her little. all
the report which Jos bring from the street fall very vaguely on her
ear; though they be sufficient to give that timorous gentleman, and
many other people then in Brussels, every disquiet. the French have
be repulse certainly, but it be after a severe and doubtful
struggle, and with only a division of the french army. the Emperor,
with the main body, be away at Ligny, where he have utterly annihilate
the Prussians, and be now free to bring his whole force to bear upon
the ally. the Duke of Wellington be retreat upon the capital, and
a great battle must be fight under its wall probably, of which the
chance be more than doubtful. the Duke of Wellington have but twenty
thousand british troop on whom he could rely, for the Germans be raw
militia, the Belgians disaffect, and with this handful his grace have
to resist a hundred and fifty thousand man that have break into Belgium
under Napoleon. under Napoleon! what warrior be there, however
famous and skilful, that could fight at odd with he?
Jos think of all these thing, and tremble. so do all the rest of
Brussels--where people feel that the fight of the day before be but
the prelude to the great combat which be imminent. one of the
army oppose to the Emperor be scatter to the wind already. the
few English that could be bring to resist he would perish at their
post, and the conqueror would pass over their body into the city.
Woe be to those whom he find there! address be prepare, public
functionary assemble and debate secretly, apartment be get
ready, and tricoloure banner and triumphal emblem manufacture, to
welcome the arrival of his Majesty the Emperor and King.
the emigration still continue, and wherever family could find mean
of departure, they flee. when Jos, on the afternoon of the 17th of
June, go to Rebecca's hotel, he find that the great Bareacres'
carriage have at length roll away from the porte-cochere. the Earl
have procure a pair of horse somehow, in spite of Mrs. Crawley, and
be roll on the road to Ghent. Louis the Desired be get ready
his portmanteau in that city, too. it seem as if Misfortune be
never tired of worry into motion that unwieldy exile.
Jos feel that the delay of yesterday have be only a respite, and that
his dearly buy horse must of a surety be put into requisition. his
agony be very severe all this day. as long as there be an english
army between Brussels and Napoleon, there be no need of immediate
flight; but he have his horse bring from their distant stable, to
the stable in the court-yard of the hotel where he live; so that they
might be under his own eye, and beyond the risk of violent abduction.
Isidor watch the stable-door constantly, and have the horse saddle,
to be ready for the start. he long intensely for that event.
after the reception of the previous day, Rebecca do not care to come
near her dear Amelia. she clip the bouquet which George have bring
she, and give fresh water to the flower, and read over the letter
which he have send she. "poor wretch," she say, twirl round the
little bit of paper in her finger, "how I could crush she with
this!--and it be for a thing like this that she must break her heart,
forsooth--for a man who be stupid--a coxcomb--and who do not care for
she. my poor good Rawdon be worth ten of this creature." and then she
fall to think what she should do if--if anything happen to poor
good Rawdon, and what a great piece of luck it be that he have leave his
horse behind.
in the course of this day too, Mrs. Crawley, who see not without anger
the Bareacres party drive off, bethink she of the precaution which
the Countess have take, and do a little needlework for her own
advantage; she stitch away the major part of her trinket, bill, and
bank-note about her person, and so prepared, be ready for any
event--to fly if she think fit, or to stay and welcome the conqueror,
be he Englishman or Frenchman. and I be not sure that she do not
dream that night of become a duchess and Madame la Marechale, while
Rawdon wrap in his cloak, and make his bivouac under the rain at
Mount Saint John, be think, with all the force of his heart, about
the little wife whom he have leave behind he.
the next day be a Sunday. and Mrs. Major O'Dowd have the satisfaction
of see both her patient refresh in health and spirit by some
rest which they have take during the night. she herself have sleep on a
great chair in Amelia's room, ready to wait upon her poor friend or the
ensign, should either need her nursing. when morning come, this robust
woman go back to the house where she and her Major have their billet;
and here perform an elaborate and splendid toilette, befit the
day. and it be very possible that whilst alone in that chamber, which
her husband have inhabit, and where his cap still lie on the pillow,
and his cane stand in the corner, one prayer at least be send up to
Heaven for the welfare of the brave soldier, Michael O'Dowd.
when she return she bring her prayer-book with she, and her uncle
the Dean's famous book of sermon, out of which she never fail to
read every Sabbath; not understand all, haply, not pronounce many
of the word aright, which be long and abstruse--for the Dean be a
learn man, and love long latin word--but with great gravity, vast
emphasis, and with tolerable correctness in the main. how often have my
Mick listen to these sermon, she think, and I read in the
cabin of a calm! she propose to resume this exercise on the present
day, with Amelia and the wound ensign for a congregation. the same
service be read on that day in twenty thousand church at the same
hour; and million of british man and woman, on their knee, implored
protection of the Father of all.
they do not hear the noise which disturb our little congregation at
Brussels. much louder than that which have interrupt they two day
previously, as Mrs. O'Dowd be read the service in her good voice,
the cannon of Waterloo begin to roar.
when Jos hear that dreadful sound, he make up his mind that he would
bear this perpetual recurrence of terror no long, and would fly at
once. he rush into the sick man's room, where our three friend have
pause in their prayer, and far interrupt they by a passionate
appeal to Amelia.
"I cannot stand it any more, Emmy," he say; "I willnot stand it; and you
must come with I. I have buy a horse for you--never mind at what
price--and you must dress and come with I, and ride behind Isidor."
"God forgive I, Mr. Sedley, but you be no well than a coward," Mrs.
O'Dowd say, lay down the book.
"I say come, Amelia," the civilian go on; "never mind what she say;
why be we to stop here and be butcher by the Frenchmen?"
"you forget the --th, my boy," say the little Stubble, the wound
hero, from his bed--"and and you willnot leave I, will you, Mrs. O'Dowd?"
"no, my dear fellow," say she, go up and kiss the boy. "no harm
shall come to you while I stand by. I donot budge till I get the word
from Mick. a pretty figure Iwould be, wouldnot I, stick behind that chap
on a pillion?"
this image cause the young patient to burst out laugh in his bed,
and even make Amelia smile. "I donot ask she," Jos shout out--"i
donot ask that--that Irishwoman, but you Amelia; once for all, will you
come?"
"without my husband, Joseph?" Amelia say, with a look of wonder, and
give her hand to the Major's wife. Jos's patience be exhaust.
"good-bye, then," he say, shake his fist in a rage, and slam the
door by which he retreat. and this time he really give his order for
march: and mount in the court-yard. Mrs. O'Dowd hear the
clattering hoof of the horse as they issue from the gate; and
look on, make many scornful remark on poor Joseph as he ride down
the street with Isidor after he in the laced cap. the horse, which
have not be exercise for some day, be lively, and spring about the
street. Jos, a clumsy and timid horseman, do not look to advantage in
the saddle. "look at he, Amelia dear, drive into the parlour
window. such a bull in a china-shop I never see." and presently the
pair of rider disappear at a canter down the street lead in the
direction of the Ghent road, Mrs. O'Dowd pursue they with a fire of
sarcasm so long as they be in sight.
all that day from morning until past sunset, the cannon never cease to
roar. it be dark when the cannonading stop all of a sudden.
all of we have read of what occur during that interval. the tale be
in every Englishman's mouth; and you and I, who be child when the
great battle be win and lose, be never tired of hear and
recount the history of that famous action. its remembrance rankle
still in the bosom of million of the countryman of those brave man
who lose the day. they pant for an opportunity of revenge that
humiliation; and if a contest, end in a victory on their part,
should ensue, elate they in their turn, and leave its cursed legacy
of hatred and rage behind to we, there be no end to the so-call glory
and shame, and to the alternation of successful and unsuccessful
murder, in which two high-spirited nation might engage. century
hence, we Frenchmen and Englishmen might be boast and kill each
other still, carry out bravely the Devil's code of honour.
all our friend take their share and fight like man in the great
field. all day long, whilst the woman be pray ten mile away, the
line of the dauntless english infantry be receive and repel
the furious charge of the french horseman. gun which be hear at
Brussels be plough up their rank, and comrade fall, and the
resolute survivor close in. towards evening, the attack of the
French, repeat and resist so bravely, slacken in its fury. they
have other foe besides the british to engage, or be prepare for a
final onset. it come at last: the column of the Imperial Guard
march up the hill of Saint Jean, at length and at once to sweep the
English from the height which they have maintain all day, and spite of
all: unscare by the thunder of the artillery, which hurl death from
the english line--the dark roll column press on and up the hill.
it seem almost to crest the eminence, when it begin to wave and
falter. then it stop, still face the shot. then at last the
english troop rush from the post from which no enemy have be able
to dislodge they, and the Guard turn and flee.
no more firing be hear at Brussels--the pursuit roll mile away.
darkness come down on the field and city: and Amelia be pray for
George, who be lie on his face, dead, with a bullet through his
heart.
CHAPTER XXXIII
in which Miss Crawley's Relations be very anxious about her
the kind reader must please to remember--while the army be march
from Flanders, and, after its heroic action there, be advance to
take the fortification on the frontier of France, previous to an
occupation of that country--that there be a number of person live
peaceably in England who have to do with the history at present in
hand, and must come in for their share of the chronicle. during the
time of these battle and danger, old Miss Crawley be live at
Brighton, very moderately move by the great event that be go on.
the great event render the newspaper rather interesting, to be
sure, and Briggs read out the Gazette, in which Rawdon Crawley's
gallantry be mention with honour, and his promotion be presently
record.
"what a pity that young man have take such an irretrievable step in the
world!" his aunt say; "with his rank and distinction he might have
marry a brewer's daughter with a quarter of a million--like Miss
Grains; or have look to ally himself with the good family in
England. he would have have my money some day or other; or his child
would--for Ibe not in a hurry to go, Miss Briggs, although you may be
in a hurry to be rid of I; and instead of that, he be a doomed pauper,
with a dancing-girl for a wife."
"will my dear Miss Crawley not cast an eye of compassion upon the
heroic soldier, whose name be inscribe in the annal of his country's
glory?" say Miss Briggs, who be greatly excited by the Waterloo
proceeding, and love speak romantically when there be an
occasion. "have not the Captain--or the Colonel as I may now style
he--do deed which make the name of Crawley illustrious?"
"Briggs, you be a fool," say Miss Crawley: "Colonel Crawley have
drag the name of Crawley through the mud, Miss Briggs. marry a
drawing-master's daughter, indeed!--marry a dame de compagnie--for she
be no well, Briggs; no, she be just what you be--only young, and
a great deal pretty and cleverer. be you an accomplice of that
abandon wretch, I wonder, of whose vile art he become a victim, and
of whom you use to be such an admirer? yes, I daresay you be an
accomplice. but you will find yourself disappointed in my will, I can
tell you: and you will have the goodness to write to Mr. Waxy, and say
that I desire to see he immediately." Miss Crawley be now in the
habit of write to Mr. Waxy her solicitor almost every day in the
week, for her arrangement respect her property be all revoke,
and her perplexity be great as to the future disposition of her money.
the spinster have, however, rally considerably; as be prove by the
increase vigour and frequency of her sarcasm upon Miss Briggs, all
which attack the poor companion bore with meekness, with cowardice,
with a resignation that be half generous and half hypocritical--with
the slavish submission, in a word, that woman of her disposition and
station be compel to show. who have not see how woman bully woman?
what torture have man to endure, comparable to those daily repeat
shaft of scorn and cruelty with which poor woman be riddle by the
tyrant of their sex? poor victim! but we be start from our
proposition, which be, that Miss Crawley be always particularly
annoying and savage when she be rally from illness--as they say
wound tingle most when they be about to heal.
while thus approach, as all hop, to convalescence, Miss Briggs be
the only victim admit into the presence of the invalid; yet Miss
Crawley's relative afar off do not forget their beloved kinswoman,
and by a number of token, present, and kind affectionate message,
strove to keep themselves alive in her recollection.
in the first place, let we mention her nephew, Rawdon Crawley. a few
week after the famous fight of Waterloo, and after the Gazette have
make known to she the promotion and gallantry of that distinguish
officer, the Dieppe packet bring over to Miss Crawley at Brighton, a
box contain present, and a dutiful letter, from the Colonel her
nephew. in the box be a pair of french epaulet, a Cross of the
Legion of Honour, and the hilt of a sword--relic from the field of
battle: and the letter describe with a good deal of humour how the
latter belong to a command officer of the Guard, who have swear
that "the Guard die, but never surrender," be take prisoner the
next minute by a private soldier, who break the Frenchman's sword with
the butt of his musket, when Rawdon make himself master of the
shattered weapon. as for the cross and epaulet, they come from a
Colonel of french cavalry, who have fall under the aide-de-camp's arm
in the battle: and Rawdon Crawley do not know what well to do with
the spoil than to send they to his kind and most affectionate old
friend. should he continue to write to she from Paris, whither the army
be march? he might be able to give her interesting news from that
capital, and of some of Miss Crawley's old friend of the emigration,
to whom she have show so much kindness during their distress.
the spinster cause Briggs to write back to the Colonel a gracious and
complimentary letter, encourage he to continue his correspondence.
his first letter be so excessively lively and amusing that she should
look with pleasure for its successors.--"Of course, I know," she
explain to Miss Briggs, "that Rawdon could not write such a good
letter any more than you could, my poor Briggs, and that it be that
clever little wretch of a Rebecca, who dictate every word to he; but
that be no reason why my nephew should not amuse I; and so I wish to
let he understand that I be in high good humour."
I wonder whether she know that it be not only Becky who write the
letter, but that Mrs. Rawdon actually take and send home the trophy
which she buy for a few franc, from one of the innumerable pedlar
who immediately begin to deal in relic of the war. the novelist, who
know everything, know this also. be this, however, as it may, Miss
Crawley's gracious reply greatly encourage our young friend, Rawdon
and his lady, who hop for the good from their aunt's evidently
pacify humour: and they take care to entertain she with many
delightful letter from Paris, whither, as Rawdon say, they have the
good luck to go in the track of the conquering army.
to the rector's lady, who go off to tend her husband's break
collar-bone at the Rectory at Queen's Crawley, the spinster's
communication be by no mean so gracious. Mrs. Bute, that brisk,
manage, lively, imperious woman, have commit the most fatal of all
error with regard to her sister-in-law. she have not merely oppress
she and her household--she have bore Miss Crawley; and if poor Miss
Briggs have be a woman of any spirit, she might have be make happy
by the commission which her principal give she to write a letter to
Mrs. Bute Crawley, say that Miss Crawley's health be greatly
improve since Mrs. Bute have leave she, and beg the latter on no
account to put herself to trouble, or quit her family for Miss
Crawley's sake. this triumph over a lady who have be very haughty and
cruel in her behaviour to Miss Briggs, would have rejoice most woman;
but the truth be, Briggs be a woman of no spirit at all, and the
moment her enemy be discomfit, she begin to feel compassion in her
favour.
"how silly I be," Mrs. Bute think, and with reason, "ever to hint
that I be come, as I do, in that foolish letter when we send Miss
Crawley the guinea-fowl. I ought to have go without a word to the
poor dear doting old creature, and take she out of the hand of that
ninny Briggs, and that harpy of a femme de chambre. oh! Bute, Bute,
why do you break your collar-bone?"
why, indeed? we have see how Mrs. Bute, have the game in her hand,
have really play her card too well. she have rule over Miss Crawley's
household utterly and completely, to be utterly and completely rout
when a favourable opportunity for rebellion come. she and her
household, however, consider that she have be the victim of horrible
selfishness and treason, and that her sacrifice in Miss Crawley's
behalf have meet with the most savage ingratitude. Rawdon's promotion,
and the honourable mention make of his name in the Gazette, fill this
good christian lady also with alarm. would his aunt relent towards he
now that he be a Lieutenant-Colonel and a C.B.? and would that odious
Rebecca once more get into favour? the Rector's wife write a sermon for
her husband about the vanity of military glory and the prosperity of
the wicked, which the worthy parson read in his good voice and without
understand one syllable of it. he have Pitt Crawley for one of his
auditor--Pitt, who have come with his two half-sister to church, which
the old Baronet could now by no mean be bring to frequent.
since the departure of Becky Sharp, that old wretch have give himself
up entirely to his bad course, to the great scandal of the county and
the mute horror of his son. the ribbon in Miss Horrocks's cap become
more splendid than ever. the polite family flee the hall and its
owner in terror. Sir Pitt go about tipple at his tenant' house;
and drank rum-and-water with the farmer at Mudbury and the
neighbouring place on market-day. he drive the family coach-and-four
to Southampton with Miss Horrocks inside: and the county people
expect, every week, as his son do in speechless agony, that his
marriage with she would be announce in the provincial paper. it be
indeed a rude burthen for Mr. Crawley to bear. his eloquence be
palsy at the missionary meeting, and other religious assembly in
the neighbourhood, where he have be in the habit of presiding, and of
speak for hour; for he feel, when he rise, that the audience say,
"that be the son of the old reprobate Sir Pitt, who be very likely
drink at the public house at this very moment." and once when he be
speak of the benighted condition of the king of Timbuctoo, and the
number of his wife who be likewise in darkness, some gipsy miscreant
from the crowd ask, "how many be there at Queen's Crawley, Young
Squaretoes?" to the surprise of the platform, and the ruin of Mr.
Pitt's speech. and the two daughter of the house of Queen's Crawley
would have be allow to run utterly wild (for Sir Pitt swear that no
governess should ever enter into his door again), have not Mr. Crawley,
by threaten the old gentleman, force the latter to send they to
school.
meanwhile, as we have say, whatever individual difference there might
be between they all, Miss Crawley's dear nephews and niece be
unanimous in love she and send her token of affection. thus Mrs.
Bute send guinea-fowl, and some remarkably fine cauliflower, and a
pretty purse or pincushion work by her darling girl, who beg to
keep a little place in the recollection of their dear aunt, while Mr.
Pitt send peach and grape and venison from the Hall. the
Southampton coach use to carry these token of affection to Miss
Crawley at Brighton: it use sometimes to convey Mr. Pitt thither too:
for his difference with Sir Pitt cause Mr. Crawley to absent himself
a good deal from home now: and besides, he have an attraction at
Brighton in the person of the Lady Jane Sheepshanks, whose engagement
to Mr. Crawley have be formerly mention in this history. her
ladyship and her sister live at Brighton with their mamma, the
Countess Southdown, that strong-minded woman so favourably know in
the serious world.
a few word ought to be say regard her ladyship and her noble
family, who be bind by tie of present and future relationship to the
house of Crawley. respect the chief of the Southdown family, Clement
William, fourth Earl of Southdown, little need be tell, except that his
Lordship come into Parliament (as Lord Wolsey) under the auspex of
Mr. Wilberforce, and for a time be a credit to his political sponsor,
and decidedly a serious young man. but word cannot describe the
feeling of his admirable mother, when she learn, very shortly after
her noble husband's demise, that her son be a member of several
worldly club, have lose largely at play at Wattier's and the Cocoa
Tree; that he have raise money on post-obit, and encumber the
family estate; that he drive four-in-hand, and patronise the ring; and
that he actually have an opera-box, where he entertain the most
dangerous bachelor company. his name be only mention with groan in
the dowager's circle.
the Lady Emily be her brother's senior by many year; and take
considerable rank in the serious world as author of some of the
delightful tract before mention, and of many hymn and spiritual
piece. a mature spinster, and have but faint idea of marriage, her
love for the black occupy almost all her feeling. it be to she, I
believe, we owe that beautiful poem.
lead we to some sunny isle,
yonder in the western deep;
where the sky for ever smile,
and the black for ever weep, &c.
she have correspondence with clerical gentleman in most of our East and
West India possession; and be secretly attach to the Reverend Silas
Hornblower, who be tattoo in the South Sea Islands.
as for the Lady Jane, on whom, as it have be say, Mr. Pitt Crawley's
affection have be place, she be gentle, blushing, silent, and timid.
in spite of his fall away, she weep for her brother, and be quite
ashamed of love he still. even yet she use to send he little
hurried smuggle note, and pop they into the post in private. the one
dreadful secret which weigh upon her life be, that she and the old
housekeeper have be to pay southdown a furtive visit at his chamber
in the Albany; and find he--o the naughty dear abandon
wretch!--smoke a cigar with a bottle of Curacao before he. she
admire her sister, she adore her mother, she think Mr. Crawley the
most delightful and accomplish of man, after Southdown, that fall
angel: and her mamma and sister, who be lady of the most superior
sort, manage everything for she, and regard she with that amiable
pity, of which your really superior woman always have such a share to
give away. her mamma order her dress, her book, her bonnet, and
her idea for she. she be make to take pony-riding, or piano-exercise,
or any other sort of bodily medicament, accord as my Lady Southdown
see meet; and her ladyship would have keep her daughter in pinafore up
to her present age of six-and-twenty, but that they be throw off
when Lady Jane be present to Queen Charlotte.
when these lady first come to their house at Brighton, it be to they
alone that Mr. Crawley pay his personal visit, content himself by
leave a card at his aunt's house, and make a modest inquiry of Mr.
Bowls or his assistant footman, with respect to the health of the
invalid. when he meet Miss Briggs come home from the library with a
cargo of novel under her arm, Mr. Crawley blush in a manner quite
unusual to he, as he step forward and shake Miss Crawley's
companion by the hand. he introduce Miss Briggs to the lady with whom
he happen to be walk, the Lady Jane Sheepshanks, say, "Lady
Jane, permit I to introduce to you my aunt's kind friend and most
affectionate companion, Miss Briggs, whom you know under another title,
as authoress of the delightful 'lyric of the heart,' of which you be
so fond." Lady Jane blush too as she hold out a kind little hand to
Miss Briggs, and say something very civil and incoherent about mamma,
and propose to call on Miss Crawley, and be glad to be make known
to the friend and relative of Mr. Crawley; and with soft dove-like
eye salute Miss Briggs as they separate, while Pitt Crawley treat
she to a profound courtly bow, such as he have use to H.H. the Duchess
of Pumpernickel, when he be attache at that court.
the artful diplomatist and disciple of the Machiavellian Binkie! it
be he who have give Lady Jane that copy of poor Briggs's early poem,
which he remember to have see at Queen's Crawley, with a dedication
from the poetess to his father's late wife; and he bring the volume
with he to Brighton, read it in the Southampton coach and mark
it with his own pencil, before he present it to the gentle Lady Jane.
it be he, too, who lay before Lady Southdown the great advantage
which might occur from an intimacy between her family and Miss
Crawley--advantage both worldly and spiritual, he say: for Miss
Crawley be now quite alone; the monstrous dissipation and alliance of
his brother Rawdon have estrange her affection from that reprobate
young man; the greedy tyranny and avarice of Mrs. Bute Crawley have
cause the old lady to revolt against the exorbitant pretension of
that part of the family; and though he himself have hold off all his
life from cultivate Miss Crawley's friendship, with perhaps an
improper pride, he think now that every becoming mean should be
take, both to save her soul from perdition, and to secure her fortune
to himself as the head of the house of Crawley.
the strong-minded Lady Southdown quite agree in both proposal of her
son-in-law, and be for convert Miss Crawley off-hand. at her own
home, both at Southdown and at Trottermore Castle, this tall and awful
missionary of the truth ride about the country in her barouche with
outrider, launch packet of tract among the cottager and tenant,
and would order Gaffer Jones to be convert, as she would order Goody
Hicks to take a James's powder, without appeal, resistance, or benefit
of clergy. my Lord Southdown, her late husband, an epileptic and
simple-minded nobleman, be in the habit of approve of everything
which his Matilda do and think. so that whatever change her own
belief might undergo (and it accommodate itself to a prodigious
variety of opinion, take from all sort of doctor among the
Dissenters) she have not the least scruple in order all her tenant
and inferior to follow and believe after she. thus whether she
receive the Reverend Saunders McNitre, the Scotch divine; or the
Reverend Luke Waters, the mild Wesleyan; or the Reverend Giles Jowls,
the illuminated Cobbler, who dub himself reverend as Napoleon
crown himself Emperor--the household, child, tenantry of my Lady
Southdown be expect to go down on their knee with her ladyship,
and say amen to the prayer of either Doctor. during these exercise
old Southdown, on account of his invalid condition, be allow to sit
in his own room, and have negus and the paper read to he. Lady Jane
be the old Earl's favourite daughter, and tend he and love he
sincerely: as for Lady Emily, the authoress of the "Washerwoman of
Finchley Common," her denunciation of future punishment (at this
period, for her opinion modify afterwards) be so awful that they
use to frighten the timid old gentleman her father, and the physician
declare his fit always occur after one of her ladyship's sermon.
"I will certainly call," say Lady Southdown then, in reply to the
exhortation of her daughter's pretendu, Mr. Pitt crawley--"who be Miss
Crawley's medical man?"
Mr. Crawley mention the name of Mr. Creamer.
"a most dangerous and ignorant practitioner, my dear Pitt. I have
providentially be the mean of remove he from several house:
though in one or two instance I do not arrive in time. I could not
save poor dear General Glanders, who be die under the hand of that
ignorant man--die. he rally a little under the Podgers' pill
which I administer to he; but alas! it be too late. his death be
delightful, however; and his change be only for the well; Creamer,
my dear Pitt, must leave your aunt."
Pitt express his perfect acquiescence. he, too, have be carry
along by the energy of his noble kinswoman, and future mother-in-law.
he have be make to accept Saunders McNitre, Luke water, Giles Jowls,
Podgers' Pills, Rodgers' Pills, Pokey's elixir, every one of her
ladyship's remedy spiritual or temporal. he never leave her house
without carry respectfully away with he pile of her quack theology
and medicine. o, my dear brother and fellow-sojourner in Vanity
Fair, which among you do not know and suffer under such benevolent
despot? it be in vain you say to they, "Dear Madam, I take Podgers'
specific at your order last year, and believe in it. why, why be I to
recant and accept the Rodgers' article now?" there be no help for it;
the faithful proselytizer, if she cannot convince by argument, burst
into tear, and the refusant find himself, at the end of the contest,
take down the bolus, and say, "well, well, Rodgers' be it."
"and as for her spiritual state," continue the Lady, "that of course
must be look to immediately: with Creamer about she, she may go off
any day: and in what a condition, my dear Pitt, in what a dreadful
condition! I will send the Reverend Mr. Irons to she instantly. jane,
write a line to the Reverend Bartholomew Irons, in the third person,
and say that I desire the pleasure of his company this evening at tea
at half-past six. he be an awakening man; he ought to see Miss Crawley
before she rest this night. and emily, my love, get ready a packet of
book for Miss Crawley. put up 'a Voice from the flame,' 'a
Trumpet-warning to Jericho,' and the 'Fleshpots Broken; or, the
Converted Cannibal.'"
"and the 'Washerwoman of Finchley Common,' Mamma," say Lady Emily. "it
be as well to begin soothingly at first."
"stop, my dear lady," say Pitt, the diplomatist. "with every
deference to the opinion of my beloved and respected Lady Southdown, I
think it would be quite unadvisable to commence so early upon serious
topic with Miss Crawley. remember her delicate condition, and how
little, how very little accustomed she have hitherto be to
consideration connect with her immortal welfare."
"can we then begin too early, Pitt?" say Lady Emily, rise with six
little book already in her hand.
"if you begin abruptly, you will frighten she altogether. I know my
aunt's worldly nature so well as to be sure that any abrupt attempt at
conversion will be the very bad mean that can be employ for the
welfare of that unfortunate lady. you will only frighten and annoy
she. she will very likely fle the book away, and refuse all
acquaintance with the giver."
"you be as worldly as Miss Crawley, Pitt," say Lady Emily, toss
out of the room, her book in her hand.
"and I need not tell you, my dear Lady Southdown," Pitt continue, in a
low voice, and without heed the interruption, "how fatal a little
want of gentleness and caution may be to any hope which we may
entertain with regard to the worldly possession of my aunt. remember
she have seventy thousand pound; think of her age, and her highly
nervous and delicate condition; I know that she have destroy the will
which be make in my brother's (Colonel Crawley's) favour: it be by
soothe that wound spirit that we must lead it into the right path,
and not by frighten it; and so I think you will agree with I
that--that--'
"of course, of course," Lady Southdown remark. "Jane, my love, you
need not send that note to Mr. Irons. if her health be such that
discussion fatigue she, we will wait her amendment. I will call upon
Miss Crawley tomorrow."
"and if I might suggest, my sweet lady," Pitt say in a bland tone, "it
would be as well not to take our precious Emily, who be too
enthusiastic; but rather that you should be accompany by our sweet
and dear Lady Jane."
"most certainly, Emily would ruin everything," Lady Southdown say; and
this time agree to forego her usual practice, which be, as we have
say, before she bear down personally upon any individual whom she
propose to subjugate, to fire in a quantity of tract upon the menace
party (as a charge of the French be always precede by a furious
cannonade). Lady Southdown, we say, for the sake of the invalid's
health, or for the sake of her soul's ultimate welfare, or for the sake
of her money, agree to temporise.
the next day, the great southdown female family carriage, with the
Earl's coronet and the lozenge (upon which the three lamb trottant
argent upon the field vert of the southdown, be quarter with sable
on a bend or, three snuff-mull gule, the cognizance of the house of
Binkie), drive up in state to Miss Crawley's door, and the tall serious
footman hand in to Mr. Bowls her ladyship's card for Miss Crawley,
and one likewise for Miss Briggs. by way of compromise, Lady Emily
send in a packet in the evening for the latter lady, contain copy
of the "Washerwoman," and other mild and favourite tract for Miss B.'s
own perusal; and a few for the servant' hall, viz.: "Crumbs from the
Pantry," "the Frying Pan and the fire," and "the Livery of sin," of a
much strong kind.
CHAPTER XXXIV
James Crawley's Pipe be Put out
the amiable behaviour of Mr. Crawley, and Lady Jane's kind reception of
she, highly flatter Miss Briggs, who be enable to speak a good word
for the latter, after the card of the Southdown family have be
present to Miss Crawley. a Countess's card leave personally too for
she, Briggs, be not a little pleasing to the poor friendless
companion. "what could Lady Southdown mean by leave a card upon you,
I wonder, Miss Briggs?" say the republican Miss Crawley; upon which
the companion meekly say "that she hop there could be no harm in a
lady of rank taking notice of a poor gentlewoman," and she put away
this card in her work-box amongst her most cherish personal
treasure. furthermore, Miss Briggs explain how she have meet Mr.
Crawley walk with his cousin and long affiance bride the day
before: and she tell how kind and gentle-look the lady be, and
what a plain, not to say common, dress she have, all the article of
which, from the bonnet down to the boot, she describe and estimate
with female accuracy.
Miss Crawley allow Briggs to prattle on without interrupt she too
much. as she get well, she be pin for society. Mr. Creamer, her
medical man, would not hear of she return to her old haunt and
dissipation in London. the old spinster be too glad to find any
companionship at Brighton, and not only be the card acknowledge the
very next day, but Pitt Crawley be graciously invite to come and see
his aunt. he come, bring with he Lady Southdown and her daughter.
the dowager do not say a word about the state of Miss Crawley's soul;
but talk with much discretion about the weather: about the war and
the downfall of the monster Bonaparte: and above all, about doctor,
quack, and the particular merit of Dr. Podgers, whom she then
patronise.
during their interview Pitt Crawley make a great stroke, and one which
show that, have his diplomatic career not be blight by early
neglect, he might have rise to a high rank in his profession. when the
Countess Dowager of Southdown fall foul of the Corsican upstart, as the
fashion be in those day, and show that he be a monster stain
with every conceivable crime, a coward and a tyrant not fit to live,
one whose fall be predict, &c., Pitt Crawley suddenly take up the
cudgel in favour of the man of Destiny. he describe the First Consul
as he see he at Paris at the peace of Amiens; when he, Pitt Crawley,
have the gratification of make the acquaintance of the great and good
Mr. Fox, a statesman whom, however much he might differ with he, it
be impossible not to admire fervently--a statesman who have always have
the high opinion of the Emperor Napoleon. and he speak in term of
the strong indignation of the faithless conduct of the ally
towards this dethrone monarch, who, after give himself generously up
to their mercy, be consign to an ignoble and cruel banishment, while
a bigote popish rabble be tyrannise over France in his stead.
this orthodox horror of Romish superstition save Pitt Crawley in Lady
Southdown's opinion, whilst his admiration for Fox and Napoleon raise
he immeasurably in Miss Crawley's eye. her friendship with that
defunct british statesman be mention when we first introduce she in
this history. a true Whig, Miss Crawley have be in opposition all
through the war, and though, to be sure, the downfall of the Emperor
do not very much agitate the old lady, or his ill-treatment tend to
shorten her life or natural rest, yet Pitt speak to her heart when he
laud both her idol; and by that single speech make immense progress
in her favour.
"and what do you think, my dear?" Miss Crawley say to the young lady,
for whom she have take a liking at first sight, as she always do for
pretty and modest young people; though it must be own her affection
cool as rapidly as they rise.
Lady Jane blush very much, and say "that she do not understand
politic, which she leave to wise head than her; but though Mamma
be, no doubt, correct, Mr. Crawley have speak beautifully." and when
the lady be retire at the conclusion of their visit, Miss Crawley
hop "Lady Southdown would be so kind as to send her Lady Jane
sometimes, if she could be spar to come down and console a poor sick
lonely old woman." this promise be graciously accord, and they
separate upon great term of amity.
"donot let Lady Southdown come again, Pitt," say the old lady. "she be
stupid and pompous, like all your mother's family, whom I never could
endure. but bring that nice good-natured little Jane as often as ever
you please." Pitt promise that he would do so. he do not tell the
Countess of Southdown what opinion his aunt have form of her ladyship,
who, on the contrary, think that she have make a most delightful and
majestic impression on Miss Crawley.
and so, nothing loth to comfort a sick lady, and perhaps not sorry in
her heart to be free now and again from the dreary spouting of the
Reverend Bartholomew Irons, and the serious toady who gather round
the footstool of the pompous Countess, her mamma, Lady Jane become a
pretty constant visitor to Miss Crawley, accompany she in her drive,
and solace many of her evening. she be so naturally good and soft,
that even Firkin be not jealous of she; and the gentle Briggs think
her friend be less cruel to she when kind Lady Jane be by. towards
her ladyship Miss Crawley's manner be charming. the old spinster
tell she a thousand anecdote about her youth, talk to she in a very
different strain from that in which she have be accustom to converse
with the godless little rebecca; for there be that in Lady Jane's
innocence which render light talking impertinence before she, and
Miss Crawley be too much of a gentlewoman to offend such purity. the
young lady herself have never receive kindness except from this old
spinster, and her brother and father: and she repay Miss Crawley's
engoument by artless sweetness and friendship.
in the autumn evening (when Rebecca be flaunt at Paris, the gay
among the gay conqueror there, and our Amelia, our dear wound
Amelia, ah! where be she?) Lady Jane would be sit in Miss
Crawley's drawing-room singing sweetly to she, in the twilight, she
little simple song and hymn, while the sun be set and the sea
be roar on the beach. the old spinster use to wake up when these
ditty cease, and ask for more. as for Briggs, and the quantity of
tear of happiness which she now shed as she pretend to knit, and
look out at the splendid ocean darkle before the window, and the
lamp of heaven begin more brightly to shine--who, I say can
measure the happiness and sensibility of Briggs?
Pitt meanwhile in the dining-room, with a pamphlet on the Corn Laws or
a Missionary Register by his side, take that kind of recreation which
suit romantic and unromantic man after dinner. he sip Madeira:
build castle in the air: think himself a fine fellow: feel himself
much more in love with Jane than he have be any time these seven
year, during which their liaison have last without the slight
impatience on Pitt's part--and sleep a good deal. when the time for
coffee come, Mr. Bowls use to enter in a noisy manner, and summon
Squire Pitt, who would be find in the dark very busy with his pamphlet.
"I wish, my love, I could get somebody to play piquet with I," Miss
Crawley say one night when this functionary make his appearance with
the candle and the coffee. "Poor Briggs can no more play than an owl,
she be so stupid" (the spinster always take an opportunity of abuse
Briggs before the servant); "and I think I should sleep well if I
have my game."
at this Lady Jane blush to the tip of her little ear, and down to
the end of her pretty finger; and when Mr. Bowls have quit the
room, and the door be quite shut, she say:
"Miss Crawley, I can play a little. I use to--to play a little with
poor dear papa."
"come and kiss I. come and kiss I this instant, you dear good little
soul," cry Miss Crawley in an ecstasy: and in this picturesque and
friendly occupation Mr. Pitt find the old lady and the young one, when
he come upstairs with he pamphlet in his hand. how she do blush all
the evening, that poor Lady Jane!
it must not be imagine that Mr. Pitt Crawley's artifice escape the
attention of his dear relation at the Rectory at Queen's Crawley.
Hampshire and Sussex lie very close together, and Mrs. Bute have friend
in the latter county who take care to inform she of all, and a great
deal more than all, that pass at Miss Crawley's house at Brighton.
Pitt be there more and more. he do not come for month together to
the Hall, where his abominable old father abandon himself completely
to rum-and-water, and the odious society of the Horrocks family. Pitt's
success render the Rector's family furious, and Mrs. Bute regret
more (though she confess less) than ever her monstrous fault in so
insult Miss Briggs, and in be so haughty and parsimonious to
Bowls and Firkin, that she have not a single person leave in Miss
Crawley's household to give her information of what take place there.
"it be all Bute's collar-bone," she persist in say; "if that have
not break, I never would have leave she. I be a martyr to duty and to
your odious unclerical habit of hunting, Bute."
"hunting; nonsense! it be you that frighten she, Barbara," the
divine interpose. "yoube a clever woman, but youhave get a devil of a
temper; and yoube a screw with your money, Barbara."
"youwould have be screw in gaol, Bute, if I have not keep your money."
"I know I would, my dear," say the Rector, good-naturedly. "you be a
clever woman, but you manage too well, you know": and the pious man
console himself with a big glass of port.
"what the deuce can she find in that spooney of a Pitt Crawley?" he
continue. "the fellow have not pluck enough to say Bo to a goose. I
remember when Rawdon, who be a man, and be hang to he, use to flog
he round the stable as if he be a whipping-top: and Pitt would go
howl home to his ma--ha, ha! why, either of my boy would whop he
with one hand. Jim say hebe remember at Oxford as Miss Crawley
still--the spooney.
"I say, Barbara," his reverence continue, after a pause.
"what?" say Barbara, who be bite her nail, and drum the table.
"I say, why not send Jim over to Brighton to see if he can do anything
with the old lady. hebe very near get his degree, you know. hebe
only be pluck twice--so be I--but hebe have the advantage of
Oxford and a university education. he know some of the good chap
there. he pull stroke in the Boniface boat. hebe a handsome feller.
D---- it, ma'am, letus put he on the old woman, hey, and tell he to
thrash Pitt if he say anything. ha, ha, ha!
"Jim might go down and see she, certainly," the housewife say; add
with a sigh, "if we could but get one of the girl into the house; but
she could never endure they, because they be not pretty!" those
unfortunate and well-educate woman make themselves hear from the
neighbour drawing-room, where they be thrum away, with hard
finger, an elaborate music-piece on the piano-forte, as their mother
speak; and indeed, they be at music, or at backboard, or at
geography, or at history, the whole day long. but what avail all these
accomplishment, in Vanity Fair, to girl who be short, poor, plain,
and have a bad complexion? Mrs. Bute could think of nobody but the
Curate to take one of they off her hand; and Jim come in from the
stable at this minute, through the parlour window, with a short pipe
stick in his oilskin cap, he and his father fall to talk about odd
on the St. Leger, and the colloquy between the Rector and his wife
end.
Mrs. Bute do not augur much good to the cause from the sending of her
son James as an ambassador, and see he depart in rather a despairing
mood. nor do the young fellow himself, when tell what his mission be
to be, expect much pleasure or benefit from it; but he be console by
the thought that possibly the old lady would give he some handsome
remembrance of she, which would pay a few of his most pressing bill at
the commencement of the ensue Oxford term, and so take his place by
the coach from Southampton, and be safely land at Brighton on the
same evening? with his portmanteau, his favourite bull-dog Towzer, and
an immense basket of farm and garden produce, from the dear Rectory
folk to the dear Miss Crawley. consider it be too late to disturb
the invalid lady on the first night of his arrival, he put up at an
inn, and do not wait upon Miss Crawley until a late hour in the noon
of next day.
James Crawley, when his aunt have last beheld he, be a gawky lad, at
that uncomfortable age when the voice vary between an unearthly
treble and a preternatural bass; when the face not uncommonly bloom
out with appearance for which Rowland's Kalydor be say to act as a
cure; when boy be see to shave furtively with their sister's
scissor, and the sight of other young woman produce intolerable
sensation of terror in they; when the great hand and ankle protrude
a long way from garment which have grow too tight for they; when
their presence after dinner be at once frightful to the lady, who be
whisper in the twilight in the drawing-room, and inexpressibly
odious to the gentleman over the mahogany, who be restrain from
freedom of intercourse and delightful interchange of wit by the
presence of that gawky innocence; when, at the conclusion of the second
glass, papa say, "Jack, my boy, go out and see if the evening hold
up," and the youth, willing to be free, yet hurt at not be yet a
man, quit the incomplete banquet. James, then a hobbadehoy, be now
become a young man, have have the benefit of a university education,
and acquire the inestimable polish which be gain by live in a fast
set at a small college, and contracting debt, and be rusticate,
and be pluck.
he be a handsome lad, however, when he come to present himself to his
aunt at Brighton, and good look be always a title to the fickle old
lady's favour. nor do his blush and awkwardness take away from it:
she be pleased with these healthy token of the young gentleman's
ingenuousness.
he say "he have come down for a couple of day to see a man of his
college, and--and to pay my respect to you, Ma'am, and my father's and
mother's, who hope you be well."
Pitt be in the room with Miss Crawley when the lad be announce, and
look very blank when his name be mention. the old lady have plenty
of humour, and enjoy her correct nephew's perplexity. she ask
after all the people at the Rectory with great interest; and say she
be think of pay they a visit. she praise the lad to his face,
and say he be well-grow and very much improve, and that it be a
pity his sister have not some of his good look; and find, on
inquiry, that he have take up his quarter at an hotel, would not hear
of his stop there, but bade Mr. Bowls send for Mr. James Crawley's
thing instantly; "and hark ye, Bowls," she add, with great
graciousness, "you will have the goodness to pay Mr. James's bill."
she fling Pitt a look of arch triumph, which cause that diplomatist
almost to choke with envy. much as he have ingratiate himself with his
aunt, she have never yet invite he to stay under her roof, and here
be a young whipper-snapper, who at first sight be make welcome there.
"I beg your pardon, sir," say Bowls, advance with a profound bow;
"what 'otel, sir, shall Thomas fetch the luggage from?"
"o, dam," say young James, start up, as if in some alarm, "Iwill go."
"what!" say Miss Crawley.
"the Tom Cribb's arm," say James, blush deeply.
Miss Crawley burst out laugh at this title. Mr. Bowls give one
abrupt guffaw, as a confidential servant of the family, but choke the
rest of the volley; the diplomatist only smile.
"I--I donot know any well," say James, look down. "Ihave never
be here before; it be the coachman tell I." the young story-teller!
the fact be, that on the Southampton coach, the day previous,
James Crawley have meet the Tutbury Pet, who be come to Brighton to
make a match with the Rottingdean Fibber; and enchant by the Pet's
conversation, have pass the evening in company with that scientific
man and his friend, at the inn in question.
"I--I'd well go and settle the score," James continue. "couldnot think
of ask you, Ma'am," he add, generously.
this delicacy make his aunt laugh the more.
"go and settle the bill, Bowls," she say, with a wave of her hand,
"and bring it to I."
poor lady, she do not know what she have do! "there--therebe a
little dawg," say James, look frightfully guilty. "Iwould well go for
he. he bite footmen's calf."
all the party cry out with laugh at this description; even Briggs
and Lady Jane, who be sit mute during the interview between Miss
Crawley and her nephew: and bowl, without a word, quit the room.
still, by way of punish her eld nephew, Miss Crawley persist in
be gracious to the young Oxonian. there be no limit to her
kindness or her compliment when they once begin. she tell Pitt he
might come to dinner, and insist that James should accompany she in
her drive, and parade he solemnly up and down the cliff, on the back
seat of the barouche. during all this excursion, she condescend to
say civil thing to he: she quote italian and french poetry to the
poor bewildered lad, and persist that he be a fine scholar, and be
perfectly sure he would gain a gold medal, and be a Senior Wrangler.
"haw, haw," laugh James, encourage by these compliment; "Senior
Wrangler, indeed; thatbe at the other shop."
"what be the other shop, my dear child?" say the lady.
"Senior Wranglers at Cambridge, not Oxford," say the scholar, with a
know air; and would probably have be more confidential, but that
suddenly there appear on the cliff in a tax-cart, draw by a bang-up
pony, dress in white flannel coat, with mother-of-pearl button, his
friend the Tutbury Pet and the Rottingdean Fibber, with three other
gentleman of their acquaintance, who all salute poor James there in
the carriage as he sate. this incident damp the ingenuous youth's
spirit, and no word of yea or nay could he be induce to utter during
the rest of the drive.
on his return he find his room prepare, and his portmanteau ready,
and might have remark that Mr. Bowls's countenance, when the latter
conduct he to his apartment, wear a look of gravity, wonder, and
compassion. but the thought of Mr. Bowls do not enter his head. he
be deplore the dreadful predicament in which he find himself, in a
house full of old woman, jabber french and italian, and talk
poetry to he. "reglarly up a tree, by jingo!" exclaim the modest
boy, who could not face the gentle of her sex--not even Briggs--when
she begin to talk to he; whereas, put he at Iffley Lock, and he could
out-slang the bold bargeman.
at dinner, James appear choke in a white neckcloth, and have the
honour of hand my Lady Jane downstairs, while Briggs and Mr. Crawley
follow afterwards, conduct the old lady, with her apparatus of
bundle, and shawl, and cushion. half of Briggs's time at dinner be
spend in superintend the invalid's comfort, and in cut up
chicken for her fat spaniel. James do not talk much, but he make a
point of ask all the lady to drink wine, and accept Mr.
Crawley's challenge, and consume the great part of a bottle of
champagne which Mr. Bowls be order to produce in his honour. the
lady have withdraw, and the two cousin be leave together, Pitt,
the ex-diplomatist, he come very communicative and friendly. he ask
after James's career at college--what his prospect in life be--hop
heartily he would get on; and, in a word, be frank and amiable.
James's tongue unloose with the port, and he tell his cousin his life,
his prospect, his debt, his trouble at the little-go, and his row
with the proctor, fill rapidly from the bottle before he, and
fly from Port to Madeira with joyous activity.
"the chief pleasure which my aunt have," say Mr. Crawley, fill his
glass, "be that people should do as they like in her house. this be
Liberty Hall, James, and you cannot do Miss Crawley a great kindness
than to do as you please, and ask for what you will. I know you have
all sneered at I in the country for be a tory. Miss Crawley be
liberal enough to suit any fancy. she be a Republican in principle,
and despise everything like rank or title."
"why be you go to marry an Earl's daughter?" say James.
"my dear friend, remember it be not poor Lady Jane's fault that she be
well bear," Pitt reply, with a courtly air. "she cannot help be a
lady. besides, I be a Tory, you know."
"oh, as for that," say Jim, "therebe nothing like old blood; no,
dammy, nothing like it. Ibe none of your radical. I know what it be
to be a gentleman, dammy. see the chap in a boat-race; look at the
feller in a fight; aye, look at a dawg kill rat--which be it win?
the good-blooded one. get some more port, Bowls, old boy, whilst I
buzz this bottle-here. what be I asaye?"
"I think you be speak of dog kill rat," Pitt remark mildly,
hand his cousin the decant to "buzz."
"kill rat be I? well, Pitt, be you a sporting man? do you want to
see a dawg as can kill a rat? if you do, come down with I to Tom
Corduroy's, in Castle Street Mews, and Iwill show you such a bull-terrier
as--Pooh! gammon," cry James, burst out laugh at his
own absurdity--"YOU donot care about a dawg or rat; itbe all nonsense.
Ibe blest if I think you know the difference between a dog and a duck."
"no; by the way," Pitt continue with increase blandness, "it be
about blood you be talk, and the personal advantage which people
derive from patrician birth. herebe the fresh bottle."
"blood's the word," say James, gulp the ruby fluid down. "nothing
like blood, sir, in hosse, dawgs, and man. why, only last term, just
before I be rusticate, that is, I mean just before I have the measle,
ha, ha--there be I and Ringwood of Christchurch, Bob Ringwood, Lord
Cinqbars' son, have our beer at the Bell at Blenheim, when the
Banbury bargeman offer to fight either of we for a bowl of punch. I
couldnot. my arm be in a sling; couldnot even take the drag down--a
brute of a mare of mine have fall with I only two day before, out with
the Abingdon, and I think my arm be break. well, sir, I couldnot
finish he, but Bob have his coat off at once--he stand up to the
Banbury man for three minute, and polish he off in four round
easy. Gad, how he do drop, sir, and what be it? blood, sir, all
blood."
"you donot drink, James," the ex-attache continue. "in my time at
Oxford, the man pass round the bottle a little quick than you young
fellow seem to do."
"come, come," say James, put his hand to his nose and wink at
his cousin with a pair of vinous eye, "no joke, old boy; no try it
on on I. you want to trot I out, but itbe no go. in vino verita,
old boy. Mars, Bacchus, Apollo virorum, hey? I wish my aunt would send
down some of this to the governor; itbe a precious good tap."
"you have well ask she," Machiavel continue, "or make the good of
your time now. what say the bard? 'nunc vino pellite curas, Cras
ingen iterabimus aequor,'" and the Bacchanalian, quote the above
with a House of Commons air, toss off nearly a thimbleful of wine
with an immense flourish of his glass.
at the Rectory, when the bottle of port wine be open after dinner,
the young lady have each a glass from a bottle of currant wine. Mrs.
Bute take one glass of port, honest James have a couple commonly, but as
his father grow very sulky if he make further inroad on the bottle,
the good lad generally refrain from try for more, and subside
either into the currant wine, or to some private gin-and-water in the
stable, which he enjoy in the company of the coachman and his pipe.
at Oxford, the quantity of wine be unlimited, but the quality be
inferior: but when quantity and quality unite as at his aunt's house,
James show that he could appreciate they indeed; and hardly need
any of his cousin's encouragement in drain off the second bottle
supply by Mr. Bowls.
when the time for coffee come, however, and for a return to the lady,
of whom he stand in awe, the young gentleman's agreeable frankness leave
he, and he relapse into his usual surly timidity; content himself
by say yes and no, by scowl at Lady Jane, and by upset one
cup of coffee during the evening.
if he do not speak he yawn in a pitiable manner, and his presence
throw a damp upon the modest proceeding of the evening, for Miss
Crawley and Lady Jane at their piquet, and Miss Briggs at her work,
feel that his eye be wildly fix on they, and be uneasy under
that maudlin look.
"he seem a very silent, awkward, bashful lad," say Miss Crawley to
Mr. Pitt.
"he be more communicative in man's society than with lady," Machiavel
dryly reply: perhaps rather disappointed that the port wine have not
make Jim speak more.
he have spend the early part of the next morning in write home to his
mother a most flourishing account of his reception by Miss Crawley.
but ah! he little know what evil the day be bring for he, and how
short his reign of favour be destine to be. a circumstance which Jim
have forget--a trivial but fatal circumstance--have take place at the
Cribb's arm on the night before he have come to his aunt's house. it
be no other than this--Jim, who be always of a generous disposition,
and when in his cup especially hospitable, have in the course of the
night treat the Tutbury champion and the rottingdean man, and their
friend, twice or thrice to the refreshment of gin-and-water--so that
no less than eighteen glass of that fluid at eightpence per glass
be charge in Mr. James Crawley's bill. it be not the amount of
eightpence, but the quantity of gin which tell fatally against poor
James's character, when his aunt's butler, Mr. Bowls, go down at his
mistress's request to pay the young gentleman's bill. the landlord,
fear lest the account should be refuse altogether, swear solemnly
that the young gent have consume personally every farthing's worth of
the liquor: and bowl pay the bill finally, and show it on his
return home to Mrs. Firkin, who be shock at the frightful
prodigality of gin; and take the bill to Miss Briggs as
accountant-general; who think it her duty to mention the circumstance
to her principal, Miss Crawley.
have he drunk a dozen bottle of claret, the old spinster could have
pardon he. Mr. Fox and Mr. Sheridan drink claret. gentleman drink
claret. but eighteen glass of gin consume among boxer in an
ignoble pot-house--it be an odious crime and not to be pardon
readily. everything go against the lad: he come home perfume from
the stable, whither he have be to pay his dog Towzer a visit--and
whence he be go to take his friend out for an airing, when he meet
Miss Crawley and her wheezy Blenheim spaniel, which Towzer would have
eat up have not the Blenheim flee squealing to the protection of Miss
Briggs, while the atrocious master of the bull-dog stand laugh at
the horrible persecution.
this day too the unlucky boy's modesty have likewise forsake he. he
be lively and facetious at dinner. during the repast he level one
or two joke against Pitt Crawley: he drink as much wine as upon the
previous day; and go quite unsuspiciously to the drawing-room, begin
to entertain the lady there with some choice Oxford story. he
describe the different pugilistic quality of Molyneux and Dutch Sam,
offer playfully to give Lady Jane the odd upon the Tutbury Pet
against the rottingdean man, or take they, as her ladyship choose: and
crown the pleasantry by propose to back himself against his cousin
Pitt Crawley, either with or without the glove. "and thatbe a fair
offer, my buck," he say, with a loud laugh, slap Pitt on the
shoulder, "and my father tell I to make it too, and hewill go half in
the bet, ha, ha!" so say, the engage youth nod knowingly at
poor Miss Briggs, and point his thumb over his shoulder at Pitt
Crawley in a jocular and exult manner.
Pitt be not pleased altogether perhaps, but still not unhappy in the
main. poor Jim have his laugh out: and stagger across the room with
his aunt's candle, when the old lady move to retire, and offer to
salute she with the blandest tipsy smile: and he take his own leave
and go upstairs to his bedroom perfectly satisfied with himself, and
with a pleased notion that his aunt's money would be leave to he in
preference to his father and all the rest of the family.
once up in the bedroom, one would have think he could not make
matter bad; and yet this unlucky boy do. the moon be shin very
pleasantly out on the sea, and Jim, attract to the window by the
romantic appearance of the ocean and the heaven, think he would
far enjoy they while smoke. nobody would smell the tobacco, he
think, if he cunningly open the window and keep his head and pipe
in the fresh air. this he do: but be in an excited state, poor Jim
have forget that his door be open all this time, so that the breeze
blow inward and a fine thorough draught be establish, the
cloud of tobacco be carry downstairs, and arrive with quite
undiminishe fragrance to Miss Crawley and Miss Briggs.
the pipe of tobacco finish the business: and the Bute-Crawleys never
know how many thousand pound it cost they. Firkin rush downstair
to bowl who be read out the "Fire and the fry pan" to his
aide-de-camp in a loud and ghostly voice. the dreadful secret be tell
to he by Firkin with so frighten a look, that for the first moment
Mr. Bowls and his young man think that robber be in the house, the
leg of whom have probably be discover by the woman under Miss
Crawley's bed. when make aware of the fact, however--to rush upstairs
at three step at a time to enter the unconscious James's apartment,
call out, "Mr. James," in a voice stifle with alarm, and to cry,
"for Gawd's sake, sir, stop that 'ere pipe," be the work of a minute
with Mr. Bowls. "o, Mr. James, what 'AVE you do!" he say in a voice
of the deep pathos, as he throw the implement out of the window.
"what 'ave you do, sir! missis cannot abide them."
"missis neednot smoke," say James with a frantic misplace laugh, and
think the whole matter an excellent joke. but his feeling be very
different in the morning, when Mr. Bowls's young man, who operate upon
Mr. James's boot, and bring he his hot water to shave that beard
which he be so anxiously expect, hand a note in to Mr. James in
bed, in the handwriting of Miss Briggs.
"dear sir," it say, "Miss Crawley have pass an exceedingly disturbed
night, owe to the shocking manner in which the house have be
pollute by tobacco; Miss Crawley bid I say she regret that she be
too unwell to see you before you go--and above all that she ever
induce you to remove from the ale-house, where she be sure you will be
much more comfortable during the rest of your stay at Brighton."
and herewith honest James's career as a candidate for his aunt's favour
end. he have in fact, and without know it, do what he menace to
do. he have fight his cousin Pitt with the glove.
where meanwhile be he who have be once first favourite for this race
for money? Becky and Rawdon, as we have see, be come together after
Waterloo, and be pass the winter of 1815 at Paris in great
splendour and gaiety. rebecca be a good economist, and the price poor
Jos Sedley have pay for her two horse be in itself sufficient to keep
their little establishment afloat for a year, at the least; there be
no occasion to turn into money "my pistol, the same which I shoot
Captain Marker," or the gold dressing-case, or the cloak line with
sable. Becky have it make into a pelisse for herself, in which she ride
in the Bois de Boulogne to the admiration of all: and you should have
see the scene between she and her delighted husband, whom she rejoin
after the army have enter Cambray, and when she unsewe herself, and
let out of her dress all those watch, knick-knack, bank-note,
cheque, and valuable, which she have secrete in the wadding, previous
to her meditate flight from Brussels! Tufto be charm, and Rawdon
roar with delighted laughter, and swear that she be well than any
play he ever see, by Jove. and the way in which she jockey Jos, and
which she describe with infinite fun, carry up his delight to a
pitch of quite insane enthusiasm. he believe in his wife as much as
the french soldier in Napoleon.
her success in Paris be remarkable. all the french lady vote she
charming. she speak their language admirably. she adopt at once
their grace, their liveliness, their manner. her husband be stupid
certainly--all English be stupid--and, besides, a dull husband at
Paris be always a point in a lady's favour. he be the heir of the
rich and spirituelle Miss Crawley, whose house have be open to so many
of the french noblesse during the emigration. they receive the
colonel's wife in their own hotels--"why," write a great lady to Miss
Crawley, who have buy her lace and trinket at the Duchess's own
price, and give she many a dinner during the pinch time after the
revolution--"why do not our dear Miss come to her nephew and niece,
and her attach friend in Paris? all the world raffole of the
charming Mistress and her espiegle beauty. yes, we see in her the
grace, the charm, the wit of our dear friend Miss Crawley! the king
take notice of she yesterday at the Tuileries, and we be all jealous
of the attention which Monsieur pay she. if you could have see the
spite of a certain stupid Miladi Bareacres (whose eagle-beak and toque
and feather may be see peer over the head of all assembly) when
Madame, the Duchess of Angouleme, the august daughter and companion of
king, desire especially to be present to Mrs. Crawley, as your dear
daughter and protegee, and thank she in the name of France, for all
your benevolence towards our unfortunate during their exile! she be of
all the society, of all the ball--of the ball--yes--of the dance,
no; and yet how interesting and pretty this fair creature look
surround by the homage of the man, and so soon to be a mother! to
hear she speak of you, her protectress, her mother, would bring tear
to the eye of ogre. how she love you! how we all love our
admirable, our respectable Miss Crawley!"
it be to be fear that this letter of the parisian great lady do not
by any mean advance Mrs. Becky's interest with her admirable, her
respectable, relative. on the contrary, the fury of the old spinster
be beyond bound, when she find what be Rebecca's situation, and how
audaciously she have make use of Miss Crawley's name, to get an entree
into parisian society. too much shake in mind and body to compose a
letter in the french language in reply to that of her correspondent,
she dictate to Briggs a furious answer in her own native tongue,
repudiate Mrs. Rawdon Crawley altogether, and warn the public to
beware of she as a most artful and dangerous person. but as Madame the
Duchess of X--have only be twenty year in England, she do not
understand a single word of the language, and content herself by
inform Mrs. Rawdon Crawley at their next meeting, that she have
receive a charming letter from that chere Mees, and that it be full
of benevolent thing for Mrs. Crawley, who begin seriously to have
hope that the spinster would relent.
meanwhile, she be the gay and most admire of Englishwomen: and
have a little european congress on her reception-night. Prussians and
cossack, Spanish and English--all the world be at Paris during this
famous winter: to have see the star and cordon in Rebecca's humble
saloon would have make all Baker Street pale with envy. famous warrior
ride by her carriage in the Bois, or crowd her modest little box at
the Opera. Rawdon be in the high spirit. there be no dun in
Paris as yet: there be party every day at Very's or beauvillier';
play be plentiful and his luck good. Tufto perhaps be sulky. Mrs.
Tufto have come over to Paris at her own invitation, and besides this
contretemp, there be a score of general now round Becky's chair,
and she might take her choice of a dozen bouquet when she go to the
play. Lady Bareacres and the chief of the english society, stupid and
irreproachable female, writhe with anguish at the success of the
little upstart Becky, whose poison joke quiver and rankle in
their chaste breast. but she have all the man on her side. she fight
the woman with indomitable courage, and they could not talk scandal in
any tongue but their own.
so in fete, pleasure, and prosperity, the winter of 1815-16 pass
away with Mrs. Rawdon Crawley, who accommodate herself to polite life
as if her ancestor have be people of fashion for century past--and
who from her wit, talent, and energy, indeed merit a place of honour
in Vanity Fair. in the early spring of 1816, Galignani's Journal
contain the follow announcement in an interesting corner of the
paper: "on the 26th of March--the Lady of Lieutenant-Colonel Crawley,
of the Life Guards Green--of a son and heir."
this event be copy into the London paper, out of which Miss Briggs
read the statement to Miss Crawley, at breakfast, at Brighton. the
intelligence, expect as it might have be, cause a crisis in the
affair of the Crawley family. the spinster's rage rise to its height,
and send instantly for Pitt, her nephew, and for the Lady Southdown,
from Brunswick Square, she request an immediate celebration of the
marriage which have be so long pende between the two family. and
she announce that it be her intention to allow the young couple a
thousand a year during her lifetime, at the expiration of which the
bulk of her property would be settle upon her nephew and her dear
niece, Lady Jane Crawley. Waxy come down to ratify the deed--Lord
Southdown give away his sister--she be marry by a Bishop, and not by
the Rev. Bartholomew Irons--to the disappointment of the irregular
prelate.
when they be marry, Pitt would have like to take a hymeneal tour
with his bride, as become people of their condition. but the affection
of the old lady towards Lady Jane have grow so strong, that she fairly
own she could not part with her favourite. Pitt and his wife come
therefore and live with Miss Crawley: and (greatly to the annoyance of
poor Pitt, who conceive himself a most injure character--be
subject to the humour of his aunt on one side, and of his
mother-in-law on the other) Lady Southdown, from her neighbouring
house, reign over the whole family--Pitt, Lady Jane, Miss Crawley,
Briggs, Bowls, Firkin, and all. she pitilessly dose they with her
tract and her medicine, she dismiss Creamer, she instal Rodgers,
and soon strip Miss Crawley of even the semblance of authority. the
poor soul grow so timid that she actually leave off bully Briggs any
more, and clung to her niece, more fond and terrify every day. peace
to thee, kind and selfish, vain and generous old heathen!--We shall see
thee no more. let we hope that Lady Jane support she kindly, and lead
she with gentle hand out of the busy struggle of Vanity Fair.
CHAPTER XXXV
Widow and Mother
the news of the great fight of Quatre Bras and Waterloo reach
England at the same time. the Gazette first publish the result of
the two battle; at which glorious intelligence all England thrill
with triumph and fear. particular then follow; and after the
announcement of the victory come the list of the wounded and the
slain. who can tell the dread with which that catalogue be open and
read! Fancy, at every village and homestead almost through the three
kingdom, the great news come of the battle in Flanders, and the
feeling of exultation and gratitude, bereavement and sicken dismay,
when the list of the regimental loss be go through, and it
become know whether the dear friend and relative have escape or
fall. anybody who will take the trouble of look back to a file of
the newspaper of the time, must, even now, feel at second-hand this
breathless pause of expectation. the list of casualty be carry
on from day to day: you stop in the midst as in a story which be to be
continue in our next. think what the feeling must have be as those
paper follow each other fresh from the press; and if such an
interest could be feel in our country, and about a battle where but
twenty thousand of our people be engage, think of the condition of
Europe for twenty year before, where people be fight, not by
thousand, but by million; each one of whom as he strike his enemy
wound horribly some other innocent heart far away.
the news which that famous Gazette bring to the Osbornes give a
dreadful shock to the family and its chief. the girl indulge
unrestrained in their grief. the gloom-stricken old father be still
more bear down by his fate and sorrow. he strove to think that a
judgment be on the boy for his disobedience. he dare not own that
the severity of the sentence frighten he, and that its fulfilment
have come too soon upon his curse. sometimes a shudder terror
strike he, as if he have be the author of the doom which he have
call down on his son. there be a chance before of reconciliation.
the boy's wife might have die; or he might have come back and say,
Father I have sin. but there be no hope now. he stand on the
other side of the gulf impassable, haunt his parent with sad eye.
he remember they once before so in a fever, when every one think
the lad be die, and he lie on his bed speechless, and gaze with a
dreadful gloom. good God! how the father clung to the doctor then, and
with what a sicken anxiety he follow he: what a weight of grief
be off his mind when, after the crisis of the fever, the lad
recover, and look at his father once more with eye that recognise
he. but now there be no help or cure, or chance of reconcilement:
above all, there be no humble word to soothe vanity outrage and
furious, or bring to its natural flow the poison, angry blood. and
it be hard to say which pang it be that tear the proud father's heart
most keenly--that his son should have go out of the reach of his
forgiveness, or that the apology which his own pride expect should
have escape he.
whatever his sensation might have be, however, the stem old man
would have no confidant. he never mention his son's name to his
daughter; but order the elder to place all the female of the
establishment in mourning; and desire that the male servant should be
similarly attire in deep black. all party and entertainment, of
course, be to be put off. no communication be make to his future
son-in-law, whose marriage-day have be fix: but there be enough in
Mr. Osborne's appearance to prevent Mr. Bullock from make any
inquiry, or in any way press forward that ceremony. he and the
lady whisper about it under their voice in the drawing-room
sometimes, whither the father never come. he remain constantly in
his own study; the whole front part of the house be close until
some time after the completion of the general mourning.
about three week after the 18th of June, Mr. Osborne's acquaintance,
Sir William Dobbin, call at Mr. Osborne's house in Russell Square,
with a very pale and agitated face, and insist upon see that
gentleman. usher into his room, and after a few word, which neither
the speaker nor the host understand, the former produce from an
inclosure a letter seal with a large red seal. "my son, Major
Dobbin," the Alderman say, with some hesitation, "despatch I a
letter by an officer of the --th, who arrive in town to-day. my son's
letter contain one for you, Osborne." the Alderman place the letter
on the table, and Osborne star at he for a moment or two in silence.
his look frighten the ambassador, who after look guiltily for a
little time at the grief-stricken man, hurry away without another
word.
the letter be in George's well-know bold handwriting. it be that one
which he have write before daybreak on the 16th of June, and just
before he take leave of Amelia. the great red seal be emblazon with
the sham coat of arm which Osborne have assume from the Peerage, with
"Pax in bello" for a motto; that of the ducal house with which the vain
old man try to fancy himself connect. the hand that sign it would
never hold pen or sword more. the very seal that seal it have be
rob from George's dead body as it lie on the field of battle. the
father know nothing of this, but sit and look at the letter in
terrified vacancy. he almost fall when he go to open it.
have you ever have a difference with a dear friend? how his letter,
write in the period of love and confidence, sicken and rebuke you!
what a dreary mourning it be to dwell upon those vehement protest of
dead affection! what lie epitaph they make over the corpse of love!
what dark, cruel comment upon life and vanity! Most of we have get
or write drawer full of they. they be closet-skeleton which we
keep and shun. Osborne tremble long before the letter from his dead
son.
the poor boy's letter do not say much. he have be too proud to
acknowledge the tenderness which his heart feel. he only say, that on
the eve of a great battle, he wish to bid his father farewell, and
solemnly to implore his good office for the wife--it might be for the
child--whom he leave behind he. he own with contrition that his
irregularity and his extravagance have already waste a large part of
his mother's little fortune. he thank his father for his former
generous conduct; and he promise he that if he fall on the field or
survive it, he would act in a manner worthy of the name of George
Osborne.
his english habit, pride, awkwardness perhaps, have prevent he from
say more. his father could not see the kiss George have place on
the superscription of his letter. Mr. Osborne drop it with the
bitter, deadly pang of balked affection and revenge. his son be
still beloved and unforgiven.
about two month afterwards, however, as the young lady of the family
go to church with their father, they remark how he take a different
seat from that which he usually occupy when he choose to attend divine
worship; and that from his cushion opposite, he look up at the wall
over their head. this cause the young woman likewise to gaze in the
direction towards which their father's gloomy eye point: and they
see an elaborate monument upon the wall, where Britannia be
represent weep over an urn, and a broken sword and a couchant lion
indicate that the piece of sculpture have be erect in honour of a
deceased warrior. the sculptor of those day have stock of such
funereal emblem in hand; as you may see still on the wall of St.
Paul's, which be cover with hundred of these braggart heathen
allegory. there be a constant demand for they during the first
fifteen year of the present century.
under the memorial in question be emblazon the well-know and
pompous osborne arm; and the inscription say, that the monument be
"sacred to the memory of George Osborne, Junior, Esq., late a captain
in his Majesty's --th regiment of foot, who fall on the 18th of June,
1815, age 28 year, while fight for his king and country in the
glorious victory of Waterloo. Dulce et decorum est pro patria mori."
the sight of that stone agitate the nerve of the sister so much,
that Miss Maria be compel to leave the church. the congregation
make way respectfully for those sob girl clothe in deep black,
and pity the stern old father seat opposite the memorial of the
dead soldier. "will he forgive Mrs. George?" the girl say to
themselves as soon as their ebullition of grief be over. much
conversation pass too among the acquaintance of the Osborne family,
who know of the rupture between the son and father cause by the
former's marriage, as to the chance of a reconciliation with the young
widow. there be bet among the gentleman both about Russell Square
and in the City.
if the sister have any anxiety regard the possible recognition of
Amelia as a daughter of the family, it be increase presently, and
towards the end of the autumn, by their father's announcement that he
be go abroad. he do not say whither, but they know at once that
his step would be turn towards Belgium, and be aware that George's
widow be still in Brussels. they have pretty accurate news indeed of
poor Amelia from Lady Dobbin and her daughter. our honest Captain have
be promote in consequence of the death of the second Major of the
regiment on the field; and the brave O'Dowd, who have distinguish
himself greatly here as upon all occasion where he have a chance to
show his coolness and valour, be a Colonel and Companion of the Bath.
very many of the brave --th, who have suffer severely upon both day
of action, be still at Brussels in the autumn, recover of their
wound. the city be a vast military hospital for month after the
great battle; and as man and officer begin to rally from their hurt,
the garden and place of public resort swarm with maim warrior,
old and young, who, just rescue out of death, fall to gambling, and
gaiety, and love-making, as people of Vanity Fair will do. Mr. Osborne
find out some of the --th easily. he know their uniform quite well,
and have be use to follow all the promotion and exchange in the
regiment, and love to talk about it and its officer as if he have be
one of the number. on the day after his arrival at Brussels, and as he
issue from his hotel, which face the park, he see a soldier in the
well-know facing, repose on a stone bench in the garden, and go
and sate down tremble by the wound convalescent man.
"be you in Captain Osborne's company?" he say, and add, after a
pause, "he be my son, sir."
the man be not of the Captain's company, but he lift up his
unwounded arm and touch-his cap sadly and respectfully to the haggard
break-spirit gentleman who question he. "the whole army donot
contain a finer or a well officer," the soldier say. "the Sergeant
of the Captain's company (Captain Raymond have it now), be in town,
though, and be just well of a shot in the shoulder. his honour might
see he if he like, who could tell he anything he want to know
about--about the --th's action. but his honour have see Major Dobbin,
no doubt, the brave Captain's great friend; and Mrs. Osborne, who be
here too, and have be very bad, he hear everybody say. they say she
be out of her mind like for six week or more. but your honour know
all about that--and ask your pardon"--the man add.
Osborne put a guinea into the soldier's hand, and tell he he should
have another if he would bring the Sergeant to the Hotel du Parc; a
promise which very soon bring the desire officer to Mr. Osborne's
presence. and the first soldier go away; and after tell a comrade
or two how Captain Osborne's father be arrive, and what a free-handed
generous gentleman he be, they go and make good cheer with drink and
feasting, as long as the guineas last which have come from the proud
purse of the mourn old father.
in the Sergeant's company, who be also just convalescent, Osborne make
the journey of Waterloo and Quatre Bras, a journey which thousand of
his countryman be then take. he take the Sergeant with he in his
carriage, and go through both field under his guidance. he see the
point of the road where the regiment march into action on the 16th,
and the slope down which they drive the french cavalry who be
press on the retreat Belgians. there be the spot where the
noble Captain cut down the french officer who be grapple with the
young Ensign for the colour, the Colour-sergeant have be shoot
down. along this road they retreat on the next day, and here be the
bank at which the regiment bivouac under the rain of the night of
the seventeenth. far on be the position which they take and hold
during the day, form time after time to receive the charge of the
enemy's horseman and lie down under the shelter of the bank from the
furious french cannonade. and it be at this declivity when at evening
the whole english line receive the order to advance, as the enemy fall
back after his last charge, that the Captain, hurraye and rush
down the hill wave his sword, receive a shot and fall dead. "it be
major Dobbin who take back the Captain's body to Brussels," the
Sergeant say, in a low voice, "and have he bury, as your honour
know." the peasant and relic-hunter about the place be scream
round the pair, as the soldier tell his story, offer for sale all
sort of memento of the fight, cross, and epaulet, and shatter
cuirass, and eagle.
Osborne give a sumptuous reward to the Sergeant when he part with
he, after have visit the scene of his son's last exploit. his
burial-place he have already see. indeed, he have drive thither
immediately after his arrival at Brussels. George's body lie in the
pretty burial-ground of Laeken, near the city; in which place, have
once visit it on a party of pleasure, he have lightly express a wish
to have his grave make. and there the young officer be lay by his
friend, in the unconsecrated corner of the garden, separate by a
little hedge from the temple and tower and plantation of flower and
shrub, under which the roman catholic dead repose. it seem a
humiliation to old Osborne to think that his son, an english gentleman,
a captain in the famous british army, should not be find worthy to lie
in ground where mere foreigner be bury. which of we be there can
tell how much vanity lurk in our warm regard for other, and how
selfish our love be? Old Osborne do not speculate much upon the
mingle nature of his feeling, and how his instinct and selfishness
be combat together. he firmly believe that everything he do be
right, that he ought on all occasion to have his own way--and like the
sting of a wasp or serpent his hatred rush out armed and poisonous
against anything like opposition. he be proud of his hatred as of
everything else. always to be right, always to trample forward, and
never to doubt, be not these the great quality with which dullness
take the lead in the world?
as after the drive to Waterloo, Mr. Osborne's carriage be near the
gate of the city at sunset, they meet another open barouche, in which
be a couple of lady and a gentleman, and by the side of which an
officer be rid. Osborne give a start back, and the Sergeant,
seat with he, cast a look of surprise at his neighbour, as he
touch his cap to the officer, who mechanically return his salute.
it be Amelia, with the lame young Ensign by her side, and opposite to
she her faithful friend Mrs. O'Dowd. it be Amelia, but how change
from the fresh and comely girl Osborne know. her face be white and
thin. her pretty brown hair be part under a widow's cap--the poor
child. her eye be fix, and look nowhere. they star blank in
the face of Osborne, as the carriage cross each other, but she do
not know he; nor do he recognise she, until look up, he see Dobbin
riding by she: and then he know who it be. he hat she. he do not
know how much until he see she there. when her carriage have pass on,
he turn and star at the Sergeant, with a curse and defiance in his
eye cast at his companion, who could not help look at he--as much
as to say "how dare you look at I? damn you! I do hate she. it be
she who have tumble my hope and all my pride down." "tell the
scoundrel to drive on quick," he shout with an oath, to the lackey on
the box. a minute afterwards, a horse come clatter over the pavement
behind Osborne's carriage, and Dobbin ride up. his thought have be
elsewhere as the carriage pass each other, and it be not until he
have ride some pace forward, that he remember it be Osborne who
have just pass he. then he turn to examine if the sight of her
father-in-law have make any impression on Amelia, but the poor girl do
not know who have pass. then William, who daily use to accompany she
in his drive, take out his watch, make some excuse about an
engagement which he suddenly recollect, and so ride off. she do not
remark that either: but sate look before she, over the homely
landscape towards the wood in the distance, by which George march
away.
"Mr. Osborne, Mr. Osborne!" cry Dobbin, as he ride up and hold out
his hand. Osborne make no motion to take it, but shout out once more
and with another curse to his servant to drive on.
Dobbin lay his hand on the carriage side. "I will see you, sir," he
say. "I have a message for you."
"from that woman?" say Osborne, fiercely.
"no," reply the other, "from your son"; at which Osborne fall back
into the corner of his carriage, and Dobbin allow it to pass on,
ride close behind it, and so through the town until they reach Mr.
Osborne's hotel, and without a word. there he follow Osborne up to
his apartment. George have often be in the room; they be the
lodging which the Crawleys have occupy during their stay in Brussels.
"pray, have you any command for I, Captain Dobbin, or, I beg your
pardon, I should say MAJOR Dobbin, since well man than you be dead,
and you step into their shoe?" say Mr. Osborne, in that sarcastic
tone which he sometimes be pleased to assume.
"well man be dead," Dobbin reply. "I want to speak to you about
one."
"make it short, sir," say the other with an oath, scowl at his
visitor.
"I be here as his close friend," the Major resume, "and the executor
of his will. he make it before he go into action. be you aware how
small his mean be, and of the straiten circumstance of his widow?"
"I donot know his widow, sir," Osborne say. "let she go back to her
father." but the gentleman whom he address be determined to remain
in good temper, and go on without heed the interruption.
"do you know, sir, Mrs. Osborne's condition? her life and her reason
almost have be shake by the blow which have fall on she. it be
very doubtful whether she will rally. there be a chance leave for she,
however, and it be about this I come to speak to you. she will be a
mother soon. will you visit the parent's offence upon the child's
head? or will you forgive the child for poor George's sake?"
Osborne break out into a rhapsody of self-praise and imprecations;--by
the first, excuse himself to his own conscience for his conduct; by
the second, exaggerate the undutifulness of George. no father in all
England could have behave more generously to a son, who have rebel
against he wickedly. he have die without even so much as confess
he be wrong. let he take the consequence of his undutifulness and
folly. as for himself, Mr. Osborne, he be a man of his word. he have
swear never to speak to that woman, or to recognize she as his son's
wife. "and thatbe what you may tell she," he conclude with an oath;
"and thatbe what I will stick to to the last day of my life."
there be no hope from that quarter then. the widow must live on her
slender pittance, or on such aid as Jos could give she. "I might tell
she, and she would not heed it," think Dobbin, sadly: for the poor
girl's thought be not here at all since her catastrophe, and,
stupefy under the pressure of her sorrow, good and evil be alike
indifferent to she.
so, indeed, be even friendship and kindness. she receive they both
uncomplainingly, and have accept they, relapse into her grief.
suppose some twelve month after the above conversation take place to
have pass in the life of our poor Amelia. she have spend the first
portion of that time in a sorrow so profound and pitiable, that we who
have be watch and describe some of the emotion of that weak and
tender heart, must draw back in the presence of the cruel grief under
which it be bleed. Tread silently round the hapless couch of the
poor prostrate soul. shut gently the door of the dark chamber wherein
she suffer, as those kind people do who nurse she through the first
month of her pain, and never leave she until heaven have send she
consolation. a day come--of almost terrified delight and wonder--when
the poor widow girl press a child upon her breast--a child, with
the eye of George who be go--a little boy, as beautiful as a
cherub. what a miracle it be to hear its first cry! how she laugh
and weep over it--how love, and hope, and prayer wake again in her
bosom as the baby nestle there. she be safe. the doctor who
attend she, and have fear for her life or for her brain, have wait
anxiously for this crisis before they could pronounce that either be
secure. it be worth the long month of doubt and dread which the
person who have constantly be with she have pass, to see her eye
once more beam tenderly upon they.
our friend Dobbin be one of they. it be he who bring she back to
England and to her mother's house; when Mrs. O'Dowd, receive a
peremptory summon from her Colonel, have be force to quit she
patient. to see Dobbin hold the infant, and to hear Amelia's laugh
of triumph as she watch he, would have do any man good who have a
sense of humour. William be the godfather of the child, and exert
his ingenuity in the purchase of cup, spoon, pap-boat, and coral
for this little Christian.
how his mother nurse he, and dress he, and live upon he; how she
drive away all nurse, and would scarce allow any hand but her own to
touch he; how she consider that the great favour she could confer
upon his godfather, Major Dobbin, be to allow the Major occasionally
to dandle he, need not be tell here. this child be her be. she
existence be a maternal caress. she envelop the feeble and
unconscious creature with love and worship. it be her life which the
baby drink in from her bosom. of night, and when alone, she have
stealthy and intense rapture of motherly love, such as God's
marvellous care have award to the female instinct--joy how far
high and low than reason--blind beautiful devotion which only
woman's heart know. it be William Dobbin's task to muse upon these
movement of Amelia's, and to watch her heart; and if his love make he
divine almost all the feeling which agitate it, alas! he could see
with a fatal perspicuity that there be no place there for he. and
so, gently, he bear his fate, know it, and content to bear it.
I suppose Amelia's father and mother see through the intention of the
Major, and be not ill-disposed to encourage he; for Dobbin visit
their house daily, and stay for hour with they, or with Amelia, or
with the honest landlord, Mr. Clapp, and his family. he bring, on
one pretext or another, present to everybody, and almost every day;
and go, with the landlord's little girl, who be rather a favourite
with Amelia, by the name of Major Sugarplums. it be this little child
who commonly act as mistress of the ceremony to introduce he to
Mrs. Osborne. she laugh one day when Major Sugarplums' cab drive up
to Fulham, and he descend from it, bring out a wooden horse, a
drum, a trumpet, and other warlike toy, for little Georgy, who be
scarcely six month old, and for whom the article in question be
entirely premature.
the child be asleep. "hush," say Amelia, annoyed, perhaps, at the
creaking of the Major's boot; and she hold out her hand; smile
because William could not take it until he have rid himself of his cargo
of toy. "go downstairs, little Mary," say he presently to the child,
"I want to speak to Mrs. Osborne." she look up rather astonished, and
lay down the infant on its bed.
"I be come to say good-bye, Amelia," say he, take her slender little
white hand gently.
"good-bye? and where be you go?" she say, with a smile.
"send the letter to the agent," he say; "they will forward they; for
you will write to I, willnot you? I shall be away a long time."
"Iwill write to you about Georgy," she say. "dear' William, how good
you have be to he and to I. look at he. benot he like an angel?"
the little pink hand of the child close mechanically round the honest
soldier's finger, and Amelia look up in his face with bright maternal
pleasure. the cruell look could not have wound he more than
that glance of hopeless kindness. he bend over the child and mother.
he could not speak for a moment. and it be only with all his strength
that he could force himself to say a God bless you. "God bless you,"
say Amelia, and hold up her face and kiss he.
"hush! donot wake georgy!" she add, as William Dobbin go to the
door with heavy step. she do not hear the noise of his cab-wheel as
he drive away: she be look at the child, who be laugh in his
sleep.
CHAPTER xxxvi
how to live well on nothing a year
I suppose there be no man in this Vanity Fair of ours so little
observant as not to think sometimes about the worldly affair of his
acquaintance, or so extremely charitable as not to wonder how his
neighbour Jones, or his neighbour Smith, can make both end meet at the
end of the year. with the utmost regard for the family, for instance
(for I dine with they twice or thrice in the season), I cannot but own
that the appearance of the Jenkinses in the park, in the large barouche
with the grenadi-footman, will surprise and mystify I to my dying
day: for though I know the equipage be only job, and all the
Jenkins people be on board wage, yet those three man and the carriage
must represent an expense of six hundred a year at the very least--and
then there be the splendid dinner, the two boy at Eton, the prize
governess and master for the girl, the trip abroad, or to Eastbourne
or Worthing, in the autumn, the annual ball with a supper from Gunter's
(who, by the way, supply most of the first-rate dinner which J.
give, as I know very well, have be invite to one of they to fill
a vacant place, when I see at once that these repast be very superior
to the common run of entertainment for which the humbler sort of J.'s
acquaintance get cards)--who, I say, with the most good-natured
feeling in the world, can help wonder how the Jenkinses make out
matter? what be jenkin? we all know--Commissioner of the Tape and
Sealing Wax Office, with 1200 pound a year for a salary. have his wife
a private fortune? Pooh!--Miss Flint--one of eleven child of a small
squire in Buckinghamshire. all she ever get from her family be a
turkey at Christmas, in exchange for which she have to board two or
three of her sister in the off season, and lodge and feed her brother
when they come to town. how do Jenkins balance his income? I say, as
every friend of his must say, how be it that he have not be outlaw
long since, and that he ever come back (as he do to the surprise of
everybody) last year from Boulogne?
"I" be here introduce to personify the world in general--the Mrs.
Grundy of each respected reader's private circle--every one of whom can
point to some family of his acquaintance who live nobody know how.
many a glass of wine have we all of we drunk, I have very little doubt,
hob-and-nobbing with the hospitable giver and wonder how the deuce
he pay for it.
some three or four year after his stay in Paris, when Rawdon Crawley
and his wife be establish in a very small comfortable house in
Curzon Street, May Fair, there be scarcely one of the numerous friend
whom they entertain at dinner that do not ask the above question
regard they. the novelist, it have be say before, know
everything, and as I be in a situation to be able to tell the public
how Crawley and his wife live without any income, may I entreat the
public newspaper which be in the habit of extract portion of the
various periodical work now publish not to reprint the follow
exact narrative and calculation--of which I ought, as the discoverer
(and at some expense, too), to have the benefit? my son, I would say,
be I bless with a child--you may by deep inquiry and constant
intercourse with he learn how a man live comfortably on nothing a
year. but it be good not to be intimate with gentleman of this
profession and to take the calculation at second hand, as you do
logarithm, for to work they yourself, depend upon it, will cost you
something considerable.
on nothing per annum then, and during a course of some two or three
year, of which we can afford to give but a very brief history, Crawley
and his wife live very happily and comfortably at Paris. it be in
this period that he quit the Guards and sell out of the army. when
we find he again, his mustachio and the title of Colonel on his card
be the only relic of his military profession.
it have be mention that rebecca, soon after her arrival in Paris,
take a very smart and leading position in the society of that capital,
and be welcome at some of the most distinguished house of the
restore french nobility. the english man of fashion in Paris court
she, too, to the disgust of the lady their wife, who could not bear
the parvenue. for some month the salon of the Faubourg St. Germain,
in which her place be secure, and the splendour of the new Court,
where she be receive with much distinction, delighted and perhaps a
little intoxicate Mrs. Crawley, who may have be dispose during this
period of elation to slight the people--honest young military man
mostly--who form her husband's chief society.
but the Colonel yawn sadly among the Duchesses and great lady of
the Court. the old woman who play ecarte make such a noise about a
five-franc piece that it be not worth Colonel Crawley's while to sit
down at a card-table. the wit of their conversation he could not
appreciate, be ignorant of their language. and what good could his
wife get, he urge, by make curtsy every night to a whole circle of
Princesses? he leave Rebecca presently to frequent these party alone,
resume his own simple pursuit and amusement amongst the amiable
friend of his own choice.
the truth be, when we say of a gentleman that he live elegantly on
nothing a year, we use the word "nothing" to signify something unknown;
meaning, simply, that we donot know how the gentleman in question
defray the expense of his establishment. now, our friend the Colonel
have a great aptitude for all game of chance: and exercise himself,
as he continually do, with the card, the dice-box, or the cue, it be
natural to suppose that he attain a much great skill in the use of
these article than man can possess who only occasionally handle they.
to use a cue at billiard well be like use a pencil, or a german
flute, or a small-sword--you cannot master any one of these implement
at first, and it be only by repeat study and perseverance, join to
a natural taste, that a man can excel in the handling of either. now
Crawley, from be only a brilliant amateur, have grow to be a
consummate master of billiard. like a great general, his genius use
to rise with the danger, and when the luck have be unfavourable to he
for a whole game, and the bet be consequently against he, he would,
with consummate skill and boldness, make some prodigious hit which
would restore the battle, and come in a victor at the end, to the
astonishment of everybody--of everybody, that is, who be a stranger to
his play. those who be accustomed to see it be cautious how they
stake their money against a man of such sudden resource and brilliant
and overpower skill.
at game of card he be equally skilful; for though he would
constantly lose money at the commencement of an evening, play so
carelessly and make such blunder, that newcomer be often incline
to think meanly of his talent; yet when rouse to action and awaken
to caution by repeat small loss, it be remark that Crawley's
play become quite different, and that he be pretty sure of beat his
enemy thoroughly before the night be over. indeed, very few man could
say that they ever have the well of he. his success be so
repeat that no wonder the envious and the vanquished speak sometimes
with bitterness regard they. and as the French say of the Duke of
Wellington, who never suffer a defeat, that only an astonishing
series of lucky accident enable he to be an invariable winner; yet
even they allow that he cheat at Waterloo, and be enable to win the
last great trick: so it be hint at headquarters in England that
some foul play must have take place in order to account for the
continuous success of Colonel Crawley.
Though Frascati's and the Salon be open at that time in Paris, the
mania for play be so widely spread that the public gambling-room do
not suffice for the general ardour, and gambling go on in private
house as much as if there have be no public mean for gratify the
passion. at Crawley's charming little reunion of an evening this
fatal amusement commonly be practise--much to good-natured little
Mrs. Crawley's annoyance. she speak about her husband's passion for
dice with the deep grief; she bewail it to everybody who come to
her house. she besought the young fellow never, never to touch a box;
and when young Green, of the Rifles, lose a very considerable sum of
money, Rebecca pass a whole night in tear, as the servant tell the
unfortunate young gentleman, and actually go on her knee to her
husband to beseech he to remit the debt, and burn the acknowledgement.
how could he? he have lose just as much himself to Blackstone of the
Hussars, and Count Punter of the Hanoverian Cavalry. Green might have
any decent time; but pay?--of course he must pay; to talk of burn
IOU's be child's play.
other officer, chiefly young--for the young fellow gather round
Mrs. Crawley--come from her party with long face, have drop
more or less money at her fatal card-table. her house begin to have
an unfortunate reputation. the old hand warn the less experienced
of their danger. Colonel O'Dowd, of the --th regiment, one of those
occupy in Paris, warn Lieutenant Spooney of that corps. a loud
and violent fracas take place between the infantry Colonel and his
lady, who be din at the Cafe de Paris, and Colonel and Mrs.
Crawley; who be also take their meal there. the lady engage on
both side. Mrs. O'Dowd snap her finger in Mrs. Crawley's face and
call her husband "no betther than a black-leg." Colonel Crawley
challenge Colonel O'Dowd, C.B. the Commander-in-chief hearing of the
dispute send for Colonel Crawley, who be get ready the same
pistol "which he shoot Captain Marker," and have such a conversation
with he that no duel take place. if Rebecca have not go on her knee
to General Tufto, Crawley would have be send back to England; and he
do not play, except with civilian, for some week after.
but, in spite of Rawdon's undoubted skill and constant success, it
become evident to Rebecca, consider these thing, that their
position be but a precarious one, and that, even although they pay
scarcely anybody, their little capital would end one day by dwindle
into zero. "gambling," she would say, "dear, be good to help your
income, but not as an income itself. some day people may be tired of
play, and then where be we?" Rawdon acquiesce in the justice of her
opinion; and in truth he have remark that after a few night of his
little supper, &c., gentleman be tired of play with he, and, in
spite of Rebecca's charm, do not present themselves very eagerly.
easy and pleasant as their life at Paris be, it be after all only an
idle dalliance and amiable trifling; and Rebecca see that she must push
Rawdon's fortune in their own country. she must get he a place or
appointment at home or in the colony, and she determine to make a
move upon England as soon as the way could be clear for she. as a
first step she have make Crawley sell out of the Guards and go on
half-pay. his function as aide-de-camp to General Tufto have cease
previously. rebecca laugh in all company at that officer, at his
toupee (which he mount on come to Paris), at his waistband, at his
false tooth, at his pretension to be a lady-killer above all, and his
absurd vanity in fancy every woman whom he come near be in love
with he. it be to Mrs. Brent, the beetle-browed wife of Mr.
Commissary Brent, to whom the general transfer his attention
now--his bouquet, his dinner at the restaurateur', his opera-box,
and his knick-knack. poor Mrs. Tufto be no more happy than before,
and have still to pass long evening alone with her daughter, know
that her General be go off scented and curl to stand behind Mrs.
Brent's chair at the play. Becky have a dozen admirer in his place, to
be sure, and could cut her rival to piece with her wit. but, as we
have say, she be grow tired of this idle social life:
opera-box and restaurateur dinner pal upon she: nosegay could
not be lay by as a provision for future year: and she could not live
upon knick-knack, laced handkerchief, and kid glove. she feel the
frivolity of pleasure and long for more substantial benefit.
at this juncture news arrive which be spread among the many creditor
of the Colonel at Paris, and which cause they great satisfaction.
Miss Crawley, the rich aunt from whom he expect his immense
inheritance, be die; the Colonel must haste to her bedside. Mrs.
Crawley and her child would remain behind until he come to reclaim
they. he depart for Calais, and have reach that place in safety,
it might have be suppose that he go to Dover; but instead he take
the diligence to Dunkirk, and thence travel to Brussels, for which
place he have a former predilection. the fact be, he owe more money at
London than at Paris; and he prefer the quiet little belgian city to
either of the more noisy capital.
her aunt be dead. Mrs. Crawley order the most intense mourning for
herself and little Rawdon. the Colonel be busy arrange the affair
of the inheritance. they could take the premier now, instead of the
little entresol of the hotel which they occupy. Mrs. Crawley and the
landlord have a consultation about the new hanging, an amicable wrangle
about the carpet, and a final adjustment of everything except the
bill. she go off in one of his carriage; her french bonne with she;
the child by her side; the admirable landlord and landlady smile
farewell to she from the gate. General Tufto be furious when he hear
she be go, and Mrs. Brent furious with he for be furious;
Lieutenant Spooney be cut to the heart; and the landlord get ready his
good apartment previous to the return of the fascinating little woman
and her husband. he _serre_ the trunk which she leave in his charge
with the great care. they have be especially recommend to he by
Madame Crawley. they be not, however, find to be particularly
valuable when open some time after.
but before she go to join her husband in the Belgic capital, Mrs.
Crawley make an expedition into England, leave behind her her little
son upon the continent, under the care of her french maid.
the parting between Rebecca and the little Rawdon do not cause either
party much pain. she have not, to say truth, see much of the young
gentleman since his birth. after the amiable fashion of french mother,
she have place he out at nurse in a village in the neighbourhood of
Paris, where little Rawdon pass the first month of his life, not
unhappily, with a numerous family of foster-brother in wooden shoe.
his father would ride over many a time to see he here, and the elder
Rawdon's paternal heart glow to see he rosy and dirty, shout
lustily, and happy in the making of mud-pie under the superintendence
of the gardener's wife, his nurse.
Rebecca do not care much to go and see the son and heir. once he
spoil a new dove-colour pelisse of her. he prefer his nurse's
caress to his mamma's, and when finally he quit that jolly nurse
and almost parent, he cry loudly for hour. he be only console by
his mother's promise that he should return to his nurse the next day;
indeed the nurse herself, who probably would have be pain at the
parting too, be tell that the child would immediately be restore to
she, and for some time await quite anxiously his return.
in fact, our friend may be say to have be among the first of that
brood of hardy english adventurer who have subsequently invade the
Continent and swindle in all the capital of Europe. the respect in
those happy day of 1817-18 be very great for the wealth and honour of
Britons. they have not then learn, as I be tell, to haggle for
bargain with the pertinacity which now distinguish they. the great
city of Europe have not be as yet open to the enterprise of our
rascal. and whereas there be now hardly a town of France or Italy in
which you shall not see some noble countryman of our own, with that
happy swagger and insolence of demeanour which we carry everywhere,
swindle inn-landlord, pass fictitious cheque upon credulous
banker, rob coach-maker of their carriage, goldsmith of their
trinket, easy traveller of their money at card, even public
library of their book--thirty year ago you need but to be a Milor
Anglais, travel in a private carriage, and credit be at your hand
wherever you choose to seek it, and gentleman, instead of cheat, be
cheat. it be not for some week after the Crawleys' departure that
the landlord of the hotel which they occupy during their residence at
Paris find out the loss which he have sustain: not until Madame
Marabou, the milliner, make repeat visit with her little bill for
article supply to Madame Crawley; not until Monsieur Didelot from
Boule d'or in the Palais Royal have ask half a dozen time whether
cette charmante Miladi who have buy watch and bracelet of he be
de retour. it be a fact that even the poor gardener's wife, who have
nurse madame's child, be never pay after the first six month for
that supply of the milk of human kindness with which she have furnish
the lusty and healthy little Rawdon. no, not even the nurse be
pay--the Crawleys be in too great a hurry to remember their trifling
debt to she. as for the landlord of the hotel, his curse against the
english nation be violent for the rest of his natural life. he ask
all traveller whether they know a certain Colonel Lor Crawley--avec sa
femme une petite dame, tre spirituelle. "ah, Monsieur!" he would
add--"il m'ont affreusement vole." it be melancholy to hear his
accent as he speak of that catastrophe.
Rebecca's object in her journey to London be to effect a kind of
compromise with her husband's numerous creditor, and by offer they
a dividend of ninepence or a shilling in the pound, to secure a return
for he into his own country. it do not become we to trace the step
which she take in the conduct of this most difficult negotiation; but,
have show they to their satisfaction that the sum which she be
empower to offer be all her husband's available capital, and have
convince they that Colonel Crawley would prefer a perpetual retirement
on the continent to a residence in this country with his debt
unsettled; have prove to they that there be no possibility of money
accrue to he from other quarter, and no earthly chance of their
get a large dividend than that which she be empower to offer,
she bring the Colonel's creditor unanimously to accept she
proposal, and purchase with fifteen hundred pound of ready money
more than ten time that amount of debt.
Mrs. Crawley employ no lawyer in the transaction. the matter be so
simple, to have or to leave, as she justly observe, that she make the
lawyer of the creditor themselves do the business. and Mr. Lewis
represent Mr. Davids, of Red Lion Square, and Mr. Moss act for
Mr. Manasseh of Cursitor Street (chief creditor of the Colonel's),
compliment his lady upon the brilliant way in which she do business,
and declare that there be no professional man who could beat she.
Rebecca receive their congratulation with perfect modesty; order a
bottle of sherry and a bread cake to the little dingy lodging where
she dwelt, while conduct the business, to treat the enemy's lawyer:
shake hand with they at part, in excellent good humour, and
return straightway to the continent, to rejoin her husband and son
and acquaint the former with the glad news of his entire liberation.
as for the latter, he have be considerably neglect during his
mother's absence by Mademoiselle Genevieve, her french maid; for that
young woman, contract an attachment for a soldier in the garrison of
Calais, forget her charge in the society of this militaire, and little
Rawdon very narrowly escape drown on Calais sand at this period,
where the absent Genevieve have leave and lose he.
and so, Colonel and Mrs. Crawley come to London: and it be at their
house in Curzon Street, May Fair, that they really show the skill
which must be possess by those who would live on the resource above
name.
CHAPTER XXXVII
the subject continue
in the first place, and as a matter of the great necessity, we be
bind to describe how a house may be get for nothing a year. these
mansion be to be have either unfurnishe, where, if you have credit
with Messrs. Gillows or banting, you can get they splendidly montee
and decorate entirely accord to your own fancy; or they be to be
let furnish, a less troublesome and complicated arrangement to most
party. it be so that Crawley and his wife prefer to hire their
house.
before Mr. Bowls come to preside over Miss Crawley's house and cellar
in Park Lane, that lady have have for a butler a Mr. Raggles, who be
bear on the family estate of Queen's Crawley, and indeed be a young
son of a gardener there. by good conduct, a handsome person and
calf, and a grave demeanour, Raggles rise from the knife-board to the
footboard of the carriage; from the footboard to the butler's pantry.
when he have be a certain number of year at the head of Miss
Crawley's establishment, where he have have good wage, fat perquisite,
and plenty of opportunity of saving, he announce that he be about
to contract a matrimonial alliance with a late cook of Miss Crawley's,
who have subsist in an honourable manner by the exercise of a mangle,
and the keeping of a small greengrocer's shop in the neighbourhood.
the truth be, that the ceremony have be clandestinely perform some
year back; although the news of Mr. Raggles' marriage be first
bring to Miss Crawley by a little boy and girl of seven and eight
year of age, whose continual presence in the kitchen have attract the
attention of Miss Briggs.
Mr. Raggles then retire and personally undertake the superintendence
of the small shop and the green. he add milk and cream, egg and
country-feed pork to his store, content himself whilst other retire
butler be vend spirit in public house, by deal in the
simple country produce. and have a good connection amongst the
butler in the neighbourhood, and a snug back parlour where he and Mrs.
Raggles receive they, his milk, cream, and egg get to be adopt by
many of the fraternity, and his profit increase every year. year
after year he quietly and modestly amass money, and when at length
that snug and complete bachelor's residence at no. 201, Curzon Street,
May Fair, lately the residence of the Honourable Frederick Deuceace,
go abroad, with its rich and appropriate furniture by the first
maker, be bring to the hammer, who should go in and purchase the
lease and furniture of the house but Charles Raggles? a part of the
money he borrow, it be true, and at rather a high interest, from a
brother butler, but the chief part he pay down, and it be with no
small pride that Mrs. Raggles find herself sleep in a bed of carve
mahogany, with silk curtain, with a prodigious cheval glass opposite
to she, and a wardrobe which would contain she, and Raggles, and all
the family.
of course, they do not intend to occupy permanently an apartment so
splendid. it be in order to let the house again that Raggles
purchase it. as soon as a tenant be find, he subside into the
greengrocer's shop once more; but a happy thing it be for he to walk
out of that tenement and into Curzon Street, and there survey his
house--his own house--with geranium in the window and a carve bronze
knocker. the footman occasionally lounge at the area rail,
treat he with respect; the cook take her green stuff at his house
and call he Mr. Landlord, and there be not one thing the tenant
do, or one dish which they have for dinner, that Raggles might not know
of, if he like.
he be a good man; good and happy. the house bring he in so
handsome a yearly income that he be determined to send his child to
good school, and accordingly, regardless of expense, Charles be send
to boarding at Dr. Swishtail's, Sugar-cane Lodge, and little Matilda to
Miss Peckover's, Laurentinum House, Clapham.
raggle love and adore the Crawley family as the author of all his
prosperity in life. he have a silhouette of his mistress in his back
shop, and a drawing of the Porter's Lodge at Queen's Crawley, do by
that spinster herself in India ink--and the only addition he make to
the decoration of the Curzon Street House be a print of Queen's
Crawley in Hampshire, the seat of Sir Walpole Crawley, Baronet, who be
represent in a gild car draw by six white horse, and pass by a
lake cover with swan, and barge contain lady in hoop, and
musician with flag and penwig. indeed Raggles think there be no
such palace in all the world, and no such august family.
as luck would have it, Raggles' house in Curzon Street be to let when
Rawdon and his wife return to London. the Colonel know it and its
owner quite well; the latter's connection with the Crawley family have
be keep up constantly, for Raggles help Mr. Bowls whenever Miss
Crawley receive friend. and the old man not only let his house to
the Colonel but officiate as his butler whenever he have company; Mrs.
Raggles operate in the kitchen below and send up dinner of which
old Miss Crawley herself might have approve. this be the way, then,
Crawley get his house for nothing; for though Raggles have to pay taxis
and rate, and the interest of the mortgage to the brother butler; and
the insurance of his life; and the charge for his child at school;
and the value of the meat and drink which his own family--and for a
time that of Colonel Crawley too--consume; and though the poor wretch
be utterly ruin by the transaction, his child be fling on the
street, and himself drive into the Fleet Prison: yet somebody must
pay even for gentleman who live for nothing a year--and so it be this
unlucky Raggles be make the representative of Colonel Crawley's
defective capital.
I wonder how many family be drive to roguery and to ruin by great
practitioner in Crawlers way?--how many great nobleman rob their petty
tradesman, condescend to swindle their poor retainer out of wretched
little sum and cheat for a few shilling? when we read that a noble
nobleman have leave for the continent, or that another noble nobleman have
an execution in his house--and that one or other owe six or seven
million, the defeat seem glorious even, and we respect the victim in
the vastness of his ruin. but who pity a poor barber who cannot get
his money for powder the footman's head; or a poor carpenter who
have ruin himself by fix up ornament and pavilion for my lady's
dejeuner; or the poor devil of a tailor whom the steward patronize,
and who have pledge all he be worth, and more, to get the livery
ready, which my lord have do he the honour to bespeak? when the great
house tumble down, these miserable wretch fall under it unnoticed:
as they say in the old legend, before a man go to the devil himself,
he send plenty of other soul thither.
Rawdon and his wife generously give their patronage to all such of Miss
Crawley's tradesman and purveyor as choose to serve they. some be
willing enough, especially the poor one. it be wonderful to see the
pertinacity with which the washerwoman from Tooting bring the cart
every Saturday, and her bill week after week. Mr. Raggles himself have
to supply the greengrocery. the bill for servant' porter at the
Fortune of War public house be a curiosity in the chronicle of beer.
every servant also be owe the great part of his wage, and thus
keep up perforce an interest in the house. nobody in fact be pay.
not the blacksmith who open the lock; nor the glazier who mend the
pane; nor the jobber who let the carriage; nor the groom who drive it;
nor the butcher who provide the leg of mutton; nor the coal which
roast it; nor the cook who baste it; nor the servant who eat it:
and this I be give to understand be not unfrequently the way in which
people live elegantly on nothing a year.
in a little town such thing cannot be do without remark. we know
there the quantity of milk our neighbour take and espy the joint or
the fowl which be go in for his dinner. so, probably, 200 and 202
in Curzon Street might know what be go on in the house between
they, the servant communicate through the area-railing; but Crawley
and his wife and his friend do not know 200 and 202. when you come to
201 there be a hearty welcome, a kind smile, a good dinner, and a
jolly shake of the hand from the host and hostess there, just for all
the world as if they have be undisputed master of three or four
thousand a year--and so they be, not in money, but in produce and
labour--if they do not pay for the mutton, they have it: if they do
not give bullion in exchange for their wine, how should we know? never
be well claret at any man's table than at honest Rawdon's; dinner
more gay and neatly serve. his drawing-room be the pretty,
little, modest salon conceivable: they be decorate with the
great taste, and a thousand knick-knack from Paris, by Rebecca:
and when she sit at her piano trill song with a lightsome heart,
the stranger vote himself in a little paradise of domestic comfort and
agree that, if the husband be rather stupid, the wife be charming,
and the dinner the pleasantest in the world.
Rebecca's wit, cleverness, and flippancy make she speedily the vogue in
London among a certain class. you see demure chariot at her door, out
of which step very great people. you behold her carriage in the
park, surround by dandy of note. the little box in the third tier
of the opera be crowd with head constantly change; but it must be
confess that the lady hold aloof from she, and that their door
be shut to our little adventurer.
with regard to the world of female fashion and its custom, the present
writer of course can only speak at second hand. a man can no more
penetrate or under-stand those mystery than he can know what the
lady talk about when they go upstairs after dinner. it be only by
inquiry and perseverance that one sometimes get hint of those
secret; and by a similar diligence every person who tread the Pall
Mall pavement and frequent the club of this metropolis know, either
through his own experience or through some acquaintance with whom he
play at billiard or share the joint, something about the genteel
world of London, and how, as there be man (such as Rawdon Crawley,
whose position we mention before) who cut a good figure to the eye
of the ignorant world and to the apprentice in the park, who behold
they consort with the most notorious dandy there, so there be
lady, who may be call man's woman, be welcome entirely by all
the gentleman and cut or slight by all their wife. Mrs. Firebrace
be of this sort; the lady with the beautiful fair ringlet whom you see
every day in Hyde Park, surround by the great and most famous
dandy of this empire. Mrs. Rockwood be another, whose party be
announce laboriously in the fashionable newspaper and with whom you
see that all sort of ambassador and great nobleman dine; and many
more might be mention have they to do with the history at present in
hand. but while simple folk who be out of the world, or country
people with a taste for the genteel, behold these lady in their
seem glory in public place, or envy they from afar off, person who
be well instruct could inform they that these envy lady have
no more chance of establish themselves in "society," than the
benighted squire's wife in Somersetshire who read of their doing in
the Morning Post. man live about London be aware of these awful
truth. you hear how pitilessly many lady of seem rank and wealth
be exclude from this "society." the frantic effort which they make
to enter this circle, the meanness to which they submit, the insult
which they undergo, be matter of wonder to those who take human or
womankind for a study; and the pursuit of fashion under difficulty
would be a fine theme for any very great person who have the wit, the
leisure, and the knowledge of the english language necessary for the
compiling of such a history.
now the few female acquaintance whom Mrs. Crawley have know abroad not
only decline to visit she when she come to this side of the Channel,
but cut she severely when they meet in public place. it be curious to
see how the great lady forget she, and no doubt not altogether a
pleasant study to Rebecca. when Lady Bareacres meet she in the
waiting-room at the opera, she gather her daughter about she as if
they would be contaminate by a touch of Becky, and retreat a step
or two, place herself in front of they, and star at her little
enemy. to stare Becky out of countenance require a severer glance than
even the frigid old Bareacres could shoot out of her dismal eye. when
Lady de la Mole, who have ride a score of time by Becky's side at
Brussels, meet Mrs. Crawley's open carriage in Hyde Park, her ladyship
be quite blind, and could not in the least recognize her former
friend. even Mrs. Blenkinsop, the banker's wife, cut she at church.
Becky go regularly to church now; it be edify to see she enter
there with Rawdon by her side, carry a couple of large gilt
prayer-book, and afterwards go through the ceremony with the
grave resignation.
Rawdon at first feel very acutely the slight which be pass upon
his wife, and be inclined to be gloomy and savage. he talk of
call out the husband or brother of every one of the insolent woman
who do not pay a proper respect to his wife; and it be only by the
strong command and entreaty on her part that he be bring into
keep a decent behaviour. "you cannot shoot I into society," she
say good-naturedly. "remember, my dear, that I be but a governess,
and you, you poor silly old man, have the bad reputation for debt,
and dice, and all sort of wickedness. we shall get quite as many
friend as we want by and by, and in the meanwhile you must be a good
boy and obey your schoolmistress in everything she tell you to do.
when we hear that your aunt have leave almost everything to Pitt and his
wife, do you remember what a rage you be in? you would have tell all
Paris, if I have not make you keep your temper, and where would you have
be now?--in prison at Ste. Pelagie for debt, and not establish in
London in a handsome house, with every comfort about you--you be in
such a fury you be ready to murder your brother, you wicke Cain you,
and what good would have come of remain angry? all the rage in the
world willnot get we your aunt's money; and it be much well that we
should be friend with your brother's family than enemy, as those
foolish Butes be. when your father die, Queen's Crawley will be a
pleasant house for you and I to pass the winter in. if we be ruin,
you can carve and take charge of the stable, and I can be a governess
to Lady Jane's child. ruin! fiddlede-dee! I will get you a good
place before that; or Pitt and his little boy will die, and we will be
Sir Rawdon and my lady. while there be life, there be hope, my dear,
and I intend to make a man of you yet. who sell your horse for you?
who pay your debt for you?" Rawdon be oblige to confess that he
owe all these benefit to his wife, and to trust himself to her
guidance for the future.
indeed, when Miss Crawley quit the world, and that money for which
all her relative have be fight so eagerly be finally leave to
Pitt, Bute Crawley, who find that only five thousand pound have be
leave to he instead of the twenty upon which he calculate, be in such
a fury at his disappointment that he vent it in savage abuse upon his
nephew; and the quarrel always rankle between they end in an utter
breach of intercourse. Rawdon Crawley's conduct, on the other hand,
who get but a hundred pound, be such as to astonish his brother and
delight his sister-in-law, who be disposed to look kindly upon all the
member of her husband's family. he write to his brother a very frank,
manly, good-humour letter from Paris. he be aware, he say, that by
his own marriage he have forfeit his aunt's favour; and though he do
not disguise his disappointment that she should have be so entirely
relentless towards he, he be glad that the money be still keep in
their branch of the family, and heartily congratulate his brother on
his good fortune. he send his affectionate remembrance to his sister,
and hop to have her good-will for Mrs. Rawdon; and the letter
conclude with a postscript to Pitt in the latter lady's own
handwriting. she, too, beg to join in her husband's
congratulation. she should ever remember Mr. Crawley's kindness to
she in early day when she be a friendless orphan, the instructress of
his little sister, in whose welfare she still take the tender
interest. she wish he every happiness in his married life, and,
ask his permission to offer her remembrance to Lady Jane (of whose
goodness all the world inform she), she hop that one day she might
be allow to present her little boy to his uncle and aunt, and beg
to bespeak for he their good-will and protection.
Pitt Crawley receive this communication very graciously--more
graciously than Miss Crawley have receive some of Rebecca's previous
composition in Rawdon's handwriting; and as for Lady Jane, she be so
charm with the letter that she expect her husband would instantly
divide his aunt's legacy into two equal portion and send off one-half
to his brother at Paris.
to her ladyship's surprise, however, Pitt decline to accommodate his
brother with a cheque for thirty thousand pound. but he make Rawdon a
handsome offer of his hand whenever the latter should come to England
and choose to take it; and, thank Mrs. Crawley for her good opinion
of himself and Lady Jane, he graciously pronounce his willingness to
take any opportunity to serve her little boy.
thus an almost reconciliation be bring about between the brother.
when Rebecca come to town Pitt and his wife be not in London. many a
time she drive by the old door in Park Lane to see whether they have
take possession of Miss Crawley's house there. but the new family do
not make its appearance; it be only through Raggles that she hear of
their movement--how Miss Crawley's domestic have be dismiss with
decent gratuity, and how Mr. Pitt have only once make his appearance
in London, when he stop for a few day at the house, do business
with his lawyer there, and sell off all Miss Crawley's french novel
to a bookseller out of Bond Street. Becky have reason of her own which
cause she to long for the arrival of her new relation. "when Lady Jane
come," think she, "she shall be my sponsor in London society; and as
for the woman! bah! the woman will ask I when they find the man want
to see I."
an article as necessary to a lady in this position as her brougham or
her bouquet be her companion. I have always admire the way in which
the tender creature, who cannot exist without sympathy, hire an
exceedingly plain friend of their own sex from whom they be almost
inseparable. the sight of that inevitable woman in her fade gown
seat behind her dear friend in the opera-box, or occupy the back
seat of the barouche, be always a wholesome and moral one to I, as
jolly a reminder as that of the death'-head which figure in the
repast of egyptian bon-vivant, a strange sardonic memorial of Vanity
Fair. what? even batter, brazen, beautiful, conscienceless,
heartless, Mrs. Firebrace, whose father die of her shame: even
lovely, dare Mrs. Mantrap, who will ride at any fence which any man
in England will take, and who drive her grey in the park, while her
mother keep a huckster's stall in Bath still--even those who be so
bold, one might fancy they could face anything dare not face the world
without a female friend. they must have somebody to cling to, the
affectionate creature! and you will hardly see they in any public
place without a shabby companion in a dye silk, sit somewhere in
the shade close behind they.
"Rawdon," say Becky, very late one night, as a party of gentleman be
seat round her crackling drawing-room fire (for the man come to her
house to finish the night; and she have ice and coffee for they, the
good in London): "I must have a sheep-dog."
"a what?" say Rawdon, look up from an ecarte table.
"a sheep-dog!" say young Lord Southdown. "my dear Mrs. Crawley, what
a fancy! why not have a danish dog? I know of one as big as a
camel-leopard, by Jove. it would almost pull your brougham. or a
persian greyhound, eh? (I propose, if you please); or a little pug that
would go into one of Lord Steyne's snuff-box? therebe a man at
bayswater get one with such a nose that you might--I mark the king and
play--that you might hang your hat on it."
"I mark the trick," Rawdon gravely say. he attend to his game
commonly and donot much meddle with the conversation, except when it
be about horse and bet.
"what can you want with a shepherd's dog?" the lively little Southdown
continue.
"I mean a MORAL shepherd's dog," say Becky, laugh and look up at
Lord Steyne.
"what the devil's that?" say his Lordship.
"a dog to keep the wolf off I," Rebecca continue. "a companion."
"dear little innocent lamb, you want one," say the marquis; and his
jaw thrust out, and he begin to grin hideously, his little eye leer
towards Rebecca.
the great Lord of Steyne be stand by the fire sip coffee. the
fire crackle and blaze pleasantly there be a score of candle
sparkle round the mantel piece, in all sort of quaint sconce, of
gilt and bronze and porcelain. they light up Rebecca's figure to
admiration, as she sit on a sofa cover with a pattern of gaudy
flower. she be in a pink dress that look as fresh as a rose; her
dazzle white arm and shoulder be half-cover with a thin hazy
scarf through which they sparkle; her hair hang in curl round her
neck; one of her little foot peep out from the fresh crisp fold of
the silk: the prettiest little foot in the prettiest little sandal in
the fine silk stocking in the world.
the candle light up Lord Steyne's shin bald head, which be
fringe with red hair. he have thick bushy eyebrow, with little
twinkle bloodshot eye, surround by a thousand wrinkle. his jaw
be underhung, and when he laugh, two white buck-tooth protrude
themselves and glisten savagely in the midst of the grin. he have be
dining with royal personage, and wear his garter and ribbon. a short
man be his Lordship, broad-cheste and bow-legged, but proud of the
fineness of his foot and ankle, and always caress his garter-knee.
"and so the shepherd be not enough," say he, "to defend his lambkin?"
"the shepherd be too fond of play at card and go to his club,"
answer Becky, laugh.
"'Gad, what a debauch Corydon!" say my lord--"what a mouth for a
pipe!"
"I take your three to two," here say Rawdon, at the card-table.
"Hark at Meliboeus," snarl the noble marquis; "hebe pastorally
occupy too: hebe shear a Southdown. what an innocent mutton, hey?
Damme, what a snowy fleece!"
Rebecca's eye shoot out gleam of scornful humour. "my lord," she say,
"you be a knight of the order." he have the collar round his neck,
indeed--a gift of the restore prince of Spain.
Lord Steyne in early life have be notorious for his daring and his
success at play. he have sit up two day and two night with Mr. Fox at
hazard. he have win money of the most august personage of the realm:
he have win his marquisate, it be say, at the gaming-table; but he do
not like an allusion to those bygone fredaine. Rebecca see the scowl
gathering over his heavy brow.
she rise up from her sofa and go and take his coffee cup out of his
hand with a little curtsey. "yes," she say, "I must get a watchdog.
but he willnot bark at you." and, go into the other drawing-room, she
sit down to the piano and begin to sing little french song in such a
charming, thrill voice that the mollified nobleman speedily follow
she into that chamber, and might be see nod his head and bow
time over she.
Rawdon and his friend meanwhile play ecarte until they have enough.
the Colonel win; but, say that he win ever so much and often, night
like these, which occur many time in the week--his wife have all
the talk and all the admiration, and he sit silent without the
circle, not comprehend a word of the joke, the allusion, the
mystical language within--must have be rather wearisome to the
ex-dragoon.
"how be Mrs. Crawley's husband?" Lord Steyne use to say to he by way
of a good day when they meet; and indeed that be now his avocation in
life. he be Colonel Crawley no more. he be Mrs. Crawley's husband.
about the little Rawdon, if nothing have be say all this while, it be
because he be hide upstairs in a garret somewhere, or have crawl
below into the kitchen for companionship. his mother scarcely ever
take notice of he. he pass the day with his french bonne as long
as that domestic remain in Mr. Crawley's family, and when the
Frenchwoman go away, the little fellow, howl in the loneliness of
the night, have compassion take on he by a housemaid, who take he out
of his solitary nursery into her bed in the garret hard by and
comfort he.
Rebecca, my Lord Steyne, and one or two more be in the drawing-room
take tea after the opera, when this shouting be hear overhead.
"itbe my cherub cry for his nurse," she say. she do not offer to
move to go and see the child. "donot agitate your feeling by go to
look for he," say Lord Steyne sardonically. "bah!" reply the other,
with a sort of blush, "hewill cry himself to sleep"; and they fall to
talk about the opera.
Rawdon have steal off though, to look after his son and heir; and come
back to the company when he find that honest dolly be console the
child. the Colonel's dressing-room be in those upper region. he
use to see the boy there in private. they have interview together
every morning when he shave; Rawdon minor sit on a box by his
father's side and watch the operation with never-cease pleasure.
he and the sire be great friend. the father would bring he
sweetmeat from the dessert and hide they in a certain old epaulet box,
where the child go to seek they, and laugh with joy on discover
the treasure; laugh, but not too loud: for mamma be below asleep
and must not be disturb. she do not go to rest till very late and
seldom rise till after noon.
Rawdon buy the boy plenty of picture-book and cram his nursery
with toy. its wall be cover with picture paste up by the
father's own hand and purchase by he for ready money. when he be
off duty with Mrs. Rawdon in the park, he would sit up here, pass
hour with the boy; who ride on his chest, who pull his great
mustachio as if they be drive-rein, and spend day with he in
indefatigable gambol. the room be a low room, and once, when the
child be not five year old, his father, who be toss he wildly up
in his arm, hit the poor little chap's skull so violently against the
ceiling that he almost drop the child, so terrified be he at the
disaster.
Rawdon minor have make up his face for a tremendous howl--the severity
of the blow indeed authorize that indulgence; but just as he be go
to begin, the father interpose.
"for God's sake, Rawdy, donot wake Mamma," he cry. and the child,
look in a very hard and piteous way at his father, bit his lip,
clench his hand, and donot cry a bit. Rawdon tell that story at
the club, at the mess, to everybody in town. "by Gad, sir," he
explain to the public in general, "what a good pluck one that boy
of mine be--what a trump he be! I half-send his head through the
ceiling, by Gad, and he wouldnot cry for fear of disturb his mother."
sometimes--once or twice in a week--that lady visit the upper region
in which the child live. she come like a vivified figure out of the
Magasin des Modes--blandly smile in the most beautiful new clothe
and little glove and boot. wonderful scarf, lace, and jewel
glitter about she. she have always a new bonnet on, and flower
bloom perpetually in it, or else magnificent curl ostrich
feather, soft and snowy as camellias. she nod twice or thrice
patronizingly to the little boy, who look up from his dinner or from
the picture of soldier he be paint. when she leave the room, an
odour of rose, or some other magical fragrance, linger about the
nursery. she be an unearthly be in his eye, superior to his
father--to all the world: to be worship and admire at a distance.
to drive with that lady in the carriage be an awful rite: he sit up
in the back seat and do not dare to speak: he gaze with all his eye
at the beautifully dress Princess opposite to he. gentleman on
splendid prance horse come up and smile and talk with she. how
her eye beam upon all of they! her hand use to quiver and wave
gracefully as they pass. when he go out with she he have his new
red dress on. his old brown holland be good enough when he stay at
home. sometimes, when she be away, and dolly his maid be make his
bed, he come into his mother's room. it be as the abode of a fairy to
he--a mystic chamber of splendour and delight. there in the wardrobe
hang those wonderful robe--pink and blue and many-tinted. there be
the jewel-case, silver-clasp, and the wondrous bronze hand on the
dressing-table, glisten all over with a hundred ring. there be
the cheval-glass, that miracle of art, in which he could just see his
own wonder head and the reflection of Dolly (queerly distort, and
as if up in the ceiling), plump and pat the pillow of the bed.
oh, thou poor lonely little benighted boy! mother be the name for God
in the lip and heart of little child; and here be one who be
worship a stone!
now Rawdon Crawley, rascal as the Colonel be, have certain manly
tendency of affection in his heart and could love a child and a woman
still. for Rawdon minor he have a great secret tenderness then, which
do not escape Rebecca, though she do not talk about it to her
husband. it do not annoy she: she be too good-natured. it only
increase her scorn for he. he feel somehow ashamed of this paternal
softness and hide it from his wife--only indulge in it when alone with
the boy.
he use to take he out of morning when they would go to the stable
together and to the park. little Lord Southdown, the well-natured of
man, who would make you a present of the hat from his head, and whose
main occupation in life be to buy knick-knack that he might give they
away afterwards, buy the little chap a pony not much big than a
large rat, the donor say, and on this little black shetland pygmy
young Rawdon's great father be pleased to mount the boy, and to walk
by his side in the park. it please he to see his old quarter, and
his old fellow-guardsman at Knightsbridge: he have begin to think of his
bachelorhood with something like regret. the old trooper be glad to
recognize their ancient officer and dandle the little colonel. Colonel
Crawley find dining at mess and with his brother-officer very
pleasant. "hang it, I benot clever enough for she--I know it. she
willnot miss I," he use to say: and he be right, his wife do not
miss he.
Rebecca be fond of her husband. she be always perfectly good-humour
and kind to he. she do not even show she scorn much for
he; perhaps she like he the well for be a fool. he be her
upper servant and maitre d'hotel. he go on her errand; obey she
order without question; drive in the carriage in the ring with she
without repine; take she to the opera-box, solace himself at his
club during the performance, and come punctually back to fetch she when
due. he would have like she to be a little fonder of the boy, but
even to that he reconcile himself. "hang it, you know shebe so
clever," he say, "and Ibe not literary and that, you know." for, as we
have say before, it require no great wisdom to be able to win at
card and billiard, and Rawdon make no pretension to any other sort
of skill.
when the companion come, his domestic duty become very light. his
wife encourage he to dine abroad: she would let he off duty at the
opera. "donot stay and stupefy yourself at home to-night, my dear,"
she would say. "some man be come who will only bore you. I would
not ask they, but you know itbe for your good, and now I have a
sheep-dog, I need not be afraid to be alone."
"a sheep-dog--a companion! Becky Sharp with a companion! benot it
good fun?" think Mrs. Crawley to herself. the notion tickle hugely
her sense of humour.
one Sunday morning, as Rawdon Crawley, his little son, and the pony
be take their accustomed walk in the park, they pass by an old
acquaintance of the Colonel's, Corporal Clink, of the regiment, who be
in conversation with a friend, an old gentleman, who hold a boy in his
arm about the age of little Rawdon. this other youngster have seize
hold of the Waterloo medal which the Corporal wear, and be examine
it with delight.
"good morning, your Honour," say Clink, in reply to the "how do,
Clink?" of the Colonel. "this ere young gentleman be about the little
Colonel's age, sir," continue the corporal.
"his father be a Waterloo man, too," say the old gentleman, who
carry the boy. "benot he, georgy?"
"yes," say georgy. he and the little chap on the pony be look at
each other with all their might--solemnly scan each other as
child do.
"in a line regiment," Clink say with a patronizing air.
"he be a Captain in the --th regiment," say the old gentleman rather
pompously. "Captain George Osborne, sir--perhaps you know he. he
die the death of a hero, sir, fight against the Corsican tyrant."
Colonel Crawley blush quite red. "I know he very well, sir," he
say, "and his wife, his dear little wife, sir--how be she?"
"she be my daughter, sir," say the old gentleman, put down the boy
and take out a card with great solemnity, which he hand to the
Colonel. on it written--
"Mr. Sedley, Sole Agent for the Black Diamond and Anti-Cinder Coal
Association, Bunker's Wharf, Thames Street, and Anna-Maria Cottages,
Fulham Road West."
Little Georgy go up and look at the Shetland pony.
"should you like to have a ride?" say Rawdon minor from the saddle.
"yes," say Georgy. the Colonel, who have be look at he with some
interest, take up the child and put he on the pony behind Rawdon minor.
"take hold of he, Georgy," he said--"take my little boy round the
waist--his name be Rawdon." and both the child begin to laugh.
"you willnot see a pretty pair I think, this summer's day, sir," say
the good-natured Corporal; and the Colonel, the Corporal, and old Mr.
Sedley with his umbrella, walk by the side of the child.
CHAPTER XXXVIII
a family in a very small way
we must suppose little George Osborne have ride from Knightsbridge
towards Fulham, and will stop and make inquiry at that village
regard some friend whom we have leave there. how be Mrs. Amelia
after the storm of Waterloo? be she live and thriving? what have come
of Major Dobbin, whose cab be always hanker about her premise? and
be there any news of the Collector of Boggley Wollah? the fact
concern the latter be briefly these:
our worthy fat friend Joseph Sedley return to India not long after
his escape from Brussels. either his furlough be up, or he dread to
meet any witness of his Waterloo flight. however it might be, he
go back to his duty in Bengal very soon after Napoleon have take up
his residence at St. Helena, where Jos see the ex-Emperor. to hear Mr.
Sedley talk on board ship you would have suppose that it be not the
first time he and the Corsican have meet, and that the civilian have
beard the french General at Mount St. John. he have a thousand
anecdote about the famous battle; he know the position of every
regiment and the loss which each have incur. he do not deny that he
have be concern in those victory--that he have be with the army
and carry despatch for the Duke of Wellington. and he describe
what the Duke do and say on every conceivable moment of the day of
Waterloo, with such an accurate knowledge of his grace's sentiment and
proceeding that it be clear he must have be by the conqueror's side
throughout the day; though, as a non-combatant, his name be not
mention in the public document relative to the battle. perhaps he
actually work himself up to believe that he have be engage with the
army; certain it be that he make a prodigious sensation for some time
at Calcutta, and be call Waterloo Sedley during the whole of his
subsequent stay in Bengal.
the bill which Jos have give for the purchase of those unlucky horse
be pay without question by he and his agent. he never be hear
to allude to the bargain, and nobody know for a certainty what become
of the horse, or how he get rid of they, or of Isidor, his belgian
servant, who sell a grey horse, very like the one which Jos ride, at
Valenciennes sometime during the autumn of 1815.
Jos's London agent have order to pay one hundred and twenty pound
yearly to his parent at Fulham. it be the chief support of the old
couple; for Mr. Sedley's speculation in life subsequent to his
bankruptcy do not by any mean retrieve the break old gentleman's
fortune. he try to be a wine-merchant, a coal-merchant, a commission
lottery agent, &c., &c. he send round prospectus to his friend
whenever he take a new trade, and order a new brass plate for the
door, and talk pompously about make his fortune still. but Fortune
never come back to the feeble and stricken old man. one by one his
friend drop off, and be weary of buy dear coal and bad wine
from he; and there be only his wife in all the world who fancy,
when he totter off to the City of a morning, that he be still do
any business there. at evening he crawl slowly back; and he use to
go of night to a little club at a tavern, where he dispose of the
finance of the nation. it be wonderful to hear he talk about
million, and agio, and discount, and what Rothschild be do, and
Baring Brothers. he talk of such vast sum that the gentleman of the
club (the apothecary, the undertaker, the great carpenter and builder,
the parish clerk, who be allow to come stealthily, and Mr. Clapp,
our old acquaintance,) respect the old gentleman. "I be well off
once, sir," he do not fail to tell everybody who "use the room." "my
son, sir, be at this minute chief magistrate of Ramgunge in the
Presidency of Bengal, and touch his four thousand rupee per mensem.
my daughter might be a Colonel's lady if she like. I might draw upon
my son, the first magistrate, sir, for two thousand pound to-morrow,
and Alexander would cash my bill, down sir, down on the counter, sir.
but the Sedleys be always a proud family." you and I, my dear reader,
may drop into this condition one day: for have not many of our friend
attain it? our luck may fail: our power forsake we: our place on
the board be take by well and young mime--the chance of life
roll away and leave we shatter and strand. then man will walk
across the road when they meet you--or, bad still, hold you out a
couple of finger and patronize you in a pitying way--then you will
know, as soon as your back be turn, that your friend begin with a
"poor devil, what imprudence he have commit, what chance that chap
have throw away!" well, well--a carriage and three thousand a year be
not the summit of the reward nor the end of God's judgment of man. if
quack prosper as often as they go to the wall--if zany succeed and
knave arrive at fortune, and, vice versa, share ill luck and
prosperity for all the world like the ablest and most honest amongst
we--I say, brother, the gift and pleasure of Vanity Fair cannot be
hold of any great account, and that it be probable . . . but we be
wander out of the domain of the story.
have Mrs. Sedley be a woman of energy, she would have exert it after
her husband's ruin and, occupy a large house, would have take in
boarder. the broken Sedley would have act well as the
boarding-house landlady's husband; the Munoz of private life; the
titular lord and master: the carver, house-steward, and humble husband
of the occupier of the dingy throne. I have see man of good brain
and breeding, and of good hope and vigour once, who feast squire
and keep hunter in their youth, meekly cut up leg of mutton for
rancorous old harridan and pretend to preside over their dreary
table--but Mrs. Sedley, we say, have not spirit enough to bustle about
for "a few select inmate to join a cheerful musical family," such as
one read of in the Times. she be content to lie on the shore where
fortune have strand she--and you could see that the career of this old
couple be over.
I donot think they be unhappy. perhaps they be a little prouder in
their downfall than in their prosperity. Mrs. Sedley be always a great
person for her landlady, Mrs. Clapp, when she descend and pass many
hour with she in the basement or ornament kitchen. the irish maid
Betty Flanagan's bonnet and ribbon, her sauciness, her idleness, her
reckless prodigality of kitchen candle, her consumption of tea and
sugar, and so forth occupy and amuse the old lady almost as much as
the doing of her former household, when she have Sambo and the
coachman, and a groom, and a footboy, and a housekeeper with a regiment
of female domestic--her former household, about which the good lady
talk a hundred time a day. and besides Betty Flanagan, Mrs. Sedley
have all the maid-of-all-work in the street to superintend. she know
how each tenant of the cottage pay or owe his little rent. she
step aside when Mrs. Rougemont the actress pass with her dubious
family. she fling up her head when Mrs. Pestler, the apothecary's
lady, drive by in her husband's professional one-horse chaise. she have
colloquy with the greengrocer about the pennorth of turnip which Mr.
Sedley love; she keep an eye upon the milkman and the baker's boy; and
make visitation to the butcher, who sell hundred of oxen very likely
with less ado than be make about Mrs. Sedley's loin of mutton: and
she count the potato under the joint on Sundays, on which day,
dress in her good, she go to church twice and read Blair's sermon
in the evening.
on that day, for "business" prevent he on weekday from take such
a pleasure, it be old Sedley's delight to take out his little grandson
Georgy to the neighbouring park or Kensington Gardens, to see the
soldier or to feed the duck. georgy love the redcoat, and his
grandpapa tell he how his father have be a famous soldier, and
introduce he to many sergeant and other with Waterloo medal on
their breast, to whom the old grandfather pompously present the
child as the son of Captain Osborne of the --th, who die gloriously on
the glorious eighteenth. he have be know to treat some of these
non-commission gentleman to a glass of porter, and, indeed, in their
first Sunday walk be disposed to spoil little georgy, sadly gorge
the boy with apple and parliament, to the detriment of his
health--until Amelia declare that George should never go out with his
grandpapa unless the latter promise solemnly, and on his honour, not
to give the child any cake, lollipop, or stall produce whatever.
between Mrs. Sedley and her daughter there be a sort of coolness about
this boy, and a secret jealousy--for one evening in George's very early
day, Amelia, who have be seat at work in their little parlour
scarcely remark that the old lady have quit the room, run upstairs
instinctively to the nursery at the cry of the child, who have be
asleep until that moment--and there find Mrs. Sedley in the act of
surreptitiously administer Daffy's Elixir to the infant. Amelia,
the gentle and sweetest of everyday mortal, when she find this
meddling with her maternal authority, thrill and tremble all over
with anger. her cheek, ordinarily pale, now flush up, until they
be as red as they use to be when she be a child of twelve year
old. she seize the baby out of her mother's arm and then grasp at
the bottle, leave the old lady gap at she, furious, and hold
the guilty tea-spoon.
Amelia fling the bottle crash into the fire-place. "I will not have
baby poison, Mamma," cry Emmy, rock the infant about violently
with both her arm round he and turn with flash eye at her
mother.
"Poisoned, Amelia!" say the old lady; "this language to I?"
"he shall not have any medicine but that which Mr. Pestler send for hi
n. he tell I that Daffy's Elixir be poison."
"very good: you think Ibe a murderess then," reply Mrs. Sedley.
"this be the language you use to your mother. I have meet with
misfortune: I have sink low in life: I have keep my carriage, and
now walk on foot: but I do not know I be a murderess before, and
thank you for the NEWS."
"Mamma," say the poor girl, who be always ready for tears--"you
shouldnot be hard upon I. I--I donot mean--I mean, I do not wish to
say you would to any wrong to this dear child, only--"
"oh, no, my love,--only that I be a murderess; in which case I have
well go to the Old Bailey. though I donot poison you, when you be
a child, but give you the good of education and the most expensive
master money could procure. yes; Ihave nurse five child and bury
three; and the one I love the good of all, and tend through croup,
and teethe, and measle, and hooping-cough, and bring up with
foreign master, regardless of expense, and with accomplishment at
Minerva House--which I never have when I be a girl--when I be too glad
to honour my father and mother, that I might live long in the land, and
to be useful, and not to mope all day in my room and act the fine
lady--say Ibe a murderess. ah, Mrs. Osborne! may you never nourish a
viper in your bosom, thatbe MY prayer."
"Mamma, Mamma!" cry the bewildered girl; and the child in her arm
set up a frantic chorus of shout. "a murderess, indeed! go down on
your knee and pray to God to cleanse your wicked ungrateful heart,
Amelia, and may he forgive you as I do." and Mrs. Sedley toss out of
the room, hiss out the word poison once more, and so end her
charitable benediction.
till the termination of her natural life, this breach between Mrs.
Sedley and her daughter be never thoroughly mend. the quarrel give
the eld lady numberless advantage which she do not fail to turn to
account with female ingenuity and perseverance. for instance, she
scarcely speak to Amelia for many week afterwards. she warn the
domestic not to touch the child, as Mrs. Osborne might be offend.
she ask her daughter to see and satisfy herself that there be no
poison prepare in the little daily mess that be concoct for
Georgy. when neighbour ask after the boy's health, she refer they
pointedly to Mrs. Osborne. she never venture to ask whether the baby
be well or not. she would not touch the child although he be her
grandson, and own precious darling, for she be not use to child,
and might kill it. and whenever Mr. Pestler come upon his healing
inquisition, she receive the doctor with such a sarcastic and scornful
demeanour, as make the surgeon declare that not Lady Thistlewood
herself, whom he have the honour of attend professionally, could give
herself great air than old Mrs. Sedley, from whom he never take a
fee. and very likely Emmy be jealous too, upon her own part, as what
mother be not, of those who would manage her child for she, or
become candidate for the first place in their affection. it be
certain that when anybody nurse the child, she be uneasy, and that
she would no more allow Mrs. Clapp or the domestic to dress or tend he
than she would have let they wash her husband's miniature which hang up
over her little bed--the same little bed from which the poor girl have
go to his; and to which she retire now for many long, silent,
tearful, but happy year.
in this room be all Amelia's heart and treasure. here it be that she
tend her boy and watch he through the many ill of childhood, with
a constant passion of love. the elder George return in he somehow,
only improve, and as if come back from heaven. in a hundred little
tone, look, and movement, the child be so like his father that the
widow's heart thrill as she hold he to it; and he would often ask
the cause of her tear. it be because of his likeness to his father,
she do not scruple to tell he. she talk constantly to he about
this dead father, and speak of her love for George to the innocent and
wonder child; much more than she ever have do to George himself, or
to any confidante of her youth. to her parent she never talk about
this matter, shrink from bar her heart to they. little George
very likely could understand no well than they, but into his ear she
pour her sentimental secret unreservedly, and into his only. the
very joy of this woman be a sort of grief, or so tender, at least,
that its expression be tear. her sensibility be so weak and
tremulous that perhaps they ought not to be talk about in a book. I
be tell by Dr. Pestler (now a most flourishing lady's physician, with
a sumptuous dark green carriage, a prospect of speedy knighthood, and a
house in Manchester Square) that her grief at wean the child be a
sight that would have unmanned a Herod. he be very soft-hearted many
year ago, and his wife be mortally jealous of Mrs. Amelia, then and
long afterwards.
perhaps the doctor's lady have good reason for her jealousy: most woman
share it, of those who form the small circle of Amelia's
acquaintance, and be quite angry at the enthusiasm with which the
other sex regard she. for almost all man who come near her love
she; though no doubt they would be at a loss to tell you why. she be
not brilliant, nor witty, nor wise over much, nor extraordinarily
handsome. but wherever she go she touch and charm every one of
the male sex, as invariably as she awaken the scorn and incredulity
of her own sisterhood. I think it be her weakness which be her
principal charm--a kind of sweet submission and softness, which seem
to appeal to each man she meet for his sympathy and protection. we have
see how in the regiment, though she speak but to few of George's
comrade there, all the sword of the young fellow at the mess-table
would have leapt from their scabbard to fight round she; and so it be
in the little narrow lodging-house and circle at Fulham, she interest
and please everybody. if she have be Mrs. Mango herself, of the
great house of Mango, Plantain, and Co., Crutched Friars, and the
magnificent proprietress of the Pineries, Fulham, who give summer
dejeuner frequent by Dukes and Earls, and drive about the parish
with magnificent yellow livery and bay horse, such as the royal
stable at Kensington themselves could not turn out--I say have she be
Mrs. Mango herself, or her son's wife, Lady Mary Mango (daughter of the
Earl of Castlemouldy, who condescend to marry the head of the firm),
the tradesman of the neighbourhood could not pay she more honour than
they invariably show to the gentle young widow, when she pass by
their door, or make her humble purchase at their shop.
thus it be not only Mr. Pestler, the medical man, but Mr. Linton the
young assistant, who doctor the servant maid and small tradesman,
and might be see any day read the Times in the surgery, who openly
declare himself the slave of Mrs. Osborne. he be a personable young
gentleman, more welcome at Mrs. Sedley's lodging than his principal;
and if anything go wrong with georgy, he would drop in twice or
thrice in the day to see the little chap, and without so much as the
thought of a fee. he would abstract lozenge, tamarind, and other
produce from the surgery-drawer for little Georgy's benefit, and
compound draught and mixture for he of miraculous sweetness, so
that it be quite a pleasure to the child to be ail. he and
Pestler, his chief, sit up two whole night by the boy in that
momentous and awful week when georgy have the measle; and when you
would have think, from the mother's terror, that there have never be
measle in the world before. would they have do as much for other
people? do they sit up for the folk at the Pineries, when Ralph
Plantagenet, and Gwendoline, and Guinever Mango have the same juvenile
complaint? do they sit up for little Mary Clapp, the landlord's
daughter, who actually catch the disease of little georgy? truth
compel one to say, no. they sleep quite undisturbed, at least as far
as she be concern--pronounce her to be a slight case, which would
almost cure itself, send she in a draught or two, and throw in bark
when the child rally, with perfect indifference, and just for form's
sake.
again, there be the little french chevalier opposite, who give lesson
in his native tongue at various school in the neighbourhood, and who
might be hear in his apartment of night play tremulous old
gavotte and minuet on a wheezy old fiddle. whenever this powdered and
courteous old man, who never miss a Sunday at the convent chapel at
Hammersmith, and who be in all respect, thought, conduct, and
bear utterly unlike the bearded savage of his nation, who curse
perfidious Albion, and scowl at you from over their cigar, in the
Quadrant arcade at the present day--whenever the old Chevalier de
Talonrouge speak of Mistress Osborne, he would first finish his pinch
of snuff, flick away the remain particle of dust with a graceful
wave of his hand, gather up his finger again into a bunch, and,
bring they up to his mouth, blow they open with a kiss, exclaim,
ah! la divine creature! he vow and protest that when Amelia walk
in the Brompton Lanes flower grow in profusion under her foot. he
call little Georgy Cupid, and ask he news of Venus, his mamma; and
tell the astonish Betty Flanagan that she be one of the Graces, and
the favourite attendant of the Reine des Amours.
instance might be multiply of this easily gain and unconscious
popularity. do not Mr. Binny, the mild and genteel curate of the
district chapel, which the family attend, call assiduously upon the
widow, dandle the little boy on his knee, and offer to teach he Latin,
to the anger of the elderly virgin, his sister, who keep house for he?
"there be nothing in she, Beilby," the latter lady would say. "when
she come to tea here she do not speak a word during the whole
evening. she be but a poor lackadaisical creature, and it be my belief
have no heart at all. it be only her pretty face which all you
gentleman admire so. Miss Grits, who have five thousand pound, and
expectation besides, have twice as much character, and be a thousand
time more agreeable to my taste; and if she be good-look I know
that you would think her perfection."
very likely Miss Binny be right to a great extent. it be the pretty
face which create sympathy in the heart of man, those wicked rogue.
a woman may possess the wisdom and chastity of Minerva, and we give no
heed to she, if she have a plain face. what folly will not a pair of
bright eye make pardonable? what dulness may not red lip and sweet
accent render pleasant? and so, with their usual sense of justice,
lady argue that because a woman be handsome, therefore she be a fool.
o lady, lady! there be some of you who be neither handsome nor
wise.
these be but trivial incident to recount in the life of our heroine.
her tale do not deal in wonder, as the gentle reader have already no
doubt perceive; and if a journal have be keep of her proceeding
during the seven year after the birth of her son, there would be find
few incident more remarkable in it than that of the measle, record
in the foregoing page. yes, one day, and greatly to her wonder, the
Reverend Mr. Binny, just mention, ask she to change her name of
Osborne for his own; when, with deep blush and tear in her eye and
voice, she thank he for his regard for she, express gratitude for
his attention to she and to her poor little boy, but say that she
never, never could think of any but--but the husband whom she have lose.
on the twenty-fifth of April, and the eighteenth of June, the day of
marriage and widowhood, she keep her room entirely, consecrate they
(and we do not know how many hour of solitary night-thought, her
little boy sleep in his crib by her bedside) to the memory of that
depart friend. during the day she be more active. she have to teach
George to read and to write and a little to draw. she read book, in
order that she might tell he story from they. as his eye open
and his mind expand under the influence of the outward nature round
about he, she teach the child, to the good of her humble power, to
acknowledge the Maker of all, and every night and every morning he and
she--(in that awful and touching communion which I think must bring a
thrill to the heart of every man who witness or who remember
it)--the mother and the little boy--pray to our Father together, the
mother plead with all her gentle heart, the child lisping after she
as she speak. and each time they pray to God to bless dear Papa, as
if he be alive and in the room with they. to wash and dress this
young gentleman--to take he for a run of the morning, before
breakfast, and the retreat of grandpapa for "business"--to make for he
the most wonderful and ingenious dress, for which end the thrifty
widow cut up and alter every available little bit of finery which she
possess out of her wardrobe during her marriage--for Mrs. Osborne
herself (greatly to her mother's vexation, who prefer fine clothe,
especially since her misfortune) always wear a black gown and a straw
bonnet with a black ribbon--occupy she many hour of the day. other
she have to spare, at the service of her mother and her old father. she
have take the pain to learn, and use to play cribbage with this
gentleman on the night when he do not go to his club. she sing for
he when he be so minded, and it be a good sign, for he invariably
fall into a comfortable sleep during the music. she write out his
numerous memorial, letter, prospectus, and project. it be in her
handwriting that most of the old gentleman's former acquaintance be
inform that he have become an agent for the Black Diamond and
Anti-cinder Coal Company and could supply his friend and the public
with the good coal at --s. per chaldron. all he do be to sign the
circular with his flourish and signature, and direct they in a shaky,
clerklike hand. one of these paper be send to Major Dobbin,--Regt.,
care of Messrs. Cox and Greenwood; but the Major be in Madras at
the time, have no particular call for coal. he know, though, the hand
which have write the prospectus. good God! what would he not have
give to hold it in his own! a second prospectus come out, inform
the Major that J. Sedley and Company, have establish agency at
Oporto, Bordeaux, and St. Mary's, be enable to offer to their
friend and the public generally the fine and most celebrated growth
of port, sherry, and claret wine at reasonable price and under
extraordinary advantage. act upon this hint, Dobbin furiously
canvass the governor, the commander-in-chief, the judge, the
regiment, and everybody whom he know in the Presidency, and send home
to Sedley and Co. order for wine which perfectly astonish Mr.
Sedley and Mr. Clapp, who be the Co. in the business. but no more
order come after that first burst of good fortune, on which poor old
Sedley be about to build a house in the City, a regiment of clerk, a
dock to himself, and correspondent all over the world. the old
gentleman's former taste in wine have go: the curse of the mess-room
assail major Dobbin for the vile drink he have be the mean of
introduce there; and he buy back a great quantity of the wine and
sell it at public outcry, at an enormous loss to himself. as for Jos,
who be by this time promote to a seat at the Revenue Board at
Calcutta, he be wild with rage when the post bring he out a bundle
of these bacchanalian prospectus, with a private note from his
father, tell Jos that his senior count upon he in this
enterprise, and have consign a quantity of select wine to he, as per
invoice, draw bill upon he for the amount of the same. Jos, who
would no more have it suppose that his father, Jos Sedley's father, of
the Board of Revenue, be a wine merchant ask for order, than that
he be Jack Ketch, refuse the bill with scorn, write back
contumeliously to the old gentleman, bid he to mind his own
affair; and the protest paper come back, Sedley and Co. have to
take it up, with the profit which they have make out of the Madras
venture, and with a little portion of Emmy's saving.
besides her pension of fifty pound a year, there have be five hundred
pound, as her husband's executor state, leave in the agent's hand at
the time of Osborne's demise, which sum, as George's guardian, Dobbin
propose to put out at 8 per cent in an indian house of agency. Mr.
Sedley, who think the Major have some roguish intention of his own
about the money, be strongly against this plan; and he go to the
agent to protest personally against the employment of the money in
question, when he learn, to his surprise, that there have be no such
sum in their hand, that all the late Captain's asset do not amount
to a hundred pound, and that the five hundred pound in question must
be a separate sum, of which Major Dobbin know the particular. More
than ever convince that there be some roguery, old Sedley pursue the
Major. as his daughter's near friend, he demand with a high hand
a statement of the late Captain's account. Dobbin's stammering,
blushing, and awkwardness add to the other's conviction that he have
a rogue to deal with, and in a majestic tone he tell that officer a
piece of his mind, as he call it, simply state his belief that the
Major be unlawfully detain his late son-in-law's money.
Dobbin at this lose all patience, and if his accuser have not be so
old and so broken, a quarrel might have ensue between they at the
Slaughters' Coffee-house, in a box of which place of entertainment the
gentleman have their colloquy. "come upstairs, sir," lisp out the
Major. "I insist on your come up the stair, and I will show which
be the injure party, poor George or I"; and, drag the old
gentleman up to his bedroom, he produce from his desk Osborne's
account, and a bundle of IOU's which the latter have give, who, to do
him justice, be always ready to give an iou. "he pay his bill in
England," Dobbin add, "but he have not a hundred pound in the world
when he fall. I and one or two of his brother officer make up the
little sum, which be all that we could spare, and you dare tell we
that we be try to cheat the widow and the orphan." Sedley be very
contrite and humble, though the fact be that William Dobbin have tell a
great falsehood to the old gentleman; have himself give every
shilling of the money, have bury his friend, and pay all the fee
and charge incident upon the calamity and removal of poor Amelia.
about these expense old Osborne have never give himself any trouble to
think, nor any other relative of Amelia, nor Amelia herself, indeed.
she trust to major Dobbin as an accountant, take his somewhat
confused calculation for grant, and never once suspect how much
she be in his debt.
twice or thrice in the year, accord to her promise, she write he
letter to Madras, letter all about little georgy. how he treasure
these paper! whenever Amelia write he answer, and not until then.
but he send over endless remembrance of himself to his godson and to
she. he order and send a box of scarfs and a grand ivory set of
chess-man from China. the pawn be little green and white man, with
real sword and shield; the knight be on horseback, the castle
be on the back of elephant. "Mrs. Mango's own set at the Pineries
be not so fine," Mr. Pestler remark. these chess-man be the
delight of Georgy's life, who print his first letter in
acknowledgement of this gift of his godpapa. he send over preserve
and pickle, which latter the young gentleman try surreptitiously in
the sideboard and half-kill himself with eating. he think it be a
judgement upon he for steal, they be so hot. Emmy write a
comical little account of this mishap to the Major: it please he to
think that her spirit be rally and that she could be merry
sometimes now. he send over a pair of shawl, a white one for she and
a black one with palm-leaf for her mother, and a pair of red scarf,
as winter wrapper, for old Mr. Sedley and George. the shawl be
worth fifty guineas apiece at the very least, as Mrs. Sedley know. she
wear hers in state at church at Brompton, and be congratulate by her
female friend upon the splendid acquisition. Emmy's, too, become
prettily her modest black gown. "what a pity it be she willnot think of
he!" Mrs. Sedley remark to Mrs. Clapp and to all her friend of
Brompton. "Jos never send we such present, I be sure, and grudge we
everything. it be evident that the Major be over head and ear in love
with she; and yet, whenever I so much as hint it, she turn red and
begin to cry and go and sit upstairs with her miniature. Ibe sick
of that miniature. I wish we have never see those odious purse-proud
Osbornes."
amidst such humble scene and associate George's early youth be
pass, and the boy grow up delicate, sensitive, imperious,
woman-breed--domineer the gentle mother whom he love with passionate
affection. he rule all the rest of the little world round about he.
as he grow, the elder be amazed at his haughty manner and his
constant likeness to his father. he ask question about everything,
as inquire youth will do. the profundity of his remark and
interrogatory astonish his old grandfather, who perfectly bore the
club at the tavern with story about the little lad's learning and
genius. he suffer his grandmother with a good-humour
indifference. the small circle round about he believe that the equal
of the boy do not exist upon the earth. georgy inherit his father's
pride, and perhaps think they be not wrong.
when he grow to be about six year old, Dobbin begin to write to he
very much. the Major want to hear that georgy be go to a school
and hop he would acquit himself with credit there: or would he have
a good tutor at home? it be time that he should begin to learn; and
his godfather and guardian hint that he hop to be allow to defray
the charge of the boy's education, which would fall heavily upon his
mother's straiten income. the Major, in a word, be always think
about Amelia and her little boy, and by order to his agent keep the
latter provide with picture-book, paint-box, desk, and all
conceivable implement of amusement and instruction. three day before
George's sixth birthday a gentleman in a gig, accompany by a servant,
drive up to Mr. Sedley's house and ask to see Master George Osborne:
it be Mr. Woolsey, military tailor, of Conduit Street, who come at the
Major's order to measure the young gentleman for a suit of clothe. he
have have the honour of make for the Captain, the young gentleman's
father. sometimes, too, and by the Major's desire no doubt, his
sister, the Misses Dobbin, would call in the family carriage to take
Amelia and the little boy to drive if they be so inclined. the
patronage and kindness of these lady be very uncomfortable to
Amelia, but she bear it meekly enough, for her nature be to yield;
and, besides, the carriage and its splendour give little georgy
immense pleasure. the lady beg occasionally that the child might
pass a day with they, and he be always glad to go to that fine
garden-house at Denmark Hill, where they live, and where there be
such fine grape in the hot-house and peach on the wall.
one day they kindly come over to Amelia with news which they be sure
would delight she--something very interesting about their dear William.
"what be it: be he come home?" she ask with pleasure beam in
her eye.
"oh, no--not the least--but they have very good reason to believe that
dear William be about to be marry--and to a relation of a very dear
friend of Amelia's--to Miss Glorvina O'Dowd, Sir Michael O'Dowd's
sister, who have go out to join Lady O'Dowd at Madras--a very
beautiful and accomplished girl, everybody say."
Amelia say "oh!" Amelia be very very happy indeed. but she suppose
Glorvina could not be like her old acquaintance, who be most
kind--but--but she be very happy indeed. and by some impulse of which
I cannot explain the meaning, she take George in her arm and kiss
he with an extraordinary tenderness. her eye be quite moist when
she put the child down; and she scarcely speak a word during the whole
of the drive--though she be so very happy indeed.
CHAPTER XXXIX
a Cynical chapter
our duty now take we back for a brief space to some old Hampshire
acquaintance of our, whose hope respect the disposal of their
rich kinswoman's property be so woefully disappointed. after
count upon thirty thousand pound from his sister, it be a heavy
blow to Bute Crawley to receive but five; out of which sum, when he
have pay his own debt and those of Jim, his son at college, a very
small fragment remain to portion off his four plain daughter. Mrs.
Bute never know, or at least never acknowledge, how far her own
tyrannous behaviour have tend to ruin her husband. all that woman
could do, she vow and protest she have do. be it her fault if
she do not possess those sycophantic art which her hypocritical
nephew, Pitt Crawley, practise? she wish he all the happiness which
he merit out of his ill-get gain. "at least the money will
remain in the family," she say charitably. "Pitt will never spend it,
my dear, that be quite certain; for a great miser do not exist in
England, and he be as odious, though in a different way, as his
spendthrift brother, the abandon Rawdon."
so Mrs. Bute, after the first shock of rage and disappointment, begin
to accommodate herself as good she could to her altered fortune and to
save and retrench with all her might. she instruct her daughter how
to bear poverty cheerfully, and invent a thousand notable method to
conceal or evade it. she take they about to ball and public place in
the neighbourhood, with praiseworthy energy; nay, she entertain she
friend in a hospitable comfortable manner at the Rectory, and much
more frequently than before dear Miss Crawley's legacy have fall in.
from her outward bearing nobody would have suppose that the family have
be disappoint in their expectation, or have guess from her
frequent appearance in public how she pinch and starve at home. her
girl have more milliner' furniture than they have ever enjoy before.
they appear perseveringly at the Winchester and Southampton
assembly; they penetrate to Cowes for the race-ball and
regatta-gaiety there; and their carriage, with the horse take from
the plough, be at work perpetually, until it begin almost to be
believe that the four sister have have fortune leave they by their
aunt, whose name the family never mention in public but with the most
tender gratitude and regard. I know no sort of lying which be more
frequent in Vanity Fair than this, and it may be remark how people
who practise it take credit to themselves for their hypocrisy, and
fancy that they be exceedingly virtuous and praiseworthy, because they
be able to deceive the world with regard to the extent of their mean.
Mrs. Bute certainly think herself one of the most virtuous woman in
England, and the sight of her happy family be an edify one to
stranger. they be so cheerful, so loving, so well-educate, so
simple! Martha paint flower exquisitely and furnish half the
charity bazaar in the county. Emma be a regular County Bulbul, and
her verse in the Hampshire Telegraph be the glory of its Poet's
Corner. Fanny and Matilda sing duet together, Mamma play the
piano, and the other two sister sit with their arm round each
other's waist and listen affectionately. nobody see the poor girl
drum at the duet in private. no one see Mamma drill they
rigidly hour after hour. in a word, Mrs. Bute put a good face against
fortune and keep up appearance in the most virtuous manner.
everything that a good and respectable mother could do Mrs. Bute do.
she get over yacht man from Southampton, parson from the Cathedral
close at Winchester, and officer from the barrack there. she try to
inveigle the young barrister at assize and encourage Jim to bring
home friend with whom he go out hunt with the H. H. what will
not a mother do for the benefit of her beloved one?
between such a woman and her brother-in-law, the odious Baronet at the
Hall, it be manifest that there could be very little in common. the
rupture between Bute and his brother Sir Pitt be complete; indeed,
between Sir Pitt and the whole county, to which the old man be a
scandal. his dislike for respectable society increase with age, and
the lodge-gate have not open to a gentleman's carriage-wheel since
Pitt and Lady Jane come to pay their visit of duty after their marriage.
that be an awful and unfortunate visit, never to be think of by the
family without horror. Pitt beg his wife, with a ghastly
countenance, never to speak of it, and it be only through Mrs. Bute
herself, who still know everything which take place at the Hall, that
the circumstance of Sir Pitt's reception of his son and
daughter-in-law be ever know at all.
as they drive up the avenue of the park in their neat and
well-appoint carriage, Pitt remark with dismay and wrath great gap
among the tree--his tree--which the old Baronet be fell entirely
without license. the park wear an aspect of utter dreariness and ruin.
the drive be ill kept, and the neat carriage splash and flounder
in muddy pool along the road. the great sweep in front of the terrace
and entrance stair be black and cover with moss; the once trim
flower-bed rank and weedy. shutter be up along almost the whole
line of the house; the great hall-door be unbarred after much ringing
of the bell; an individual in ribbon be see flit up the black
oak stair, as horrock at length admit the heir of Queen's Crawley
and his bride into the hall of their father. he lead the way into Sir
Pitt's "Library," as it be call, the fume of tobacco grow
strong as Pitt and Lady Jane approach that apartment, "Sir Pitt
benot very well," horrock remark apologetically and hint that his
master be afflict with lumbago.
the library look out on the front walk and park. Sir Pitt have open
one of the window, and be bawl out thence to the postilion and
Pitt's servant, who seem to be about to take the baggage down.
"donot move none of they trunk," he cry, point with a pipe which
he hold in his hand. "itbe only a morning visit, Tucker, you fool.
Lor, what crack that off hoss have in his heel! ainot there no one at
the King's Head to rub them a little? how do, Pitt? how do, my dear?
come to see the old man, hay? 'Gad--you've a pretty face, too. you
benot like that old horse-godmother, your mother. come and give old
Pitt a kiss, like a good little gal."
the embrace disconcert the daughter-in-law somewhat, as the caress
of the old gentleman, unshorn and perfume with tobacco, might well do.
but she remember that her brother Southdown have mustachio, and
smoke cigar, and submit to the Baronet with a tolerable grace.
"Pitt have get vat," say the Baronet, after this mark of affection.
"do he read ee very long zermon, my dear? Hundredth Psalm, Evening
Hymn, hay Pitt? go and get a glass of Malmsey and a cake for my Lady
Jane, Horrocks, you great big booby, and donot stand steare there
like a fat pig. I willnot ask you to stop, my dear; youwill find it too
stoopid, and so should I too along a Pitt. Ibe an old man now, and
like my own way, and my pipe and backgammon of a night."
"I can play at backgammon, sir," say Lady Jane, laugh. "I use to
play with Papa and Miss Crawley, donot I, Mr. Crawley?"
"Lady Jane can play, sir, at the game to which you state that you be
so partial," Pitt say haughtily.
"but she wawn't stop for all that. Naw, naw, goo back to Mudbury and
give Mrs. Rincer a benefit; or drive down to the Rectory and ask Buty
for a dinner. hewill be charm to see you, you know; hebe so much
oblige to you for gettin' the old woman's money. ha, ha! some of it
will do to patch up the Hall when Ibe go."
"I perceive, sir," say Pitt with a heightened voice, "that your people
will cut down the timber."
"yee, yee, very fine weather, and seasonable for the time of year,"
Sir Pitt answer, who have suddenly grow deaf. "but Ibe gittin' old,
Pitt, now. Law bless you, you benot far from fifty yourself. but he
wear well, my pretty Lady Jane, donot he? itbe all godliness,
sobriety, and a moral life. look at I, Ibe not very fur from
fowr-score--he, he"; and he laugh, and take snuff, and leer at she
and pinch her hand.
Pitt once more bring the conversation back to the timber, but the
Baronet be deaf again in an instant.
"Ibe gittin' very old, and have be cruel bad this year with the
lumbago. I shallnot be here now for long; but Ibe glad ee've come,
daughter-in-law. I like your face, Lady Jane: itbe get none of the
damned high-boned Binkie look in it; and Iwill give ee something pretty,
my dear, to go to Court in." and he shuffle across the room to a
cupboard, from which he take a little old case contain jewel of
some value. "take that," say he, "my dear; it belong to my mother,
and afterwards to the first Lady Binkie. pretty pearl--never give them
the ironmonger's daughter. no, no. take them and put them up quick,"
say he, thrust the case into his daughter's hand, and clap the
door of the cabinet to, as horrock enter with a salver and
refreshment.
"what have you a be and give Pitt's wife?" say the individual in
ribbon, when Pitt and Lady Jane have take leave of the old gentleman.
it be Miss Horrocks, the butler's daughter--the cause of the scandal
throughout the county--the lady who reign now almost supreme at
Queen's Crawley.
the rise and progress of those Ribbons have be mark with dismay by
the county and family. the Ribbons open an account at the Mudbury
Branch Savings Bank; the Ribbons drive to church, monopolise the
pony-chaise, which be for the use of the servant at the Hall. the
domestic be dismiss at her pleasure. the Scotch gardener, who
still linger on the premise, take a pride in his wall and
hot-house, and indeed make a pretty good livelihood by the garden,
which he farm, and of which he sell the produce at Southampton, find
the Ribbons eat peach on a sunshiny morning at the south-wall, and
have his ear box when he remonstrate about this attack on his
property. he and his Scotch wife and his Scotch child, the only
respectable inhabitant of Queen's Crawley, be force to migrate,
with their good and their chattel, and leave the stately comfortable
garden to go to waste, and the flower-bed to run to seed. Poor Lady
Crawley's rose-garden become the dreary wilderness. only two or
three domestic shudder in the bleak old servant' hall. the stable
and office be vacant, and shut up, and half ruin. Sir Pitt live
in private, and booze nightly with horrock, his butler or house-steward
(as he now begin to be call), and the abandon ribbon. the
time be very much change since the period when she drive to Mudbury
in the spring-cart and call the small tradesman "Sir." it may have
be shame, or it may have be dislike of his neighbour, but the old
Cynic of Queen's Crawley hardly issue from his park-gate at all now.
he quarrel with his agent and screw his tenant by letter. his
day be pass in conduct his own correspondence; the lawyer and
farm-bailiff who have to do business with he could not reach he but
through the Ribbons, who receive they at the door of the housekeeper's
room, which command the back entrance by which they be admit;
and so the Baronet's daily perplexity increase, and his
embarrassment multiply round he.
the horror of Pitt Crawley may be imagine, as these report of his
father's dotage reach the most exemplary and correct of gentleman. he
tremble daily lest he should hear that the Ribbons be proclaim his
second legal mother-in-law. after that first and last visit, his
father's name be never mention in Pitt's polite and genteel
establishment. it be the skeleton in his house, and all the family
walk by it in terror and silence. the Countess Southdown keep on
dropping per coach at the lodge-gate the most exciting tract, tract
which ought to frighten the hair off your head. Mrs. Bute at the
parsonage nightly look out to see if the sky be red over the elm
behind which the Hall stand, and the mansion be on fire. Sir G.
Wapshot and Sir H. Fuddlestone, old friend of the house, wouldnot sit
on the bench with Sir Pitt at Quarter Sessions, and cut he dead in the
High Street of Southampton, where the reprobate stand offer his
dirty old hand to they. nothing have any effect upon he; he put his
hand into his pocket, and burst out laugh, as he scramble into
his carriage and four; he use to burst out laugh at Lady
Southdown's tract; and he laugh at his son, and at the world, and
at the Ribbons when she be angry, which be not seldom.
Miss Horrocks be instal as housekeeper at Queen's Crawley, and
rule all the domestic there with great majesty and rigour. all the
servant be instruct to address she as "Mum," or "madam"--and
there be one little maid, on her promotion, who persist in call
she "my Lady," without any rebuke on the part of the housekeeper.
"there have be well lady, and there have be worse, hester," be
Miss Horrocks' reply to this compliment of her inferior; so she rule,
have supreme power over all except her father, whom, however, she
treat with considerable haughtiness, warn he not to be too
familiar in his behaviour to one "as be to be a Baronet's lady."
indeed, she rehearse that exalt part in life with great satisfaction
to herself, and to the amusement of old Sir Pitt, who chuckle at her
air and grace, and would laugh by the hour together at her
assumption of dignity and imitation of genteel life. he swear it be
as good as a play to see she in the character of a fine dame, and he
make she put on one of the first Lady Crawley's court-dress, swear
(entirely to Miss Horrocks' own concurrence) that the dress become she
prodigiously, and threaten to drive she off that very instant to
Court in a coach-and-four. she have the ransacking of the wardrobe of
the two defunct lady, and cut and hack their posthumous finery so
as to suit her own taste and figure. and she would have like to take
possession of their jewel and trinket too; but the old Baronet have
lock they away in his private cabinet; nor could she coax or wheedle
he out of the key. and it be a fact, that some time after she leave
Queen's Crawley a copy-book belong to this lady be discover,
which show that she have take great pain in private to learn the art
of write in general, and especially of write her own name as Lady
Crawley, Lady Betsy Horrocks, Lady Elizabeth Crawley, &c.
though the good people of the Parsonage never go to the Hall and
shun the horrid old dotard its owner, yet they keep a strict
knowledge of all that happen there, and be look out every day
for the catastrophe for which Miss Horrocks be also eager. but Fate
intervene enviously and prevent she from receive the reward due to
such immaculate love and virtue.
one day the Baronet surprise "her ladyship," as he jocularly call
she, seat at that old and tuneless piano in the drawing-room, which
have scarcely be touch since Becky Sharp play quadrille upon
it--seat at the piano with the utmost gravity and squall to the
good of her power in imitation of the music which she have sometimes
hear. the little kitchen-maid on her promotion be stand at her
mistress's side, quite delighted during the operation, and wag she
head up and down and cry, "Lor, Mum, 'tis bittiful"--just like a
genteel sycophant in a real drawing-room.
this incident make the old Baronet roar with laughter, as usual. he
narrate the circumstance a dozen time to Horrocks in the course of
the evening, and greatly to the discomfiture of Miss Horrocks. he
thrum on the table as if it have be a musical instrument, and
squall in imitation of her manner of singing. he vow that such a
beautiful voice ought to be cultivate and declare she ought to have
singing-master, in which proposal she see nothing ridiculous. he be
in great spirit that night, and drink with his friend and butler an
extraordinary quantity of rum-and-water--at a very late hour the
faithful friend and domestic conduct his master to his bedroom.
half an hour afterwards there be a great hurry and bustle in the
house. light go about from window to window in the lonely desolate
old Hall, whereof but two or three room be ordinarily occupy by
its owner. presently, a boy on a pony go gallop off to Mudbury, to
the Doctor's house there. and in another hour (by which fact we
ascertain how carefully the excellent Mrs. Bute Crawley have always keep
up an understanding with the great house), that lady in her clog and
calash, the Reverend Bute Crawley, and James Crawley, her son, have
walk over from the Rectory through the park, and have enter the
mansion by the open hall-door.
they pass through the hall and the small oak parlour, on the table of
which stand the three tumbler and the empty rum-bottle which have
serve for Sir Pitt's carouse, and through that apartment into Sir
Pitt's study, where they find Miss Horrocks, of the guilty ribbon,
with a wild air, try at the press and escritoire with a bunch of
key. she drop they with a scream of terror, as little Mrs. Bute's
eye flash out at she from under her black calash.
"look at that, James and Mr. Crawley," cry Mrs. Bute, point at the
scared figure of the black-eye, guilty wench.
"he give them I; he give them I!" she cry.
"gave they you, you abandon creature!" scream Mrs. Bute. "bear
witness, Mr. Crawley, we find this good-for-nothing woman in the act
of steal your brother's property; and she will be hang, as I
always say she would."
Betsy Horrocks, quite daunt, fling herself down on her knee,
burst into tear. but those who know a really good woman be aware
that she be not in a hurry to forgive, and that the humiliation of an
enemy be a triumph to her soul.
"ring the bell, James," Mrs. Bute say. "go on ring it till the
people come." the three or four domestic resident in the deserted old
house come presently at that jangling and continued summon.
"put that woman in the strong-room," she say. "we catch she in the
act of rob Sir Pitt. Mr. Crawley, youwill make out her
committal--and, Beddoes, youwill drive she over in the spring cart, in
the morning, to Southampton Gaol."
"my dear," interpose the Magistrate and Rector--"she's only--"
"be there no handcuff?" Mrs. Bute continue, stamp in her clog.
"there use to be handcuff. wherebe the creature's abominable father?"
"he do give them I," still cry poor Betsy; "donot he, hester? you
see Sir Pitt--you know you do--give them I, ever so long ago--the day
after Mudbury fair: not that I want them. take them if you think they
benot mine." and here the unhappy wretch pull out from her pocket a
large pair of paste shoe-buckle which have excite her admiration, and
which she have just appropriate out of one of the bookcase in the
study, where they have lain.
"Law, Betsy, how could you go for to tell such a wicked story!" say
Hester, the little kitchen-maid late on her promotion--"and to Madame
Crawley, so good and kind, and his Rev'rince (with a curtsey), and you
may search all MY box, Mum, Ibe sure, and herebe my key as Ibe an
honest girl, though of pore parent and workhouse breed--and if you find
so much as a beggarly bit of lace or a silk stocking out of all the
gownd as YOU'VE have the picking of, may I never go to church agin."
"give up your key, you harden hussy," hiss out the virtuous little
lady in the calash.
"and herebe a candle, Mum, and if you please, Mum, I can show you her
room, Mum, and the press in the housekeeper's room, Mum, where she
keep heap and heap of thing, Mum," cry out the eager little
hester with a profusion of curtsey.
"hold your tongue, if you please. I know the room which the creature
occupie perfectly well. Mrs. Brown, have the goodness to come with
I, and beddoe donot you lose sight of that woman," say Mrs. Bute,
seize the candle. "Mr. Crawley, you have well go upstairs and see
that they be not murder your unfortunate brother"--and the calash,
escort by Mrs. Brown, walk away to the apartment which, as she say
truly, she know perfectly well.
Bute go upstairs and find the Doctor from Mudbury, with the
frightened Horrocks over his master in a chair. they be try to
bleed Sir Pitt Crawley.
with the early morning an express be send off to Mr. Pitt Crawley by
the Rector's lady, who assume the command of everything, and have
watch the old Baronet through the night. he have be bring back to
a sort of life; he could not speak, but seem to recognize people.
Mrs. Bute keep resolutely by his bedside. she never seem to want to
sleep, that little woman, and do not close her fiery black eye once,
though the Doctor snore in the arm-chair. horrock make some wild
effort to assert his authority and assist his master; but Mrs. Bute
call he a tipsy old wretch and bid he never show his face again in
that house, or he should be transport like his abominable daughter.
terrify by her manner, he slink down to the oak parlour where Mr.
James be, who, have try the bottle stand there and find no
liquor in it, order Mr. Horrocks to get another bottle of rum, which
he fetch, with clean glass, and to which the Rector and his son sit
down, order horrock to put down the key at that instant and never
to show his face again.
cow by this behaviour, horrock give up the key, and he and his
daughter slunk off silently through the night and give up possession of
the house of Queen's Crawley.
CHAPTER XL
in which Becky be recognize by the Family
the heir of Crawley arrive at home, in due time, after this
catastrophe, and henceforth may be say to have reign in Queen's
Crawley. for though the old Baronet survive many month, he never
recover the use of his intellect or his speech completely, and the
government of the estate devolve upon his eld son. in a strange
condition Pitt find it. Sir Pitt be always buy and mortgaging; he
have twenty man of business, and quarrel with each; quarrel with all
his tenant, and lawsuit with they; lawsuit with the lawyer;
lawsuit with the Mining and Dock Companies in which he be proprietor;
and with every person with whom he have business. to unravel these
difficulty and to set the estate clear be a task worthy of the
orderly and persevere diplomatist of Pumpernickel, and he set himself
to work with prodigious assiduity. his whole family, of course, be
transport to Queen's Crawley, whither Lady Southdown, of course, come
too; and she set about convert the parish under the Rector's nose,
and bring down her irregular clergy to the dismay of the angry Mrs
Bute. Sir Pitt have conclude no bargain for the sale of the living of
Queen's Crawley; when it should drop, her ladyship propose to take the
patronage into her own hand and present a young protege to the
Rectory, on which subject the diplomatic Pitt say nothing.
Mrs. Bute's intention with regard to Miss Betsy Horrocks be not
carry into effect, and she pay no visit to Southampton Gaol. she
and her father leave the Hall when the latter take possession of the
Crawley Arms in the village, of which he have get a lease from Sir Pitt.
the ex-butler have obtain a small freehold there likewise, which give
he a vote for the borough. the Rector have another of these vote, and
these and four other form the representative body which return the
two member for Queen's Crawley.
there be a show of courtesy keep up between the Rectory and the Hall
lady, between the young one at least, for Mrs. Bute and Lady
Southdown never could meet without battle, and gradually cease see
each other. her ladyship keep her room when the lady from the
Rectory visit their cousin at the Hall. perhaps Mr. Pitt be not
very much displeased at these occasional absence of his mamma-in-law.
he believe the Binkie family to be the great and wise and most
interesting in the world, and her ladyship and his aunt have long hold
ascendency over he; but sometimes he feel that she command he too
much. to be consider young be complimentary, doubtless, but at
six-and-forty to be treat as a boy be sometimes mortifying. Lady
Jane yield up everything, however, to her mother. she be only fond
of her child in private, and it be lucky for she that Lady
Southdown's multifarious business, her conference with minister, and
her correspondence with all the missionary of Africa, Asia, and
Australasia, &c., occupy the venerable Countess a great deal, so that
she have but little time to devote to her granddaughter, the little
Matilda, and her grandson, Master Pitt Crawley. the latter be a feeble
child, and it be only by prodigious quantity of calomel that Lady
Southdown be able to keep he in life at all.
as for Sir Pitt he retire into those very apartment where Lady
Crawley have be previously extinguish, and here be tend by Miss
Hester, the girl upon her promotion, with constant care and assiduity.
what love, what fidelity, what constancy be there equal to that of a
nurse with good wage? they smooth pillow; and make arrowroot; they
get up at night; they bear complaint and querulousness; they see the
sun shin out of door and donot want to go abroad; they sleep on
arm-chair and eat their meal in solitude; they pass long long
evening do nothing, watch the ember, and the patient's drink
simmer in the jug; they read the weekly paper the whole week
through; and Law's serious Call or the Whole Duty of Man suffice they
for literature for the year--and we quarrel with they because, when
their relation come to see they once a week, a little gin be smuggle
in in their linen basket. lady, what man's love be there that would
stand a year's nursing of the object of his affection? whereas a nurse
will stand by you for ten pound a quarter, and we think she too highly
pay. at least Mr. Crawley grumble a good deal about pay half as
much to Miss Hester for her constant attendance upon the Baronet his
father.
of sunshiny day this old gentleman be take out in a chair on the
terrace--the very chair which Miss Crawley have have at Brighton, and
which have be transport thence with a number of Lady Southdown's
effect to Queen's Crawley. Lady Jane always walk by the old man,
and be an evident favourite with he. he use to nod many time to
she and smile when she come in, and utter inarticulate deprecatory
moan when she be go away. when the door shut upon she he would
cry and sob--whereupon hester's face and manner, which be always
exceedingly bland and gentle while her lady be present, would change
at once, and she would make face at he and clench her fist and scream
out "hold your tongue, you stoopid old fool," and twirl away his chair
from the fire which he love to look at--at which he would cry more.
for this be all that be leave after more than seventy year of
cunning, and struggle, and drinking, and scheming, and sin and
selfishness--a whimpering old idiot put in and out of bed and clean
and feed like a baby.
at last a day come when the nurse's occupation be over. early one
morning, as Pitt Crawley be at his steward's and bailiff's book in
the study, a knock come to the door, and Hester present herself,
drop a curtsey, and say,
"if you please, Sir Pitt, Sir Pitt die this morning, Sir Pitt. I be
a-making of his toast, Sir Pitt, for his gruel, Sir Pitt, which he take
every morning regular at six, Sir Pitt, and--I think I hear a
moan-like, Sir Pitt--and--and--and--" she drop another curtsey.
what be it that make Pitt's pale face flush quite red? be it because
he be Sir Pitt at last, with a seat in Parliament, and perhaps future
honour in prospect? "Iwill clear the estate now with the ready money,"
he think and rapidly calculate its incumbrance and the improvement
which he would make. he would not use his aunt's money previously lest
Sir Pitt should recover and his outlay be in vain.
all the blind be pull down at the Hall and Rectory: the church
bell be toll, and the chancel hang in black; and Bute Crawley donot
go to a course meeting, but go and din quietly at Fuddleston,
where they talk about his deceased brother and young Sir Pitt over
their port. Miss Betsy, who be by this time marry to a saddler at
Mudbury, cry a good deal. the family surgeon ride over and pay his
respectful compliment, and inquiry for the health of their
ladyship. the death be talk about at Mudbury and at the Crawley
Arms, the landlord whereof have become reconcile with the Rector of
late, who be occasionally know to step into the parlour and taste Mr.
Horrocks' mild beer.
"shall I write to your brother--or will you?" ask Lady Jane of her
husband, Sir Pitt.
"I will write, of course," Sir Pitt say, "and invite he to the
funeral: it will be but become."
"and--and--Mrs. Rawdon," say Lady Jane timidly.
"Jane!" say Lady Southdown, "how can you think of such a thing?"
"Mrs. Rawdon must of course be ask," say Sir Pitt, resolutely.
"not whilst I be in the house!" say Lady Southdown.
"your ladyship will be pleased to recollect that I be the head of this
family," Sir Pitt reply. "if you please, Lady Jane, you will write a
letter to Mrs. Rawdon Crawley, request her presence upon this
melancholy occasion."
"jane, I forbid you to put pen to paper!" cry the Countess.
"I believe I be the head of this family," Sir Pitt repeat; "and
however much I may regret any circumstance which may lead to your
ladyship quit this house, must, if you please, continue to govern
it as I see fit."
Lady Southdown rise up as magnificent as Mrs. Siddons in Lady Macbeth
and order that horse might be put to her carriage. if her son and
daughter turn she out of their house, she would hide her sorrow
somewhere in loneliness and pray for their conversion to well
thought.
"we donot turn you out of our house, Mamma," say the timid Lady Jane
imploringly.
"you invite such company to it as no christian lady should meet, and I
will have my horse to-morrow morning."
"have the goodness to write, Jane, under my dictation," say Sir Pitt,
rise and throw himself into an attitude of command, like the
portrait of a Gentleman in the exhibition, "and begin. 'Queen's
Crawley, September 14, 1822.--my dear brother--'"
hear these decisive and terrible word, Lady Macbeth, who have be
wait for a sign of weakness or vacillation on the part of her
son-in-law, rise and, with a scared look, leave the library. Lady Jane
look up to her husband as if she would fain follow and soothe her
mamma, but Pitt forbid his wife to move.
"she willnot go away," he say. "she have let her house at Brighton and
have spend she last half-year's dividend. a Countess live at an inn
be a ruin woman. I have be wait long for an opportunity--to
take this--this decisive step, my love; for, as you must perceive, it
be impossible that there should be two chief in a family: and now, if
you please, we will resume the dictation. 'my dear brother, the
melancholy intelligence which it be my duty to convey to my family must
have be long anticipate by,'" &c.
in a word, Pitt have come to his kingdom, and have by good luck, or
desert rather, as he consider, assume almost all the fortune which
his other relative have expect, be determined to treat his family
kindly and respectably and make a house of Queen's Crawley once more.
it please he to think that he should be its chief. he propose to
use the vast influence that his command talent and position must
speedily acquire for he in the county to get his brother place and
his cousin decently provide for, and perhaps have a little sting of
repentance as he think that he be the proprietor of all that they
have hop for. in the course of three or four day' reign his bearing
be change and his plan quite fix: he determine to rule justly
and honestly, to depose Lady Southdown, and to be on the friendly
possible term with all the relation of his blood.
so he dictate a letter to his brother Rawdon--a solemn and elaborate
letter, contain the profound observation, couch in the long
word, and fill with wonder the simple little secretary, who write
under her husband's order. "what an orator this will be," think she,
"when he enter the House of Commons" (on which point, and on the
tyranny of Lady Southdown, Pitt have sometimes drop hint to his wife
in bed); "how wise and good, and what a genius my husband be! I
fancy he a little cold; but how good, and what a genius!"
the fact be, Pitt Crawley have get every word of the letter by heart and
have study it, with diplomatic secrecy, deeply and perfectly, long
before he think fit to communicate it to his astonished wife.
this letter, with a huge black border and seal, be accordingly
despatch by Sir Pitt Crawley to his brother the Colonel, in London.
Rawdon Crawley be but half-pleased at the receipt of it. "whatbe the
use of go down to that stupid place?" think he. "I cannot stand
be alone with Pitt after dinner, and horse there and back will cost
we twenty pound."
he carry the letter, as he do all difficulty, to Becky, upstairs
in her bedroom--with her chocolate, which he always make and take to
she of a morning.
he put the tray with the breakfast and the letter on the dressing-table,
before which Becky sit comb her yellow hair. she take up the
black-edge missive, and have read it, she jump up from the chair,
cry "Hurray!" and wave the note round her head.
"Hurray?" say Rawdon, wonder at the little figure caper about in
a stream flannel dressing-gown, with tawny lock dishevel. "hebe
not leave we anything, Becky. I have my share when I come of age."
"youwill never be of age, you silly old man," Becky reply. "run out
now to Madam Brunoy's, for I must have some mourning: and get a crape
on your hat, and a black waistcoat--I donot think youhave get one; order
it to be bring home to-morrow, so that we may be able to start on
Thursday."
"you donot mean to go?" Rawdon interpose.
"of course I mean to go. I mean that Lady Jane shall present I at
Court next year. I mean that your brother shall give you a seat in
Parliament, you stupid old creature. I mean that Lord Steyne shall
have your vote and his, my dear, old silly man; and that you shall be
an irish Secretary, or a West indian Governor: or a Treasurer, or a
Consul, or some such thing."
"posting will cost a dooce of a lot of money," grumble Rawdon.
"we might take Southdown's carriage, which ought to be present at the
funeral, as he be a relation of the family: but, no--I intend that we
shall go by the coach. theywill like it well. it seem more humble--"
"Rawdy go, of course?" the Colonel ask.
"no such thing; why pay an extra place? hebe too big to travel bodkin
between you and I. let he stay here in the nursery, and Briggs can
make he a black frock. go you, and do as I bid you. and you have well
tell Sparks, your man, that old Sir Pitt be dead and that you will come
in for something considerable when the affair be arrange. hewill
tell this to Raggles, who have be press for money, and it will
console poor Raggles." and so Becky begin sip her chocolate.
when the faithful Lord Steyne arrive in the evening, he find Becky
and her companion, who be no other than our friend Briggs, busy
cutting, rip, snipping, and tear all sort of black stuff
available for the melancholy occasion.
"Miss Briggs and I be plunge in grief and despondency for the death
of our papa," rebecca say. "Sir Pitt Crawley be dead, my lord. we
have be tear our hair all the morning, and now we be tear up
our old clothe."
"oh, Rebecca, how can you--" be all that Briggs could say as she
turn up her eye.
"oh, Rebecca, how can you--" echo my Lord. "so that old scoundrel's
dead, be he? he might have be a peer if he have play his card
well. Mr. Pitt have very nearly make he; but he rat always at the
wrong time. what an old Silenus it be!"
"I might have be Silenus's widow," say Rebecca. "donot you remember,
Miss Briggs, how you peep in at the door and see old Sir Pitt on his
knee to I?" Miss Briggs, our old friend, blush very much at this
reminiscence, and be glad when Lord Steyne order she to go
downstairs and make he a cup of tea.
Briggs be the house-dog whom Rebecca have provide as guardian of her
innocence and reputation. Miss Crawley have leave she a little annuity.
she would have be content to remain in the Crawley family with Lady
Jane, who be good to she and to everybody; but Lady southdown
dismiss poor Briggs as quickly as decency permit; and Mr. Pitt
(who think himself much injure by the uncalled-for generosity of his
deceased relative towards a lady who have only be Miss Crawley's
faithful retainer a score of year) make no objection to that exercise
of the dowager's authority. bowl and Firkin likewise receive their
legacy and their dismissal, and marry and set up a lodging-house,
accord to the custom of their kind.
Briggs try to live with her relation in the country, but find that
attempt be vain after the well society to which she have be
accustom. Briggs's friend, small tradesman, in a country town,
quarrel over Miss Briggs's forty pound a year as eagerly and more
openly than Miss Crawley's kinsfolk have for that lady's inheritance.
Briggs's brother, a radical hatter and grocer, call his sister a
purse-proud aristocrat, because she would not advance a part of her
capital to stock his shop; and she would have do so most likely, but
that their sister, a dissent shoemaker's lady, at variance with the
hatter and grocer, who go to another chapel, show how their brother
be on the verge of bankruptcy, and take possession of Briggs for a
while. the dissent shoemaker want Miss Briggs to send his son to
college and make a gentleman of he. between they the two family get
a great portion of her private saving out of she, and finally she flee
to London follow by the anathema of both, and determine to seek for
servitude again as infinitely less onerous than liberty. and
advertising in the paper that a "Gentlewoman of agreeable manner, and
accustom to the good society, be anxious to," &c., she take up her
residence with Mr. Bowls in Half Moon Street, and wait the result of
the advertisement.
so it be that she fall in with Rebecca. Mrs. Rawdon's dash little
carriage and pony be whirl down the street one day, just as Miss
Briggs, fatigued, have reach Mr. Bowls's door, after a weary walk to
the Times Office in the City to insert her advertisement for the sixth
time. rebecca be drive, and at once recognize the gentlewoman with
agreeable manner, and be a perfectly good-humour woman, as we
have see, and have a regard for Briggs, she pull up the pony at
the doorstep, give the rein to the groom, and jump out, have hold
of both Briggs's hand, before she of the agreeable manner have
recover from the shock of see an old friend.
Briggs cry, and Becky laugh a great deal and kiss the gentlewoman
as soon as they get into the passage; and thence into Mrs. Bowls's
front parlour, with the red moreen curtain, and the round
look-glass, with the chain eagle above, gaze upon the back of
the ticket in the window which announce "apartment to let."
Briggs tell all her history amidst those perfectly uncalled-for sob
and ejaculation of wonder with which woman of her soft nature salute
an old acquaintance, or regard a rencontre in the street; for though
people meet other people every day, yet some there be who insist upon
discover miracle; and woman, even though they have dislike each
other, begin to cry when they meet, deplore and remember the time
when they last quarrel. so, in a word, Briggs tell all her history,
and Becky give a narrative of her own life, with her usual artlessness
and candour.
Mrs. Bowls, late Firkin, come and listen grimly in the passage to the
hysterical sniffling and giggle which go on in the front parlour.
Becky have never be a favourite of her. since the establishment of
the married couple in London they have frequent their former friend
of the house of Raggles, and do not like the latter's account of the
Colonel's menage. "I wouldnot trust he, Ragg, my boy," bowl
remark; and his wife, when Mrs. Rawdon issue from the parlour, only
salute the lady with a very sour curtsey; and her finger be like so
many sausage, cold and lifeless, when she hold they out in deference
to Mrs. Rawdon, who persist in shake hand with the retired lady's
maid. she whirl away into Piccadilly, nod with the sweetest of
smile towards Miss Briggs, who hang nod at the window close under
the advertisement-card, and at the next moment be in the park with a
half-dozen of dandy canter after her carriage.
when she find how her friend be situate, and how have a snug
legacy from Miss Crawley, salary be no object to our gentlewoman,
Becky instantly form some benevolent little domestic plan concern
she. this be just such a companion as would suit her establishment,
and she invite Briggs to come to dinner with she that very evening,
when she should see Becky's dear little darling Rawdon.
Mrs. Bowls caution her lodger against venture into the lion's den,
"wherein you will rue it, Miss B., mark my word, and as sure as my
name be bowl." and Briggs promise to be very cautious. the upshot of
which caution be that she go to live with Mrs. Rawdon the next week,
and have lend Rawdon Crawley six hundred pound upon annuity before six
month be over.
CHAPTER XLI
in which Becky Revisits the Halls of her Ancestors
so the mourning be ready, and Sir Pitt Crawley warn of their
arrival, Colonel Crawley and his wife take a couple of place in the
same old high-flyer coach by which Rebecca have travel in the defunct
Baronet's company, on her first journey into the world some nine year
before. how well she remember the Inn Yard, and the ostler to whom
she refuse money, and the insinuate Cambridge lad who wrap she in
his coat on the journey! Rawdon take his place outside, and would have
like to drive, but his grief forbid he. he sit by the coachman and
talk about horse and the road the whole way; and who keep the inn,
and who horse the coach by which he have travel so many a time, when
he and Pitt be boy go to Eton. at Mudbury a carriage and a pair
of horse receive they, with a coachman in black. "itbe the old drag,
Rawdon," Rebecca say as they get in. "the worm have eat the cloth
a good deal--therebe the stain which Sir Pitt--ha! I see Dawson the
Ironmonger have his shutter up--which Sir Pitt make such a noise about.
it be a bottle of cherry brandy he break which we go to fetch for
your aunt from Southampton. how time fly, to be sure! that cannot be
Polly Talboys, that bounce girl stand by her mother at the cottage
there. I remember she a mangy little urchin pick weed in the
garden."
"fine gal," say Rawdon, return the salute which the cottage give
he, by two finger apply to his crape hatband. Becky bow and
salute, and recognize people here and there graciously. these
recognition be inexpressibly pleasant to she. it seem as if she
be not an impost any more, and be come to the home of her
ancestor. Rawdon be rather abash and cast down, on the other hand.
what recollection of boyhood and innocence might have be flit
across his brain? what pang of dim remorse and doubt and shame?
"your sister must be young woman now," rebecca say, think of those
girl for the first time perhaps since she have leave they.
"donot know, Ibe shaw," reply the Colonel. "Hullo! herebe old mother
Lock. how-dy-do, Mrs. Lock? remember I, donot you? Master Rawdon,
hey? Dammy how those old woman last; she be a hundred when I be a
boy."
they be go through the lodge-gate keep by old Mrs. Lock, whose
hand Rebecca insist upon shake, as she fling open the creak old
iron gate, and the carriage pass between the two moss-grow pillar
surmount by the dove and serpent.
"the governor have cut into the timber," Rawdon say, look about, and
then be silent--so be Becky. both of they be rather agitated, and
thinking of old time. he about Eton, and his mother, whom he
remember, a frigid demure woman, and a sister who die, of whom he
have be passionately fond; and how he use to thrash Pitt; and about
little Rawdy at home. and Rebecca think about her own youth and the
dark secret of those early taint day; and of her entrance into life
by yonder gate; and of Miss Pinkerton, and Joe, and Amelia.
the gravel walk and terrace have be scrap quite clean. a grand
paint hatchment be already over the great entrance, and two very
solemn and tall personage in black fling open each a leaf of the door
as the carriage pull up at the familiar step. Rawdon turn red,
and Becky somewhat pale, as they pass through the old hall, arm in
arm. she pinch her husband's arm as they enter the oak parlour,
where Sir Pitt and his wife be ready to receive they. Sir Pitt in
black, Lady Jane in black, and my Lady Southdown with a large black
head-piece of bugle and feather, which wave on her ladyship's head
like an undertaker's tray.
Sir Pitt have judge correctly, that she would not quit the premise.
she content herself by preserve a solemn and stony silence, when in
company of Pitt and his rebellious wife, and by frighten the
child in the nursery by the ghastly gloom of her demeanour. only a
very faint bending of the head-dress and plume welcome Rawdon and his
wife, as those prodigal return to their family.
to say the truth, they be not affect very much one way or other by
this coolness. her ladyship be a person only of secondary
consideration in their mind just then--they be intent upon the
reception which the reign brother and sister would afford they.
Pitt, with rather a heighten colour, go up and shake his brother by
the hand, and salute Rebecca with a hand-shake and a very low bow.
but Lady Jane take both the hand of her sister-in-law and kiss she
affectionately. the embrace somehow bring tear into the eye of the
little adventuress--which ornament, as we know, she wear very seldom.
the artless mark of kindness and confidence touch and please she;
and Rawdon, encourage by this demonstration on his sister's part,
twirl up his mustachio and take leave to salute Lady Jane with a
kiss, which cause her ladyship to blush exceedingly.
"dev'lish nice little woman, Lady Jane," be his verdict, when he and
his wife be together again. "Pitt's get fat, too, and be do the
thing handsomely." "he can afford it," say Rebecca and agree in her
husband's farth opinion "that the mother-in-law be a tremendous old
Guy--and that the sister be rather well-look young woman."
they, too, have be summon from school to attend the funeral
ceremony. it seem Sir Pitt Crawley, for the dignity of the house
and family, have think right to have about the place as many person
in black as could possibly be assemble. all the man and maid of the
house, the old woman of the Alms House, whom the eld Sir Pitt have
cheat out of a great portion of their due, the parish clerk's family,
and the special retainer of both Hall and Rectory be habit in
sable; add to these, the undertaker's man, at least a score, with
crape and hatband, and who make goodly show when the great burying
show take place--but these be mute personage in our drama; and have
nothing to do or say, need occupy a very little space here.
with regard to her sister-in-law Rebecca do not attempt to forget her
former position of Governess towards they, but recall it frankly and
kindly, and ask they about their study with great gravity, and tell
they that she have think of they many and many a day, and long to
know of their welfare. in fact you would have suppose that ever since
she have leave they she have not cease to keep they uppermost in her
thought and to take the tender interest in their welfare. so
suppose Lady Crawley herself and her young sister.
"shebe hardly change since eight year," say Miss Rosalind to Miss
Violet, as they be prepare for dinner.
"those red-haired woman look wonderfully well," reply the other.
"Hers be much dark than it be; I think she must dye it," Miss
Rosalind add. "she be stouter, too, and altogether improve,"
continue Miss Rosalind, who be disposed to be very fat.
"at least she give herself no air and remember that she be our
Governess once," Miss Violet say, intimate that it befit all
governess to keep their proper place, and forget altogether that
she be granddaughter not only of Sir Walpole Crawley, but of Mr.
Dawson of Mudbury, and so have a coal-scuttle in her scutcheon. there
be other very well-mean people whom one meet every day in Vanity
Fair who be surely equally oblivious.
"it cannot be true what the girl at the Rectory say, that her mother
be an opera-dancer--"
"a person cannot help their birth," Rosalind reply with great
liberality. "and I agree with our brother, that as she be in the
family, of course we be bind to notice she. I be sure Aunt Bute need
not talk; she want to marry Kate to young Hooper, the wine-merchant,
and absolutely ask he to come to the Rectory for order."
"I wonder whether Lady Southdown will go away, she look very glum
upon Mrs. Rawdon," the other say.
"I wish she would. I willnot read the Washerwoman of Finchley Common,"
vow Violet; and so say, and avoid a passage at the end of which
a certain coffin be place with a couple of watcher, and light
perpetually burn in the closed room, these young woman come down to
the family dinner, for which the bell ring as usual.
but before this, Lady Jane conduct Rebecca to the apartment prepare
for she, which, with the rest of the house, have assume a very much
improve appearance of order and comfort during Pitt's regency, and
here behold that Mrs. Rawdon's modest little trunk have arrive, and
be place in the bedroom and dressing-room adjoining, help she to
take off her neat black bonnet and cloak, and ask her sister-in-law
in what more she could be useful.
"what I should like good," say Rebecca, "would be to go to the nursery
and see your dear little child." on which the two lady look very
kindly at each other and go to that apartment hand in hand.
Becky admire little Matilda, who be not quite four year old, as the
most charming little love in the world; and the boy, a little fellow of
two year--pale, heavy-eye, and large-headed--she pronounce to be a
perfect prodigy in point of size, intelligence, and beauty.
"I wish Mamma would not insist on give he so much medicine," Lady
Jane say with a sigh. "I often think we should all be well without
it." and then Lady Jane and her new-find friend have one of those
confidential medical conversation about the child, which all
mother, and most woman, as I be give to understand, delight in. fifty
year ago, and when the present writer, be an interesting little
boy, be order out of the room with the lady after dinner, I
remember quite well that their talk be chiefly about their ailment;
and put this question directly to two or three since, I have always
get from they the acknowledgement that time be not change. let my
fair reader remark for themselves this very evening when they quit the
dessert-table and assemble to celebrate the drawing-room mystery.
well--in half an hour Becky and Lady Jane be close and intimate
friend--and in the course of the evening her ladyship inform Sir
Pitt that she think her new sister-in-law be a kind, frank,
unaffected, and affectionate young woman.
and so have easily win the daughter's good-will, the indefatigable
little woman bend herself to conciliate the august Lady Southdown. as
soon as she find her ladyship alone, Rebecca attack she on the
nursery question at once and say that her own little boy be save,
actually save, by calomel, freely administer, when all the
physician in Paris have give the dear child up. and then she
mention how often she have hear of Lady Southdown from that excellent
man the Reverend Lawrence Grills, Minister of the chapel in May Fair,
which she frequent; and how her view be very much change by
circumstance and misfortune; and how she hop that a past life spend
in worldliness and error might not incapacitate she from more serious
thought for the future. she describe how in former day she have be
indebted to Mr. Crawley for religious instruction, touch upon the
Washerwoman of Finchley Common, which she have read with the great
profit, and ask about Lady Emily, its gifted author, now Lady Emily
Hornblower, at Cape Town, where her husband have strong hope of
become Bishop of Caffraria.
but she crown all, and confirm herself in Lady Southdown's favour,
by feel very much agitated and unwell after the funeral and
request her ladyship's medical advice, which the Dowager not only
give, but, wrap up in a bed-gown and look more like Lady Macbeth
than ever, come privately in the night to Becky's room with a parcel of
favourite tract, and a medicine of her own composition, which she
insist that Mrs. Rawdon should take.
Becky first accept the tract and begin to examine they with great
interest, engage the Dowager in a conversation concern they and
the welfare of her soul, by which mean she hop that her body might
escape medication. but after the religious topic be exhaust, Lady
Macbeth would not quit Becky's chamber until her cup of night-drink be
empty too; and poor Mrs. Rawdon be compel actually to assume a
look of gratitude, and to swallow the medicine under the unyielding old
Dowager's nose, who leave her victim finally with a benediction.
it do not much comfort Mrs. Rawdon; her countenance be very queer
when Rawdon come in and hear what have happen; and his explosion
of laughter be as loud as usual, when Becky, with a fun which she
could not disguise, even though it be at her own expense, describe
the occurrence and how she have be victimize by Lady Southdown. Lord
Steyne, and her son in London, have many a laugh over the story when
Rawdon and his wife return to their quarter in May Fair. Becky
act the whole scene for they. she put on a night-cap and gown. she
preach a great sermon in the true serious manner; she lecture on the
virtue of the medicine which she pretend to administer, with a
gravity of imitation so perfect that you would have think it be the
Countess's own roman nose through which she snuffle. "give we Lady
Southdown and the black dose," be a constant cry amongst the folk in
Becky's little drawing-room in May Fair. and for the first time in her
life the Dowager Countess of Southdown be make amusing.
Sir Pitt remember the testimony of respect and veneration which
Rebecca have pay personally to himself in early day, and be tolerably
well disposed towards she. the marriage, ill-advise as it be, have
improve Rawdon very much--that be clear from the Colonel's alter
habit and demeanour--and have it not be a lucky union as regard
Pitt himself? the cunning diplomatist smile inwardly as he own that
he owe his fortune to it, and acknowledge that he at least ought not
to cry out against it. his satisfaction be not remove by Rebecca's
own statement, behaviour, and conversation.
she double the deference which before have charm he, call out his
conversational power in such a manner as quite to surprise Pitt
himself, who, always inclined to respect his own talent, admire they
the more when Rebecca point they out to he. with her sister-in-law,
Rebecca be satisfactorily able to prove that it be Mrs. Bute Crawley
who bring about the marriage which she afterwards so calumniate;
that it be Mrs. Bute's avarice--who hop to gain all Miss Crawley's
fortune and deprive Rawdon of his aunt's favour--which cause and
invent all the wicked report against Rebecca. "she succeed in
make we poor," Rebecca say with an air of angelical patience; "but
how can I be angry with a woman who have give I one of the good
husband in the world? and have not her own avarice be sufficiently
punish by the ruin of her own hope and the loss of the property by
which she set so much store? poor!" she cry. "Dear Lady Jane, what
care we for poverty? I be use to it from childhood, and I be often
thankful that Miss Crawley's money have go to restore the splendour of
the noble old family of which I be so proud to be a member. I be sure
Sir Pitt will make a much well use of it than Rawdon would."
all these speech be report to Sir Pitt by the most faithful of
wife, and increase the favourable impression which Rebecca make; so
much so that when, on the third day after the funeral, the family party
be at dinner, Sir Pitt Crawley, carve fowl at the head of the
table, actually say to Mrs. Rawdon, "Ahem! rebecca, may I give you a
wing?"--a speech which make the little woman's eye sparkle with
pleasure.
while Rebecca be prosecute the above scheme and hope, and pitt
Crawley arrange the funeral ceremonial and other matter connect
with his future progress and dignity, and Lady Jane busy with her
nursery, as far as her mother would let she, and the sun rise and
setting, and the clock-tower bell of the Hall ring to dinner and to
prayer as usual, the body of the late owner of Queen's Crawley lie in
the apartment which he have occupy, watch unceasingly by the
professional attendant who be engage for that rite. a woman or
two, and three or four undertaker's man, the good whom Southampton
could furnish, dress in black, and of a proper stealthy and tragical
demeanour, have charge of the remain which they watch turn about,
have the housekeeper's room for their place of rendezvous when off
duty, where they play at card in privacy and drank their beer.
the member of the family and servant of the house keep away from the
gloomy spot, where the bone of the descendant of an ancient line of
knight and gentleman lay, await their final consignment to the
family crypt. no regret attend they, save those of the poor woman
who have hop to be Sir Pitt's wife and widow and who have flee in
disgrace from the Hall over which she have so nearly be a ruler.
beyond she and a favourite old pointer he have, and between whom and
himself an attachment subsist during the period of his imbecility,
the old man have not a single friend to mourn he, have indeed, during
the whole course of his life, never take the least pain to secure
one. could the good and kind of we who depart from the earth have
an opportunity of revisit it, I suppose he or she (assume that any
Vanity Fair feeling subsist in the sphere whither we be bind) would
have a pang of mortification at find how soon our survivor be
console. and so Sir Pitt be forget--like the kind and good of
we--only a few week soon.
those who will may follow his remain to the grave, whither they be
bear on the appoint day, in the most becoming manner, the family in
black coach, with their handkerchief up to their nose, ready for
the tear which do not come; the undertaker and his gentleman in deep
tribulation; the select tenantry mourn out of compliment to the new
landlord; the neighbouring gentry's carriage at three mile an hour,
empty, and in profound affliction; the parson speak out the formula
about "our dear brother depart." as long as we have a man's body, we
play our vanity upon it, surround it with humbug and ceremony,
lay it in state, and pack it up in gilt nail and velvet; and we
finish our duty by place over it a stone, write all over with lie.
Bute's curate, a smart young fellow from Oxford, and Sir Pitt Crawley
compose between they an appropriate latin epitaph for the late
lamented Baronet, and the former preach a classical sermon, exhort
the survivor not to give way to grief and inform they in the most
respectful term that they also would be one day call upon to pass
that gloomy and mysterious portal which have just close upon the
remain of their lamented brother. then the tenantry mount on
horseback again, or stay and refresh themselves at the Crawley
arm. then, after a lunch in the servant' hall at Queen's Crawley,
the gentry's carriage wheel off to their different destination:
then the undertaker's man, take the rope, pall, velvet, ostrich
feather, and other mortuary property, clamber up on the roof of
the hearse and ride off to Southampton. their face relapse into a
natural expression as the horse, clear the lodge-gate, get into a
brisker trot on the open road; and squad of they might have be see,
speckle with black the public-house entrance, with pewter-pot
flash in the sunshine. Sir Pitt's invalid chair be wheel away
into a tool-house in the garden; the old pointer use to howl sometimes
at first, but these be the only accent of grief which be hear in
the Hall of which Sir Pitt Crawley, Baronet, have be master for some
threescore year.
as the bird be pretty plentiful, and partridge shooting be as it
be the duty of an english gentleman of statesmanlike propensity,
Sir Pitt Crawley, the first shock of grief over, go out a little and
partook of that diversion in a white hat with crape round it. the sight
of those field of stubble and turnip, now his own, give he many
secret joy. sometimes, and with an exquisite humility, he take no
gun, but go out with a peaceful bamboo cane; Rawdon, his big brother,
and the keeper blaze away at his side. Pitt's money and acre have a
great effect upon his brother. the penniless Colonel become quite
obsequious and respectful to the head of his house, and despise the
milksop Pitt no long. Rawdon listen with sympathy to his senior's
prospect of planting and draining, give his advice about the stable
and cattle, ride over to Mudbury to look at a mare, which he think
would carry Lady Jane, and offer to break she, &c.: the rebellious
dragoon be quite humble and subdue, and become a most creditable
young brother. he have constant bulletin from Miss Briggs in London
respect little Rawdon, who be leave behind there, who send message
of his own. "I be very well," he write. "I hope you be very well. I
hope Mamma be very well. the pony be very well. Grey take I to ride
in the park. I can canter. I meet the little boy who ride before. he
cry when he canter. I do not cry." Rawdon read these letter to
his brother and Lady Jane, who be delighted with they. the Baronet
promise to take charge of the lad at school, and his kind-hearte wife
give Rebecca a bank-note, beg she to buy a present with it for her
little nephew.
one day follow another, and the lady of the house pass their life
in those calm pursuit and amusement which satisfy country lady.
bell ring to meal and to prayer. the young lady take exercise on
the pianoforte every morning after breakfast, rebecca give they the
benefit of her instruction. then they put on thick shoe and walk in
the park or shrubbery, or beyond the paling into the village,
descend upon the cottage, with Lady Southdown's medicine and tract
for the sick people there. Lady Southdown drive out in a pony-chaise,
when Rebecca would take her place by the Dowager's side and listen to
her solemn talk with the utmost interest. she sing Handel and Haydn to
the family of evening, and engage in a large piece of worsted work,
as if she have be bear to the business and as if this kind of life be
to continue with she until she should sink to the grave in a polite old
age, leave regret and a great quantity of consol behind she--as if
there be not care and dun, scheme, shift, and poverty waiting
outside the park gate, to pounce upon she when she issue into the
world again.
"it benot difficult to be a country gentleman's wife," rebecca think.
"I think I could be a good woman if I have five thousand a year. I
could dawdle about in the nursery and count the apricot on the wall.
I could water plant in a green-house and pick off dead leaf from the
geranium. I could ask old woman about their rheumatism and order
half-a-crown's worth of soup for the poor. I shouldnot miss it much,
out of five thousand a year. I could even drive out ten mile to dine
at a neighbour's, and dress in the fashion of the year before last. I
could go to church and keep awake in the great family pew, or go to
sleep behind the curtain, with my veil down, if I only have practice.
I could pay everybody, if I have but the money. this be what the
conjuror here pride themselves upon do. they look down with pity
upon we miserable sinner who have none. they think themselves
generous if they give our child a five-pound note, and we
contemptible if we be without one." and who know but Rebecca be
right in her speculation--and that it be only a question of money and
fortune which make the difference between she and an honest woman? if
you take temptation into account, who be to say that he be well than
his neighbour? a comfortable career of prosperity, if it do not make
people honest, at least keep they so. an alderman come from a
turtle feast will not step out of his carnage to steal a leg of mutton;
but put he to starve, and see if he will not purloin a loaf. Becky
console herself by so balance the chance and equalize the
distribution of good and evil in the world.
the old haunt, the old field and wood, the copse, pond, and
garden, the room of the old house where she have spend a couple of
year seven year ago, be all carefully revisit by she. she have
be young there, or comparatively so, for she forget the time when she
ever be young--but she remember her thought and feeling seven
year back and contrast they with those which she have at present, now
that she have see the world, and live with great people, and raise
herself far beyond her original humble station.
"I have pass beyond it, because I have brain," Becky think, "and
almost all the rest of the world be fool. I could not go back and
consort with those people now, whom I use to meet in my father's
studio. lord come up to my door with star and garter, instead of
poor artist with screw of tobacco in their pocket. I have a
gentleman for my husband, and an Earl's daughter for my sister, in the
very house where I be little well than a servant a few year ago.
but be I much well to do now in the world than I be when I be the
poor painter's daughter and wheedle the grocer round the corner for
sugar and tea? suppose I have marry Francis who be so fond of I--I
couldnot have be much poor than I be now. Heigho! I wish I could
exchange my position in society, and all my relation for a snug sum in
the three per Cent. consol"; for so it be that Becky feel the Vanity
of human affair, and it be in those security that she would have
like to cast anchor.
it may, perhaps, have strike she that to have be honest and humble,
to have do her duty, and to have march straightforward on her way,
would have bring she as near happiness as that path by which she be
strive to attain it. but--just as the child at Queen's Crawley
go round the room where the body of their father lay--if ever Becky
have these thought, she be accustom to walk round they and not look
in. she elude they and despise they--or at least she be commit
to the other path from which retreat be now impossible. and for my
part I believe that remorse be the least active of all a man's moral
sens--the very easy to be deaden when waken, and in some never
waken at all. we grieve at be find out and at the idea of shame
or punishment, but the mere sense of wrong make very few people
unhappy in Vanity Fair.
so Rebecca, during her stay at Queen's Crawley, make as many friend of
the Mammon of Unrighteousness as she could possibly bring under
control. Lady Jane and her husband bid her farewell with the warm
demonstration of good-will. they look forward with pleasure to the
time when, the family house in Gaunt Street be repair and
beautify, they be to meet again in London. Lady Southdown make she
up a packet of medicine and send a letter by she to the Rev. Lawrence
Grills, exhort that gentleman to save the brand who "honour" the
letter from the burning. Pitt accompany they with four horse in the
carriage to Mudbury, have send on their baggage in a cart previously,
accompany with load of game.
"how happy you will be to see your darling little boy again!" Lady
Crawley say, take leave of her kinswoman.
"oh so happy!" say Rebecca, throw up the green eye. she be
immensely happy to be free of the place, and yet loath to go. Queen's
Crawley be abominably stupid, and yet the air there be somehow purer
than that which she have be accustom to breathe. everybody have be
dull, but have be kind in their way. "it be all the influence of a
long course of three per cent," Becky say to herself, and be right
very likely.
however, the London lamp flash joyfully as the stage roll into
Piccadilly, and Briggs have make a beautiful fire in Curzon Street, and
little Rawdon be up to welcome back his papa and mamma.
CHAPTER XLII
which Treats of the Osborne Family
considerable time have elapse since we have see our respectable
friend, old Mr. Osborne of Russell Square. he have not be the
happy of mortal since last we meet he. event have occur which
have not improve his temper, and in more in stance than one he have
not be allow to have his own way. to be thwart in this
reasonable desire be always very injurious to the old gentleman; and
resistance become doubly exasperating when gout, age, loneliness, and
the force of many disappointment combine to weigh he down. his
stiff black hair begin to grow quite white soon after his son's death;
his-face grow redder; his hand tremble more and more as he pour out
his glass of port wine. he lead his clerk a dire life in the City:
his family at home be not much happy. I doubt if Rebecca, whom we
have see piously pray for Consols, would have exchange her poverty
and the dare-devil excitement and chance of her life for Osborne's
money and the humdrum gloom which envelop he. he have propose for
Miss Swartz, but have be reject scornfully by the partisan of that
lady, who marry she to a young sprig of Scotch nobility. he be a
man to have marry a woman out of low life and bully she dreadfully
afterwards; but no person present herself suitable to his taste, and,
instead, he tyrannize over his unmarried daughter, at home. she have a
fine carriage and fine horse and sit at the head of a table load
with the grand plate. she have a cheque-book, a prize footman to
follow she when she walk, unlimited credit, and bow and compliment
from all the tradesman, and all the appurtenance of an heiress; but
she spend a woeful time. the little charity-girl at the Foundling, the
sweeperess at the crossing, the poor under-kitchen-maid in the
servant' hall, be happy compare to that unfortunate and now
middle-aged young lady.
Frederick Bullock, Esq., of the house of Bullock, Hulker, and Bullock,
have marry Maria Osborne, not without a great deal of difficulty and
grumble on Mr. Bullock's part. George be dead and cut out of his
father's will, Frederick insist that the half of the old gentleman's
property should be settle upon his Maria, and indeed, for a long time,
refuse, "to come to the scratch" (it be Mr. Frederick's own
expression) on any other term. Osborne say Fred have agree to take
his daughter with twenty thousand, and he should bind himself to no
more. "Fred might take it, and welcome, or leave it, and go and be
hang." Fred, whose hope have be raise when George have be
disinherit, think himself infamously swindle by the old merchant,
and for some time make as if he would break off the match altogether.
Osborne withdraw his account from Bullock and Hulker's, go on 'Change
with a horsewhip which he swear he would lay across the back of a
certain scoundrel that should be nameless, and demean himself in his
usual violent manner. Jane Osborne condole with her sister Maria
during this family feud. "I always tell you, Maria, that it be your
money he love and not you," she say, soothingly.
"he select I and my money at any rate; he donot choose you and
your," reply Maria, toss up her head.
the rapture be, however, only temporary. Fred's father and senior
partner counsel he to take Maria, even with the twenty thousand
settle, half down, and half at the death of Mr. Osborne, with the
chance of the further division of the property. so he "knuckle
down," again to use his own phrase, and send old Hulker with peaceable
overture to Osborne. it be his father, he say, who would not hear
of the match, and have make the difficulty; he be most anxious to
keep the engagement. the excuse be sulkily accept by Mr. Osborne.
Hulker and Bullock be a high family of the City aristocracy, and
connect with the "nob" at the West End. it be something for the old
man to be able to say, "my son, sir, of the house of Hulker, Bullock,
and Co., sir; my daughter's cousin, Lady Mary Mango, sir, daughter of
the Right Hon. the Earl of Castlemouldy." in his imagination he see
his house people by the "nob." so he forgive young Bullock and
consent that the marriage should take place.
it be a grand affair--the bridegroom's relative give the breakfast,
their habitation be near St. George's, Hanover Square, where the
business take place. the "nob of the West End" be invite, and many
of they sign the book. Mr. Mango and Lady Mary Mango be there,
with the dear young Gwendoline and Guinever Mango as bridesmaid;
Colonel Bludyer of the Dragoon Guards (eld son of the house of
Bludyer Brothers, Mincing Lane), another cousin of the bridegroom, and
the Honourable Mrs. Bludyer; the honourable George Boulter, Lord
Levant's son, and his lady, Miss Mango that be; Lord Viscount
Castletoddy; Honourable James McMull and Mrs. McMull (formerly Miss
Swartz); and a host of fashionable, who have all marry into Lombard
Street and do a great deal to ennoble Cornhill.
the young couple have a house near Berkeley Square and a small villa at
Roehampton, among the banking colony there. Fred be consider to
have make rather a mesalliance by the lady of his family, whose
grandfather have be in a Charity School, and who be ally through
the husband with some of the good blood in England. and Maria be
bind, by superior pride and great care in the composition of she
visit-book, to make up for the defect of birth, and feel it her
duty to see her father and sister as little as possible.
that she should utterly break with the old man, who have still so many
score of thousand pound to give away, be absurd to suppose. Fred
Bullock would never allow she to do that. but she be still young and
incapable of hide her feeling; and by invite her papa and sister
to her third-rate party, and behave very coldly to they when they
come, and by avoid Russell Square, and indiscreetly beg her
father to quit that odious vulgar place, she do more harm than all
Frederick's diplomacy could repair, and perille her chance of her
inheritance like a giddy heedless creature as she be.
"so Russell Square be not good enough for Mrs. Maria, hay?" say the
old gentleman, rattle up the carriage window as he and his daughter
drive away one night from Mrs. Frederick Bullock's, after dinner. "so
she invite her father and sister to a second day's dinner (if those
side, or ontry, as she call them, benot serve yesterday, Ibe
d--d), and to meet City folk and littery man, and keep the Earls and
the Ladies, and the Honourables to herself. honourable? Damn
Honourables. I be a plain british merchant I be, and could buy the
beggarly hound over and over. lord, indeed!--why, at one of her
swarrey I see one of them speak to a dam fiddler--a fellar I despise.
and they willnot come to Russell Square, willnot they? why, Iwill lay my
life Ihave get a well glass of wine, and pay a well figure for it,
and can show a handsomer service of silver, and can lay a well dinner
on my mahogany, than ever they see on theirs--the cringing, sneaking,
stuck-up fool. drive on quick, James: I want to get back to Russell
Square--ha, ha!" and he sink back into the corner with a furious laugh.
with such reflection on his own superior merit, it be the custom of
the old gentleman not unfrequently to console himself.
Jane Osborne could not but concur in these opinion respect her
sister's conduct; and when Mrs. Frederick's first-bear, Frederick
Augustus Howard Stanley Devereux Bullock, be bear, old Osborne, who
be invite to the christening and to be godfather, content himself
with send the child a gold cup, with twenty guineas inside it for
the nurse. "thatbe more than any of your Lords will give, I'LL
warrant," he say and refuse to attend at the ceremony.
the splendour of the gift, however, cause great satisfaction to the
house of Bullock. Maria think that her father be very much pleased
with she, and Frederick augur the good for his little son and heir.
one can fancy the pang with which Miss Osborne in her solitude in
Russell Square read the Morning Post, where her sister's name occur
every now and then, in the article head "Fashionable Reunions," and
where she have an opportunity of read a description of Mrs. F.
Bullock's costume, when present at the drawing room by Lady Frederica
Bullock. Jane's own life, as we have say, admit of no such
grandeur. it be an awful existence. she have to get up of black
winter's morning to make breakfast for her scowl old father, who
would have turn the whole house out of door if his tea have not be
ready at half-past eight. she remain silent opposite to he,
listen to the urn hiss, and sit in tremor while the parent
read his paper and consume his accustomed portion of muffin and tea.
at half-past nine he rise and go to the City, and she be almost free
till dinner-time, to make visitation in the kitchen and to scold the
servant; to drive abroad and descend upon the tradesman, who be
prodigiously respectful; to leave her card and her papabe at the great
glum respectable house of their City friend; or to sit alone in the
large drawing-room, expect visitor; and work at a huge piece of
worst by the fire, on the sofa, hard by the great Iphigenia clock,
which tick and toll with mournful loudness in the dreary room. the
great glass over the mantelpiece, face by the other great console
glass at the opposite end of the room, increase and multiply between
they the brown Holland bag in which the chandelier hung, until you see
these brown Holland bag fade away in endless perspective, and this
apartment of Miss Osborne's seem the centre of a system of
drawing-room. when she remove the cordovan leather from the grand
piano and venture to play a few note on it, it sound with a
mournful sadness, startle the dismal echo of the house. George's
picture be go, and lay upstairs in a lumber-room in the garret; and
though there be a consciousness of he, and father and daughter often
instinctively know that they be think of he, no mention be ever
make of the brave and once darling son.
at five o'clock Mr. Osborne come back to his dinner, which he and his
daughter take in silence (seldom break, except when he swear and be
savage, if the cooking be not to his liking), or which they share
twice in a month with a party of dismal friend of Osborne's rank and
age. old Dr. Gulp and his lady from Bloomsbury Square; old Mr.
Frowser, the attorney, from Bedford Row, a very great man, and from his
business, hand-in-glove with the "nob at the West End"; old Colonel
Livermore, of the Bombay Army, and Mrs. Livermore, from Upper Bedford
Place; old Sergeant Toffy and Mrs. Toffy; and sometimes old Sir Thomas
Coffin and Lady Coffin, from Bedford Square. Sir Thomas be celebrate
as a hang judge, and the particular tawny port be produce when he
din with Mr. Osborne.
these people and their like give the pompous Russell Square merchant
pompous dinner back again. they have solemn rubber of whist, when
they go upstairs after drinking, and their carriage be call at
half past ten. many rich people, whom we poor devil be in the habit
of envy, lead contentedly an existence like that above describe.
Jane Osborne scarcely ever meet a man under sixty, and almost the only
bachelor who appear in their society be Mr. Smirk, the celebrated
lady' doctor.
I cannot say that nothing have occur to disturb the monotony of this
awful existence: the fact be, there have be a secret in poor Jane's
life which have make her father more savage and morose than even nature,
pride, and over-feeding have make he. this secret be connect with
Miss Wirt, who have a cousin an artist, Mr. Smee, very celebrated since
as a portrait-painter and R.A., but who once be glad enough to give
draw lesson to lady of fashion. Mr. Smee have forget where
Russell Square be now, but he be glad enough to visit it in the year
1818, when Miss Osborne have instruction from he.
Smee (formerly a pupil of Sharpe of Frith Street, a dissolute,
irregular, and unsuccessful man, but a man with great knowledge of his
art) be the cousin of Miss Wirt, we say, and introduce by she to
Miss Osborne, whose hand and heart be still free after various
incomplete love affair, feel a great attachment for this lady, and it
be believe inspire one in her bosom. Miss Wirt be the confidante of
this intrigue. I know not whether she use to leave the room where the
master and his pupil be paint, in order to give they an
opportunity for exchange those vow and sentiment which cannot be
utter advantageously in the presence of a third party; I know not
whether she hop that should her cousin succeed in carry off the
rich merchant's daughter, he would give Miss Wirt a portion of the
wealth which she have enable he to win--all that be certain be that
Mr. Osborne get some hint of the transaction, come back from the City
abruptly, and enter the drawing-room with his bamboo cane; find the
painter, the pupil, and the companion all look exceedingly pale
there; turn the former out of door with menace that he would break
every bone in his skin, and half an hour afterwards dismiss Miss Wirt
likewise, kick her trunk down the stair, trample on her
bandbox, and shake his fist at her hackney coach as it bear she
away.
Jane Osborne keep her bedroom for many day. she be not allow to
have a companion afterwards. her father swear to she that she should
not have a shilling of his money if she make any match without his
concurrence; and as he want a woman to keep his house, he do not
choose that she should marry, so that she be oblige to give up all
project with which Cupid have any share. during her papa's life, then,
she resign herself to the manner of existence here describe, and be
content to be an old maid. her sister, meanwhile, be have child
with fine name every year and the intercourse between the two grow
fainter continually. "Jane and I do not move in the same sphere of
life," Mrs. Bullock say. "I regard she as a sister, of course"--which
mean--what do it mean when a lady say that she regard Jane as a
sister?
it have be describe how the Misses Dobbin live with their father at
a fine villa at Denmark Hill, where there be beautiful graperie and
peach-tree which delight little Georgy Osborne. the Misses Dobbin,
who drive often to Brompton to see our dear Amelia, come sometimes to
Russell Square too, to pay a visit to their old acquaintance Miss
Osborne. I believe it be in consequence of the command of their
brother the Major in India (for whom their papa have a prodigious
respect), that they pay attention to Mrs. George; for the Major, the
godfather and guardian of Amelia's little boy, still hop that the
child's grandfather might be induce to relent towards he and
acknowledge he for the sake of his son. the Misses Dobbin keep Miss
Osborne acquaint with the state of Amelia's affair; how she be
live with her father and mother; how poor they be; how they
wonder what man, and such man as their brother and dear Captain
Osborne, could find in such an insignificant little chit; how she be
still, as heretofore, a namby-pamby milk-and-water affected
creature--but how the boy be really the noble little boy ever
see--for the heart of all woman warm towards young child, and the
sour spinster be kind to they.
one day, after great entreaty on the part of the Misses Dobbin,
Amelia allow little George to go and pass a day with they at Denmark
Hill--a part of which day she spend herself in writing to the Major in
India. she congratulate he on the happy news which his sister have
just convey to she. she pray for his prosperity and that of the
bride he have choose. she thank he for a thousand thousand kind
office and proof of stead fast friendship to she in her affliction.
she tell he the last news about little georgy, and how he be go to
spend that very day with his sister in the country. she underline
the letter a great deal, and she sign herself affectionately his
friend, Amelia Osborne. she forget to send any message of kindness to
Lady O'Dowd, as she willnot be--and do not mention Glorvina by name, and
only in italic, as the Major's BRIDE, for whom she beg blessing.
but the news of the marriage remove the reserve which she have keep up
towards he. she be glad to be able to own and feel how warmly and
gratefully she regard he--and as for the idea of be jealous of
Glorvina (Glorvina, indeed!), Amelia would have scout it, if an angel
from heaven have hint it to she. that night, when georgy come back in
the pony-carriage in which he rejoice, and in which he be drive by
Sir Wm. Dobbin's old coachman, he have round his neck a fine gold chain
and watch. he say an old lady, not pretty, have give it he, who
cry and kiss he a great deal. but he donot like she. he like
grape very much. and he only like his mamma. Amelia shrink and
start; the timid soul feel a presentiment of terror when she hear
that the relation of the child's father have see he.
Miss Osborne come back to give her father his dinner. he have make a
good speculation in the City, and be rather in a good humour that day,
and chance to remark the agitation under which she labour. "whatbe
the matter, Miss Osborne?" he deign to say.
the woman burst into tear. "oh, sir," she say, "Ihave see little
George. he be as beautiful as an angel--and so like he!" the old man
opposite to she do not say a word, but flush up and begin to tremble
in every limb.
CHAPTER XLIII
in which the reader have to double the cape
the astonished reader must be call upon to transport himself ten
thousand mile to the military station of Bundlegunge, in the Madras
division of our indian empire, where our gallant old friend of the
--th regiment be quarter under the command of the brave Colonel, Sir
Michael O'Dowd. time have deal kindly with that stout officer, as it
do ordinarily with man who have good stomach and good temper and
be not perplex over much by fatigue of the brain. the Colonel play
a good knife and fork at tiffin and resume those weapon with great
success at dinner. he smoke his hookah after both meal and puff as
quietly while his wife scold he as he do under the fire of the
French at Waterloo. age and heat have not diminish the activity or
the eloquence of the descendant of the Malonys and the Molloys. her
Ladyship, our old acquaintance, be as much at home at Madras as at
Brussels in the cantonment as under the tent. on the march you see
she at the head of the regiment seat on a royal elephant, a noble
sight. mount on that beast, she have be into action with tiger in
the jungle, she have be receive by native prince, who have welcome
she and Glorvina into the recess of their zenana and offer she
shawl and jewel which it go to her heart to refuse. the sentry
of all arm salute she wherever she make her appearance, and she
touch her hat gravely to their salutation. Lady O'Dowd be one of the
great lady in the Presidency of Madras--her quarrel with Lady
Smith, wife of Sir Minos Smith the puisne judge, be still remember by
some at Madras, when the Colonel's lady snap her finger in the
Judge's lady's face and say SHE'D never walk behind ever a beggarly
civilian. even now, though it be five-and-twenty year ago, people
remember Lady O'Dowd perform a jig at Government House, where she
dance down two Aides-de-Camp, a Major of Madras cavalry, and two
gentleman of the Civil Service; and, persuade by Major Dobbin, C.B.,
second in command of the --th, to retire to the supper-room, lassata
nondum satiata recessit.
Peggy O'Dowd be indeed the same as ever, kind in act and think;
impetuous in temper; eager to command; a tyrant over her Michael; a
dragon amongst all the lady of the regiment; a mother to all the
young man, whom she tend in their sickness, defend in all their
scrape, and with whom Lady Peggy be immensely popular. but the
Subalterns' and Captains' lady (the Major be unmarried) cabal against
she a good deal. they say that Glorvina give herself air and that
Peggy herself be ill tolerably domineering. she interfere with a
little congregation which Mrs. Kirk have get up and laugh the young
man away from her sermon, state that a soldier's wife have no
business to be a parson--that Mrs. Kirk would be much well mend
her husband's clothe; and, if the regiment want sermon, that she
have the fine in the world, those of her uncle, the Dean. she abruptly
put a termination to a flirtation which Lieutenant Stubble of the
regiment have commence with the Surgeon's wife, threaten to come
down upon Stubble for the money which he have borrow from she (for the
young fellow be still of an extravagant turn) unless he break off at
once and go to the Cape on sick leave. on the other hand, she house
and shelter Mrs. Posky, who flee from her bungalow one night, pursue
by her infuriate husband, wield his second brandy bottle, and
actually carry Posky through the delirium tremen and break he of
the habit of drinking, which have grow upon that officer, as all evil
habit will grow upon man. in a word, in adversity she be the good of
comforter, in good fortune the most troublesome of friend, have a
perfectly good opinion of herself always and an indomitable resolution
to have her own way.
among other point, she have make up her mind that Glorvina should marry
our old friend Dobbin. Mrs. O'Dowd know the Major's expectation and
appreciate his good quality and the high character which he enjoy
in his profession. Glorvina, a very handsome, fresh-colour,
black-haired, blue-eyed young lady, who could ride a horse, or play a
sonata with any girl out of the County Cork, seem to be the very
person destine to insure Dobbin's happiness--much more than that poor
good little weak-spur'ted Amelia, about whom he use to take on
so.--"Look at Glorvina enter a room," Mrs. O'Dowd would say, "and
compare she with that poor Mrs. Osborne, who couldnot say boo to a
goose. shewould be worthy of you, Major--you're a quiet man yourself, and
want some one to talk for ye. and though she do not come of such
good blood as the Malonys or Molloys, let I tell ye, shebe of an
ancient family that any nobleman might be proud to marry into."
but before she have come to such a resolution and determine to
subjugate major Dobbin by her endearment, it must be own that
Glorvina have practise they a good deal elsewhere. she have have a
season in Dublin, and who know how many in Cork, Killarney, and
Mallow? she have flirt with all the marriageable officer whom the
depot of her country afford, and all the bachelor squire who seem
eligible. she have be engage to be marry a half-score time in
Ireland, besides the clergyman at Bath who use she so ill. she have
flirt all the way to Madras with the Captain and chief mate of the
Ramchunder East Indiaman, and have a season at the Presidency with her
brother and Mrs. O'Dowd, who be stay there, while the Major of the
regiment be in command at the station. everybody admire she there;
everybody dance with she; but no one propose who be worth the
marrying--one or two exceedingly young subaltern sigh after she, and
a beardless civilian or two, but she reject these as beneath her
pretension--and other and young virgin than Glorvina be marry
before she. there be woman, and handsome woman too, who have this
fortune in life. they fall in love with the utmost generosity; they
ride and walk with half the Army-list, though they draw near to forty,
and yet the Misses O'Grady be the Misses O'Grady still: Glorvina
persist that but for Lady O'Dowd's unlucky quarrel with the Judge's
lady, she would have make a good match at Madras, where old Mr.
Chutney, who be at the head of the civil service (and who afterwards
marry Miss Dolby, a young lady only thirteen year of age who have
just arrive from school in Europe), be just at the point of propose
to she.
well, although Lady O'Dowd and Glorvina quarrel a great number of
time every day, and upon almost every conceivable subject--indeed, if
Mick O'Dowd have not possess the temper of an angel two such woman
constantly about his ear would have drive he out of his sens--yet
they agree between themselves on this point, that Glorvina should
marry Major Dobbin, and be determined that the Major should have no
rest until the arrangement be bring about. undismaye by forty or
fifty previous defeat, Glorvina lay siege to he. she sing irish
melody at he unceasingly. she ask he so frequently and
pathetically, will ye come to the bower? that it be a wonder how any
man of feeling could have resist the invitation. she be never tired
of inquire, if Sorrow have his young day fade, and be ready to
listen and weep like Desdemona at the story of his danger and his
campaign. it have be say that our honest and dear old friend use
to perform on the flute in private; Glorvina insist upon have duet
with he, and Lady O'Dowd would rise and artlessly quit the room when
the young couple be so engaged. Glorvina force the Major to ride
with she of morning. the whole cantonment see they set out and
return. she be constantly write note over to he at his house,
borrow his book, and score with her great pencil-mark such
passage of sentiment or humour as awaken her sympathy. she borrow
his horse, his servant, his spoon, and palanquin--no wonder that
public rumour assign she to he, and that the Major's sister in
England should fancy they be about to have a sister-in-law.
Dobbin, who be thus vigorously besiege, be in the meanwhile in a
state of the most odious tranquillity. he use to laugh when the young
fellow of the regiment joke he about Glorvina's manifest attention
to he. "bah!" say he, "she be only keep her hand in--she
practise upon I as she do upon Mrs. Tozer's piano, because itbe the
most handy instrument in the station. I be much too battered and old
for such a fine young lady as Glorvina." and so he go on rid with
she, and copy music and verse into her album, and play at chess
with she very submissively; for it be with these simple amusement that
some officer in India be accustom to while away their leisure
moment, while other of a less domestic turn hunt hog, and shoot
snipe, or gamble and smoke cheroot, and betake themselves to
brandy-and-water. as for Sir Michael O'Dowd, though his lady and her
sister both urge he to call upon the Major to explain himself and not
keep on torture a poor innocent girl in that shameful way, the old
soldier refuse point-blank to have anything to do with the conspiracy.
"Faith, the Major's big enough to choose for himself," Sir Michael
say; "hewill ask ye when he want ye"; or else he would turn the matter
off jocularly, declare that "Dobbin be too young to keep house, and
have write home to ask lave of his mamma." Nay, he go far, and
in private communication with his Major would caution and rally he,
cry, "mind your oi, Dob, my boy, they girl be bent on mischief--I
Lady have just get a box of gown from Europe, and therebe a pink satin
for Glorvina, which will finish ye, Dob, if itbe in the power of woman
or satin to move ye."
but the truth be, neither beauty nor fashion could conquer he. our
honest friend have but one idea of a woman in his head, and that one do
not in the least resemble Miss Glorvina O'Dowd in pink satin. a gentle
little woman in black, with large eye and brown hair, seldom speak,
save when speak to, and then in a voice not the least resemble Miss
Glorvina's--a soft young mother tend an infant and beckon the
Major up with a smile to look at he--a rosy-cheeked lass come
singing into the room in Russell Square or hang on George Osborne's
arm, happy and loving--there be but this image that fill our honest
Major's mind, by day and by night, and reign over it always. very
likely Amelia be not like the portrait the Major have form of she:
there be a figure in a book of fashion which his sister have in
England, and with which William have make away privately, paste it
into the lid of his desk, and fancy he see some resemblance to Mrs.
Osborne in the print, whereas I have see it, and can vouch that it be
but the picture of a high-waiste gown with an impossible doll's face
simper over it--and, perhaps, Mr. Dobbin's sentimental Amelia be no
more like the real one than this absurd little print which he
cherish. but what man in love, of we, be well informed?--or be he
much happy when he see and own his delusion? Dobbin be under this
spell. he do not bother his friend and the public much about his
feeling, or indeed lose his natural rest or appetite on account of
they. his head have grizzle since we see he last, and a line or two
of silver may be see in the soft brown hair likewise. but his
feeling be not in the least change or oldene, and his love remain
as fresh as a man's recollection of boyhood be.
we have say how the two Misses Dobbin and Amelia, the Major's
correspondent in Europe, write he letter from England, Mrs. Osborne
congratulate he with great candour and cordiality upon his
approach nuptial with Miss O'Dowd. "your sister have just kindly
visit I," Amelia write in her letter, "and inform I of an
interesting event, upon which I beg to offer my MOST SINCERE
CONGRATULATIONS. I hope the young lady to whom I hear you be to be
UNITED will in every respect prove worthy of one who be himself all
kindness and goodness. the poor widow have only her prayer to offer
and her cordial cordial wish for your PROSPERITY! georgy send his
love to his DEAR GODPAPA and hop that you will not forget he. I tell
he that you be about to form other tie, with one who I be sure
merit all your AFFECTION, but that, although such tie must of course
be the strong and most sacred, and supersede all other, yet that I
be sure the widow and the child whom you have ever protect and love
will always have a corner in your heart" the letter, which have be
before allude to, go on in this strain, protest throughout as to
the extreme satisfaction of the writer.
this letter, which arrive by the very same ship which bring out
Lady O'Dowd's box of millinery from London (and which you may be sure
Dobbin open before any one of the other packet which the mail
bring he), put the receiver into such a state of mind that Glorvina,
and her pink satin, and everything belong to she become perfectly
odious to he. the Major curse the talk of woman, and the sex in
general. everything annoy he that day--the parade be insufferably
hot and wearisome. good heaven! be a man of intellect to waste his
life, day after day, inspect cross-belt and put fool through
their manoeuvre? the senseless chatter of the young man at mess be
more than ever jarring. what care he, a man on the high road to forty,
to know how many snipe Lieutenant Smith have shoot, or what be the
performance of Ensign Brown's mare? the joke about the table fill
he with shame. he be too old to listen to the banter of the
assistant surgeon and the slang of the youngster, at which old O'Dowd,
with his bald head and red face, laugh quite easily. the old man have
listen to those joke any time these thirty year--Dobbin himself have
be fifteen year hear they. and after the boisterous dulness of
the mess-table, the quarrel and scandal of the lady of the regiment!
it be unbearable, shameful. "O Amelia, Amelia," he think, "you to
whom I have be so faithful--you reproach I! it be because you
cannot feel for I that I drag on this wearisome life. and you reward
I after year of devotion by give I your blessing upon my marriage,
forsooth, with this flaunt irish girl!" sick and sorry feel poor
William; more than ever wretched and lonely. he would like to have
do with life and its vanity altogether--so bootless and
unsatisfactory the struggle, so cheerless and dreary the prospect
seem to he. he lie all that night sleepless, and yearn to go
home. Amelia's letter have fall as a blank upon he. no fidelity, no
constant truth and passion, could move she into warmth. she would not
see that he love she. toss in his bed, he speak out to she. "good
God, Amelia!" he say, "donot you know that I only love you in the
world--you, who be a stone to I--you, whom I tend through month
and month of illness and grief, and who bid I farewell with a smile
on your face, and forget I before the door shut between we!" the
native servant lie outside his veranda beheld with wonder the
Major, so cold and quiet ordinarily, at present so passionately move
and cast down. would she have pity he have she see he? he read
over and over all the letter which he ever have from she--letter of
business relative to the little property which he have make she believe
her husband have leave to she--brief note of invitation--every scrap of
write that she have ever send to he--how cold, how kind, how
hopeless, how selfish they be!
have there be some kind gentle soul near at hand who could read and
appreciate this silent generous heart, who know but that the reign of
Amelia might have be over, and that friend William's love might have
flow into a kind channel? but there be only Glorvina of the jetty
ringlet with whom his intercourse be familiar, and this dash young
woman be not bent upon love the Major, but rather on make the
Major admire HER--a most vain and hopeless task, too, at least
consider the mean that the poor girl possess to carry it out.
she curl her hair and show her shoulder at he, as much as to say,
do ye ever see such jet ringlet and such a complexion? she grin at
he so that he might see that every tooth in her head be sound--and he
never heed all these charm. very soon after the arrival of the box
of millinery, and perhaps indeed in honour of it, Lady O'Dowd and the
lady of the King's regiment give a ball to the Company's Regiments
and the civilian at the station. Glorvina sport the kill pink
frock, and the Major, who attend the party and walk very ruefully
up and down the room, never so much as perceive the pink garment.
Glorvina dance past he in a fury with all the young subaltern of the
station, and the Major be not in the least jealous of her performance,
or angry because Captain Bangles of the Cavalry hand she to supper.
it be not jealousy, or frock, or shoulder that could move he, and
Glorvina have nothing more.
so these two be each exemplify the Vanity of this life, and each
longing for what he or she could not get. Glorvina cry with rage at
the failure. she have set her mind on the major "more than on any of
the other," she own, sob. "hewill break my heart, he will,
Peggy," she would whimper to her sister-in-law when they be good
friend; "sure every one of I frock must be take in--itbe such a
skeleton Ibe grow." fat or thin, laugh or melancholy, on
horseback or the music-stool, it be all the same to the Major. and
the Colonel, puff his pipe and listen to these complaint, would
suggest that glory should have some black frock out in the next box
from London, and tell a mysterious story of a lady in Ireland who die
of grief for the loss of her husband before she get ere a one.
while the Major be go on in this tantalize way, not propose,
and decline to fall in love, there come another ship from Europe
bring letter on board, and amongst they some more for the heartless
man. these be home letter bear an early postmark than that of
the former packet, and as Major Dobbin recognize among his the
handwriting of his sister, who always cross and recrosse her letter
to her brother--gather together all the possible bad news which she
could collect, abuse he and read he lecture with sisterly
frankness, and always leave he miserable for the day after "dear
William" have achieve the perusal of one of her epistle--the truth
must be tell that dearest William do not hurry himself to break the
seal of Miss Dobbin's letter, but wait for a particularly favourable
day and mood for do so. a fortnight before, moreover, he have
write to scold she for tell those absurd story to Mrs. Osborne,
and have despatch a letter in reply to that lady, undeceive she with
respect to the report concern he and assure she that "he have no
sort of present intention of alter his condition."
two or three night after the arrival of the second package of letter,
the Major have pass the evening pretty cheerfully at Lady O'Dowd's
house, where Glorvina think that he listen with rather more
attention than usual to the Meeting of the Wathers, the Minsthrel Boy,
and one or two other specimen of song with which she favour he (the
truth be, he be no more listen to Glorvina than to the howling of
the jackal in the moonlight outside, and the delusion be her as
usual), and have play his game at chess with she (cribbage with the
surgeon be Lady O'Dowd's favourite evening pastime), Major Dobbin take
leave of the Colonel's family at his usual hour and retire to his own
house.
there on his table, his sister's letter lie reproach he. he take
it up, ashamed rather of his negligence regard it, and prepare
himself for a disagreeable hour's communing with that crab-handed
absent relative. . . . it may have be an hour after the Major's
departure from the Colonel's house--Sir Michael be sleep the sleep
of the just; Glorvina have arrange her black ringlet in the
innumerable little bit of paper, in which it be her habit to confine
they; Lady O'Dowd, too, have go to her bed in the nuptial chamber, on
the ground-floor, and have tuck her musquito curtain round her fair
form, when the guard at the gate of the Commanding-Officer's compound
beheld Major Dobbin, in the moonlight, rush towards the house with a
swift step and a very agitated countenance, and he pass the sentinel
and go up to the window of the Colonel's bedchamber.
"O'Dowd--Colonel!" say Dobbin and keep up a great shouting.
"Heavens, Meejor!" say Glorvina of the curl-paper, put out her
head too, from her window.
"what be it, dob, I boy?" say the Colonel, expect there be a fire
in the station, or that the route have come from headquarters.
"I--I must have leave of absence. I must go to England--on the most
urgent private affair," Dobbin say.
"good heaven, what have happen!" think Glorvina, tremble with all
the papillote.
"I want to be off--now--to-night," Dobbin continue; and the Colonel
get up, come out to parley with he.
in the postscript of Miss Dobbin's cross-letter, the Major have just
come upon a paragraph, to the follow effect:--"i drive yesterday to
see your old ACQUAINTANCE, Mrs. Osborne. the wretched place they live
at, since they be bankrupt, you know--Mr. S., to judge from a BRASS
plate on the door of his hut (it be little well) be a coal-merchant.
the little boy, your godson, be certainly a fine child, though forward,
and incline to be saucy and self-willed. but we have take notice of
he as you wish it, and have introduce he to his aunt, Miss O., who
be rather pleased with he. perhaps his grandpapa, not the bankrupt
one, who be almost dot, but Mr. Osborne, of Russell Square, may be
induce to relent towards the child of your friend, his erring and
self-WILLED son. and Amelia will not be ill-disposed to give he up.
the widow be console, and be about to marry a reverend gentleman, the
Rev. Mr. Binny, one of the curate of Brompton. a poor match. but
Mrs. O. be get old, and I see a great deal of grey in her hair--she
be in very good spirit: and your little godson overate himself at
our house. Mamma send her love with that of your affectionate, Ann
Dobbin."
CHAPTER XLIV
a round-about chapter between London and Hampshire
our old friend the Crawleys' family house, in Great Gaunt Street,
still bear over its front the hatchment which have be place there as
a token of mourning for Sir Pitt Crawley's demise, yet this heraldic
emblem be in itself a very splendid and gaudy piece of furniture, and
all the rest of the mansion become more brilliant than it have ever be
during the late baronet's reign. the black outer-coating of the brick
be remove, and they appear with a cheerful, blush face streak
with white: the old bronze lion of the knocker be gild handsomely,
the railing paint, and the dismallest house in Great Gaunt Street
become the smart in the whole quarter, before the green leaf in
Hampshire have replace those yellow one which be on the tree in
Queen's Crawley Avenue when old Sir Pitt Crawley pass under they for
the last time.
a little woman, with a carriage to correspond, be perpetually see
about this mansion; an elderly spinster, accompany by a little boy,
also might be remark come thither daily. it be Miss Briggs and
little Rawdon, whose business it be to see to the inward renovation of
Sir Pitt's house, to superintend the female band engage in stitch
the blind and hanging, to poke and rummage in the drawer and
cupboard cram with the dirty relic and congregate trumpery of a
couple of generation of Lady Crawleys, and to take inventory of the
china, the glass, and other property in the closet and store-room.
Mrs. Rawdon Crawley be general-in-chief over these arrangement, with
full order from Sir Pitt to sell, barter, confiscate, or purchase
furniture, and she enjoy herself not a little in an occupation which
give full scope to her taste and ingenuity. the renovation of the
house be determine upon when Sir Pitt come to town in November to see
his lawyer, and when he pass nearly a week in Curzon Street, under
the roof of his affectionate brother and sister.
he have put up at an hotel at first, but, Becky, as soon as she hear of
the Baronet's arrival, go off alone to greet he, and return in an
hour to Curzon Street with Sir Pitt in the carriage by her side. it
be impossible sometimes to resist this artless little creature's
hospitality, so kindly be they press, so frankly and amiably
offer. Becky seize Pitt's hand in a transport of gratitude when he
agree to come. "thank you," she say, squeeze it and look into
the Baronet's eye, who blush a good deal; "how happy this will make
Rawdon!" she bustle up to Pitt's bedroom, lead on the servant, who
be carry his trunk thither. she come in herself laugh, with a
coal-scuttle out of her own room.
a fire be blaze already in Sir Pitt's apartment (it be Miss
Briggs's room, by the way, who be send upstairs to sleep with the
maid). "I know I should bring you," she say with pleasure beam in
her glance. indeed, she be really sincerely happy at have he for a
guest.
Becky make Rawdon dine out once or twice on business, while Pitt stay
with they, and the Baronet pass the happy evening alone with she and
Briggs. she go downstairs to the kitchen and actually cook little
dish for he. "benot it a good salmi?" she say; "I make it for you.
I can make you well dish than that, and will when you come to see
I."
"everything you do, you do well," say the Baronet gallantly. "the
salmi be excellent indeed."
"a poor man's wife," Rebecca reply gaily, "must make herself useful,
you know"; on which her brother-in-law vow that "she be fit to be
the wife of an Emperor, and that to be skilful in domestic duty be
surely one of the most charming of woman's quality." and Sir Pitt
thought, with something like mortification, of Lady Jane at home, and
of a certain pie which she have insist on make, and serve to he
at dinner--a most abominable pie.
besides the salmi, which be make of Lord Steyne's pheasant from his
lordship's cottage of Stillbrook, Becky give her brother-in-law a
bottle of white wine, some that Rawdon have bring with he from
France, and have pick up for nothing, the little story-teller say;
whereas the liquor be, in truth, some White Hermitage from the Marquis
of Steyne's famous cellar, which bring fire into the Baronet's
pallid cheek and a glow into his feeble frame.
then when he have drink up the bottle of petit vin blanc, she give he
her hand, and take he up to the drawing-room, and make he snug on the
sofa by the fire, and let he talk as she listen with the tender
kindly interest, sit by he, and hem a shirt for her dear
little boy. whenever Mrs. Rawdon wish to be particularly humble and
virtuous, this little shirt use to come out of her work-box. it have
get to be too small for Rawdon long before it be finish.
well, Rebecca listen to Pitt, she talk to he, she sing to he, she
coax he, and cuddle he, so that he find himself more and more
glad every day to get back from the lawyer's at Gray's Inn, to the
blaze fire in Curzon Street--a gladness in which the man of law
likewise participate, for Pitt's harangue be of the long--and so
that when he go away he feel quite a pang at depart. how pretty
she look kiss her hand to he from the carriage and wave her
handkerchief when he have take his place in the mail! she put the
handkerchief to her eye once. he pull his sealskin cap over his, as
the coach drive away, and, sink back, he think to himself how she
respect he and how he deserve it, and how Rawdon be a foolish dull
fellow who donot half-appreciate his wife; and how mum and stupid his
own wife be compare to that brilliant little Becky. Becky have hint
every one of these thing herself, perhaps, but so delicately and
gently that you hardly know when or where. and, before they part, it
be agree that the house in London should be redecorate for the next
season, and that the brother' family should meet again in the
country at Christmas.
"I wish you could have get a little money out of he," Rawdon say to
his wife moodily when the Baronet be go. "I should like to give
something to old Raggles, hang if I shouldnot. it benot right, you
know, that the old fellow should be keep out of all his money. it may
be inconvenient, and he might let to somebody else besides we, you
know."
"tell he," say Becky, "that as soon as Sir Pitt's affair be
settle, everybody will be pay, and give he a little something on
account. herebe a cheque that Pitt leave for the boy," and she take
from her bag and give her husband a paper which his brother have hand
over to she, on behalf of the little son and heir of the young branch
of the Crawleys.
the truth be, she have try personally the ground on which her husband
express a wish that she should venture--try it ever so delicately,
and find it unsafe. even at a hint about embarrassment, Sir Pitt
Crawley be off and alarm. and he begin a long speech, explain
how straiten he himself be in money matter; how the tenant would
not pay; how his father's affair, and the expense attendant upon the
demise of the old gentleman, have involve he; how he want to pay off
incumbrance; and how the banker and agent be overdraw; and Pitt
Crawley end by make a compromise with his sister-in-law and give
she a very small sum for the benefit of her little boy.
Pitt know how poor his brother and his brother's family must be. it
could not have escape the notice of such a cool and experienced old
diplomatist that Rawdon's family have nothing to live upon, and that
house and carriage be not to be keep for nothing. he know very well
that he be the proprietor or appropriator of the money, which,
accord to all proper calculation, ought to have fall to his
young brother, and he have, we may be sure, some secret pang of
remorse within he, which warn he that he ought to perform some act
of justice, or, let we say, compensation, towards these disappoint
relation. a just, decent man, not without brain, who say his
prayer, and know his catechism, and do his duty outwardly through
life, he could not be otherwise than aware that something be due to
his brother at his hand, and that morally he be Rawdon's debtor.
but, as one read in the column of the Times newspaper every now and
then, queer announcement from the Chancellor of the Exchequer,
acknowledge the receipt of 50 pound from A. B., or 10 pound from
W. T., as conscience-money, on account of taxis due by the say A. B.
or W. T., which payment the penitent beg the Right honourable
gentleman to acknowledge through the medium of the public press--so be
the Chancellor no doubt, and the reader likewise, always perfectly sure
that the above-name A. B. and W. T. be only pay a very small
instalment of what they really owe, and that the man who send up a
twenty-pound note have very likely hundred or thousand more for which
he ought to account. such, at least, be my feeling, when I see
A. B. or W. T.'s insufficient act of repentance. and I have no doubt
that Pitt Crawley's contrition, or kindness if you will, towards his
young brother, by whom he have so much profit, be only a very small
dividend upon the capital sum in which he be indebted to Rawdon. not
everybody be willing to pay even so much. to part with money be a
sacrifice beyond almost all man endow with a sense of order. there
be scarcely any man alive who do not think himself meritorious for
give his neighbour five pound. thriftless give, not from a
beneficent pleasure in giving, but from a lazy delight in spending. he
would not deny himself one enjoyment; not his opera-stall, not his
horse, not his dinner, not even the pleasure of give Lazarus the five
pound. Thrifty, who be good, wise, just, and owe no man a penny,
turn from a beggar, haggle with a hackney-coachman, or deny a poor
relation, and I doubt which be the most selfish of the two. money have
only a different value in the eye of each.
so, in a word, Pitt Crawley think he would do something for his
brother, and then think that he would think about it some other time.
and with regard to Becky, she be not a woman who expect too much
from the generosity of her neighbour, and so be quite content with
all that Pitt Crawley have do for she. she be acknowledge by the
head of the family. if Pitt would not give she anything, he would get
something for she some day. if she get no money from her
brother-in-law, she get what be as good as money--credit. Raggles be
make rather easy in his mind by the spectacle of the union between the
brother, by a small payment on the spot, and by the promise of a much
large sum speedily to be assign to he. and Rebecca tell Miss
Briggs, whose Christmas dividend upon the little sum lend by her Becky
pay with an air of candid joy, and as if her exchequer be brim
over with gold--rebecca, we say, tell Miss Briggs, in strict confidence
that she have confer with Sir Pitt, who be famous as a financier, on
Briggs's special behalf, as to the most profitable investment of Miss
B.'s remain capital; that Sir Pitt, after much consideration, have
thought of a most safe and advantageous way in which Briggs could lay
out her money; that, be especially interested in she as an attach
friend of the late Miss Crawley, and of the whole family, and that long
before he leave town, he have recommend that she should be ready with
the money at a moment's notice, so as to purchase at the most
favourable opportunity the share which Sir Pitt have in his eye. poor
Miss Briggs be very grateful for this mark of Sir Pitt's attention--it
come so unsolicited, she say, for she never should have think of
remove the money from the fund--and the delicacy enhance the
kindness of the office; and she promise to see her man of business
immediately and be ready with her little cash at the proper hour.
and this worthy woman be so grateful for the kindness of Rebecca in
the matter, and for that of her generous benefactor, the Colonel, that
she go out and spend a great part of her half-year's dividend in the
purchase of a black velvet coat for little Rawdon, who, by the way, be
grow almost too big for black velvet now, and be of a size and age
befit he for the assumption of the virile jacket and pantaloon.
he be a fine open-faced boy, with blue eye and wave flaxen hair,
sturdy in limb, but generous and soft in heart, fondly attach
himself to all who be good to he--to the pony--to Lord Southdown,
who give he the horse (he use to blush and glow all over when he see
that kind young nobleman)--to the groom who have charge of the pony--to
Molly, the cook, who cram he with ghost story at night, and with
good thing from the dinner--to Briggs, whom he plague and laugh
at--and to his father especially, whose attachment towards the lad be
curious too to witness. here, as he grow to be about eight year old,
his attachment may be say to have end. the beautiful mother-vision
have fade away after a while. during near two year she have scarcely
speak to the child. she dislike he. he have the measle and the
hooping-cough. he bore she. one day when he be stand at the
landing-place, have creep down from the upper region, attract by
the sound of his mother's voice, who be sing to Lord Steyne, the
drawing room door opening suddenly, discover the little spy, who but
a moment before have be rapt in delight, and listen to the music.
his mother come out and strike he violently a couple of box on the
ear. he hear a laugh from the Marquis in the inner room (who be
amuse by this free and artless exhibition of Becky's temper) and flee
down below to his friend of the kitchen, burst in an agony of grief.
"it be not because it hurt I," little Rawdon gasp
out--"only--only"--sob and tear wound up the sentence in a storm. it
be the little boy's heart that be bleed. "why maynot I hear she
singing? why donot she ever sing to I--as she do to that baldheade
man with the large tooth?" he gasp out at various interval these
exclamation of rage and grief. the cook look at the housemaid, the
housemaid look knowingly at the footman--the awful kitchen inquisition
which sit in judgement in every house and know everything--sit on
Rebecca at that moment.
after this incident, the mother's dislike increase to hatred; the
consciousness that the child be in the house be a reproach and a pain
to she. his very sight annoy she. fear, doubt, and resistance
spring up, too, in the boy's own bosom. they be separate from that
day of the box on the ear.
Lord Steyne also heartily dislike the boy. when they meet by
mischance, he make sarcastic bow or remark to the child, or glare at
he with savage-look eye. Rawdon use to stare he in the face and
double his little fist in return. he know his enemy, and this
gentleman, of all who come to the house, be the one who anger he
most. one day the footman find he square his fist at Lord
Steyne's hat in the hall. the footman tell the circumstance as a good
joke to Lord Steyne's coachman; that officer impart it to Lord
Steyne's gentleman, and to the servant' hall in general. and very soon
afterwards, when Mrs. Rawdon Crawley make her appearance at Gaunt
House, the porter who unbar the gate, the servant of all uniform
in the hall, the functionary in white waistcoat, who bawl out from
land to land the name of Colonel and Mrs. Rawdon Crawley, know
about she, or fancy they do. the man who bring her refreshment and
stand behind her chair, have talk her character over with the large
gentleman in motley-colour clothe at his side. Bon Dieu! it be
awful, that servant' inquisition! you see a woman in a great party in
a splendid saloon, surround by faithful admirer, distribute
sparkle glance, dress to perfection, curl, rouge, smile and
happy--Discovery walk respectfully up to she, in the shape of a huge
powdered man with large calf and a tray of ice--with Calumny (which
be as fatal as truth) behind he, in the shape of the hulking fellow
carry the wafer-biscuit. Madam, your secret will be talk over by
those man at their club at the public-house to-night. jeame will tell
Chawles his notion about you over their pipe and pewter beer-pot.
some people ought to have mute for servant in Vanity Fair--mute who
could not write. if you be guilty, tremble. that fellow behind your
chair may be a Janissary with a bow-string in his plush breech
pocket. if you be not guilty, have a care of appearance, which be
as ruinous as guilt.
"be rebecca guilty or not?" the Vehmgericht of tho servant' hall have
pronounce against she.
and, I shame to say, she would not have get credit have they not
believe she to be guilty. it be the sight of the Marquis of Steyne's
carriage-lamp at her door, contemplate by Raggles, burn in the
blackness of midnight, "that kep he up," as he afterwards say, that
even more than Rebecca's art and coaxing.
and so--guiltless very likely--she be writhe and push onward
towards what they call "a position in society," and the servant be
point at she as lose and ruin. so you see Molly, the housemaid,
of a morning, watch a spider in the doorpost lie his thread and
laboriously crawl up it, until, tired of the sport, she raise she
broom and sweep away the thread and the artificer.
a day or two before Christmas, Becky, her husband and her son make
ready and go to pass the holiday at the seat of their ancestor at
Queen's Crawley. Becky would have like to leave the little brat
behind, and would have do so but for Lady Jane's urgent invitation
to the youngster, and the symptom of revolt and discontent which
Rawdon manifest at her neglect of her son. "hebe the fine boy in
England," the father say in a tone of reproach to she, "and you donot
seem to care for he, Becky, as much as you do for your spaniel. he
shallnot bother you much; at home he will be away from you in the
nursery, and he shall go outside on the coach with I."
"where you go yourself because you want to smoke those filthy cigar,"
reply Mrs. Rawdon.
"I remember when you like them though," answer the husband.
Becky laugh; she be almost always good-humour. "that be when I
be on my promotion, Goosey," she say. "take Rawdon outside with you
and give he a cigar too if you like."
Rawdon do not warm his little son for the winter's journey in this
way, but he and Briggs wrap up the child in shawl and comforter,
and he be hoist respectfully onto the roof of the coach in the dark
morning, under the lamp of the White Horse Cellar; and with no small
delight he watch the dawn rise and make his first journey to the
place which his father still call home. it be a journey of infinite
pleasure to the boy, to whom the incident of the road afford endless
interest, his father answer to he all question connect with it
and tell he who live in the great white house to the right, and
whom the park belong to. his mother, inside the vehicle, with she
maid and her fur, her wrapper, and her scent bottle, make such a
to-do that you would have think she never have be in a stage-coach
before--much less, that she have be turn out of this very one to
make room for a pay passenger on a certain journey perform some
half-score year ago.
it be dark again when little Rawdon be waken up to enter his
uncle's carriage at Mudbury, and he sit and look out of it wonder
as the great iron gate fly open, and at the white trunk of the lime
as they sweep by, until they stop, at length, before the light
window of the Hall, which be blaze and comfortable with Christmas
welcome. the hall-door be fling open--a big fire be burn in the
great old fire-place--a carpet be down over the chequer black
flags--"It's the old Turkey one that use to be in the lady'
Gallery," think Rebecca, and the next instant be kiss Lady Jane.
she and Sir Pitt perform the same salute with great gravity; but
Rawdon, have be smoking, hang back rather from his sister-in-law,
whose two child come up to their cousin; and, while Matilda hold out
her hand and kiss he, Pitt Binkie Southdown, the son and heir, stand
aloof rather and examine he as a little dog do a big dog.
then the kind hostess conduct her guest to the snug apartment
blaze with cheerful fire. then the young lady come and knock at
Mrs. Rawdon's door, under the pretence that they be desirous to be
useful, but in reality to have the pleasure of inspect the content
of her band and bonnet-box, and her dress which, though black, be
of the new London fashion. and they tell she how much the Hall be
change for the well, and how old Lady Southdown be go, and how
Pitt be take his station in the county, as become a Crawley in fact.
then the great dinner-bell have rung, the family assemble at dinner,
at which meal Rawdon Junior be place by his aunt, the good-natured
lady of the house, Sir Pitt be uncommonly attentive to his
sister-in-law at his own right hand.
Little Rawdon exhibit a fine appetite and show a gentlemanlike
behaviour.
"I like to dine here," he say to his aunt when he have complete his
meal, at the conclusion of which, and after a decent grace by Sir Pitt,
the young son and heir be introduce, and be perch on a high
chair by the Baronet's side, while the daughter take possession of the
place and the little wine-glass prepare for she near her mother. "I
like to dine here," say Rawdon Minor, look up at his relation's
kind face.
"why?" say the good Lady Jane.
"I dine in the kitchen when I be at home," reply Rawdon Minor, "or
else with Briggs." but Becky be so engaged with the Baronet, her host,
pour out a flood of compliment and delight and rapture, and
admire young Pitt Binkie, whom she declare to be the most beautiful,
intelligent, noble-looking little creature, and so like his father,
that she do not hear the remark of her own flesh and blood at the
other end of the broad shin table.
as a guest, and it be the first night of his arrival, Rawdon the
Second be allow to sit up until the hour when tea be over, and a
great gilt book be lay on the table before Sir Pitt, all the
domestic of the family stream in, and Sir Pitt read prayer. it be
the first time the poor little boy have ever witness or hear of such
a ceremonial.
the house have be much improve even since the Baronet's brief reign,
and be pronounce by Becky to be perfect, charming, delightful, when
she survey it in his company. as for little Rawdon, who examine it
with the child for his guide, it seem to he a perfect palace of
enchantment and wonder. there be long gallery, and ancient state
bedroom, there be picture and old China, and armour. there be
the room in which Grandpapa die, and by which the child walk
with terrified look. "who be grandpapa?" he ask; and they tell he
how he use to be very old, and use to be wheel about in a
garden-chair, and they show he the garden-chair one day rot in
the out-house in which it have lain since the old gentleman have be
wheel away yonder to the church, of which the spire be glitter
over the park elm.
the brother have good occupation for several morning in examine the
improvement which have be effect by Sir Pitt's genius and economy.
and as they walk or ride, and look at they, they could talk without
too much boring each other. and Pitt take care to tell Rawdon what a
heavy outlay of money these improvement have occasion, and that a man
of land and fund property be often very hard press for twenty
pound. "there be that new lodge-gate," say Pitt, point to it
humbly with the bamboo cane, "I can no more pay for it before the
dividend in January than I can fly."
"I can lend you, Pitt, till then," Rawdon answer rather ruefully; and
they go in and look at the restore lodge, where the family arm
be just new scrap in stone, and where old Mrs. Lock, for the first
time these many long year, have tight door, sound roof, and whole
window.
CHAPTER XLV
between Hampshire and London
Sir Pitt Crawley have do more than repair fence and restore
dilapidate lodge on the Queen's Crawley estate. like a wise man he
have set to work to rebuild the injure popularity of his house and stop
up the gap and ruin in which his name have be leave by his
disreputable and thriftless old predecessor. he be elect for the
borough speedily after his father's demise; a magistrate, a member of
parliament, a county magnate and representative of an ancient family,
he make it his duty to show himself before the Hampshire public,
subscribe handsomely to the county charity, call assiduously upon
all the county folk, and lay himself out in a word to take that
position in Hampshire, and in the Empire afterwards, to which he
think his prodigious talent justly entitle he. Lady Jane be
instruct to be friendly with the Fuddlestones, and the wapshot, and
the other famous baronet, their neighbour. their carriage might
frequently be see in the Queen's Crawley avenue now; they din pretty
frequently at the Hall (where the cookery be so good that it be clear
Lady Jane very seldom have a hand in it), and in return Pitt and his
wife most energetically din out in all sort of weather and at all
sort of distance. for though Pitt do not care for joviality, be
a frigid man of poor hearth and appetite, yet he consider that to be
hospitable and condescending be quite incumbent on-his station, and
every time that he get a headache from too long an after-dinner
sitting, he feel that he be a martyr to duty. he talk about crop,
corn-law, politic, with the good country gentleman. he (who have be
formerly inclined to be a sad free-thinker on these point) enter
into poaching and game preserve with ardour. he donot hunt; he
benot a hunt man; he be a man of book and peaceful habit; but he
think that the breed of horse must be keep up in the country, and
that the breed of fox must therefore be look to, and for his part,
if his friend, Sir Huddlestone Fuddlestone, like to draw his country
and meet as of old the F. hound use to do at Queen's Crawley, he
should be happy to see he there, and the gentleman of the Fuddlestone
hunt. and to Lady Southdown's dismay too he become more orthodox in
his tendency every day; give up preach in public and attend
meeting-house; go stoutly to church; call on the Bishop and all
the Clergy at Winchester; and make no objection when the Venerable
Archdeacon Trumper ask for a game of whist. what pang must have
be those of Lady Southdown, and what an utter castaway she must have
think her son-in-law for permit such a godless diversion! and
when, on the return of the family from an oratorio at Winchester, the
Baronet announce to the young lady that he should next year very
probably take they to the "county ball," they worship he for his
kindness. Lady Jane be only too obedient, and perhaps glad herself to
go. the Dowager write off the dire description of her daughter's
worldly behaviour to the authoress of the Washerwoman of Finchley
Common at the cape; and her house in Brighton be about this time
unoccupied, return to that watering-place, her absence be not very
much deplore by her child. we may suppose, too, that rebecca, on
pay a second visit to Queen's Crawley, do not feel particularly
grieve at the absence of the lady of the medicine chest; though she
write a Christmas letter to her ladyship, in which she respectfully
recall herself to Lady Southdown's recollection, speak with gratitude
of the delight which her ladyship's conversation have give she on the
former visit, dilate on the kindness with which her ladyship have
treat she in sickness, and declare that everything at Queen's
Crawley remind she of her absent friend.
a great part of the alter demeanour and popularity of Sir Pitt
Crawley might have be trace to the counsel of that astute little
lady of Curzon Street. "you remain a Baronet--you consent to be a mere
country gentleman," she say to he, while he have be her guest in
London. "no, Sir Pitt Crawley, I know you well. I know your talent
and your ambition. you fancy you hide they both, but you can conceal
neither from I. I show Lord Steyne your pamphlet on malt. he be
familiar with it, and say it be in the opinion of the whole Cabinet
the most masterly thing that have appear on the subject. the Ministry
have its eye upon you, and I know what you want. you want to
distinguish yourself in Parliament; every one say you be the fine
speaker in England (for your speech at Oxford be still remember).
you want to be Member for the County, where, with your own vote and
your borough at your back, you can command anything. and you want to
be Baron Crawley of Queen's Crawley, and will be before you die. I see
it all. I could read your heart, Sir Pitt. if I have a husband who
possess your intellect as he do your name, I sometimes think I
should not be unworthy of he--but--but I be your kinswoman now," she
add with a laugh. "poor little penniless, I have get a little
interest--and who know, perhaps the mouse may be able to aid the
lion." Pitt Crawley be amazed and enrapture with her speech. "how
that woman comprehend I!" he say. "I never could get Jane to read
three page of the malt pamphlet. she have no idea that I have
command talent or secret ambition. so they remember my speaking at
Oxford, do they? the rascal! now that I represent my borough and may
sit for the county, they begin to recollect I! why, Lord Steyne cut
I at the levee last year; they be begin to find out that Pitt
Crawley be some one at last. yes, the man be always the same whom
these people neglect: it be only the opportunity that be want,
and I will show they now that I can speak and act as well as write.
Achilles do not declare himself until they give he the sword. I hold
it now, and the world shall yet hear of Pitt Crawley."
therefore it be that this roguish diplomatist have grow so hospitable;
that he be so civil to oratorio and hospital; so kind to Deans and
chapter; so generous in give and accept dinner; so uncommonly
gracious to farmer on market-day; and so much interested about county
business; and that the Christmas at the Hall be the gay which have
be know there for many a long day.
on Christmas Day a great family gathering take place. all the Crawleys
from the Rectory come to dine. Rebecca be as frank and fond of Mrs.
Bute as if the other have never be her enemy; she be affectionately
interested in the dear girl, and surprise at the progress which they
have make in music since her time, and insist upon encore one of the
duet out of the great song-book which Jim, grumbling, have be force
to bring under his arm from the Rectory. Mrs. Bute, perforce, be
oblige to adopt a decent demeanour towards the little adventuress--of
course be free to discourse with her daughter afterwards about the
absurd respect with which Sir Pitt treat his sister-in-law. but Jim,
who have sit next to she at dinner, declare she be a trump, and one
and all of the Rector's family agree that the little Rawdon be a fine
boy. they respect a possible baronet in the boy, between whom and the
title there be only the little sickly pale Pitt Binkie.
the child be very good friend. Pitt Binkie be too little a dog
for such a big dog as Rawdon to play with; and Matilda be only a
girl, of course not fit companion for a young gentleman who be near
eight year old, and go into jacket very soon. he take the command
of this small party at once--the little girl and the little boy
follow he about with great reverence at such time as he
condescend to sport with they. his happiness and pleasure in the
country be extreme. the kitchen garden please he hugely, the
flower moderately, but the pigeon and the poultry, and the stable
when he be allow to visit they, be delightful object to he. he
resist be kiss by the Misses Crawley, but he allow Lady Jane
sometimes to embrace he, and it be by her side that he like to sit
when, the signal to retire to the drawing-room be give, the lady
leave the gentleman to their claret--by her side rather than by his
mother. for Rebecca, see that tenderness be the fashion, call
Rawdon to her one evening and stoop down and kiss he in the
presence of all the lady.
he look her full in the face after the operation, trembling and
turn very red, as his willnot be when move. "you never kiss I at
home, Mamma," he say, at which there be a general silence and
consternation and a by no means pleasant look in Becky's eye.
Rawdon be fond of his sister-in-law, for her regard for his son. Lady
Jane and Becky do not get on quite so well at this visit as on
occasion of the former one, when the Colonel's wife be bent upon
pleasing. those two speech of the child strike rather a chill.
perhaps Sir Pitt be rather too attentive to she.
but Rawdon, as become his age and size, be fonder of the society of
the man than of the woman, and never weary of accompany his sire
to the stable, whither the Colonel retire to smoke his cigar--Jim,
the Rector's son, sometimes join his cousin in that and other
amusement. he and the Baronet's keeper be very close friend, their
mutual taste for "dawgs" bring they much together. on one day, Mr.
James, the Colonel, and Horn, the keeper, go and shoot pheasant,
take little Rawdon with they. on another most blissful morning,
these four gentleman partook of the amusement of rat-hunting in a barn,
than which sport Rawdon as yet have never see anything more noble.
they stop up the end of certain drain in the barn, into the other
opening of which ferret be insert, and then stand silently aloof,
with uplifted stake in their hand, and an anxious little terri (Mr.
James's celebrated "dawg" Forceps, indeed) scarcely breathe from
excitement, listen motionless on three leg, to the faint squeaking
of the rat below. desperately bold at last, the persecute animal
bolt above-ground--the terri account for one, the keeper for
another; Rawdon, from flurry and excitement, miss his rat, but on the
other hand he half-murder a ferret.
but the great day of all be that on which Sir Huddlestone
Fuddlestone's hound meet upon the lawn at Queen's Crawley.
that be a famous sight for little Rawdon. at half-past ten, Tom
Moody, Sir Huddlestone Fuddlestone's huntsman, be see trot up the
avenue, follow by the noble pack of hound in a compact body--the
rear being bring up by the two whip clothe in stain scarlet
frock--light hard-feature lad on well-breed lean horse, possess
marvellous dexterity in cast the point of their long heavy whip at
the thin part of any dog's skin who dare to straggle from the main
body, or to take the slight notice, or even so much as wink, at the
hare and rabbit start under their nose.
next come boy Jack, Tom Moody's son, who weigh five stone, measure
eight-and-forty inch, and will never be any big. he be perch on
a large raw-boned hunter, half-cover by a capacious saddle. this
animal be Sir Huddlestone Fuddlestone's favourite horse the Nob. other
horse, ride by other small boy, arrive from time to time, await
their master, who will come canter on anon.
Tom Moody rid up to the door of the Hall, where he be welcome by the
butler, who offer he drink, which he decline. he and his pack then
draw off into a sheltered corner of the lawn, where the dog roll on
the grass, and play or growl angrily at one another, ever and anon
break out into furious fight speedily to be quell by Tom's voice,
unmatched at rating, or the snaky thong of the whip.
many young gentleman canter up on thoroughbred hack, spatter-dash to
the knee, and enter the house to drink cherry-brandy and pay their
respect to the lady, or, more modest and sportsmanlike, divest
themselves of their mud-boot, exchange their hack for their hunter,
and warm their blood by a preliminary gallop round the lawn. then they
collect round the pack in the corner and talk with Tom Moody of past
sport, and the merit of Sniveller and Diamond, and of the state of the
country and of the wretched breed of fox.
Sir Huddlestone presently appear mount on a clever cob and rid up
to the Hall, where he enter and do the civil thing by the lady,
after which, be a man of few word, he proceed to business. the
hound be draw up to the hall-door, and little Rawdon descend
amongst they, excited yet half-alarm by the caress which they
bestow upon he, at the thump he receive from their wave tail, and
at their canine bickering, scarcely restrain by Tom Moody's tongue
and lash.
meanwhile, Sir Huddlestone have hoist himself unwieldily on the Nob:
"letus try Sowster's Spinney, Tom," say the Baronet, "Farmer Mangle
tell I there be two fox in it." Tom blow his horn and trot off,
follow by the pack, by the whip, by the young gent from Winchester,
by the farmer of the neighbourhood, by the labourer of the parish on
foot, with whom the day be a great holiday, Sir Huddlestone bring up
the rear with Colonel Crawley, and the whole cortege disappear down
the avenue.
the Reverend Bute Crawley (who have be too modest to appear at the
public meet before his nephew's window), whom Tom Moody remember
forty year back a slender divine rid the wild horse, jump
the wide brook, and lark over the new gate in the country--his
Reverence, we say, happen to trot out from the Rectory Lane on his
powerful black horse just as Sir Huddlestone pass; he join the
worthy Baronet. hound and horseman disappear, and little Rawdon
remain on the doorstep, wonder and happy.
during the progress of this memorable holiday, little Rawdon, if he have
get no special liking for his uncle, always awful and cold and locked
up in his study, plunge in justice-business and surround by bailiff
and farmer--have gain the good grace of his married and maiden
aunt, of the two little folk of the Hall, and of Jim of the Rectory,
whom Sir Pitt be encouraging to pay his address to one of the young
lady, with an understanding doubtless that he shall be present to
the living when it shall be vacate by his fox-hunt old sire. Jim
have give up that sport himself and confine himself to a little
harmless duck- or snipe-shooting, or a little quiet trifling with the
rat during the Christmas holiday, after which he will return to the
University and try and not be pluck, once more. he have already
eschew green coat, red neckcloth, and other worldly ornament, and
be prepare himself for a change in his condition. in this cheap and
thrifty way Sir Pitt try to pay off his debt to his family.
also before this merry Christmas be over, the Baronet have screw up
courage enough to give his brother another draft on his banker, and
for no less a sum than a hundred pound, an act which cause Sir Pitt
cruel pang at first, but which make he glow afterwards to think
himself one of the most generous of man. Rawdon and his son go away
with the utmost heaviness of heart. Becky and the lady part with
some alacrity, however, and our friend return to London to commence
those avocation with which we find she occupy when this chapter
begin. under her care the Crawley House in Great Gaunt Street be
quite rejuvenescent and ready for the reception of Sir Pitt and his
family, when the Baronet come to London to attend his duty in
Parliament and to assume that position in the country for which his
vast genius fit he.
for the first session, this profound dissembler hide his project and
never open his lip but to present a petition from Mudbury. but he
attend assiduously in his place and learn thoroughly the routine
and business of the House. at home he give himself up to the perusal
of Blue Books, to the alarm and wonder of Lady Jane, who think he be
kill himself by late hour and intense application. and he make
acquaintance with the minister, and the chief of his party,
determine to rank as one of they before many year be over.
Lady Jane's sweetness and kindness have inspire Rebecca with such a
contempt for her ladyship as the little woman find no small difficulty
in conceal. that sort of goodness and simplicity which Lady Jane
possess annoy our friend Becky, and it be impossible for she at
time not to show, or to let the other divine, her scorn. her presence,
too, render Lady Jane uneasy. her husband talk constantly with
Becky. sign of intelligence seem to pass between they, and Pitt
speak with she on subject on which he never think of discourse
with Lady Jane. the latter do not understand they, to be sure, but it
be mortify to remain silent; still more mortifying to know that you
have nothing to say, and hear that little audacious Mrs. Rawdon dashing
on from subject to subject, with a word for every man, and a joke
always pat; and to sit in one's own house alone, by the fireside, and
watch all the man round your rival.
in the country, when Lady Jane be tell story to the child, who
cluster about her knee (little Rawdon into the bargain, who be very
fond of she), and Becky come into the room, sneer with green
scornful eye, poor Lady Jane grow silent under those baleful glance.
her simple little fancy shrink away tremulously, as fairy in the
story-book, before a superior bad angel. she could not go on,
although Rebecca, with the small inflection of sarcasm in her voice,
besought she to continue that charming story. and on her side gentle
thought and simple pleasure be odious to Mrs. Becky; they discord
with she; she hat people for like they; she spurn child and
child-lover. "I have no taste for bread and butter," she would
say, when caricature Lady Jane and her way to my Lord Steyne.
"no more have a certain person for holy water," his lordship reply
with a bow and a grin and a great jarring laugh afterwards.
so these two lady do not see much of each other except upon those
occasion when the young brother's wife, have an object to gain
from the other, frequent she. they my-loved and my-deare each other
assiduously, but keep apart generally, whereas Sir Pitt, in the midst
of his multiplied avocation, find daily time to see his sister-in-law.
on the occasion of his first Speaker's dinner, Sir Pitt take the
opportunity of appear before his sister-in-law in his uniform--that
old diplomatic suit which he have wear when attache to the Pumpernickel
legation.
Becky compliment he upon that dress and admire he almost as much
as his own wife and child, to whom he display himself before he
set out. she say that it be only the thoroughbred gentleman who
could wear the Court suit with advantage: it be only your man of
ancient race whom the culotte courte become. Pitt look down with
complacency at his leg, which have not, in truth, much more symmetry or
swell than the lean Court sword which dangle by his side--look down
at his leg, and think in his heart that he be kill.
when he be go, Mrs. Becky make a caricature of his figure, which she
show to Lord Steyne when he arrive. his lordship carry off the
sketch, delight with the accuracy of the resemblance. he have do
Sir Pitt Crawley the honour to meet he at Mrs. Becky's house and have
be most gracious to the new Baronet and member. Pitt be strike too
by the deference with which the great Peer treat his sister-in-law,
by her ease and sprightliness in the conversation, and by the delight
with which the other man of the party listen to her talk. Lord Steyne
make no doubt but that the Baronet have only commence his career in
public life, and expect rather anxiously to hear he as an orator; as
they be neighbour (for Great Gaunt Street lead into Gaunt Square,
whereof Gaunt House, as everybody know, form one side) my lord hop
that as soon as Lady Steyne arrive in London she would have the honour
of make the acquaintance of Lady Crawley. he leave a card upon his
neighbour in the course of a day or two, have never think fit to
notice his predecessor, though they have live near each other for near
a century past.
in the midst of these intrigue and fine party and wise and brilliant
personage Rawdon feel himself more and more isolated every day. he
be allow to go to the club more; to dine abroad with bachelor
friend; to come and go when he like, without any question be
ask. and he and Rawdon the young many a time would walk to Gaunt
Street and sit with the lady and the child there while Sir Pitt be
closet with Rebecca, on his way to the House, or on his return from
it.
the ex-Colonel would sit for hour in his brother's house very silent,
and think and do as little as possible. he be glad to be
employ of an errand; to go and make inquiry about a horse or a
servant, or to carve the roast mutton for the dinner of the child.
he be beat and cow into laziness and submission. Delilah have
imprison he and cut his hair off, too. the bold and reckless young
blood of ten-year back be subjugate and be turn into a torpid,
submissive, middle-aged, stout gentleman.
and poor Lady Jane be aware that Rebecca have captivate her husband,
although she and Mrs. Rawdon my-deare and my-love each other every
day they meet.
CHAPTER XLVI
Struggles and Trials
our friend at Brompton be meanwhile pass their Christmas after
their fashion and in a manner by no mean too cheerful.
out of the hundred pound a year, which be about the amount of her
income, the Widow Osborne have be in the habit of give up nearly
three-fourth to her father and mother, for the expense of herself and
her little boy. with #120 more, supply by Jos, this family of four
people, attend by a single irish servant who also do for Clapp and
his wife, might manage to live in decent comfort through the year, and
hold up their head yet, and be able to give a friend a dish of tea
still, after the storm and disappointment of their early life. Sedley
still maintain his ascendency over the family of Mr. Clapp, his
ex-clerk. Clapp remember the time when, sit on the edge of the
chair, he toss off a bumper to the health of "Mrs. S--, Miss Emmy,
and Mr. Joseph in India," at the merchant's rich table in Russell
Square. Time magnify the splendour of those recollection in the
honest clerk's bosom. whenever he come up from the kitchen-parlour to
the drawing-room and partook of tea or gin-and-water with Mr. Sedley,
he would say, "this be not what you be accustom to once, sir," and
as gravely and reverentially drink the health of the lady as he have
do in the day of their utmost prosperity. he think Miss 'Melia's
play the divinest music ever perform, and her the fine lady. he
never would sit down before Sedley at the club even, nor would he have
that gentleman's character abuse by any member of the society. he have
see the first man in London shake hand with Mr. S--; he say, "hewould
know he in time when Rothschild might be see on 'change with he
any day, and he owe he personally everythink."
Clapp, with the good of character and handwriting, have be able very
soon after his master's disaster to find other employment for himself.
"such a little fish as I can swim in any bucket," he use to remark,
and a member of the house from which old Sedley have secede be very
glad to make use of Mr. Clapp's service and to reward they with a
comfortable salary. in fine, all Sedley's wealthy friend have drop
off one by one, and this poor ex-dependent still remain faithfully
attach to he.
out of the small residue of her income which Amelia keep back for
herself, the widow have need of all the thrift and care possible in
order to enable she to keep she darling boy dress in such a manner as
become George Osborne's son, and to defray the expense of the little
school to which, after much misgiving and reluctance and many secret
pang and fear on her own part, she have be induce to send the lad.
she have sit up of night con lesson and spelling over crab
grammar and geography book in order to teach they to Georgy. she have
work even at the latin accidence, fondly hop that she might be
capable of instruct he in that language. to part with he all day,
to send he out to the mercy of a schoolmaster's cane and his
schoolfellow' roughness, be almost like wean he over again to
that weak mother, so tremulous and full of sensibility. he, for his
part, rush off to the school with the utmost happiness. he be
longing for the change. that childish gladness wound his mother, who
be herself so grieve to part with he. she would rather have have he
more sorry, she think, and then be deeply repentant within herself
for dare to be so selfish as to wish her own son to be unhappy.
georgy make great progress in the school, which be keep by a friend of
his mother's constant admirer, the Rev. Mr. Binny. he bring home
numberless prize and testimonial of ability. he tell his mother
countless story every night about his school-companion: and what a
fine fellow Lyons be, and what a sneak sniffin be, and how Steel's
father actually supply the meat for the establishment, whereas
Golding's mother come in a carriage to fetch he every Saturday, and
how neat have strap to his trowser--might he have straps?--and how
Bull Major be so strong (though only in Eutropius) that it be
believe he could lick the Usher, Mr. Ward, himself. so Amelia learn
to know every one of the boy in that school as well as Georgy himself,
and of night she use to help he in his exercise and puzzle she
little head over his lesson as eagerly as if she be herself go in
the morning into the presence of the master. once, after a certain
combat with Master Smith, George come home to his mother with a black
eye, and brag prodigiously to his parent and his delighted old
grandfather about his valour in the fight, in which, if the truth be
know he do not behave with particular heroism, and in which he
decidedly have the bad. but Amelia have never forgive that Smith to
this day, though he be now a peaceful apothecary near Leicester Square.
in these quiet labour and harmless care the gentle widow's life be
pass away, a silver hair or two mark the progress of time on her
head and a line deepen ever so little on her fair forehead. she
use to smile at these mark of time. "what matter it," she ask,
"for an old woman like I?" all she hop for be to live to see she
son great, famous, and glorious, as he deserve to be. she keep his
copy-book, his drawing, and composition, and show they about in
her little circle as if they be miracle of genius. she confide
some of these specimen to Miss Dobbin, to show they to Miss Osborne,
George's aunt, to show they to Mr. Osborne himself--to make that old
man repent of his cruelty and ill feeling towards he who be go.
all her husband's fault and foible she have bury in the grave with
he: she only remember the lover, who have marry she at all
sacrifice, the noble husband, so brave and beautiful, in whose arm
she have hang on the morning when he have go away to fight, and die
gloriously for his king. from heaven the hero must be smile down upon
that paragon of a boy whom he have leave to comfort and console she. we
have see how one of George's grandfather (Mr. Osborne), in his easy
chair in Russell Square, daily grow more violent and moody, and how his
daughter, with her fine carriage, and her fine horse, and her name on
half the public charity-list of the town, be a lonely, miserable,
persecute old maid. she think again and again of the beautiful
little boy, her brother's son, whom she have see. she long to be
allow to drive in the fine carriage to the house in which he live,
and she use to look out day after day as she take her solitary drive
in the park, in hope that she might see he. her sister, the banker's
lady, occasionally condescend to pay her old home and companion a
visit in Russell Square. she bring a couple of sickly child
attend by a prim nurse, and in a faint genteel giggle tone cackle
to her sister about her fine acquaintance, and how her little Frederick
be the image of Lord Claud Lollypop and her sweet Maria have be
notice by the Baroness as they be drive in their donkey-chaise at
Roehampton. she urge she to make her papa do something for the
darling. Frederick she have determine should go into the Guards; and
if they make an eld son of he (and Mr. Bullock be positively
ruin and pinch himself to death to buy land), how be the darling
girl to be provide for? "I expect you, dear," Mrs. Bullock would say,
"for of course my share of our Papa's property must go to the head of
the house, you know. Dear Rhoda McMull will disengage the whole of the
Castletoddy property as soon as poor dear Lord Castletoddy die, who be
quite epileptic; and little Macduff McMull will be Viscount
Castletoddy. both the Mr. Bludyers of Mincing Lane have settle their
fortune on Fanny Bludyer's little boy. my darling Frederick must
positively be an eld son; and--and do ask Papa to bring we back his
account in Lombard Street, will you, dear? it donot look well, his
go to Stumpy and Rowdy's." after which kind of speech, in which
fashion and the main chance be blend together, and after a kiss,
which be like the contact of an oyster--Mrs. Frederick Bullock would
gather her starch nursling and simper back into her carriage.
every visit which this leader of ton pay to her family be more
unlucky for she. her father pay more money into Stumpy and Rowdy's.
her patronage become more and more insufferable. the poor widow in the
little cottage at Brompton, guard her treasure there, little know
how eagerly some people covet it.
on that night when Jane Osborne have tell her father that she have see
his grandson, the old man have make she no reply, but he have show no
anger--and have bid her good-night on go himself to his room in
rather a kindly voice. and he must have meditate on what she say and
have make some inquiry of the Dobbin family regard her visit, for
a fortnight after it take place, he ask she where be her little
french watch and chain she use to wear?
"I buy it with my money, sir," she say in a great fright.
"go and order another like it, or a well if you can get it," say the
old gentleman and lapse again into silence.
of late the Misses Dobbin more than once repeat their entreaty to
Amelia, to allow George to visit they. his aunt have show she
inclination; perhaps his grandfather himself, they hint, might be
disposed to be reconcile to he. surely, Amelia could not refuse such
advantageous chance for the boy. nor could she, but she accede to
their overture with a very heavy and suspicious heart, be always
uneasy during the child's absence from she, and welcome he back as if
he be rescue out of some danger. he bring back money and toy, at
which the widow look with alarm and jealousy; she ask he always if
he have see any gentleman--"only old Sir William, who drive he about
in the four-wheel chaise, and Mr. Dobbin, who arrive on the
beautiful bay horse in the afternoon--in the green coat and pink
neck-cloth, with the gold-head whip, who promise to show he the
Tower of London and take he out with the Surrey hound." at last, he
say, "there be an old gentleman, with thick eyebrow, and a broad
hat, and large chain and seal." he come one day as the coachman be
lunge georgy round the lawn on the gray pony. "he look at I very
much. he shake very much. I say 'my name be Norval' after dinner.
my aunt begin to cry. she be always cry." such be George's report
on that night.
then Amelia know that the boy have see his grandfather; and look out
feverishly for a proposal which she be sure would follow, and which
come, in fact, in a few day afterwards. Mr. Osborne formally offer
to take the boy and make he heir to the fortune which he have intend
that his father should inherit. he would make Mrs. George Osborne an
allowance, such as to assure she a decent competency. if Mrs. George
Osborne propose to marry again, as Mr. O. hear be her intention, he
would not withdraw that allowance. but it must be understand that the
child would live entirely with his grandfather in Russell Square, or at
whatever other place Mr. O. should select, and that he would be
occasionally permit to see Mrs. George Osborne at her own residence.
this message be bring or read to she in a letter one day, when her
mother be from home and her father absent as usual in the City.
she be never see angry but twice or thrice in her life, and it be in
one of these mood that Mr. Osborne's attorney have the fortune to
behold she. she rise up tremble and flush very much as soon as,
after read the letter, Mr. Poe hand it to she, and she tear the
paper into a hundred fragment, which she trod on. "I marry again! I
take money to part from my child! who dare insult I by propose
such a thing? tell Mr. Osborne it be a cowardly letter, sir--a cowardly
letter--I will not answer it. I wish you good morning, sir--and she
bow I out of the room like a tragedy queen," say the lawyer who
tell the story.
her parent never remark her agitation on that day, and she never
tell they of the interview. they have their own affair to interest
they, affair which deeply interested this innocent and unconscious
lady. the old gentleman, her father, be always dabble in
speculation. we have see how the wine company and the coal company have
fail he. but, prowl about the City always eagerly and restlessly
still, he light upon some other scheme, of which he think so well
that he embark in it in spite of the remonstrance of Mr. Clapp, to
whom indeed he never dare to tell how far he have engage himself in
it. and as it be always Mr. Sedley's maxim not to talk about money
matter before woman, they have no inkling of the misfortune that be
in store for they until the unhappy old gentleman be force to make
gradual confession.
the bill of the little household, which have be settle weekly, first
fall into arrear. the remittance have not arrive from India, Mr.
Sedley tell his wife with a disturbed face. as she have pay her bill
very regularly hitherto, one or two of the tradesman to whom the poor
lady be oblige to go round ask for time be very angry at a delay
to which they be perfectly use from more irregular customer.
Emmy's contribution, pay over cheerfully without any question, keep
the little company in half-ration however. and the first six month
pass away pretty easily, old Sedley still keep up with the notion
that his share must rise and that all would be well.
no sixty pound, however, come to help the household at the end of the
half year, and it fall deeply and deep into trouble--Mrs. Sedley, who
be grow infirm and be much shake, remain silent or weep a great
deal with Mrs. Clapp in the kitchen. the butcher be particularly
surly, the grocer insolent: once or twice little georgy have grumble
about the dinner, and Amelia, who still would have be satisfied with
a slice of bread for her own dinner, could not but perceive that her
son be neglect and purchase little thing out of her private purse
to keep the boy in health.
at last they tell she, or tell she such a garbled story as people in
difficulty tell. one day, her own money have be receive, and
Amelia about to pay it over, she, who have keep an account of the money
expend by she, propose to keep a certain portion back out of her
dividend, have contract engagement for a new suit for Georgy.
then it come out that Jos's remittance be not pay, that the house
be in difficulty, which Amelia ought to have see before, her mother
say, but she care for nothing or nobody except Georgy. at this she
pass all her money across the table, without a word, to her mother,
and return to her room to cry her eye out. she have a great access of
sensibility too that day, when oblige to go and countermand the
clothe, the darling clothe on which she have set her heart for
Christmas Day, and the cut and fashion of which she have arrange in
many conversation with a small milliner, her friend.
hard of all, she have to break the matter to Georgy, who make a loud
outcry. everybody have new clothe at Christmas. the other would
laugh at he. he would have new clothe. she have promise they to
he. the poor widow have only kiss to give he. she darn the old
suit in tear. she cast about among her little ornament to see if she
could sell anything to procure the desire novelty. there be her
India shawl that Dobbin have send she. she remember in former day
go with her mother to a fine India shop on Ludgate Hill, where the
lady have all sort of dealing and bargain in these article. her
cheek flush and her eye shine with pleasure as she think of this
resource, and she kiss away George to school in the morning, smile
brightly after he. the boy feel that there be good news in her look.
pack up her shawl in a handkerchief (another of the gift of the
good Major), she hide they under her cloak and walk flushed and eager
all the way to Ludgate Hill, trip along by the park wall and
run over the crossing, so that many a man turn as she hurry by
he and look after her rosy pretty face. she calculate how she
should spend the proceed of her shawl--how, besides the clothe, she
would buy the book that he long for, and pay his half-year's
schooling; and how she would buy a cloak for her father instead of that
old great-coat which he wear. she be not mistake as to the value of
the Major's gift. it be a very fine and beautiful web, and the
merchant make a very good bargain when he give she twenty guineas for
her shawl.
she run on amazed and flurry with her rich to Darton's shop, in St.
Paul's Churchyard, and there purchase the Parents' Assistant and the
Sandford and Merton Georgy long for, and get into the coach there
with her parcel, and go home exulting. and she please herself by
writing in the fly-leaf in her neat little hand, "George Osborne, A
Christmas gift from his affectionate mother." the book be extant to
this day, with the fair delicate superscription.
she be go from her own room with the book in her hand to place
they on George's table, where he might find they on his return from
school, when in the passage, she and her mother meet. the gilt binding
of the seven handsome little volume catch the old lady's eye.
"what be those?" she say.
"some book for georgy," Amelia replied--"I--I promise they to he at
Christmas."
"book!" cry the eld lady indignantly, "book, when the whole house
want bread! book, when to keep you and your son in luxury, and your
dear father out of gaol, Ihave sell every trinket I have, the India shawl
from my back even down to the very spoon, that our tradesman mightnot
insult we, and that Mr. Clapp, which indeed he be justly entitle,
be not a hard landlord, and a civil man, and a father, might have
his rent. oh, Amelia! you break my heart with your book and that boy
of your, whom you be ruin, though part with he you will not. oh,
Amelia, may God send you a more dutiful child than I have have! therebe
Jos, desert his father in his old age; and therebe George, who might
be provide for, and who might be rich, go to school like a lord,
with a gold watch and chain round his neck--while my dear, dear old man
be without a sh--shilling." hysteric sob and cry end Mrs. Sedley's
speech--it echo through every room in the small house, whereof the
other female inmate hear every word of the colloquy.
"oh, Mother, Mother!" cry poor Amelia in reply. "you tell I
nothing--I--I promise he the book. I--I only sell my shawl this
morning. take the money--take everything"--and with quivering hand
she take out her silver, and her sovereign--her precious golden
sovereign, which she thrust into the hand of her mother, whence they
overflow and tumble, roll down the stair.
and then she go into her room, and sink down in despair and utter
misery. she see it all now. her selfishness be sacrifice the boy.
but for she he might have wealth, station, education, and his father's
place, which the eld George have forfeit for her sake. she have but
to speak the word, and her father be restore to competency and the
boy raise to fortune. oh, what a conviction it be to that tender and
stricken heart!
CHAPTER XLVII
Gaunt House
all the world know that Lord Steyne's town palace stand in Gaunt
Square, out of which Great Gaunt Street lead, whither we first
conduct Rebecca, in the time of the depart Sir Pitt Crawley.
peer over the railing and through the black tree into the garden
of the Square, you see a few miserable governess with wan-face
pupil wander round and round it, and round the dreary grass-plot in
the centre of which rise the statue of Lord Gaunt, who fight at
Minden, in a three-tail wig, and otherwise habit like a Roman
Emperor. Gaunt House occupy nearly a side of the Square. the
remain three side be compose of mansion that have pass away
into dowagerism--tall, dark house, with window-frame of stone, or
pick out of a light red. little light seem to be behind those
lean, comfortless casement now, and hospitality to have pass away
from those door as much as the laced lacquey and link-boy of old
time, who use to put out their torch in the blank iron
extinguisher that still flank the lamp over the step. brass plate
have penetrate into the square--doctor, the Diddlesex Bank Western
Branch--the English and European Reunion, &c.--it have a dreary
look--nor be my Lord Steyne's palace less dreary. all I have ever see
of it be the vast wall in front, with the rustic column at the great
gate, through which an old porter peer sometimes with a fat and gloomy
red face--and over the wall the garret and bedroom window, and the
chimney, out of which there seldom come any smoke now. for the
present Lord Steyne live at Naples, prefer the view of the Bay and
Capri and Vesuvius to the dreary aspect of the wall in Gaunt Square.
a few score yard down New Gaunt Street, and lead into Gaunt Mews
indeed, be a little modest back door, which you would not remark from
that of any of the other stable. but many a little close carriage have
stop at that door, as my informant (little Tom Eaves, who know
everything, and who show I the place) tell I. "the Prince and
Perdita have be in and out of that door, sir," he have often tell I;
"Marianne Clarke have enter it with the Duke of ------. it conduct to
the famous petit appartement of Lord Steyne--one, sir, fit up all
in ivory and white satin, another in ebony and black velvet; there be a
little banqueting-room take from Sallust's house at Pompeii, and
paint by Cosway--a little private kitchen, in which every saucepan
be silver and all the spit be gold. it be there that Egalite
Orleans roasted partridge on the night when he and the Marquis of
Steyne win a hundred thousand from a great personage at ombre. half of
the money go to the French Revolution, half to purchase Lord Gaunt's
Marquisate and Garter--and the remainder--" but it form no part of our
scheme to tell what become of the remainder, for every shilling of
which, and a great deal more, little Tom Eaves, who know everybody's
affair, be ready to account.
besides his town palace, the Marquis have castle and palace in various
quarter of the three kingdom, whereof the description may be find
in the road-book--Castle Strongbow, with its wood, on the Shannon
shore; Gaunt Castle, in Carmarthenshire, where Richard II be take
prisoner--Gauntly Hall in Yorkshire, where I have be inform there
be two hundred silver teapot for the breakfast of the guest of the
house, with everything to correspond in splendour; and Stillbrook in
Hampshire, which be my lord's farm, an humble place of residence, of
which we all remember the wonderful furniture which be sell at my
lord's demise by a late celebrate auctioneer.
the Marchioness of Steyne be of the renowned and ancient family of the
Caerlyons, Marquises of Camelot, who have preserve the old faith ever
since the conversion of the venerable Druid, their first ancestor, and
whose pedigree go far beyond the date of the arrival of King Brute in
these island. Pendragon be the title of the eld son of the house.
the son have be call arthur, Uthers, and Caradocs, from
immemorial time. their head have fall in many a loyal conspiracy.
Elizabeth chop off the head of the Arthur of her day, who have be
Chamberlain to Philip and Mary, and carry letter between the Queen
of scot and her uncle the Guises. a cadet of the house be an
officer of the great Duke and distinguish in the famous Saint
Bartholomew conspiracy. during the whole of Mary's confinement, the
house of Camelot conspire in her behalf. it be as much injure by its
charge in fit out an armament against the Spaniards, during the
time of the Armada, as by the fine and confiscation levy on it by
Elizabeth for harbouring of priest, obstinate recusancy, and popish
misdoing. a recreant of James's time be momentarily pervert from
his religion by the argument of that great theologian, and the
fortune of the family somewhat restore by his timely weakness. but
the Earl of Camelot, of the reign of Charles, return to the old creed
of his family, and they continue to fight for it, and ruin themselves
for it, as long as there be a Stuart leave to head or to instigate a
rebellion.
Lady Mary Caerlyon be bring up at a parisian convent; the Dauphiness
Marie Antoinette be her godmother. in the pride of her beauty she have
be marry--sell, it be say--to Lord Gaunt, then at Paris, who win
vast sum from the lady's brother at some of Philip of Orleans's
banquet. the Earl of Gaunt's famous duel with the Count de la Marche,
of the Grey Musqueteers, be attribute by common report to the
pretension of that officer (who have be a page, and remain a
favourite of the Queen) to the hand of the beautiful Lady Mary
Caerlyon. she be married to Lord Gaunt while the Count lie ill of his
wound, and come to dwell at Gaunt House, and to figure for a short time
in the splendid Court of the Prince of Wales. Fox have toast she.
Morris and Sheridan have write song about she. Malmesbury have make
she his good bow; Walpole have pronounce her charming; Devonshire have
be almost jealous of she; but she be scar by the wild pleasure
and gaiety of the society into which she be flung, and after she have
bear a couple of son, shrink away into a life of devout seclusion.
no wonder that my Lord Steyne, who like pleasure and cheerfulness, be
not often see after their marriage by the side of this trembling,
silent, superstitious, unhappy lady.
the before-mention Tom Eaves (who have no part in this history, except
that he know all the great folk in London, and the story and
mystery of each family) have further information regard my Lady
Steyne, which may or may not be true. "the humiliation," Tom use to
say, "which that woman have be make to undergo, in her own house, have
be frightful; Lord Steyne have make she sit down to table with woman
with whom I would rather die than allow Mrs. Eaves to associate--with
Lady Crackenbury, with Mrs. Chippenham, with Madame de la Cruchecassee,
the french secretary's wife (from every one of which ladie Tom
eave--who would have sacrifice his wife for know they--be too
glad to get a bow or a dinner) with the reigning FAVOURITE in a word.
and do you suppose that that woman, of that family, who be as proud as
the Bourbons, and to whom the Steynes be but lackey, mushroom of
yesterday (for after all, they be not of the Old Gaunts, but of a
minor and doubtful branch of the house); do you suppose, I say (the
reader must bear in mind that it be always Tom Eaves who speak) that
the Marchioness of Steyne, the haughty woman in England, would bend
down to her husband so submissively if there be not some cause? Pooh!
I tell you there be secret reason. I tell you that, in the
emigration, the Abbe de la Marche who be here and be employ in the
Quiberoon business with Puisaye and Tinteniac, be the same Colonel of
Mousquetaires Gris with whom Steyne fight in the year '86--that he and
the Marchioness meet again--that it be after the Reverend Colonel be
shoot in Brittany that Lady Steyne take to those extreme practice of
devotion which she carry on now; for she be closet with her
director every day--she be at service at Spanish Place, every morning,
Ihave watch she there--that be, Ihave happen to be pass there--and
depend on it, therebe a mystery in her case. People be not so unhappy
unless they have something to repent of," add Tom Eaves with a
know wag of his head; "and depend on it, that woman would not be so
submissive as she be if the Marquis have not some sword to hold over
she."
so, if Mr. Eaves's information be correct, it be very likely that this
lady, in her high station, have to submit to many a private indignity
and to hide many secret grief under a calm face. and let we, my
brother who have not our name in the Red Book, console ourselves by
think comfortably how miserable our better may be, and that
Damocles, who sit on satin cushion and be serve on gold plate, have
an awful sword hang over his head in the shape of a bailiff, or an
hereditary disease, or a family secret, which peep out every now and
then from the embroider arra in a ghastly manner, and will be sure
to drop one day or the other in the right place.
in compare, too, the poor man's situation with that of the great,
there be (always accord to Mr. Eaves) another source of comfort for
the former. you who have little or no patrimony to bequeath or to
inherit, may be on good term with your father or your son, whereas the
heir of a great prince, such as my Lord Steyne, must naturally be angry
at be keep out of his kingdom, and eye the occupant of it with no
very agreeable glance. "take it as a rule," this sardonic old lave
would say, "the father and eld son of all great family hate each
other. the Crown Prince be always in opposition to the crown or
hankering after it. Shakespeare know the world, my good sir, and when
he describe Prince Hal (from whose family the Gaunts pretend to be
descend, though they be no more related to John of Gaunt than you
be) try on his father's coronet, he give you a natural description
of all heir apparent. if you be heir to a dukedom and a thousand
pound a day, do you mean to say you would not wish for possession?
Pooh! and it stand to reason that every great man, have experience
this feeling towards his father, must be aware that his son entertain
it towards himself; and so they cannot but be suspicious and hostile.
"then again, as to the feeling of elder towards young son. my dear
sir, you ought to know that every eld brother look upon the cadet
of the house as his natural enemy, who deprive he of so much ready
money which ought to be his by right. I have often hear George Mac
Turk, Lord Bajazet's eld son, say that if he have his will when he
come to the title, he would do what the sultan do, and clear the
estate by chop off all his young brother' head at once; and so
the case be, more or less, with they all. I tell you they be all
Turks in their heart. Pooh! sir, they know the world." and here,
haply, a great man come up, Tom Eaves's hat would drop off his head,
and he would rush forward with a bow and a grin, which show that he
know the world too--in the tomeavesian way, that be. and have lay
out every shilling of his fortune on an annuity, Tom could afford to
bear no malice to his nephews and niece, and to have no other feeling
with regard to his better but a constant and generous desire to dine
with they.
between the Marchioness and the natural and tender regard of mother for
child, there be that cruel barrier place of difference of faith.
the very love which she might feel for her son only serve to render
the timid and pious lady more fearful and unhappy. the gulf which
separate they be fatal and impassable. she could not stretch her
weak arm across it, or draw her child over to that side away from
which her belief tell she there be no safety. during the youth of his
son, Lord Steyne, who be a good scholar and amateur casuist, have no
well sport in the evening after dinner in the country than in set
the boy' tutor, the Reverend Mr. Trail (now my Lord Bishop of Ealing)
on her ladyship's director, Father Mole, over their wine, and in
pit Oxford against St. Acheul. he cry "Bravo, Latimer! well
say, Loyola!" alternately; he promise Mole a bishopric if he would
come over, and vow he would use all his influence to get Trail a
cardinal's hat if he would secede. neither divine allow himself to
be conquer, and though the fond mother hop that her young and
favourite son would be reconcile to her church--his mother church--a
sad and awful disappointment await the devout lady--a disappointment
which seem to be a judgement upon she for the sin of her marriage.
my Lord Gaunt marry, as every person who frequent the peerage know,
the Lady Blanche Thistlewood, a daughter of the noble house of
Bareacres, before mention in this veracious history. a wing of Gaunt
House be assign to this couple; for the head of the family choose to
govern it, and while he reign to reign supreme; his son and heir,
however, live little at home, disagree with his wife, and
borrow upon post-obits such money as he require beyond the very
moderate sum which his father be disposed to allow he. the Marquis
know every shilling of his son's debt. at his lamented demise, he be
find himself to be possessor of many of his heir's bond, purchase
for their benefit, and devise by his Lordship to the child of his
young son.
as, to my Lord Gaunt's dismay, and the chuckle delight of his natural
enemy and father, the Lady Gaunt have no child--the Lord George Gaunt
be desire to return from Vienna, where he be engage in waltzing and
diplomacy, and to contract a matrimonial alliance with the Honourable
Joan, only daughter of John Johnes, First Baron Helvellyn, and head of
the firm of Jones, Brown, and Robinson, of Threadneedle Street,
Bankers; from which union spring several son and daughter, whose
doing do not appertain to this story.
the marriage at first be a happy and prosperous one. my Lord George
Gaunt could not only read, but write pretty correctly. he speak French
with considerable fluency; and be one of the fine waltzer in
Europe. with these talent, and his interest at home, there be little
doubt that his lordship would rise to the high dignity in his
profession. the lady, his wife, feel that court be her sphere, and
her wealth enable she to receive splendidly in those continental town
whither her husband's diplomatic duty lead he. there be talk of
appoint he minister, and bet be lay at the Travellers' that he
would be ambassador ere long, when of a sudden, rumour arrive of the
secretary's extraordinary behaviour. at a grand diplomatic dinner give
by his chief, he have start up and declare that a pate de foie gra
be poison. he go to a ball at the hotel of the bavarian envoy,
the Count de Springbock-Hohenlaufen, with his head shave and dress
as a Capuchin friar. it be not a masked ball, as some folk want to
persuade you. it be something queer, people whisper. his
grandfather be so. it be in the family.
his wife and family return to this country and take up their abode at
Gaunt House. Lord George give up his post on the european continent,
and be gazette to Brazil. but people know well; he never return
from that Brazil expedition--never die there--never live there--never
be there at all. he be nowhere; he be go out altogether.
"Brazil," say one gossip to another, with a grin--"Brazil be St.
John's Wood. Rio de Janeiro be a cottage surround by four wall, and
George Gaunt be accredit to a keeper, who have invest he with the
order of the Strait-Waistcoat." these be the kind of epitaph which
man pass over one another in Vanity Fair.
twice or thrice in a week, in the early morning, the poor mother
go for her sin and see the poor invalid. sometimes he laugh at she
(and his laughter be more pitiful than to hear he cry); sometimes she
find the brilliant dandy diplomatist of the Congress of Vienna
drag about a child's toy, or nurse the keeper's baby's doll.
sometimes he know she and Father Mole, her director and companion;
oftener he forget she, as he have do wife, child, love, ambition,
vanity. but he remember his dinner-hour, and use to cry if his
wine-and-water be not strong enough.
it be the mysterious taint of the blood; the poor mother have bring
it from her own ancient race. the evil have break out once or twice in
the father's family, long before Lady Steyne's sin have begin, or her
fast and tear and penance have be offer in their expiation. the
pride of the race be strike down as the first-bear of Pharaoh. the
dark mark of fate and doom be on the threshold--the tall old
threshold surmount by coronet and can heraldry.
the absent lord's child meanwhile prattle and grow on quite
unconscious that the doom be over they too. first they talk of
their father and devise plan against his return. then the name of
the live dead man be less frequently in their mouth--then not
mention at all. but the stricken old grandmother tremble to think
that these too be the inheritor of their father's shame as well as
of his honour, and watch sicken for the day when the awful
ancestral curse should come down on they.
this dark presentiment also haunt Lord Steyne. he try to lay the
horrid bedside ghost in Red Seas of wine and jollity, and lose sight of
it sometimes in the crowd and rout of his pleasure. but it always
come back to he when alone, and seem to grow more threatening with
year. "I have take your son," it say, "why not you? I may shut you
up in a prison some day like your son George. I may tap you on the
head to-morrow, and away go pleasure and honour, feast and beauty,
friend, flatterer, french cook, fine horse and house--in exchange
for a prison, a keeper, and a straw mattress like George Gaunt's." and
then my lord would defy the ghost which threaten he, for he know of
a remedy by which he could baulk his enemy.
so there be splendour and wealth, but no great happiness perchance,
behind the tall can portal of Gaunt House with its smoky coronet
and cipher. the feast there be of the grand in London, but
there be not overmuch content therewith, except among the guest who
sit at my lord's table. have he not be so great a Prince very few
possibly would have visit he; but in Vanity Fair the sin of very
great personage be look at indulgently. "nous regardon a deux
fois" (as the french lady say) before we condemn a person of my lord's
undoubted quality. some notorious carper and squeamish moralist
might be sulky with Lord Steyne, but they be glad enough to come when
he ask they.
"Lord Steyne be really too bad," Lady Slingstone say, "but everybody
go, and of course I shall see that my girl come to no harm." "his
lordship be a man to whom I owe much, everything in life," say the
Right Reverend Doctor Trail, think that the Archbishop be rather
shaky, and Mrs. Trail and the young lady would as soon have miss
go to church as to one of his lordship's party. "his moral be
bad," say little Lord Southdown to his sister, who meekly
expostulate, have hear terrific legend from her mamma with respect
to the doing at Gaunt House; "but hang it, hebe get the well dry
Sillery in Europe!" and as for Sir Pitt Crawley, bart.--sir Pitt that
pattern of decorum, Sir Pitt who have lead off at missionary meeting--he
never for one moment thought of not go too. "where you see such
person as the Bishop of Ealing and the Countess of Slingstone, you may
be pretty sure, Jane," the Baronet would say, "that we cannot be wrong.
the great rank and station of Lord Steyne put he in a position to
command people in our station in life. the Lord Lieutenant of a
County, my dear, be a respectable man. besides, George Gaunt and I
be intimate in early life; he be my junior when we be attache at
Pumpernickel together."
in a word everybody go to wait upon this great man--everybody who be
ask, as you the reader (do not say nay) or I the writer hereof would
go if we have an invitation.
CHAPTER XLVIII
in which the reader be introduce to the Very Best of company
at last Becky's kindness and attention to the chief of her husband's
family be destine to meet with an exceeding great reward, a reward
which, though certainly somewhat unsubstantial, the little woman
covet with great eagerness than more positive benefit. if she do
not wish to lead a virtuous life, at least she desire to enjoy a
character for virtue, and we know that no lady in the genteel world can
possess this desideratum, until she have put on a train and feather and
have be present to her Sovereign at Court. from that august
interview they come out stamp as honest woman. the Lord Chamberlain
give they a certificate of virtue. and as dubious good or letter
be pass through an oven at quarantine, sprinkle with aromatic
vinegar, and then pronounce clean, many a lady, whose reputation would
be doubtful otherwise and liable to give infection, pass through the
wholesome ordeal of the royal presence and issue from it free from all
taint.
it might be very well for my Lady Bareacres, my Lady Tufto, Mrs. Bute
Crawley in the country, and other lady who have come into contact with
Mrs. Rawdon Crawley to cry fie at the idea of the odious little
adventuress make her curtsey before the Sovereign, and to declare
that, if dear good Queen Charlotte have be alive, she never would have
admit such an extremely ill-regulate personage into her chaste
drawing-room. but when we consider that it be the First Gentleman in
Europe in whose high presence Mrs. Rawdon pass her examination, and
as it be, take her degree in reputation, it surely must be flat
disloyalty to doubt any more about her virtue. I, for my part, look
back with love and awe to that Great Character in history. ah, what a
high and noble appreciation of Gentlewomanhood there must have be in
Vanity Fair, when that revere and august be be invest, by the
universal acclaim of the refined and educate portion of this empire,
with the title of Premier Gentilhomme of his Kingdom. do you remember,
dear m--, oh friend of my youth, how one blissful night five-and-twenty
year since, the "Hypocrite" be act, Elliston be manager,
Dowton and Liston performer, two boy have leave from their loyal
master to go out from Slaughter-House School where they be educate
and to appear on Drury Lane stage, amongst a crowd which assemble
there to greet the king. the king? there he be. beefeater be
before the august box; the Marquis of Steyne (Lord of the Powder
Closet) and other great officer of state be behind the chair on
which he sit, he sit--florid of face, portly of person, cover with
order, and in a rich curl head of hair--how we sing God save he!
how the house rock and shout with that magnificent music. how they
cheer, and cry, and wave handkerchief. lady weep; mother
clasp their child; some faint with emotion. People be
suffocate in the pit, shriek and groan rise up amidst the writhing
and shout mass there of his people who be, and indeed show
themselves almost to be, ready to die for he. yes, we see he. Fate
cannot deprive we of that. other have see Napoleon. some few still
exist who have behold Frederick the Great, Doctor Johnson, Marie
Antoinette, &c.--be it our reasonable boast to our child, that we
see George the Good, the Magnificent, the great.
well, there come a happy day in Mrs. Rawdon Crawley's existence when
this angel be admit into the paradise of a court which she covet,
her sister-in-law act as her godmother. on the appoint day, Sir
Pitt and his lady, in their great family carriage (just newly build,
and ready for the Baronet's assumption of the office of High Sheriff of
his county), drive up to the little house in Curzon Street, to the
edification of Raggles, who be watch from his greengrocer's shop,
and see fine plume within, and enormous bunch of flower in the
breast of the new livery-coat of the footman.
Sir Pitt, in a glitter uniform, descend and go into Curzon
Street, his sword between his leg. little Rawdon stand with his face
against the parlour window-pane, smile and nod with all his
might to his aunt in the carriage within; and presently Sir Pitt issue
forth from the house again, lead forth a lady with grand feather,
cover in a white shawl, and hold up daintily a train of
magnificent brocade. she step into the vehicle as if she be a
princess and accustom all her life to go to Court, smile graciously
on the footman at the door and on Sir Pitt, who follow she into the
carriage.
then Rawdon follow in his old Guards' uniform, which have grow
woefully shabby, and be much too tight. he be to have follow the
procession and wait upon his sovereign in a cab, but that his
good-natured sister-in-law insist that they should be a family party.
the coach be large, the lady not very big, they would hold their
train in their lap--finally, the four go fraternally together, and
their carriage presently join the line of royal equipage which be
make its way down Piccadilly and St. James's Street, towards the old
brick palace where the Star of Brunswick be in wait to receive his
noble and gentlefolk.
Becky feel as if she could bless the people out of the carriage
window, so elated be she in spirit, and so strong a sense have she of
the dignified position which she have at last attain in life. even our
Becky have her weakness, and as one often see how man pride
themselves upon excellence which other be slow to perceive: how, for
instance, Comus firmly believe that he be the great tragic actor in
England; how Brown, the famous novelist, long to be consider, not a
man of genius, but a man of fashion; while Robinson, the great lawyer,
do not in the least care about his reputation in Westminster Hall,
but believe himself incomparable across country and at a five-bar
gate--so to be, and to be think, a respectable woman be Becky's aim
in life, and she get up the genteel with amazing assiduity, readiness,
and success. we have say, there be time when she believe herself
to be a fine lady and forget that there be no money in the chest at
home--dun round the gate, tradesman to coax and wheedle--no ground to
walk upon, in a word. and as she go to Court in the carriage, the
family carriage, she adopt a demeanour so grand, self-satisfy,
deliberate, and impose that it make even Lady Jane laugh. she walk
into the royal apartment with a toss of the head which would have
befit an empress, and I have no doubt have she be one, she would
have become the character perfectly.
we be authorize to state that Mrs. Rawdon Crawley's costume de cour
on the occasion of her presentation to the Sovereign be of the most
elegant and brilliant description. some lady we may have see--we
who wear star and cordon and attend the St. James's assembly, or
we, who, in muddy boot, dawdle up and down Pall Mall and peep into the
coach as they drive up with the great folk in their feather--some
lady of fashion, I say, we may have see, about two o'clock of the
forenoon of a levee day, as the laced-jacket band of the Life Guards
be blow triumphal march seat on those prance music-stool,
their cream-colour charger--who be by no mean lovely and enticing
object at that early period of noon. a stout countess of sixty,
decolletee, paint, wrinkle with rouge up to her droop eyelid,
and diamond twinkle in her wig, be a wholesome and edifying, but not
a pleasant sight. she have the faded look of a St. James's Street
illumination, as it may be see of an early morning, when half the
lamp be out, and the other be blink wanly, as if they be about
to vanish like ghost before the dawn. such charm as those of which
we catch glimpse while her ladyship's carriage pass should appear
abroad at night alone. if even Cynthia look haggard of an afternoon,
as we may see she sometimes in the present winter season, with Phoebus
star she out of countenance from the opposite side of the heaven,
how much more can old Lady Castlemouldy keep her head up when the sun
be shin full upon it through the chariot window, and show all
the chink and cranny with which time have mark her face! no.
drawing-room should be announce for November, or the first foggy day,
or the elderly sultanas of our Vanity Fair should drive up in closed
litter, descend in a cover way, and make their curtsey to the
Sovereign under the protection of lamplight.
our beloved Rebecca have no need, however, of any such a friendly halo
to set off her beauty. her complexion could bear any sunshine as yet,
and her dress, though if you be to see it now, any present lady of
Vanity Fair would pronounce it to be the most foolish and preposterous
attire ever worn, be as handsome in her eye and those of the public,
some five-and-twenty year since, as the most brilliant costume of the
most famous beauty of the present season. a score of year hence that
too, that milliner's wonder, will have pass into the domain of the
absurd, along with all previous vanity. but we be wander too
much. Mrs. Rawdon's dress be pronounce to be charmante on the
eventful day of her presentation. even good little Lady Jane be force
to acknowledge this effect, as she look at her kinswoman, and own
sorrowfully to herself that she be quite inferior in taste to Mrs.
Becky.
she do not know how much care, thought, and genius Mrs. Rawdon have
bestow upon that garment. Rebecca have as good taste as any milliner
in Europe, and such a clever way of do thing as Lady Jane little
understand. the latter quickly spy out the magnificence of the
brocade of Becky's train, and the splendour of the lace on her dress.
the brocade be an old remnant, Becky say; and as for the lace, it be
a great bargain. she have have it these hundred year.
"my dear Mrs. Crawley, it must have cost a little fortune," Lady Jane
say, look down at her own lace, which be not nearly so good; and
then examine the quality of the ancient brocade which form the
material of Mrs. Rawdon's Court dress, she feel inclined to say that
she could not afford such fine clothing, but check that speech, with
an effort, as one uncharitable to her kinswoman.
and yet, if Lady Jane have know all, I think even her kindly temper
would have fail she. the fact be, when she be put Sir Pitt's
house in order, Mrs. Rawdon have find the lace and the brocade in old
wardrobe, the property of the former lady of the house, and have
quietly carry the good home, and have suit they to her own little
person. Briggs see she take they, ask no question, tell no story;
but I believe quite sympathised with she on this matter, and so would
many another honest woman.
and the diamonds--"Where the doose do you get the diamond, Becky?"
say her husband, admire some jewel which he have never see before
and which sparkle in her ear and on her neck with brilliance and
profusion.
Becky blush a little and look at he hard for a moment. Pitt
Crawley blush a little too, and look out of window. the fact be,
he have give she a very small portion of the brilliant; a pretty
diamond clasp, which confine a pearl necklace which she wear--and the
Baronet have omit to mention the circumstance to his lady.
Becky look at her husband, and then at Sir Pitt, with an air of saucy
triumph--as much as to say, "shall I betray you?"
"guess!" she say to her husband. "why, you silly man," she continue,
"where do you suppose I get them?--all except the little clasp, which a
dear friend of mine give I long ago. I hire they, to be sure. I
hire they at Mr. Polonius's, in Coventry Street. you donot suppose
that all the diamond which go to Court belong to the wearer; like
those beautiful stone which Lady Jane have, and which be much
handsomer than any which I have, I be certain."
"they be family jewel," say Sir Pitt, again look uneasy. and in
this family conversation the carriage roll down the street, until its
cargo be finally discharge at the gate of the palace where the
Sovereign be sit in state.
the diamond, which have create Rawdon's admiration, never go back to
Mr. Polonius, of Coventry Street, and that gentleman never apply for
their restoration, but they retire into a little private repository,
in an old desk, which Amelia Sedley have give her year and year ago,
and in which Becky keep a number of useful and, perhaps, valuable
thing, about which her husband know nothing. to know nothing, or
little, be in the nature of some husband. to hide, in the nature of
how many woman? oh, lady! how many of you have surreptitious
milliner' bill? how many of you have gown and bracelet which you
darenot show, or which you wear trembling?--trembling, and coax
with smile the husband by your side, who do not know the new velvet
gown from the old one, or the new bracelet from last year's, or have any
notion that the ragged-looking yellow lace scarf cost forty guineas and
that Madame Bobinot be write dunning letter every week for the money!
thus Rawdon know nothing about the brilliant diamond ear-ring, or the
superb brilliant ornament which decorate the fair bosom of his lady;
but Lord Steyne, who be in his place at Court, as Lord of the Powder
Closet, and one of the great dignitary and illustrious defence of
the throne of England, and come up with all his star, garter,
collar, and cordon, and pay particular attention to the little
woman, know whence the jewel come and who pay for they.
as he bow over she he smile, and quote the hackneyed and beautiful
line from the rape of the Lock about Belinda's diamond, "which Jews
might kiss and infidel adore."
"but I hope your lordship be orthodox," say the little lady with a
toss of her head. and many lady round about whisper and talk,
and many gentleman nod and whisper, as they see what mark
attention the great nobleman be pay to the little adventuress.
what be the circumstance of the interview between Rebecca Crawley,
nee Sharp, and her Imperial Master, it do not become such a feeble
and inexperienced pen as mine to attempt to relate. the dazzle eye
close before that Magnificent Idea. loyal respect and decency tell
even the imagination not to look too keenly and audaciously about the
sacred audience-chamber, but to back away rapidly, silently, and
respectfully, make profound bow out of the August Presence.
this may be say, that in all London there be no more loyal heart than
Becky's after this interview. the name of her king be always on her
lip, and he be proclaim by she to be the most charming of man. she
go to Colnaghi's and order the fine portrait of he that art have
produce, and credit could supply. she choose that famous one in which
the good of monarch be represent in a frock-coat with a fur collar,
and breech and silk stocking, simper on a sofa from under his
curly brown wig. she have he paint in a brooch and wear it--indeed
she amuse and somewhat pester her acquaintance with her perpetual
talk about his urbanity and beauty. who know! perhaps the little
woman think she might play the part of a Maintenon or a Pompadour.
but the fine sport of all after her presentation be to hear her talk
virtuously. she have a few female acquaintance, not, it must be own,
of the very high reputation in Vanity Fair. but be make an
honest woman of, so to speak, Becky would not consort any long with
these dubious one, and cut Lady Crackenbury when the latter nod to
she from her opera-box, and give Mrs. Washington White the go-by in the
Ring. "one must, my dear, show one be somebody," she say. "one
mustnot be see with doubtful people. I pity Lady Crackenbury from my
heart, and Mrs. Washington White may be a very good-natured person.
you may go and dine with they, as you like your rubber. but I mustnot,
and willnot; and you will have the goodness to tell Smith to say I be not
at home when either of they call."
the particular of Becky's costume be in the newspaper--feather,
lappet, superb diamond, and all the rest. Lady Crackenbury read the
paragraph in bitterness of spirit and discourse to her follower about
the air which that woman be give herself. Mrs. Bute Crawley and
her young lady in the country have a copy of the Morning Post from
town, and give a vent to their honest indignation. "if you have be
sandy-haired, green-eye, and a french rope-dancer's daughter," Mrs.
Bute say to her eld girl (who, on the contrary, be a very swarthy,
short, and snub-nosed young lady), "you might have have superb diamond
forsooth, and have be present at Court by your cousin, the Lady
Jane. but yoube only a gentlewoman, my poor dear child. you have
only some of the good blood in England in your vein, and good
principle and piety for your portion. I, myself, the wife of a
Baronet's young brother, too, never think of such a thing as go
to Court--nor would other people, if good Queen Charlotte have be
alive." in this way the worthy Rectoress console herself, and her
daughter sigh and sit over the peerage all night.
a few day after the famous presentation, another great and exceed
honour be vouchsafe to the virtuous Becky. Lady Steyne's carriage
drive up to Mr. Rawdon Crawley's door, and the footman, instead of
drive down the front of the house, as by his tremendous knocking he
appear to be incline to do, relent and only deliver in a couple
of card, on which be engraven the name of the Marchioness of Steyne
and the Countess of Gaunt. if these bit of pasteboard have be
beautiful picture, or have have a hundred yard of Malines lace roll
round they, worth twice the number of guineas, Becky could not have
regard they with more pleasure. you may be sure they occupy a
conspicuous place in the china bowl on the drawing-room table, where
Becky keep the card of her visitor. Lord! lord! how poor Mrs.
Washington White's card and Lady Crackenbury's card--which our little
friend have be glad enough to get a few month back, and of which the
silly little creature be rather proud once--Lord! lord! I say, how
soon at the appearance of these grand court card, do those poor
little neglect deuce sink down to the bottom of the pack. Steyne!
Bareacres, Johnes of Helvellyn! and Caerylon of Camelot! we may be
sure that Becky and Briggs look out those august name in the
Peerage, and follow the noble race up through all the ramification
of the family tree.
my Lord Steyne come to call a couple of hour afterwards, and look
about he, and observe everything as be his willnot, find his lady'
card already range as the trump of Becky's hand, and grin, as
this old cynic always do at any naive display of human weakness.
Becky come down to he presently; whenever the dear girl expect his
lordship, her toilette be prepare, her hair in perfect order, her
mouchoir, apron, scarfs, little morocco slipper, and other female
gimcrack arrange, and she seat in some artless and agreeable
posture ready to receive he--whenever she be surprised, of course,
she have to fly to her apartment to take a rapid survey of matter in
the glass, and to trip down again to wait upon the great peer.
she find he grin over the bowl. she be discover, and she
blush a little. "thank you, Monseigneur," she say. "you see your
lady have be here. how good of you! I couldnot come before--I be
in the kitchen make a pudding."
"I know you be, I see you through the area-railing as I drive up,"
reply the old gentleman.
"you see everything," she reply.
"a few thing, but not that, my pretty lady," he say good-naturedly.
"you silly little fibster! I hear you in the room overhead, where I
have no doubt you be put a little rouge on--you must give some
of yours to my Lady Gaunt, whose complexion be quite preposterous--and
I hear the bedroom door open, and then you come downstairs."
"be it a crime to try and look my good when you come here?" answer
Mrs. Rawdon plaintively, and she rub her cheek with her handkerchief
as if to show there be no rouge at all, only genuine blush and
modesty in her case. about this who can tell? I know there be some
rouge that willnot come off on a pocket-handkerchief, and some so good
that even tear will not disturb it.
"well," say the old gentleman, twiddle round his wife's card, "you
be bent on become a fine lady. you pester my poor old life out to
get you into the world. you willnot be able to hold your own there, you
silly little fool. youhave get no money."
"you will get we a place," interpose Becky, "as quick as possible."
"youhave get no money, and you want to compete with those who have. you
poor little earthenware pipkin, you want to swim down the stream along
with the great copper kettle. all woman be alike. everybody be
strive for what be not worth the having! Gad! I din with the king
yesterday, and we have neck of mutton and turnip. a dinner of herb be
well than a stall ox very often. you will go to Gaunt House. you
give an old fellow no rest until you get there. itbe not half so nice
as here. youwill be bore there. I be. my wife be as gay as Lady
Macbeth, and my daughter as cheerful as Regan and Goneril. I darenot
sleep in what they call my bedroom. the bed be like the baldaquin of
St. Peter's, and the picture frighten I. I have a little brass bed
in a dressing-room, and a little hair mattress like an anchorite. I be
an anchorite. Ho! ho! youwill be ask to dinner next week. and gare
aux femme, look out and hold your own! how the woman will bully you!"
this be a very long speech for a man of few word like my Lord Steyne;
nor be it the first which he utter for Becky's benefit on that day.
Briggs look up from the work-table at which she be seat in the
farther room and give a deep sigh as she hear the great Marquis speak
so lightly of her sex.
"if you donot turn off that abominable sheep-dog," say Lord Steyne,
with a savage look over his shoulder at she, "I will have she poison."
"I always give my dog dinner from my own plate," say Rebecca, laugh
mischievously; and have enjoy for some time the discomfiture of my
lord, who hat poor Briggs for interrupt his tete-a-tete with the
fair Colonel's wife, Mrs. Rawdon at length have pity upon her admirer,
and call to Briggs, praise the fineness of the weather to she and
bade she to take out the child for a walk.
"I cannot send she away," Becky say presently, after a pause, and in a
very sad voice. her eye fill with tear as she speak, and she
turn away her head.
"you owe she her wage, I suppose?" say the Peer.
"bad than that," say Becky, still cast down her eye; "I have
ruin she."
"ruin she? then why donot you turn she out?" the gentleman ask.
"man do that," Becky answer bitterly. "woman be not so bad as you.
last year, when we be reduce to our last guinea, she give we
everything. she shall never leave I, until we be ruin utterly
ourselves, which do not seem far off, or until I can pay she the
utmost farthing."
"------ it, how much be it?" say the Peer with an oath. and Becky,
reflect on the largeness of his mean, mention not only the sum
which she have borrow from Miss Briggs, but one of nearly double the
amount.
this cause the Lord Steyne to break out in another brief and energetic
expression of anger, at which Rebecca hold down her head the more and
cry bitterly. "I could not help it. it be my only chance. I dare
not tell my husband. he would kill I if I tell he what I have do.
I have keep it a secret from everybody but you--and you force it from
I. ah, what shall I do, Lord Steyne? for I be very, very unhappy!"
Lord Steyne make no reply except by beat the devil's tattoo and
bite his nail. at last he clap his hat on his head and fling out
of the room. rebecca do not rise from her attitude of misery until
the door slam upon he and his carriage whirl away. then she rise
up with the queer expression of victorious mischief glitter in
her green eye. she burst out laugh once or twice to herself, as
she sit at work, and sit down to the piano, she rattle away a
triumphant voluntary on the key, which make the people pause under her
window to listen to her brilliant music.
that night, there come two note from Gaunt House for the little woman,
the one contain a card of invitation from Lord and Lady Steyne to a
dinner at Gaunt House next Friday, while the other enclose a slip of
gray paper bear Lord Steyne's signature and the address of Messrs.
Jones, Brown, and Robinson, Lombard Street.
Rawdon hear Becky laugh in the night once or twice. it be only
her delight at go to Gaunt House and face the lady there, she
say, which amuse she so. but the truth be that she be occupy
with a great number of other thought. should she pay off old Briggs
and give she her conge? should she astonish Raggles by settle his
account? she turn over all these thought on her pillow, and on the
next day, when Rawdon go out to pay his morning visit to the Club,
Mrs. Crawley (in a modest dress with a veil on) whip off in a
hackney-coach to the City: and be land at Messrs. Jones and
Robinson's bank, present a document there to the authority at the
desk, who, in reply, ask she "how she would take it?"
she gently say "she would take a hundred and fifty pound in small
note and the remainder in one note": and pass through St. Paul's
Churchyard stop there and buy the handsome black silk gown for
Briggs which money could buy; and which, with a kiss and the kind
speech, she present to the simple old spinster.
then she walk to Mr. Raggles, inquire about his child
affectionately, and give he fifty pound on account. then she go to
the livery-man from whom she job her carriage and gratify he
with a similar sum. "and I hope this will be a lesson to you, Spavin,"
she say, "and that on the next drawing-room day my brother, Sir Pitt,
will not be inconvenience by be oblige to take four of we in his
carriage to wait upon his Majesty, because my own carriage be not
forthcoming." it appear there have be a difference on the last
drawing-room day. hence the degradation which the Colonel have almost
suffer, of be oblige to enter the presence of his Sovereign in a
hack cab.
these arrangement conclude, Becky pay a visit upstairs to the
before-mention desk, which Amelia Sedley have give her year and
year ago, and which contain a number of useful and valuable little
thing--in which private museum she place the one note which Messrs.
Jones and Robinson's cashier have give she.
CHAPTER XLIX
in which we enjoy three Courses and a dessert
when the lady of Gaunt House be at breakfast that morning, Lord
Steyne (who take his chocolate in private and seldom disturb the
female of his household, or see they except upon public day, or when
they cross each other in the hall, or when from his pit-box at the
opera he survey they in their box on the grand tier) his lordship, we
say, appear among the lady and the child who be assemble over
the tea and toast, and a battle royal ensue apropos of Rebecca.
"my Lady Steyne," he say, "I want to see the list for your dinner on
Friday; and I want you, if you please, to write a card for Colonel and
Mrs. Crawley."
"Blanche write they," Lady Steyne say in a flutter. "Lady Gaunt
write they."
"I will not write to that person," Lady Gaunt say, a tall and stately
lady, who look up for an instant and then down again after she have
speak. it be not good to meet Lord Steyne's eye for those who have
offend he.
"send the child out of the room. go!" say he pull at the
bell-rope. the urchin, always frighten before he, retire: their
mother would have follow too. "not you," he say. "you stop."
"my Lady Steyne," he say, "once more will you have the goodness to go
to the desk and write that card for your dinner on Friday?"
"my Lord, I will not be present at it," Lady Gaunt say; "I will go
home."
"I wish you would, and stay there. you will find the bailiff at
Bareacres very pleasant company, and I shall be free from lending
money to your relation and from your own damned tragedy air. who be
you to give order here? you have no money. youhave get no brain. you
be here to have child, and you have not have any. Gaunt's tired of
you, and George's wife be the only person in the family who donot
wish you be dead. Gaunt would marry again if you be."
"I wish I be," her ladyship answer with tear and rage in her eye.
"you, forsooth, must give yourself air of virtue, while my wife, who
be an immaculate saint, as everybody know, and never do wrong in her
life, have no objection to meet my young friend Mrs. Crawley. my Lady
Steyne know that appearance be sometimes against the good of woman;
that lie be often tell about the most innocent of they. pray, madam,
shall I tell you some little anecdote about my Lady Bareacres, your
mamma?"
"you may strike I if you like, sir, or hit any cruel blow," Lady Gaunt
say. to see his wife and daughter suffer always put his lordship
into a good humour.
"my sweet blanche," he say, "I be a gentleman, and never lie my hand
upon a woman, save in the way of kindness. I only wish to correct
little fault in your character. you woman be too proud, and sadly
lack humility, as Father Mole, Ibe sure, would tell my Lady Steyne if
he be here. you mustnot give yourselves air; you must be meek and
humble, my blessing. for all Lady Steyne know, this calumniate,
simple, good-humour Mrs. Crawley be quite innocent--even more
innocent than herself. her husband's character be not good, but it be
as good as Bareacres', who have play a little and not pay a great
deal, who cheat you out of the only legacy you ever have and leave you
a pauper on my hand. and Mrs. Crawley be not very well-bear, but she
be not bad than Fanny's illustrious ancestor, the first de la Jones."
"the money which I bring into the family, sir," Lady George cry
out--
"you purchase a contingent reversion with it," the Marquis say
darkly. "if Gaunt die, your husband may come to his honour; your
little boy may inherit they, and who know what besides? in the
meanwhile, lady, be as proud and virtuous as you like abroad, but
donot give I any air. as for Mrs. Crawley's character, I shallnot
demean myself or that most spotless and perfectly irreproachable lady
by even hint that it require a defence. you will be pleased to
receive she with the utmost cordiality, as you will receive all person
whom I present in this house. this house?" he break out with a laugh.
"who be the master of it? and what be it? this Temple of Virtue belong
to I. and if I invite all newgate or all Bedlam here, by ------ they
shall be welcome."
after this vigorous allocution, to one of which sort Lord Steyne
treat his "Hareem" whenever symptom of insubordination appear in
his household, the crestfallen woman have nothing for it but to obey.
Lady Gaunt write the invitation which his Lordship require, and she
and her mother-in-law drive in person, and with bitter and humiliate
heart, to leave the card on Mrs. Rawdon, the reception of which
cause that innocent woman so much pleasure.
there be family in London who would have sacrifice a year's income
to receive such an honour at the hand of those great lady. Mrs.
Frederick Bullock, for instance, would have go on her knee from May
Fair to Lombard Street, if Lady Steyne and Lady Gaunt have be wait
in the City to raise she up and say, "come to we next friday"--not to
one of the great crush and grand ball of Gaunt House, whither
everybody go, but to the sacred, unapproachable, mysterious,
delicious entertainment, to be admit to one of which be a
privilege, and an honour, and a blessing indeed.
severe, spotless, and beautiful, Lady Gaunt hold the very high rank
in Vanity Fair. the distinguished courtesy with which Lord Steyne
treat her charmed everybody who witness his behaviour, cause the
severe critic to admit how perfect a gentleman he be, and to own
that his Lordship's heart at least be in the right place.
the lady of Gaunt House call Lady Bareacres in to their aid, in
order to repulse the common enemy. one of Lady Gaunt's carriage go
to Hill Street for her ladyship's mother, all whose equipage be in
the hand of the bailiff, whose very jewel and wardrobe, it be say,
have be seize by those inexorable Israelites. Bareacres Castle be
theirs, too, with all its costly picture, furniture, and article of
vertu--the magnificent vandyke; the noble Reynolds picture; the
Lawrence portrait, tawdry and beautiful, and, thirty year ago, deem
as precious as work of real genius; the matchless Dancing Nymph of
Canova, for which Lady Bareacres have sit in her youth--Lady Bareacres
splendid then, and radiant in wealth, rank, and beauty--a toothless,
bald, old woman now--a mere rag of a former robe of state. her lord,
paint at the same time by Lawrence, as wave his sabre in front of
Bareacres Castle, and clothe in his uniform as Colonel of the
Thistlewood Yeomanry, be a withered, old, lean man in a greatcoat and
a Brutus wig, slink about Gray's Inn of morning chiefly and dining
alone at club. he do not like to dine with Steyne now. they have run
race of pleasure together in youth when Bareacres be the winner. but
Steyne have more bottom than he and have last he out. the Marquis be
ten time a great man now than the young Lord Gaunt of '85, and
Bareacres nowhere in the race--old, beaten, bankrupt, and break down.
he have borrow too much money of Steyne to find it pleasant to meet
his old comrade often. the latter, whenever he wish to be merry,
use jeeringly to ask Lady Gaunt why her father have not come to see
she. "he have not be here for four month," Lord Steyne would say. "I
can always tell by my cheque-book afterwards, when I get a visit from
Bareacres. what a comfort it be, my lady, I bank with one of my
son' father-in-law, and the other bank with I!"
of the other illustrious person whom Becky have the honour to encounter
on this her first presentation to the grand world, it do not become
the present historian to say much. there be his Excellency the Prince
of Peterwaradin, with his Princess--a nobleman tightly girth, with a
large military chest, on which the plaque of his order shine
magnificently, and wear the red collar of the Golden Fleece round
his neck. he be the owner of countless flock. "look at his face. I
think he must be descend from a sheep," Becky whisper to Lord
Steyne. indeed, his Excellency's countenance, long, solemn, and white,
with the ornament round his neck, bear some resemblance to that of a
venerable bell-wether.
there be Mr. John Paul Jefferson Jones, titularly attach to the
American Embassy and correspondent of the New York Demagogue, who, by
way of make himself agreeable to the company, ask Lady Steyne,
during a pause in the conversation at dinner, how his dear friend,
George Gaunt, like the Brazils? he and George have be most intimate
at Naples and have go up Vesuvius together. Mr. Jones write a full
and particular account of the dinner, which appear duly in the
Demagogue. he mention the name and title of all the guest, give
biographical sketch of the principal people. he describe the
person of the lady with great eloquence; the service of the table;
the size and costume of the servant; enumerate the dish and wine
serve; the ornament of the sideboard; and the probable value of the
plate. such a dinner he calculate could not be dish up under
fifteen or eighteen dollar per head. and he be in the habit, until
very lately, of send over protege, with letter of recommendation
to the present Marquis of Steyne, encourage to do so by the intimate
term on which he have live with his dear friend, the late lord. he
be most indignant that a young and insignificant aristocrat, the Earl
of Southdown, should have take the pas of he in their procession to
the dining-room. "just as I be step up to offer my hand to a
very pleasing and witty fashionable, the brilliant and exclusive Mrs.
Rawdon Crawley,"--he wrote--"the young patrician interpose between I
and the lady and whisk my Helen off without a word of apology. I be
fain to bring up the rear with the Colonel, the lady's husband, a stout
red-faced warrior who distinguish himself at Waterloo, where he have
well luck than befell some of his brother redcoat at New Orleans."
the Colonel's countenance on come into this polite society wear as
many blush as the face of a boy of sixteen assume when he be
confront with his sister's schoolfellow. it have be tell before
that honest Rawdon have not be much use at any period of his life to
lady' company. with the man at the Club or the mess room, he be
well enough; and could ride, bet, smoke, or play at billiard with the
bold of they. he have have his time for female friendship too, but
that be twenty year ago, and the lady be of the rank of those
with whom Young Marlow in the comedy be represent as have be
familiar before he become abash in the presence of Miss Hardcastle.
the time be such that one scarcely dare to allude to that kind of
company which thousand of our young man in Vanity Fair be frequent
every day, which nightly fill casino and dancing-room, which be
know to exist as well as the Ring in Hyde Park or the Congregation at
St. James's--but which the most squeamish if not the most moral of
society be determined to ignore. in a word, although Colonel Crawley
be now five-and-forty year of age, it have not be his lot in life to
meet with a half dozen good woman, besides his paragon of a wife. all
except she and his kind sister Lady Jane, whose gentle nature have tame
and win he, scar the worthy Colonel, and on occasion of his first
dinner at Gaunt House he be not hear to make a single remark except
to state that the weather be very hot. indeed Becky would have leave
he at home, but that virtue ordain that her husband should be by she
side to protect the timid and flutter little creature on her first
appearance in polite society.
on her first appearance Lord Steyne step forward, take her hand,
and greet she with great courtesy, and present she to Lady
Steyne, and their ladyship, her daughter. their ladyship make three
stately curtsy, and the eld lady to be sure give her hand to the
newcomer, but it be as cold and lifeless as marble.
Becky take it, however, with grateful humility, and perform a
reverence which would have do credit to the good dancer-master, put
herself at Lady Steyne's foot, as it be, by say that his Lordship
have be her father's early friend and patron, and that she, Becky,
have learn to honour and respect the Steyne family from the day of
her childhood. the fact be that Lord Steyne have once purchase a
couple of picture of the late Sharp, and the affectionate orphan could
never forget her gratitude for that favour.
the Lady Bareacres then come under Becky's cognizance--to whom the
Colonel's lady make also a most respectful obeisance: it be return
with severe dignity by the exalt person in question.
"I have the pleasure of make your ladyship's acquaintance at Brussels,
ten year ago," Becky say in the most win manner. "I have the good
fortune to meet Lady Bareacres at the Duchess of Richmond's ball, the
night before the Battle of Waterloo. and I recollect your ladyship,
and my Lady Blanche, your daughter, sit in the carriage in the
porte-cochere at the Inn, wait for horse. I hope your ladyship's
diamond be safe."
everybody's eye look into their neighbour's. the famous diamond
have undergo a famous seizure, it appear, about which Becky, of
course, know nothing. Rawdon Crawley retreat with Lord Southdown into
a window, where the latter be hear to laugh immoderately, as Rawdon
tell he the story of Lady Bareacres wante horse and "knuckle down
by Jove," to Mrs. Crawley. "I think I neednot be afraid of that
woman," Becky think. indeed, Lady Bareacres exchange terrified and
angry look with her daughter and retreat to a table, where she begin
to look at picture with great energy.
when the Potentate from the Danube make his appearance, the
conversation be carry on in the french language, and the Lady
Bareacres and the young lady find, to their farth mortification,
that Mrs. Crawley be much well acquaint with that tongue, and
speak it with a much well accent than they. Becky have meet other
hungarian magnate with the army in France in 1816-17. she ask after
her friend with great interest the foreign personage think that she
be a lady of great distinction, and the Prince and the Princess ask
severally of Lord Steyne and the Marchioness, whom they conduct to
dinner, who be that petite dame who speak so well?
finally, the procession be form in the order describe by the
american diplomatist, they march into the apartment where the banquet
be serve, and which, as I have promise the reader he shall enjoy it,
he shall have the liberty of order himself so as to suit his fancy.
but it be when the lady be alone that Becky know the tug of war
would come. and then indeed the little woman find herself in such a
situation as make she acknowledge the correctness of Lord Steyne's
caution to she to beware of the society of lady above her own sphere.
as they say, the person who hate Irishmen most be irishman; so,
assuredly, the great tyrant over woman be woman. when poor little
Becky, alone with the lady, go up to the fire-place whither the
great lady have repair, the great lady march away and take
possession of a table of drawing. when Becky follow they to the
table of drawing, they drop off one by one to the fire again. she
try to speak to one of the child (of whom she be commonly fond in
public place), but Master George Gaunt be call away by his mamma;
and the stranger be treat with such cruelty finally, that even Lady
Steyne herself pity she and go up to speak to the friendless little
woman.
"Lord Steyne," say her ladyship, as her wan cheek glow with a
blush, "say you sing and play very beautifully, Mrs. Crawley--I wish
you would do I the kindness to sing to I."
"I will do anything that may give pleasure to my Lord Steyne or to
you," say rebecca, sincerely grateful, and seat herself at the
piano, begin to sing.
she sing religious song of Mozart, which have be early favourite of
Lady Steyne, and with such sweetness and tenderness that the lady,
linger round the piano, sit down by its side and listen until the
tear roll down her eye. it be true that the opposition lady at
the other end of the room keep up a loud and ceaseless buzzing and
talking, but the Lady Steyne do not hear those rumour. she be a
child again--and have wander back through a forty year' wilderness to
her convent garden. the chapel organ have peal the same tone, the
organist, the sister whom she love good of the community, have teach
they to she in those early happy day. she be a girl once more, and
the brief period of her happiness bloom out again for an hour--she
start when the jarring door be fling open, and with a loud laugh
from Lord Steyne, the man of the party enter full of gaiety.
he see at a glance what have happen in his absence, and be grateful
to his wife for once. he go and speak to she, and call she by her
christian name, so as again to bring blush to her pale face--"my wife
say you have be sing like an angel," he say to Becky. now there
be angel of two kind, and both sort, it be say, be charming in
their way.
whatever the previous portion of the evening have be, the rest of that
night be a great triumph for Becky. she sing she very good, and it
be so good that every one of the man come and crowd round the piano.
the woman, her enemy, be leave quite alone. and Mr. Paul Jefferson
Jones think he have make a conquest of Lady Gaunt by go up to her
ladyship and praise her delightful friend's first-rate singing.
CHAPTER L
contain a Vulgar Incident
The Muse, whoever she be, who preside over this Comic history must now
descend from the genteel height in which she have be soar and have
the goodness to drop down upon the lowly roof of John Sedley at
Brompton, and describe what event be take place there. here, too,
in this humble tenement, live care, and distrust, and dismay. Mrs.
Clapp in the kitchen be grumble in secret to her husband about the
rent, and urge the good fellow to rebel against his old friend and
patron and his present lodger. Mrs. Sedley have cease to visit her
landlady in the low region now, and indeed be in a position to
patronize Mrs. Clapp no long. how can one be condescend to a lady
to whom one owe a matter of forty pound, and who be perpetually
throw out hint for the money? the irish maidservant have not alter
in the least in her kind and respectful behaviour; but Mrs. Sedley
fancy that she be grow insolent and ungrateful, and, as the guilty
thief who fear each bush an officer, see threaten innuendo and
hint of capture in all the girl's speech and answer. Miss Clapp,
grow quite a young woman now, be declare by the soured old lady to be
an unbearable and impudent little minx. why Amelia can be so fond of
she, or have she in her room so much, or walk out with she so
constantly, Mrs. Sedley cannot conceive. the bitterness of poverty have
poison the life of the once cheerful and kindly woman. she be
thankless for Amelia's constant and gentle bearing towards she; carp
at she for her effort at kindness or service; rail at she for her
silly pride in her child and her neglect of her parent. georgy's
house be not a very lively one since Uncle Jos's annuity have be
withdraw and the little family be almost upon famine diet.
Amelia think, and think, and rack her brain, to find some mean of
increase the small pittance upon which the household be starve.
can she give lesson in anything? paint card-rack? do fine work? she
find that woman be work hard, and well than she can, for
twopence a day. she buy a couple of begilt Bristol board at the
Fancy Stationer's and paint she very good upon they--a shepherd with
a red waistcoat on one, and a pink face smile in the midst of a
pencil landscape--a shepherdess on the other, cross a little bridge,
with a little dog, nicely shade. the man of the Fancy Repository and
Brompton Emporium of Fine Arts (of whom she buy the screen, vainly
hop that he would repurchase they when ornament by her hand) can
hardly hide the sneer with which he examine these feeble work of art.
he look askance at the lady who wait in the shop, and tie up the
card again in their envelope of whitey-brown paper, and hand they to
the poor widow and Miss Clapp, who have never see such beautiful thing
in her life, and have be quite confident that the man must give at
least two guineas for the screen. they try at other shop in the
interior of London, with faint sicken hope. "donot want them," say
one. "be off," say another fiercely. three-and-sixpence have be
spend in vain--the screen retire to Miss Clapp's bedroom, who
persist in think they lovely.
she write out a little card in her neat hand, and after long
thought and labour of composition, in which the public be inform that
"a Lady who have some time at her disposal, wish to undertake the
education of some little girl, whom she would instruct in English, in
French, in Geography, in history, and in Music--address A. O., at Mr.
Brown's"; and she confide the card to the gentleman of the Fine Art
Repository, who consent to allow it to lie upon the counter, where it
grow dingy and fly-blow. Amelia pass the door wistfully many a
time, in hope that Mr. Brown will have some news to give she, but he
never beckon she in. when she go to make little purchase, there be
no news for she. poor simple lady, tender and weak--how be you to
battle with the struggle violent world?
she grow daily more care-worn and sad, fix upon her child alarmed
eye, whereof the little boy cannot interpret the expression. she
start up of a night and peep into his room stealthily, to see that he
be sleep and not steal away. she sleep but little now. a
constant thought and terror be haunt she. how she weep and pray
in the long silent night--how she try to hide from herself the
thought which will return to she, that she ought to part with the boy,
that she be the only barrier between he and prosperity. she cannot,
she cannot. not now, at least. some other day. oh! it be too hard to
think of and to bear.
a thought come over she which make her blush and turn from
herself--her parent might keep the annuity--the curate would marry she
and give a home to she and the boy. but George's picture and dear
memory be there to rebuke she. shame and love say no to the
sacrifice. she shrink from it as from something unholy, and such
thought never find a resting-place in that pure and gentle bosom.
the combat, which we describe in a sentence or two, last for many
week in poor Amelia's heart, during which she have no confidante;
indeed, she could never have one, as she would not allow to herself the
possibility of yield, though she be give way daily before the
enemy with whom she have to battle. one truth after another be
marshal itself silently against she and keep its ground. poverty
and misery for all, want and degradation for her parent, injustice to
the boy--one by one the outwork of the little citadel be take, in
which the poor soul passionately guard she only love and treasure.
at the beginning of the struggle, she have write off a letter of
tender supplication to her brother at Calcutta, implore he not to
withdraw the support which he have grant to their parent and painting
in term of artless pathos their lonely and hapless condition. she do
not know the truth of the matter. the payment of Jos's annuity be
still regular, but it be a money-lender in the City who be receive
it: old Sedley have sell it for a sum of money wherewith to prosecute
his bootless scheme. Emmy be calculate eagerly the time that would
elapse before the letter would arrive and be answer. she have write
down the date in her pocket-book of the day when she dispatch it. to
her son's guardian, the good Major at Madras, she have not communicate
any of her grief and perplexity. she have not write to he since
she write to congratulate he on his approach marriage. she think
with sicken despondency, that that friend--the only one, the one who
have feel such a regard for she--be fall away.
one day, when thing have come to a very bad pass--when the creditor
be press, the mother in hysteric grief, the father in more than
usual gloom, the inmate of the family avoid each other, each
secretly oppress with his private unhappiness and notion of
wrong--the father and daughter happen to be leave alone together, and
Amelia think to comfort her father by tell he what she have do.
she have write to Joseph--an answer must come in three or four month.
he be always generous, though careless. he could not refuse, when he
know how straiten be the circumstance of his parent.
then the poor old gentleman reveal the whole truth to she--that his
son be still pay the annuity, which his own imprudence have fling
away. he have not dare to tell it soon. he think Amelia's ghastly
and terrified look, when, with a trembling, miserable voice he make the
confession, convey reproach to he for his concealment. "ah!" say
he with quivering lip and turn away, "you despise your old father
now!"
"oh, papa! it be not that," Amelia cry out, fall on his neck and
kiss he many time. "you be always good and kind. you do it for
the good. it be not for the money--it be--my God! my God! have mercy
upon I, and give I strength to bear this trial"; and she kiss he
again wildly and go away.
still the father do not know what that explanation meant, and the
burst of anguish with which the poor girl leave he. it be that she
be conquer. the sentence be pass. the child must go from
she--to other--to forget she. her heart and her treasure--her joy,
hope, love, worship--her God, almost! she must give he up, and
then--and then she would go to George, and they would watch over the
child and wait for he until he come to they in Heaven.
she put on her bonnet, scarcely know what she do, and go out to
walk in the lane by which George use to come back from school, and
where she be in the habit of go on his return to meet the boy. it
be May, a half-holiday. the leaf be all come out, the weather
be brilliant; the boy come run to she flush with health,
singing, his bundle of school-book hang by a thong. there he be.
both her arm be round he. no, it be impossible. they could not be
go to part. "what be the matter, Mother?" say he; "you look very
pale."
"nothing, my child," she say and stoop down and kiss he.
that night Amelia make the boy read the story of Samuel to she, and how
Hannah, his mother, have wean he, bring he to Eli the high
Priest to minister before the Lord. and he read the song of gratitude
which Hannah sing, and which say, who it be who maketh poor and maketh
rich, and bringeth low and exalteth--how the poor shall be raise up
out of the dust, and how, in his own might, no man shall be strong.
then he read how Samuel's mother make he a little coat and bring it
to he from year to year when she come up to offer the yearly
sacrifice. and then, in her sweet simple way, George's mother make
commentary to the boy upon this affecting story. how Hannah, though
she love her son so much, yet give he up because of her vow. and how
she must always have think of he as she sit at home, far away,
make the little coat; and Samuel, she be sure, never forget his
mother; and how happy she must have be as the time come (and the
year pass away very quick) when she should see her boy and how good
and wise he have grow. this little sermon she speak with a gentle
solemn voice, and dry eye, until she come to the account of their
meeting--then the discourse break off suddenly, the tender heart
overflow, and take the boy to her breast, she rock he in her
arm and weep silently over he in a sainted agony of tear.
her mind be make up, the widow begin to take such measure as seem
right to she for advance the end which she propose. one day, Miss
Osborne, in Russell Square (Amelia have not write the name or number
of the house for ten year--her youth, her early story come back to she
as she write the superscription) one day Miss Osborne get a letter from
Amelia which make her blush very much and look towards her father,
sit gloome in his place at the other end of the table.
in simple term, Amelia tell she the reason which have induce she to
change her mind respect her boy. her father have meet with fresh
misfortune which have entirely ruin he. her own pittance be so
small that it would barely enable she to support her parent and would
not suffice to give George the advantage which be his due. great as
her suffering would be at part with he she would, by God's help,
endure they for the boy's sake. she know that those to whom he be
go would do all in their power to make he happy. she describe his
disposition, such as she fancy it--quick and impatient of control or
harshness, easily to be move by love and kindness. in a postscript,
she stipulate that she should have a write agreement, that she
should see the child as often as she wish--she could not part with
he under any other term.
"what? Mrs. Pride have come down, have she?" old Osborne say, when with
a tremulous eager voice Miss Osborne read he the letter. "Reg'lar
starve out, hey? ha, ha! I know she would." he try to keep his
dignity and to read his paper as usual--but he could not follow it. he
chuckle and swear to himself behind the sheet.
at last he fling it down and, scowl at his daughter, as his willnot
be, go out of the room into his study adjoining, from whence he
presently return with a key. he fling it to Miss Osborne.
"get the room over mine--his room that be--ready," he say. "yes,
sir," his daughter reply in a tremble. it be George's room. it have
not be open for more than ten year. some of his clothe, paper,
handkerchief, whip and cap, fishing-rod and sporting gear, be
still there. an Army list of 1814, with his name write on the cover;
a little dictionary he be willnot to use in writing; and the Bible his
mother have give he, be on the mantelpiece, with a pair of spur and
a dried inkstand cover with the dust of ten year. ah! since that
ink be wet, what day and people have pass away! the writing-book,
still on the table, be blot with his hand.
Miss Osborne be much affect when she first enter this room with
the servant under she. she sink quite pale on the little bed. "this
be bless news, m'am--indeed, m'am," the housekeeper say; "and the
good old time be return, m'am. the dear little feller, to be sure,
m'am; how happy he will be! but some folk in May Fair, m'am, will owe
he a grudge, m'am"; and she click back the bolt which hold the
window-sash and let the air into the chamber.
"you have well send that woman some money," Mr. Osborne say, before
he go out. "she shallnot want for nothing. send she a hundred pound."
"and Iwill go and see she to-morrow?" Miss Osborne ask.
"thatbe your look out. she donot come in here, mind. no, by ------,
not for all the money in London. but she mustnot want now. so look
out, and get thing right." with which brief speech Mr. Osborne take
leave of his daughter and go on his accustomed way into the City.
"here, Papa, be some money," Amelia say that night, kiss the old
man, her father, and put a bill for a hundred pound into his
hand. "and--and, Mamma, donot be harsh with Georgy. he--he be not
go to stop with we long." she could say nothing more, and walk
away silently to her room. let we close it upon her prayer and her
sorrow. I think we have well speak little about so much love and grief.
Miss Osborne come the next day, accord to the promise contain in
her note, and see Amelia. the meeting between they be friendly. a
look and a few word from Miss Osborne show the poor widow that, with
regard to this woman at least, there need be no fear lest she should
take the first place in her son's affection. she be cold, sensible,
not unkind. the mother have not be so well pleased, perhaps, have the
rival be well look, young, more affectionate, warmer-hearted.
Miss Osborne, on the other hand, think of old time and memory and
could not but be touch with the poor mother's pitiful situation. she
be conquer, and lay down her arm, as it be, she humbly
submit. that day they arrange together the preliminary of the
treaty of capitulation.
George be keep from school the next day, and see his aunt. Amelia
leave they alone together and go to her room. she be try the
separation--as that poor gentle Lady Jane Grey feel the edge of the axe
that be to come down and sever her slender life. day be pass in
parley, visit, preparation. the widow break the matter to georgy
with great caution; she look to see he very much affect by the
intelligence. he be rather elated than otherwise, and the poor woman
turn sadly away. he brag about the news that day to the boy at
school; tell they how he be go to live with his grandpapa his
father's father, not the one who come here sometimes; and that he
would be very rich, and have a carriage, and a pony, and go to a much
fine school, and when he be rich he would buy Leader's pencil-case
and pay the tart-woman. the boy be the image of his father, as his
fond mother think.
indeed I have no heart, on account of our dear Amelia's sake, to go
through the story of George's last day at home.
at last the day come, the carriage drive up, the little humble packet
contain token of love and remembrance be ready and dispose in
the hall long since--George be in his new suit, for which the tailor
have come previously to measure he. he have spring up with the sun and
put on the new clothe, his mother hear he from the room close by,
in which she have be lie, in speechless grief and watching. day
before she have be make preparation for the end, purchase little
store for the boy's use, mark his book and linen, talk with he
and prepare he for the change--fondly fancy that he need
preparation.
so that he have change, what care he? he be long for it. by a
thousand eager declaration as to what he would do, when he go to
live with his grandfather, he have show the poor widow how little the
idea of parting have cast he down. "he would come and see his mamma
often on the pony," he say. "he would come and fetch she in the
carriage; they would drive in the park, and she should have everything
she want." the poor mother be fain to content herself with these
selfish demonstration of attachment, and try to convince herself how
sincerely her son love she. he must love she. all child be so:
a little anxious for novelty, and--no, not selfish, but self-willed.
her child must have his enjoyment and ambition in the world. she
herself, by her own selfishness and imprudent love for he have deny
he his just right and pleasure hitherto.
I know few thing more affect than that timorous debasement and
self-humiliation of a woman. how she own that it be she and not the
man who be guilty; how she take all the fault on her side; how she
court in a manner punishment for the wrong which she have not
commit and persist in shield the real culprit! it be those who
injure woman who get the most kindness from they--they be bear timid
and tyrant and maltreat those who be humble before they.
so poor Amelia have be get ready in silent misery for her son's
departure, and have pass many and many a long solitary hour in make
preparation for the end. George stand by his mother, watch she
arrangement without the least concern. tear have fall into his
box; passage have be score in his favourite book; old toy,
relic, treasure have be hoard away for he, and pack with
strange neatness and care--and of all these thing the boy take no
note. the child go away smile as the mother break her heart. by
heaven it be pitiful, the bootless love of woman for child in
Vanity Fair.
a few day be past, and the great event of Amelia's life be
consummate. no angel have intervene. the child be sacrifice and
offer up to fate, and the widow be quite alone.
the boy come to see she often, to be sure. he rid on a pony with a
coachman behind he, to the delight of his old grandfather, Sedley, who
walk proudly down the lane by his side. she see he, but he be not
her boy any more. why, he rid to see the boy at the little school,
too, and to show off before they his new wealth and splendour. in two
day he have adopt a slightly imperious air and patronize manner.
he be bear to command, his mother think, as his father be before he.
it be fine weather now. of evening on the day when he do not come,
she take a long walk into London--yes, as far as Russell Square, and
rest on the stone by the railing of the garden opposite Mr. Osborne's
house. it be so pleasant and cool. she can look up and see the
drawing-room window illuminate, and, at about nine o'clock, the
chamber in the upper story where georgy sleep. she know--he have tell
she. she pray there as the light go out, pray with an humble
heart, and walk home shrink and silent. she be very tired when she
come home. perhaps she will sleep the well for that long weary
walk, and she may dream about Georgy.
one Sunday she happen to be walk in Russell Square, at some
distance from Mr. Osborne's house (she could see it from a distance
though) when all the bell of Sabbath be ring, and George and his
aunt come out to go to church; a little sweep ask for charity, and
the footman, who carry the book, try to drive he away; but georgy
stop and give he money. may God's blessing be on the boy! Emmy
run round the square and, come up to the sweep, give he her mite
too. all the bell of Sabbath be ring, and she follow they until
she come to the Foundling Church, into which she go. there she sit
in a place whence she could see the head of the boy under his father's
tombstone. many hundred fresh child's voice rise up there and sing
hymn to the Father Beneficent, and little George's soul thrill with
delight at the burst of glorious psalmody. his mother could not see
he for awhile, through the mist that dim her eye.
CHAPTER LI
in which a charade be act which May or may not puzzle the reader
after Becky's appearance at my Lord Steyne's private and select
party, the claim of that estimable woman as regard fashion be
settle, and some of the very great and tall door in the
metropolis be speedily open to she--door so great and tall that
the beloved reader and writer hereof may hope in vain to enter at they.
dear brother, let we tremble before those august portal. I fancy
they guard by groom of the chamber with flame silver fork with
which they prong all those who have not the right of the entree. they
say the honest newspaper-fellow who sit in the hall and take down the
name of the great one who be admit to the feast die after a
little time. he cannot survive the glare of fashion long. it scorch
he up, as the presence of Jupiter in full dress waste that poor
imprudent Semele--a giddy moth of a creature who ruin herself by
venture out of her natural atmosphere. her myth ought to be take to
heart amongst the Tyburnians, the Belgravians--her story, and perhaps
Becky's too. ah, ladies!--ask the Reverend Mr. Thurifer if Belgravia be
not a sound brass and Tyburnia a tinkle cymbal. these be
vanity. even these will pass away. and some day or other (but it
will be after our time, thank goodness) Hyde Park Gardens will be no
well know than the celebrate horticultural outskirt of Babylon,
and Belgrave Square will be as desolate as Baker Street, or Tadmor in
the wilderness.
lady, be you aware that the great Pitt live in Baker Street? what
would not your grandmother have give to be ask to Lady Hester's
party in that now decay mansion? I have din in it--moi qui vous
parle, I people the chamber with ghost of the mighty dead. as we sit
soberly drink claret there with man of to-day, the spirit of the
depart come in and take their place round the darksome board. the
pilot who weather the storm toss off great bumper of spiritual
port; the shade of Dundas do not leave the ghost of a heeltap.
Addington sit bow and smirk in a ghastly manner, and would not be
behindhand when the noiseless bottle go round; Scott, from under
bushy eyebrow, wink at the apparition of a beeswing; Wilberforce's
eye go up to the ceiling, so that he do not seem to know how his
glass go up full to his mouth and come down empty; up to the ceiling
which be above we only yesterday, and which the great of the past day
have all look at. they let the house as a furnished lodging now.
yes, Lady Hester once live in Baker Street, and lie asleep in the
wilderness. Eothen see she there--not in Baker Street, but in the other
solitude.
it be all vanity to be sure, but who will not own to like a little of
it? I should like to know what well-constitute mind, merely because it
be transitory, dislike roast beef? that be a vanity, but may every man
who read this have a wholesome portion of it through life, I beg:
aye, though my reader be five hundred thousand. sit down, gentleman,
and fall to, with a good hearty appetite; the fat, the lean, the gravy,
the horse-radish as you like it--don't spare it. another glass of
wine, Jones, my boy--a little bit of the Sunday side. yes, let we eat
our fill of the vain thing and be thankful therefor. and let we make
the good of Becky's aristocratic pleasure likewise--for these too,
like all other mortal delight, be but transitory.
the upshot of her visit to Lord Steyne be that his Highness the Prince
of Peterwaradin take occasion to renew his acquaintance with Colonel
Crawley, when they meet on the next day at the Club, and to compliment
Mrs. Crawley in the Ring of Hyde Park with a profound salute of the
hat. she and her husband be invite immediately to one of the
Prince's small party at Levant House, then occupy by his Highness
during the temporary absence from England of its noble proprietor. she
sing after dinner to a very little comite. the Marquis of Steyne be
present, paternally superintend the progress of his pupil.
at Levant House Becky meet one of the fine gentleman and great
minister that Europe have produce--the Duc de la Jabotiere, then
Ambassador from the most christian king, and subsequently Minister to
that monarch. I declare I swell with pride as these august name be
transcribe by my pen, and I think in what brilliant company my dear
Becky be move. she become a constant guest at the French Embassy,
where no party be consider to be complete without the presence of
the charming Madame Ravdonn Cravley. Messieurs de Truffigny (of the
Perigord family) and Champignac, both attache of the Embassy, be
straightway smite by the charm of the fair Colonel's wife, and both
declare, accord to the willnot of their nation (for who ever yet meet a
Frenchman, come out of England, that have not leave half a dozen family
miserable, and bring away as many heart in his pocket-book?), both,
I say, declare that they be au mieux with the charming Madame
Ravdonn.
but I doubt the correctness of the assertion. Champignac be very fond
of ecarte, and make many party with the Colonel of evening, while
Becky be sing to Lord Steyne in the other room; and as for
Truffigny, it be a well-know fact that he dare not go to the
Travellers', where he owe money to the waiter, and if he have not have
the Embassy as a dining-place, the worthy young gentleman must have
starve. I doubt, I say, that Becky would have select either of
these young man as a person on whom she would bestow her special
regard. they run of her message, purchase her glove and flower,
go in debt for opera-box for she, and make themselves amiable in a
thousand way. and they talk English with adorable simplicity, and
to the constant amusement of Becky and my Lord Steyne, she would mimic
one or other to his face, and compliment he on his advance in the
english language with a gravity which never fail to tickle the
Marquis, her sardonic old patron. Truffigny give Briggs a shawl by way
of win over Becky's confidante, and ask she to take charge of a
letter which the simple spinster hand over in public to the person to
whom it be address, and the composition of which amuse everybody
who read it greatly. Lord Steyne read it, everybody but honest Rawdon,
to whom it be not necessary to tell everything that pass in the
little house in May Fair.
here, before long, Becky receive not only "the good" foreigner (as
the phrase be in our noble and admirable society slang), but some of
the good english people too. I donot mean the most virtuous, or indeed
the least virtuous, or the clever, or the stupid, or the rich,
or the well bear, but "the best,"--in a word, people about whom there
be no question--such as the great Lady Fitz-Willis, that Patron Saint
of Almack's, the great Lady Slowbore, the great Lady Grizzel Macbeth
(she be Lady G. Glowry, daughter of Lord Grey of Glowry), and the
like. when the Countess of Fitz-Willis (her ladyship be of the
Kingstreet family, see Debrett and Burke) take up a person, he or she
be safe. there be no question about they any more. not that my Lady
Fitz-Willis be any well than anybody else, be, on the contrary, a
fade person, fifty-seven year of age, and neither handsome, nor
wealthy, nor entertaining; but it be agree on all side that she be of
the "good people." those who go to she be of the good: and from an
old grudge probably to Lady Steyne (for whose coronet her ladyship,
then the youthful Georgina Frederica, daughter of the Prince of Wales's
favourite, the Earl of Portansherry, have once try), this great and
famous leader of the fashion choose to acknowledge Mrs. Rawdon Crawley;
make she a most marked curtsey at the assembly over which she preside;
and not only encourage her son, St. Kitts (his lordship get his place
through Lord Steyne's interest), to frequent Mrs. Crawley's house, but
ask she to her own mansion and speak to she twice in the most public
and condescend manner during dinner. the important fact be know
all over London that night. People who have be cry fie about Mrs.
Crawley be silent. Wenham, the wit and lawyer, Lord Steyne's
right-hand man, go about everywhere praise she: some who have
hesitate, come forward at once and welcome she; little Tom Toady, who
have warn Southdown about visit such an abandon woman, now
besought to be introduce to she. in a word, she be admit to be
among the "good" people. ah, my beloved reader and brother, do not
envy poor Becky prematurely--glory like this be say to be fugitive.
it be currently report that even in the very inmost circle, they be
no happy than the poor wanderer outside the zone; and Becky, who
penetrate into the very centre of fashion and see the great George IV
face to face, have own since that there too be Vanity.
we must be brief in descant upon this part of her career. as I
cannot describe the mystery of freemasonry, although I have a shrewd
idea that it be a humbug, so an uninitiated man cannot take upon
himself to portray the great world accurately, and have good keep his
opinion to himself, whatever they be.
Becky have often speak in subsequent year of this season of her life,
when she move among the very great circle of the London fashion.
her success excite, elated, and then bore she. at first no
occupation be more pleasant than to invent and procure (the latter a
work of no small trouble and ingenuity, by the way, in a person of Mrs.
Rawdon Crawley's very narrow means)--to procure, we say, the prettiest
new dress and ornament; to drive to fine dinner party, where she
be welcome by great people; and from the fine dinner party to fine
assembly, whither the same people come with whom she have be dining,
whom she have meet the night before, and would see on the morrow--the
young man faultlessly appoint, handsomely cravatte, with the neat
glossy boot and white glove--the elder portly, brass-button,
noble-look, polite, and prosy--the young lady blonde, timid, and
in pink--the mother grand, beautiful, sumptuous, solemn, and in
diamond. they talk in English, not in bad French, as they do in the
novel. they talk about each other' house, and character, and
family--just as the Joneses do about the Smiths. Becky's former
acquaintance hat and envy she; the poor woman herself be yawn
in spirit. "I wish I be out of it," she say to herself. "I would
rather be a parson's wife and teach a Sunday school than this; or a
sergeant's lady and ride in the regimental waggon; or, oh, how much
gayer it would be to wear spangle and trouser and dance before a
booth at a fair."
"you would do it very well," say Lord Steyne, laugh. she use to
tell the great man she ennuis and perplexity in her artless way--they
amuse he.
"Rawdon would make a very good Ecuyer--Master of the Ceremonies--what
do you call he--the man in the large boot and the uniform, who go
round the ring crack the whip? he be large, heavy, and of a military
figure. I recollect," Becky continue pensively, "my father take I to
see a show at Brookgreen Fair when I be a child, and when we come
home, I make myself a pair of stilt and dance in the studio to the
wonder of all the pupil."
"I should have like to see it," say Lord Steyne.
"I should like to do it now," Becky continue. "how Lady Blinkey would
open her eye, and Lady Grizzel Macbeth would stare! hush! silence!
there be Pasta begin to sing." Becky always make a point of be
conspicuously polite to the professional lady and gentleman who
attend at these aristocratic party--of follow they into the
corner where they sit in silence, and shake hand with they, and
smile in the view of all person. she be an artist herself, as she
say very truly; there be a frankness and humility in the manner in
which she acknowledge her origin, which provoke, or disarm, or
amused looker-on, as the case might be. "how cool that woman be," say
one; "what air of independence she assume, where she ought to sit
still and be thankful if anybody speak to she!" "what an honest and
good-natured soul she be!" say another. "what an artful little minx"
say a third. they be all right very likely, but Becky go her own
way, and so fascinate the professional personage that they would
leave off their sore throat in order to sing at her party and give
her lesson for nothing.
yes, she give party in the little house in Curzon Street. many
score of carriage, with blaze lamp, block up the street, to the
disgust of no. 100, who could not rest for the thunder of the knocking,
and of 102, who could not sleep for envy. the gigantic footman who
accompany the vehicle be too big to be contain in Becky's little
hall, and be billet off in the neighbour public-house, whence,
when they be want, call-boy summon they from their beer. score
of the great dandy of London squeeze and trod on each other on the
little stair, laugh to find themselves there; and many spotless and
severe lady of ton be seat in the little drawing-room, listen
to the professional singer, who be sing accord to their wonot,
and as if they wish to blow the window down. and the day after,
there appear among the fashionable reunion in the Morning Post a
paragraph to the follow effect:
"yesterday, Colonel and Mrs. Crawley entertain a select party at
dinner at their house in May Fair. their excellency the Prince and
Princess of Peterwaradin, H. E. Papoosh Pasha, the turkish Ambassador
(attend by Kibob Bey, dragoman of the mission), the Marquess of
Steyne, Earl of Southdown, Sir Pitt and Lady Jane Crawley, Mr. Wagg,
&c. after dinner Mrs. Crawley have an assembly which be attend by
the Duchess (Dowager) of Stilton, Duc de la Gruyere, Marchioness of
Cheshire, marchese Alessandro Strachino, Comte de Brie, Baron
Schapzuger, Chevalier Tosti, Countess of Slingstone, and Lady F.
Macadam, Major-General and Lady G. Macbeth, and (2) Miss Macbeths;
Viscount Paddington, Sir Horace Fogey, Hon. Sands Bedwin, Bobachy
Bahawder," and an &c., which the reader may fill at his pleasure
through a dozen close line of small type.
and in her commerce with the great our dear friend show the same
frankness which distinguish her transaction with the lowly in
station. on one occasion, when out at a very fine house, Rebecca be
(perhaps rather ostentatiously) hold a conversation in the french
language with a celebrated tenor singer of that nation, while the Lady
Grizzel Macbeth look over her shoulder scowl at the pair.
"how very well you speak French," Lady Grizzel say, who herself speak
the tongue in an Edinburgh accent most remarkable to hear.
"I ought to know it," Becky modestly say, cast down her eye. "I
teach it in a school, and my mother be a Frenchwoman."
Lady Grizzel be win by her humility and be mollify towards the
little woman. she deplore the fatal levelling tendency of the age,
which admit person of all class into the society of their
superior, but her ladyship own that this one at least be well
behave and never forget her place in life. she be a very good woman:
good to the poor; stupid, blameless, unsuspicious. it be not her
ladyship's fault that she fancy herself well than you and I. the
skirt of her ancestor' garment have be kiss for century; it be
a thousand year, they say, since the tartan of the head of the family
be embrace by the defunct Duncan's lord and councillor, when the
great ancestor of the House become King of Scotland.
Lady Steyne, after the music scene, succumb before Becky, and perhaps
be not disinclined to she. the young lady of the house of Gaunt
be also compel into submission. once or twice they set people at
she, but they fail. the brilliant Lady Stunnington try a passage
of arm with she, but be rout with great slaughter by the intrepid
little Becky. when attack sometimes, Becky have a knack of adopt a
demure ingenue air, under which she be most dangerous. she say the
wicked thing with the most simple unaffected air when in this mood,
and would take care artlessly to apologize for her blunder, so that
all the world should know that she have make they.
Mr. Wagg, the celebrated wit, and a led captain and trencher-man of my
Lord Steyne, be cause by the lady to charge she; and the worthy
fellow, leer at his patroness and give they a wink, as much as
to say, "now look out for sport," one evening begin an assault upon
Becky, who be unsuspiciously eat her dinner. the little woman,
attack on a sudden, but never without arm, light up in an instant,
parried and riposte with a home-thrust, which make Wagg's face tingle
with shame; then she return to her soup with the most perfect calm
and a quiet smile on her face. Wagg's great patron, who give he
dinner and lend he a little money sometimes, and whose election,
newspaper, and other job Wagg do, give the luckless fellow such a
savage glance with the eye as almost make he sink under the table and
burst into tear. he look piteously at my lord, who never speak to
he during dinner, and at the lady, who disown he. at last Becky
herself take compassion upon he and try to engage he in talk. he
be not ask to dinner again for six week; and Fiche, my lord's
confidential man, to whom Wagg naturally pay a good deal of court, be
instruct to tell he that if he ever dare to say a rude thing to
Mrs. Crawley again, or make she the butt of his stupid joke, Milor
would put every one of his note of hand into his lawyer's hand and
sell he up without mercy. Wagg weep before Fiche and implore his
dear friend to intercede for he. he write a poem in favour of Mrs. R.
C., which appear in the very next number of the Harum-scarum
Magazine, which he conduct. he implore her good-will at party
where he meet she. he cringe and coax Rawdon at the club. he be
allow to come back to Gaunt House after a while. Becky be always
good to he, always amuse, never angry.
his lordship's vizier and chief confidential servant (with a seat in
parliament and at the dinner table), Mr. Wenham, be much more prudent
in his behaviour and opinion than Mr. Wagg. however much he might be
disposed to hate all parvenus (Mr. Wenham himself be a staunch old
true Blue Tory, and his father a small coal-merchant in the north of
England), this aide-de-camp of the Marquis never show any sort of
hostility to the new favourite, but pursue she with stealthy
kindness and a sly and deferential politeness which somehow make
Becky more uneasy than other people's overt hostility.
how the Crawleys get the money which be spend upon the entertainment
with which they treat the polite world be a mystery which give rise
to some conversation at the time, and probably add zest to these
little festivity. some person aver that Sir Pitt Crawley give
his brother a handsome allowance; if he do, Becky's power over the
Baronet must have be extraordinary indeed, and his character greatly
change in his advanced age. other party hint that it be Becky's
habit to levy contribution on all her husband's friend: go to this
one in tear with an account that there be an execution in the house;
fall on her knee to that one and declare that the whole family
must go to gaol or commit suicide unless such and such a bill could be
pay. Lord Southdown, it be say, have be induce to give many
hundred through these pathetic representation. Young Feltham, of the
--th Dragoons (and son of the firm of Tiler and Feltham, hatter and
army accoutrement maker), and whom the Crawleys introduce into
fashionable life, be also cite as one of Becky's victim in the
pecuniary way. People declare that she get money from various simply
disposed person, under pretence of get they confidential
appointment under Government. who know what story be or be not
tell of our dear and innocent friend? certain it be that if she have have
all the money which she be say to have beg or borrow or steal,
she might have capitalize and be honest for life, whereas,--but this
be advance matter.
the truth be, that by economy and good management--by a sparing use of
ready money and by pay scarcely anybody--people can manage, for a
time at least, to make a great show with very little mean: and it be
our belief that Becky's much-talk-of party, which be not, after
all be say, very numerous, cost this lady very little more than the
wax candle which light the wall. Stillbrook and Queen's Crawley
supply she with game and fruit in abundance. Lord Steyne's cellar
be at her disposal, and that excellent nobleman's famous cook
preside over her little kitchen, or send by my lord's order the rare
delicacy from their own. I protest it be quite shameful in the world
to abuse a simple creature, as people of her time abuse Becky, and I
warn the public against believe one-tenth of the story against she.
if every person be to be banish from society who run into debt and
cannot pay--if we be to be peer into everybody's private life,
speculate upon their income, and cut they if we donot approve of
their expenditure--why, what a howl wilderness and intolerable
dwell Vanity Fair would be! every man's hand would be against his
neighbour in this case, my dear sir, and the benefit of civilization
would be do away with. we should be quarrel, abuse, avoid
one another. our house would become cavern, and we should go in rag
because we care for nobody. rent would go down. party wouldnot be
give any more. all the tradesman of the town would be bankrupt. wine,
wax-light, comestible, rouge, crinoline-petticoat, diamond, wig,
Louis-Quatorze gimcrack, and old china, park hack, and splendid
high-step carriage horse--all the delight of life, I say,--would
go to the deuce, if people do but act upon their silly principle and
avoid those whom they dislike and abuse. whereas, by a little charity
and mutual forbearance, thing be make to go on pleasantly enough: we
may abuse a man as much as we like, and call he the great rascal
unhanged--but do we wish to hang he therefore? no. we shake hand when
we meet. if his cook be good we forgive he and go and dine with he,
and we expect he will do the same by we. thus trade
flourish--civilization advance; peace be keep; new dress be
want for new assembly every week; and the last year's vintage of
Lafitte will remunerate the honest proprietor who rear it.
at the time whereof we be write, though the Great George be on the
throne and lady wear gigot and large comb like tortoise-shell
shovel in their hair, instead of the simple sleeve and lovely wreath
which be actually in fashion, the manner of the very polite world
be not, I take it, essentially different from those of the present
day: and their amusement pretty similar. to we, from the outside,
gaze over the policeman's shoulder at the bewilder beauty as
they pass into Court or ball, they may seem being of unearthly
splendour and in the enjoyment of an exquisite happiness by we
unattainable. it be to console some of these dissatisfied being that
we be narrate our dear Becky's struggle, and triumph, and
disappointment, of all of which, indeed, as be the case with all
person of merit, she have her share.
at this time the amiable amusement of act charade have come among we
from France, and be considerably in vogue in this country, enable
the many lady amongst we who have beauty to display their charm, and
the few number who have cleverness to exhibit their wit. my Lord
Steyne be incite by Becky, who perhaps believe herself endow with
both the above qualification, to give an entertainment at Gaunt House,
which should include some of these little drama--and we must take
leave to introduce the reader to this brilliant reunion, and, with a
melancholy welcome too, for it will be among the very last of the
fashionable entertainment to which it will be our fortune to conduct
he.
a portion of that splendid room, the picture gallery of Gaunt House,
be arrange as the charade theatre. it have be so use when George
III be king; and a picture of the Marquis of Gaunt be still extant,
with his hair in powder and a pink ribbon, in a roman shape, as it be
call, enact the part of Cato in Mr. Addison's tragedy of that
name, perform before their Royal Highnesses the Prince of Wales, the
Bishop of Osnaburgh, and Prince William Henry, then child like the
actor. one or two of the old property be draw out of the garret,
where they have lain ever since, and furbish up anew for the present
festivity.
Young Bedwin Sands, then an elegant dandy and eastern traveller, be
manager of the revel. an eastern traveller be somebody in those
day, and the adventurous Bedwin, who have publish his quarto and
pass some month under the tent in the desert, be a personage of no
small importance. in his volume there be several picture of Sands
in various oriental costume; and he travel about with a black
attendant of most unprepossessing appearance, just like another Brian
de Bois Guilbert. Bedwin, his costume, and black man, be hail at
Gaunt House as very valuable acquisition.
he lead off the first charade. a turkish officer with an immense plume
of feather (the Janizaries be suppose to be still in existence, and
the tarboosh have not as yet displace the ancient and majestic
head-dress of the true believer) be see couch on a divan, and
making believe to puff at a narghile, in which, however, for the sake
of the lady, only a fragrant pastille be allow to smoke. the
turkish dignitary yawn and express sign of weariness and idleness.
he clap his hand and Mesrour the Nubian appear, with bare arm,
bangle, yataghans, and every eastern ornament--gaunt, tall, and
hideous. he make a salaam before my lord the Aga.
a thrill of terror and delight run through the assembly. the lady
whisper to one another. the black slave be give to Bedwin Sands by
an egyptian pasha in exchange for three dozen of Maraschino. he have
sew up ever so many odalisque in sack and tilt they into the Nile.
"bid the slave-merchant enter," say the turkish voluptuary with a wave
of his hand. Mesrour conduct the slave-merchant into my lord's
presence; he bring a veiled female with he. he remove the veil. a
thrill of applause burst through the house. it be Mrs. Winkworth (she
be a Miss Absolom) with the beautiful eye and hair. she be in a
gorgeous oriental costume; the black braid lock be twin with
innumerable jewel; her dress be cover over with gold piastre. the
odious Mahometan express himself charm by her beauty. she fall
down on her knee and entreat he to restore she to the mountain
where she be bear, and where her circassian lover be still deplore
the absence of his Zuleikah. no entreaty will move the obdurate
Hassan. he laugh at the notion of the circassian bridegroom. Zuleikah
cover her face with her hand and drop down in an attitude of the
most beautiful despair. there seem to be no hope for she, when--when
the Kislar Aga appear.
the Kislar Aga bring a letter from the Sultan. Hassan receive and
place on his head the dread firman. a ghastly terror seize he,
while on the Negro's face (it be Mesrour again in another costume)
appear a ghastly joy. "mercy! mercy!" cry the Pasha: while the
Kislar Aga, grin horribly, pull out--a bow-string.
the curtain draw just as he be go to use that awful weapon. Hassan
from within bawl out, "first two syllables"--and Mrs. Rawdon Crawley,
who be go to act in the charade, come forward and compliment Mrs.
Winkworth on the admirable taste and beauty of her costume.
the second part of the charade take place. it be still an eastern
scene. Hassan, in another dress, be in an attitude by Zuleikah, who be
perfectly reconcile to he. the Kislar Aga have become a peaceful black
slave. it be sunrise on the desert, and the Turks turn their head
eastward and bow to the sand. as there be no dromedary at hand,
the band facetiously play "the Camels be come." an enormous
egyptian head figure in the scene. it be a musical one--and, to the
surprise of the oriental traveller, sing a comic song, compose by
Mr. Wagg. the eastern voyager go off dancing, like Papageno and the
Moorish King in the Magic Flute. "last two syllable," roar the head.
the last act open. it be a grecian tent this time. a tall and
stalwart man repose on a couch there. above he hang his helmet and
shield. there be no need for they now. Ilium be down. Iphigenia be
slain. Cassandra be a prisoner in his outer hall. the king of man (it
be Colonel Crawley, who, indeed, have no notion about the sack of Ilium
or the conquest of Cassandra), the anax andron be asleep in his chamber
at Argos. a lamp cast the broad shadow of the sleep warrior
flickering on the wall--the sword and shield of Troy glitter in its
light. the band play the awful music of Don Juan, before the statue
enter.
Aegisthus steal in pale and on tiptoe. what be that ghastly face
look out balefully after he from behind the arra? he raise his
dagger to strike the sleeper, who turn in his bed, and open his broad
chest as if for the blow. he cannot strike the noble slumbering
chieftain. clytemnestra glide swiftly into the room like an
apparition--her arm be bare and white--her tawny hair float down her
shoulder--her face be deadly pale--and her eye be light up with a
smile so ghastly that people quake as they look at she.
a tremor run through the room. "Good God!" somebody say, "itbe Mrs.
Rawdon Crawley."
scornfully she snatch the dagger out of Aegisthus's hand and advance
to the bed. you see it shin over her head in the glimmer of the
lamp, and--and the lamp go out, with a groan, and all be dark.
the darkness and the scene frighten people. rebecca perform she
part so well, and with such ghastly truth, that the spectator be all
dumb, until, with a burst, all the lamp of the hall blaze out again,
when everybody begin to shout applause. "Brava! brava!" old Steyne's
strident voice be hear roar over all the rest. "By--, shewould do it
too," he say between his tooth. the performer be call by the
whole house, which sound with cry of "Manager! Clytemnestra!"
Agamemnon could not be get to show in his classical tunic, but stand in
the background with Aegisthus and other of the performer of the
little play. Mr. Bedwin Sands lead on Zuleikah and Clytemnestra. a
great personage insist on be present to the charming
Clytemnestra. "heigh ha? run he through the body. marry somebody
else, hay?" be the apposite remark make by his Royal Highness.
"Mrs. Rawdon Crawley be quite kill in the part," say Lord Steyne.
Becky laugh, gay and saucy look, and sweep the pretty little
curtsey ever see.
servant bring in salver cover with numerous cool dainty, and
the performer disappear to get ready for the second charade-tableau.
the three syllable of this charade be to be depict in pantomime,
and the performance take place in the follow wise:
First syllable. Colonel Rawdon Crawley, C.B., with a slouched hat and
a staff, a great-coat, and a lantern borrow from the stable, pass
across the stage bawl out, as if warn the inhabitant of the
hour. in the low window be see two bagman play apparently at
the game of cribbage, over which they yawn much. to they enter one
look like boot (the Honourable G. Ringwood), which character the
young gentleman perform to perfection, and divest they of their
low covering; and presently Chambermaid (the Right Honourable Lord
Southdown) with two candlestick, and a warming-pan. she ascend to
the upper apartment and warm the bed. she use the warming-pan as a
weapon wherewith she ward off the attention of the bagman. she exit.
they put on their night-cap and pull down the blind. boot come out
and close the shutter of the ground-floor chamber. you hear he
bolt and chain the door within. all the light go out. the
music play Dormez, dormez, cher Amours. a voice from behind the
curtain say, "first syllable."
second syllable. the lamp be light up all of a sudden. the music
play the old air from John of Paris, ah quel plaisir d'etre en voyage.
it be the same scene. between the first and second floor of the house
represent, you behold a sign on which the Steyne arm be paint.
all the bell be ring all over the house. in the low apartment
you see a man with a long slip of paper present it to another, who
shake his fist, threaten and vow that it be monstrous. "Ostler,
bring round my gig," cry another at the door. he chuck Chambermaid
(the right honourable Lord Southdown) under the chin; she seem to
deplore his absence, as Calypso do that of that other eminent
traveller Ulysses. boot (the Honourable G. Ringwood) pass with a
wooden box, contain silver flagon, and cry "pot" with such
exquisite humour and naturalness that the whole house ring with
applause, and a bouquet be throw to he. crack, crack, crack, go the
whip. Landlord, chambermaid, waiter rush to the door, but just as
some distinguished guest be arrive, the curtain close, and the
invisible theatrical manager cry out "second syllable."
"I think it must be 'hotel,'" say Captain Grigg of the Life Guards;
there be a general laugh at the Captain's cleverness. he be not very
far from the mark.
while the third syllable be in preparation, the band begin a nautical
medley--"all in the down," "Cease Rude Boreas," "Rule Britannia," "in
the Bay of Biscay O!"--some maritime event be about to take place. a
ben be hear ring as the curtain draw aside. "now, gent, for the
shore!" a voice exclaim. People take leave of each other. they point
anxiously as if towards the cloud, which be represent by a dark
curtain, and they nod their head in fear. Lady Squeams (the right
honourable Lord Southdown), her lap-dog, her bag, reticule, and
husband sit down, and cle hold of some rope. it be evidently a ship.
the Captain (Colonel Crawley, C.B.), with a cocked hat and a telescope,
come in, hold his hat on his head, and look out; his coat tail
fly about as if in the wind. when he leave go of his hat to use his
telescope, his hat fly off, with immense applause. it be blow
fresh. the music rise and whistle louder and louder; the mariner go
across the stage staggering, as if the ship be in severe motion. the
Steward (the Honourable G. Ringwood) pass reel by, hold six
basin. he put one rapidly by Lord Squeams--Lady Squeams, give a
pinch to her dog, which begin to howl piteously, put she
pocket-handkerchief to her face, and rush away as for the cabin. the
music rise up to the wild pitch of stormy excitement, and the third
syllable be conclude.
there be a little ballet, "Le Rossignol," in which Montessu and Noblet
use to be famous in those day, and which Mr. Wagg transfer to the
english stage as an opera, put his verse, of which he be a skilful
writer, to the pretty air of the ballet. it be dress in old french
costume, and little Lord Southdown now appear admirably attire in
the disguise of an old woman hobble about the stage with a faultless
crooked stick.
Trills of melody be hear behind the scene, and gurgle from a
sweet pasteboard cottage cover with rose and trelli work.
"Philomele, Philomele," cry the old woman, and Philomele come out.
More applause--it be Mrs. Rawdon Crawley in powder and patch, the
most ravissante little Marquise in the world.
she come in laughing, humming, and frisk about the stage with all the
innocence of theatrical youth--she make a curtsey. Mamma say "why,
child, you be always laugh and singing," and away she go, with--
the ROSE UPON MY BALCONY
the rise upon my balcony the morning air perfume
be leafless all the winter time and pin for the spring;
you ask I why her breath be sweet and why her cheek be bloom,
it be because the sun be out and bird begin to sing.
the nightingale, whose melody be through the greenwood ringing,
be silent when the bough be bare and wind be blow keen:
and if, Mamma, you ask of I the reason of his singing,
it be because the sun be out and all the leaf be green.
thus each perform his part, Mamma, the bird have find their voice,
the blowing rise a flush, Mamma, her bonny cheek to dye;
and therebe sunshine in my heart, Mamma, which waken and rejoice,
and so I sing and blush, Mamma, and thatbe the reason why.
during the interval of the stanzas of this ditty, the good-natured
personage address as Mamma by the singer, and whose large whisker
appear under her cap, seem very anxious to exhibit her maternal
affection by embrace the innocent creature who perform the
daughter's part. every caress be receive with loud acclamation of
laughter by the sympathize audience. at its conclusion (while the
music be perform a symphony as if ever so many bird be warble)
the whole house be unanimous for an encore: and applause and bouquet
without end be shower upon the Nightingale of the evening. Lord
Steyne's voice of applause be loud of all. Becky, the nightingale,
take the flower which he throw to she and press they to her heart
with the air of a consummate comedian. Lord Steyne be frantic with
delight. his guest' enthusiasm harmonize with his own. where be
the beautiful black-eyed Houri whose appearance in the first charade
have cause such delight? she be twice as handsome as Becky, but the
brilliancy of the latter have quite eclipse she. all voice be for
she. Stephens, Caradori, Ronzi de Begnis, people compare she to one
or the other, and agree with good reason, very likely, that have she
be an actress none on the stage could have surpass she. she have
reach her culmination: her voice rise trilling and bright over the
storm of applause, and soar as high and joyful as her triumph. there
be a ball after the dramatic entertainment, and everybody press
round Becky as the great point of attraction of the evening. the Royal
Personage declare with an oath that she be perfection, and engage
she again and again in conversation. little Becky's soul swell with
pride and delight at these honour; she see fortune, fame, fashion
before she. Lord Steyne be her slave, follow she everywhere, and
scarcely speak to any one in the room beside, and pay she the most
mark compliment and attention. she still appear in her Marquise
costume and dance a minuet with Monsieur de Truffigny, Monsieur Le Duc
de la Jabotiere's attache; and the Duke, who have all the tradition of
the ancient court, pronounce that Madame Crawley be worthy to have
be a pupil of Vestris, or to have figure at Versailles. only a
feeling of dignity, the gout, and the strong sense of duty and
personal sacrifice prevent his Excellency from dance with she
himself, and he declare in public that a lady who could talk and dance
like Mrs. Rawdon be fit to be ambassadress at any court in Europe. he
be only console when he hear that she be half a Frenchwoman by
birth. "none but a compatriot," his Excellency declare, "could have
perform that majestic dance in such a way."
then she figure in a waltz with Monsieur de Klingenspohr, the Prince
of Peterwaradin's cousin and attache. the delighted Prince, have
less retenue than his french diplomatic colleague, insist upon take
a turn with the charming creature, and twirl round the ball-room with
she, scatter the diamond out of his boot-tassel and hussar jacket
until his Highness be fairly out of breath. Papoosh Pasha himself
would have like to dance with she if that amusement have be the
custom of his country. the company make a circle round she and
applaud as wildly as if she have be a Noblet or a Taglioni.
everybody be in ecstacy; and Becky too, you may be sure. she pass
by Lady Stunnington with a look of scorn. she patronize Lady Gaunt
and her astonished and mortified sister-in-law--she ecrase all rival
charmer. as for poor Mrs. Winkworth, and her long hair and great
eye, which have make such an effect at the commencement of the
evening--where be she now? nowhere in the race. she might tear she
long hair and cry her great eye out, but there be not a person to
heed or to deplore the discomfiture.
the great triumph of all be at supper time. she be place at the
grand exclusive table with his Royal Highness the exalt personage
before mention, and the rest of the great guest. she be serve on
gold plate. she might have have pearl melt into her champagne if she
like--another Cleopatra--and the potentate of Peterwaradin would have
give half the brilliant off his jacket for a kind glance from those
dazzle eye. Jabotiere write home about she to his government. the
lady at the other table, who sup off mere silver and mark Lord
Steyne's constant attention to she, vow it be a monstrous
infatuation, a gross insult to lady of rank. if sarcasm could have
kill, Lady Stunnington would have slay she on the spot.
Rawdon Crawley be scared at these triumph. they seem to separate
his wife far than ever from he somehow. he think with a feeling
very like pain how immeasurably she be his superior.
when the hour of departure come, a crowd of young man follow she to
her carriage, for which the people without bawl, the cry be catch
up by the link-man who be station outside the tall gate of Gaunt
House, congratulate each person who issue from the gate and hop
his Lordship have enjoy this noble party.
Mrs. Rawdon Crawley's carriage, come up to the gate after due
shouting, rattle into the illuminated court-yard and drive up to the
cover way. Rawdon put his wife into the carriage, which drive off.
Mr. Wenham have propose to he to walk home, and offer the Colonel
the refreshment of a cigar.
they light their cigar by the lamp of one of the many link-boy
outside, and Rawdon walk on with his friend Wenham. two person
separate from the crowd and follow the two gentleman; and when they
have walk down Gaunt Square a few score of pace, one of the man come
up and, touch Rawdon on the shoulder, say, "beg your pardon,
Colonel, I vish to speak to you most particular." this gentleman's
acquaintance give a loud whistle as the latter speak, at which signal a
cab come clatter up from those station at the gate of Gaunt
House--and the aide-de-camp run round and place himself in front of
Colonel Crawley.
that gallant officer at once know what have befall he. he be in the
hand of the bailiff. he start back, fall against the man who
have first touch he.
"webe three on we--itbe no use bolting," the man behind say.
"itbe you, Moss, be it?" say the Colonel, who appear to know his
interlocutor. "how much be it?"
"only a small thing," whisper Mr. Moss, of Cursitor Street, Chancery
Lane, and assistant officer to the Sheriff of middlesex--"one hundred
and sixty-six, six and eight-pence, at the suit of Mr. Nathan."
"lend I a hundred, Wenham, for God's sake," poor Rawdon said--"I've
get seventy at home."
"Ihave not get ten pound in the world," say poor Mr. wenham--"good
night, my dear fellow."
"good night," say Rawdon ruefully. and Wenham walk away--and Rawdon
Crawley finish his cigar as the cab drive under Temple Bar.
CHAPTER LII
in which Lord Steyne show himself in a most amiable Light
when Lord Steyne be benevolently dispose, he do nothing by half,
and his kindness towards the Crawley family do the great honour to
his benevolent discrimination. his lordship extend his good-will to
little Rawdon: he point out to the boy's parent the necessity of
send he to a public school, that he be of an age now when
emulation, the first principle of the latin language, pugilistic
exercise, and the society of his fellow-boy would be of the great
benefit to the boy. his father object that he be not rich enough to
send the child to a good public school; his mother that Briggs be a
capital mistress for he, and have bring he on (as indeed be the
fact) famously in English, the latin rudiment, and in general
learning: but all these objection disappear before the generous
perseverance of the Marquis of Steyne. his lordship be one of the
governor of that famous old collegiate institution call the
Whitefriars. it have be a Cistercian Convent in old day, when the
Smithfield, which be contiguous to it, be a tournament ground.
Obstinate heretic use to be bring thither convenient for burn
hard by. Henry VIII, the Defender of the Faith, seize upon the
monastery and its possession and hang and torture some of the monk
who could not accommodate themselves to the pace of his reform.
finally, a great merchant buy the house and land adjoining, in
which, and with the help of other wealthy endowment of land and money,
he establish a famous foundation hospital for old man and child.
an extern school grow round the old almost monastic foundation, which
subsist still with its middle-age costume and usage--and all
Cistercians pray that it may long flourish.
of this famous house, some of the great nobleman, prelate, and
dignitary in England be governor: and as the boy be very
comfortably lodge, fed, and educate, and subsequently induct to
good scholarship at the University and living in the Church, many
little gentleman be devoted to the ecclesiastical profession from
their tender year, and there be considerable emulation to procure
nomination for the foundation. it be originally intend for the
son of poor and deserve cleric and laic, but many of the noble
governor of the Institution, with an enlarged and rather capricious
benevolence, select all sort of object for their bounty. to get an
education for nothing, and a future livelihood and profession assure,
be so excellent a scheme that some of the rich people do not
disdain it; and not only great man's relation, but great man
themselves, send their son to profit by the chance--Right Rev.
prelate send their own kinsman or the son of their clergy, while, on
the other hand, some great nobleman do not disdain to patronize the
child of their confidential servant--so that a lad enter this
establishment have every variety of youthful society wherewith to mingle.
Rawdon Crawley, though the only book which he study be the Racing
Calendar, and though his chief recollection of polite learning be
connect with the flogging which he receive at Eton in his early
youth, have that decent and honest reverence for classical learning
which all english gentleman feel, and be glad to think that his son
be to have a provision for life, perhaps, and a certain opportunity of
become a scholar. and although his boy be his chief solace and
companion, and endear to he by a thousand small tie, about which he
do not care to speak to his wife, who have all along show the utmost
indifference to their son, yet Rawdon agree at once to part with he
and to give up his own great comfort and benefit for the sake of the
welfare of the little lad. he do not know how fond he be of the
child until it become necessary to let he go away. when he be go,
he feel more sad and downcast than he care to own--far sad than the
boy himself, who be happy enough to enter a new career and find
companion of his own age. Becky burst out laugh once or twice when
the Colonel, in his clumsy, incoherent way, try to express his
sentimental sorrow at the boy's departure. the poor fellow feel that
his dear pleasure and close friend be take from he. he look
often and wistfully at the little vacant bed in his dressing-room,
where the child use to sleep. he miss he sadly of morning and
try in vain to walk in the park without he. he do not know how
solitary he be until little Rawdon be go. he like the people who
be fond of he, and would go and sit for long hour with his
good-natured sister Lady Jane, and talk to she about the virtue, and
good look, and hundred good quality of the child.
Young Rawdon's aunt, we have say, be very fond of he, as be her
little girl, who weep copiously when the time for her cousin's
departure come. the elder Rawdon be thankful for the fondness of
mother and daughter. the very good and honest feeling of the man
come out in these artless outpouring of paternal feeling in which he
indulge in their presence, and encourage by their sympathy. he
secure not only Lady Jane's kindness, but her sincere regard, by the
feeling which he manifest, and which he could not show to his own
wife. the two kinswoman meet as seldom as possible. Becky laugh
bitterly at Jane's feeling and softness; the other's kindly and gentle
nature could not but revolt at her sister's callous behaviour.
it estrange Rawdon from his wife more than he know or acknowledge to
himself. she do not care for the estrangement. indeed, she do not
miss he or anybody. she look upon he as her errand-man and humble
slave. he might be ever so depressed or sulky, and she do not mark
his demeanour, or only treat it with a sneer. she be busy think
about her position, or her pleasure, or her advancement in society;
she ought to have hold a great place in it, that be certain.
it be honest Briggs who make up the little kit for the boy which he
be to take to school. molly, the housemaid, blubber in the passage
when he go away--molly kind and faithful in spite of a long arrear of
unpaid wage. Mrs. Becky could not let her husband have the carriage
to take the boy to school. take the horse into the City!--such a
thing be never hear of. let a cab be bring. she do not offer to
kiss he when he go, nor do the child propose to embrace she; but
give a kiss to old Briggs (whom, in general, he be very shy of
caressing), and console she by point out that he be to come home
on Saturdays, when she would have the benefit of see he. as the
cab roll towards the City, Becky's carriage rattle off to the park.
she be chatter and laugh with a score of young dandy by the
Serpentine as the father and son enter at the old gate of the
school--where Rawdon leave the child and come away with a sad purer
feeling in his heart than perhaps that poor battered fellow have ever
know since he himself come out of the nursery.
he walk all the way home very dismally, and din alone with Briggs.
he be very kind to she and grateful for her love and watchfulness over
the boy. his conscience smite he that he have borrow Briggs's money
and aid in deceive she. they talk about little Rawdon a long
time, for Becky only come home to dress and go out to dinner--and then
he go off uneasily to drink tea with Lady Jane, and tell she of what
have happen, and how little Rawdon go off like a trump, and how he
be to wear a gown and little knee-breech, and how young Blackball,
Jack Blackball's son, of the old regiment, have take he in charge and
promise to be kind to he.
in the course of a week, young Blackball have constitute little Rawdon
his fag, shoe-black, and breakfast toaster; initiate he into the
mystery of the Latin Grammar; and thrash he three or four time,
but not severely. the little chap's good-natured honest face win his
way for he. he only get that degree of beating which be, no doubt,
good for he; and as for blacking shoe, toast bread, and fag in
general, be these office not deem to be necessary part of every
young english gentleman's education?
our business do not lie with the second generation and Master
Rawdon's life at school, otherwise the present tale might be carry to
any indefinite length. the Colonel go to see his son a short time
afterwards and find the lad sufficiently well and happy, grin and
laugh in his little black gown and little breech.
his father sagaciously tip Blackball, his master, a sovereign, and
secure that young gentleman's good-will towards his fag. as a protege
of the great Lord Steyne, the nephew of a County member, and son of a
Colonel and C.B., whose name appear in some of the most fashionable
party in the Morning Post, perhaps the school authority be
disposed not to look unkindly on the child. he have plenty of
pocket-money, which he spend in treat his comrade royally to
raspberry tart, and he be often allow to come home on Saturdays to
his father, who always make a jubilee of that day. when free, Rawdon
would take he to the play, or send he thither with the footman; and
on Sundays he go to church with Briggs and Lady Jane and his cousin.
Rawdon marvel over his story about school, and fight, and
fag. before long, he know the name of all the master and the
principal boy as well as little Rawdon himself. he invite little
Rawdon's crony from school, and make both the child sick with
pastry, and oyster, and porter after the play. he try to look
know over the Latin grammar when little Rawdon show he what part
of that work he be "in." "Stick to it, my boy," he say to he with
much gravity, "therebe nothing like a good classical education!
nothing!"
Becky's contempt for her husband grow great every day. "do what you
like--dine where you please--go and have ginger-beer and sawdust at
Astley's, or psalm-singing with Lady Jane--only donot expect I to busy
myself with the boy. I have your interest to attend to, as you cannot
attend to they yourself. I should like to know where you would have
be now, and in what sort of a position in society, if I have not
look after you." indeed, nobody want poor old Rawdon at the party
whither Becky use to go. she be often ask without he now. she
talk about great people as if she have the fee-simple of May Fair, and
when the Court go into mourning, she always wear black.
little Rawdon be dispose of, Lord Steyne, who take such a parental
interest in the affair of this amiable poor family, think that their
expense might be very advantageously curtail by the departure of
Miss Briggs, and that Becky be quite clever enough to take the
management of her own house. it have be narrate in a former chapter
how the benevolent nobleman have give his protegee money to pay off her
little debt to Miss Briggs, who however still remain behind with her
friend; whence my lord come to the painful conclusion that Mrs.
Crawley have make some other use of the money confide to she than that
for which her generous patron have give the loan. however, Lord Steyne
be not so rude as to impart his suspicion upon this head to Mrs.
Becky, whose feeling might be hurt by any controversy on the
money-question, and who might have a thousand painful reason for
dispose otherwise of his lordship's generous loan. but he determine
to satisfy himself of the real state of the case, and institute the
necessary inquiry in a most cautious and delicate manner.
in the first place he take an early opportunity of pump Miss Briggs.
that be not a difficult operation. a very little encouragement would
set that worthy woman to talk volubly and pour out all within she. and
one day when Mrs. Rawdon have go out to drive (as Mr. Fiche, his
lordship's confidential servant, easily learn at the livery stable
where the Crawleys keep their carriage and horse, or rather, where the
livery-man keep a carriage and horse for Mr. and Mrs. Crawley)--my
lord drop in upon the Curzon Street house--ask Briggs for a cup of
coffee--tell she that he have good account of the little boy at
school--and in five minute find out from she that Mrs. Rawdon have
give she nothing except a black silk gown, for which Miss Briggs be
immensely grateful.
he laugh within himself at this artless story. for the truth be, our
dear friend Rebecca have give he a most circumstantial narration of
Briggs's delight at receive her money--eleven hundred and twenty-five
pound--and in what security she have invest it; and what a pang
Becky herself feel in be oblige to pay away such a delightful sum
of money. "who know," the dear woman may have think within herself,
"perhaps he may give I a little more?" my lord, however, make no such
proposal to the little schemer--very likely think that he have be
sufficiently generous already.
he have the curiosity, then, to ask Miss Briggs about the state of her
private affair--and she tell his lordship candidly what her position
be--how Miss Crawley have leave she a legacy--how her relative have have
part of it--how Colonel Crawley have put out another portion, for which
she have the good security and interest--and how Mr. and Mrs. Rawdon
have kindly busy themselves with Sir Pitt, who be to dispose of the
remainder most advantageously for she, when he have time. my lord ask
how much the Colonel have already invest for she, and Miss Briggs at
once and truly tell he that the sum be six hundred and odd pound.
but as soon as she have tell her story, the voluble Briggs repent of
her frankness and besought my lord not to tell Mr. Crawley of the
confession which she have make. "the Colonel be so kind--Mr. Crawley
might be offend and pay back the money, for which she could get no
such good interest anywhere else." Lord Steyne, laughing, promise he
never would divulge their conversation, and when he and Miss Briggs
part he laugh still more.
"what an accomplished little devil it be!" think he. "what a splendid
actress and manager! she have almost get a second supply out of I the
other day; with her coax way. she beat all the woman I have ever
see in the course of all my well-spend life. they be baby compare
to she. I be a greenhorn myself, and a fool in her hand--an old fool.
she be unsurpassable in lie." his lordship's admiration for Becky rise
immeasurably at this proof of her cleverness. get the money be
nothing--but get double the sum she want, and pay nobody--it
be a magnificent stroke. and Crawley, my lord think--Crawley be not
such a fool as he look and seem. he have manage the matter cleverly
enough on his side. nobody would ever have suppose from his face and
demeanour that he know anything about this money business; and yet he
put she up to it, and have spend the money, no doubt. in this opinion
my lord, we know, be mistaken, but it influence a good deal his
behaviour towards Colonel Crawley, whom he begin to treat with even
less than that semblance of respect which he have formerly show towards
that gentleman. it never enter into the head of Mrs. Crawley's
patron that the little lady might be make a purse for herself; and,
perhaps, if the truth must be tell, he judge of Colonel Crawley by his
experience of other husband, whom he have know in the course of the
long and well-spend life which have make he acquaint with a great
deal of the weakness of mankind. my lord have buy so many man during
his life that he be surely to be pardon for suppose that he have
find the price of this one.
he tax Becky upon the point on the very first occasion when he meet
she alone, and he compliment she, good-humouredly, on her cleverness
in get more than the money which she require. Becky be only a
little take aback. it be not the habit of this dear creature to tell
falsehood, except when necessity compel, but in these great
emergency it be her practice to lie very freely; and in an instant
she be ready with another neat plausible circumstantial story which
she administer to her patron. the previous statement which she have
make to he be a falsehood--a wicked falsehood--she own it. but who
have make she tell it? "ah, my Lord," she say, "you donot know all I
have to suffer and bear in silence; you see I gay and happy before
you--you little know what I have to endure when there be no protector
near I. it be my husband, by threat and the most savage treatment,
force I to ask for that sum about which I deceive you. it be he
who, foresee that question might be ask regard the disposal of
the money, force I to account for it as I do. he take the money.
he tell I he have pay Miss Briggs; I do not want, I do not dare to
doubt he. pardon the wrong which a desperate man be force to commit,
and pity a miserable, miserable woman." she burst into tear as she
speak. persecute virtue never look more bewitchingly wretched.
they have a long conversation, drive round and round the Regent's Park
in Mrs. Crawley's carriage together, a conversation of which it be not
necessary to repeat the detail, but the upshot of it be that, when
Becky come home, she fly to her dear Briggs with a smile face and
announce that she have some very good news for she. Lord Steyne have
act in the noble and most generous manner. he be always think
how and when he could do good. now that little Rawdon be go to
school, a dear companion and friend be no long necessary to she.
she be grieve beyond measure to part with Briggs, but her mean
require that she should practise every retrenchment, and her sorrow
be mitigate by the idea that her dear Briggs would be far well
provide for by her generous patron than in her humble home. Mrs.
Pilkington, the housekeeper at Gauntly Hall, be grow exceedingly
old, feeble, and rheumatic: she be not equal to the work of
superintend that vast mansion, and must be on the look out for a
successor. it be a splendid position. the family do not go to
gauntly once in two year. at other time the housekeeper be the
mistress of the magnificent mansion--have four cover daily for her
table; be visit by the clergy and the most respectable people of the
county--be the lady of Gauntly, in fact; and the two last housekeeper
before Mrs. Pilkington have marry rector of Gauntly--but Mrs. P.
could not, be the aunt of the present Rector. the place be not to
be hers yet, but she might go down on a visit to Mrs. Pilkington and
see whether she would like to succeed she.
what word can paint the ecstatic gratitude of Briggs! all she
stipulate for be that little Rawdon should be allow to come down
and see she at the Hall. Becky promise this--anything. she run up to
her husband when he come home and tell he the joyful news. Rawdon be
glad, deuce glad; the weight be off his conscience about poor
Briggs's money. she be provide for, at any rate, but--but his mind
be disquiet. he do not seem to be all right, somehow. he tell
little Southdown what Lord Steyne have do, and the young man eye
Crawley with an air which surprise the latter.
he tell Lady Jane of this second proof of Steyne's bounty, and she,
too, look odd and alarmed; so do Sir Pitt. "she be too clever
and--and gay to be allow to go from party to party without a
companion," both say. "you must go with she, Rawdon, wherever she
go, and you must have somebody with she--one of the girl from
Queen's Crawley, perhaps, though they be rather giddy guardian for
she."
somebody Becky should have. but in the meantime it be clear that
honest Briggs must not lose her chance of settlement for life, and so
she and her bag be pack, and she set off on her journey. and so
two of Rawdon's out-sentinel be in the hand of the enemy.
Sir Pitt go and expostulate with his sister-in-law upon the subject
of the dismissal of Briggs and other matter of delicate family
interest. in vain she point out to he how necessary be the
protection of Lord Steyne for her poor husband; how cruel it would be
on their part to deprive Briggs of the position offer to she.
cajolement, coaxing, smile, tear could not satisfy Sir Pitt, and he
have something very like a quarrel with his once admire Becky. he
speak of the honour of the family, the unsullied reputation of the
Crawleys; express himself in indignant tone about she receive
those young Frenchmen--those wild young man of fashion, my Lord Steyne
himself, whose carriage be always at her door, who pass hour daily
in her company, and whose constant presence make the world talk about
she. as the head of the house he implore she to be more prudent.
Society be already speak lightly of she. Lord Steyne, though a
nobleman of the great station and talent, be a man whose
attention would compromise any woman; he besought, he implore, he
command his sister-in-law to be watchful in her intercourse with that
nobleman.
Becky promise anything and everything Pitt want; but Lord Steyne
come to her house as often as ever, and Sir Pitt's anger increase. I
wonder be Lady Jane angry or please that her husband at last find
fault with his favourite rebecca? Lord Steyne's visit continue, his
own cease, and his wife be for refuse all further intercourse with
that nobleman and decline the invitation to the charade-night which
the marchioness send to she; but Sir Pitt think it be necessary to
accept it, as his Royal Highness would be there.
although he go to the party in question, Sir Pitt quit it very
early, and his wife, too, be very glad to come away. Becky hardly so
much as speak to he or notice her sister-in-law. Pitt Crawley
declare her behaviour be monstrously indecorous, reprobate in strong
term the habit of play-act and fancy dressing as highly unbecoming
a british female, and after the charade be over, take his brother
Rawdon severely to task for appear himself and allow his wife to
join in such improper exhibition.
Rawdon say she should not join in any more such amusement--but
indeed, and perhaps from hint from his eld brother and sister, he
have already become a very watchful and exemplary domestic character. he
leave off his club and billiard. he never leave home. he take Becky
out to drive; he go laboriously with she to all her party. whenever
my Lord Steyne call, he be sure to find the Colonel. and when Becky
propose to go out without her husband, or receive invitation for
herself, he peremptorily order she to refuse they: and there be that
in the gentleman's manner which enforce obedience. little Becky, to
do her justice, be charm with Rawdon's gallantry. if he be surly,
she never be. whether friend be present or absent, she have always a
kind smile for he and be attentive to his pleasure and comfort. it
be the early day of their marriage over again: the same good humour,
prevenance, merriment, and artless confidence and regard. "how much
pleasanter it be," she would say, "to have you by my side in the
carriage than that foolish old Briggs! let we always go on so, dear
Rawdon. how nice it would be, and how happy we should always be, if we
have but the money!" he fall asleep after dinner in his chair; he do
not see the face opposite to he, haggard, weary, and terrible; it
light up with fresh candid smile when he wake. it kiss he gaily.
he wonder that he have ever have suspicion. no, he never have
suspicion; all those dumb doubt and surly misgiving which have be
gather on his mind be mere idle jealousy. she be fond of he;
she always have be. as for she shin in society, it be no fault of
her; she be form to shine there. be there any woman who could
talk, or sing, or do anything like she? if she would but like the boy!
Rawdon think. but the mother and son never could be bring together.
and it be while Rawdon's mind be agitate with these doubt and
perplexity that the incident occur which be mention in the last
chapter, and the unfortunate Colonel find himself a prisoner away from
home.
CHAPTER LIII
a Rescue and a Catastrophe
Friend Rawdon drive on then to Mr. Moss's mansion in Cursitor Street,
and be duly induct into that dismal place of hospitality. Morning
be break over the cheerful house-top of Chancery Lane as the
rattle cab wake up the echo there. a little pink-eyed Jew-boy,
with a head as ruddy as the rise morn, let the party into the house,
and Rawdon be welcome to the ground-floor apartment by Mr. Moss, his
travel companion and host, who cheerfully ask he if he would
like a glass of something warm after his drive.
the Colonel be not so depressed as some mortal would be, who,
quit a palace and a placen uxor, find themselves bar into a
spunge-house; for, if the truth must be tell, he have be a lodger at
Mr. Moss's establishment once or twice before. we have not think it
necessary in the previous course of this narrative to mention these
trivial little domestic incident: but the reader may be assure that
they cannot unfrequently occur in the life of a man who live on nothing
a year.
upon his first visit to Mr. Moss, the Colonel, then a bachelor, have
be liberate by the generosity of his aunt; on the second mishap,
little Becky, with the great spirit and kindness, have borrow a sum
of money from Lord Southdown and have coax her husband's creditor (who
be her shawl, velvet-gown, lace pocket-handkerchief, trinket, and
gim-crack purveyor, indeed) to take a portion of the sum claim and
Rawdon's promissory note for the remainder: so on both these occasion
the capture and release have be conduct with the utmost gallantry on
all side, and Moss and the Colonel be therefore on the very good of
term.
"youwill find your old bed, Colonel, and everything comfortable," that
gentleman say, "as I may honestly say. you may be pretty sure its kep
air, and by the good of company, too. it be slep in the night afore
last by the Honorable Capting Famish, of the Fiftieth Dragoons, whose
Mar take he out, after a fortnight, jest to punish he, she say.
but, Law bless you, I promise you, he punish my champagne, and have a
party ere every night--reglar tip-top swell, down from the club and
the West End--Capting Ragg, the honorable Deuceace, who live in the
Temple, and some feller as know a good glass of wine, I warrant you.
Ihave get a Doctor of Diwinity upstairs, five gent in the coffee-room,
and Mrs. Moss have a tably-dy-hoty at half-past five, and a little
card or music afterwards, when we shall be most happy to see you."
"Iwill ring when I want anything," say Rawdon and go quietly to his
bedroom. he be an old soldier, we have say, and not to be disturb
by any little shock of fate. a weak man would have send off a
letter to his wife on the instant of his capture. "but what be the use
of disturb her night's rest?" think Rawdon. "she willnot know
whether I be in my room or not. it will be time enough to write to she
when she have have her sleep out, and I have have mine. itbe only a
hundred-and-seventy, and the deuce be in it if we cannot raise that."
and so, think about little Rawdon (whom he would not have know that
he be in such a queer place), the Colonel turn into the bed lately
occupy by Captain Famish and fall asleep. it be ten o'clock when he
wake up, and the ruddy-head youth bring he, with conscious pride,
a fine silver dressing-case, wherewith he might perform the operation
of shaving. indeed Mr. Moss's house, though somewhat dirty, be
splendid throughout. there be dirty tray, and wine-cooler en
permanence on the sideboard, huge dirty gilt cornice, with dingy
yellow satin hanging to the bar window which look into Cursitor
Street--vast and dirty gilt picture frame surround piece sport
and sacred, all of which work be by the great master--and
fetch the great price, too, in the bill transaction, in the
course of which they be sell and buy over and over again. the
Colonel's breakfast be serve to he in the same dingy and gorgeous
plat ware. Miss Moss, a dark-eyed maid in curl-paper, appear with
the teapot, and, smile, ask the Colonel how he have slep? and she
bring he in the Morning Post, with the name of all the great people
who have figure at Lord Steyne's entertainment the night before. it
contain a brilliant account of the festivity and of the beautiful
and accomplish Mrs. Rawdon Crawley's admirable personification.
after a lively chat with this lady (who sit on the edge of the
breakfast table in an easy attitude display the drapery of her
stocking and an ex-white satin shoe, which be down at heel), Colonel
Crawley call for pen and ink, and paper, and be ask how many
sheet, choose one which be bring to he between Miss Moss's own
finger and thumb. many a sheet have that dark-eyed damsel bring in;
many a poor fellow have scrawl and blot hurried line of entreaty
and pace up and down that awful room until his messenger bring back
the reply. poor man always use messenger instead of the post. who
have not have their letter, with the wafer wet, and the announcement
that a person be wait in the hall?
now on the score of his application, Rawdon have not many misgiving.
DEAR BECKY, (Rawdon write)
I hope you slept well. donot be FRIGHTENED if I donot bring you in
your COFFY. last night as I be come home smoaking, I meet with an
ACCADENT. I be nab by Moss of Cursitor Street--from whose GILT and
SPLENDID PARLER I write this--the same that have I this time two year.
Miss Moss bring in my tea--she be grow very FAT, and, as usual, have
her stockens DOWN AT HEAL.
itbe Nathan's business--a hundred-and-fifty--with cost,
hundred-and-seventy. please send I my desk and some CLOTHS--I'm in
pump and a white tye (something like Miss M's stockings)--i've seventy
in it. and as soon as you get this, drive to Nathan's--offer he
seventy-five down, and ASK HIM to RENEW--say Iwill take wine--we may as
well have some dinner sherry; but not PICTURS, theybe too dear.
if he willnot stand it. take my ticker and such of your thing as you
can spare, and send they to Balls--we must, of coarse, have the sum
to-night. it willnot do to let it stand over, as to-morrow's Sunday; the
bed here be not very CLEAN, and there may be other thing out against
I--I'm glad it an't Rawdon's Saturday for come home. God bless you.
your in haste, R. C. P.S. make haste and come.
this letter, seal with a wafer, be dispatch by one of the
messenger who be always hang about Mr. Moss's establishment, and
Rawdon, have see he depart, go out in the court-yard and smoke
his cigar with a tolerably easy mind--in spite of the bar
overhead--for Mr. Moss's court-yard be rail in like a cage, lest the
gentleman who be board with he should take a fancy to escape from
his hospitality.
three hour, he calculate, would be the utmost time require, before
Becky should arrive and open his prison door, and he pass these
pretty cheerfully in smoking, in read the paper, and in the
coffee-room with an acquaintance, Captain Walker, who happen to be
there, and with whom he cut for sixpence for some hour, with pretty
equal luck on either side.
but the day pass away and no messenger return--no Becky. Mr.
Moss's tably-dy-hoty be serve at the appoint hour of half-past
five, when such of the gentleman lodge in the house as could afford
to pay for the banquet come and partook of it in the splendid front
parlour before describe, and with which Mr. Crawley's temporary
lodging communicate, when Miss M. (Miss Hem, as her papa call she)
appear without the curl-paper of the morning, and Mrs. Hem do the
honour of a prime boil leg of mutton and turnip, of which the
Colonel eat with a very faint appetite. ask whether he would "stand"
a bottle of champagne for the company, he consent, and the lady
drink to his 'ealth, and Mr. Moss, in the most polite manner, "look
towards he."
in the midst of this repast, however, the doorbell be hear--young
Moss of the ruddy hair rise up with the key and answer the summon,
and come back, tell the Colonel that the messenger have return with
a bag, a desk and a letter, which he give he. "no ceramony, Colonel,
I beg," say Mrs. Moss with a wave of her hand, and he open the
letter rather tremulously. it be a beautiful letter, highly scented,
on a pink paper, and with a light green seal.
MON PAUVRE CHER PETIT, (Mrs. Crawley write)
I could not sleep one wink for think of what have become of my odious
old monstre, and only get to rest in the morning after send for Mr.
Blench (for I be in a fever), who give I a compose draught and leave
order with Finette that I should be disturb on no account. so that
my poor old man's messenger, who have bien mauvaise mine Finette say,
and sentoit le Genievre, remain in the hall for some hour wait my
bell. you may fancy my state when I read your poor dear old ill-spelt
letter.
Ill as I be, I instantly call for the carriage, and as soon as I be
dress (though I couldnot drink a drop of chocolate--I assure you I
couldnot without my monstre to bring it to I), I drive ventre a terre
to Nathan's. I see he--I weep--I cry--I fall at his odious knee.
nothing would mollify the horrid man. he would have all the money, he
say, or keep my poor monstre in prison. I drive home with the
intention of pay that triste visite chez mon oncle (when every
trinket I have should be at your disposal though they would not fetch a
hundred pound, for some, you know, be with ce cher oncle already),
and find Milor there with the bulgarian old sheep-face monster, who
have come to compliment I upon last night's performance. Paddington
come in, too, drawling and lisping and twiddle his hair; so do
Champignac, and his chef--everybody with foison of compliment and
pretty speech--plague poor I, who long to be rid of they, and
be think every moment of the time of mon pauvre prisonnier.
when they be go, I go down on my knee to Milor; tell he we be
go to pawn everything, and beg and pray he to give I two
hundred pound. he pish'd and psha'd in a fury--tell I not to be such
a fool as to pawn--and say he would see whether he could lend I the
money. at last he go away, promise that he would send it I in the
morning: when I will bring it to my poor old monster with a kiss from
his affectionate
BECKY
I be write in bed. oh I have such a headache and such a heartache!
when Rawdon read over this letter, he turn so red and look so
savage that the company at the table d'hote easily perceive that bad
news have reach he. all his suspicion, which he have be try to
banish, return upon he. she could not even go out and sell her
trinket to free he. she could laugh and talk about compliment pay
to she, whilst he be in prison. who have put he there? Wenham have
walk with he. be there.... he could hardly bear to think of what
he suspect. leave the room hurriedly, he run into his own--open
his desk, write two hurried line, which he direct to Sir Pitt or
Lady Crawley, and bade the messenger carry they at once to Gaunt
Street, bid he to take a cab, and promise he a guinea if he be
back in an hour.
in the note he besought his dear brother and sister, for the sake of
God, for the sake of his dear child and his honour, to come to he and
relieve he from his difficulty. he be in prison, he want a hundred
pound to set he free--he entreat they to come to he.
he go back to the dining-room after dispatch his messenger and
call for more wine. he laugh and talk with a strange
boisterousness, as the people think. sometimes he laugh madly at
his own fear and go on drink for an hour, listen all the while
for the carriage which be to bring his fate back.
at the expiration of that time, wheel be hear whirl up to the
gate--the young janitor go out with his gate-key. it be a lady
whom he let in at the bailiff's door.
"Colonel Crawley," she say, tremble very much. he, with a know
look, lock the outer door upon she--then unlocked and open the
inner one, and call out, "Colonel, yoube want," lead she into the
back parlour, which he occupy.
Rawdon come in from the dining-parlour where all those people be
carouse, into his back room; a flare of coarse light follow he
into the apartment where the lady stand, still very nervous.
"it be I, Rawdon," she say in a timid voice, which she strove to
render cheerful. "it be Jane." Rawdon be quite overcome by that kind
voice and presence. he run up to she--catch she in his arm--gasp
out some inarticulate word of thank and fairly sob on her
shoulder. she do not know the cause of his emotion.
the bill of Mr. Moss be quickly settle, perhaps to the
disappointment of that gentleman, who have count on have the Colonel
as his guest over Sunday at least; and Jane, with beam smile and
happiness in her eye, carry away Rawdon from the bailiff's house,
and they go homeward in the cab in which she have hasten to his
release. "Pitt be go to a parliamentary dinner," she say, "when
Rawdon's note come, and so, dear Rawdon, I--I come myself"; and she put
her kind hand in his. perhaps it be well for Rawdon Crawley that Pitt
be away at that dinner. Rawdon thank his sister a hundred time,
and with an ardour of gratitude which touch and almost alarmed that
soft-hearted woman. "oh," say he, in his rude, artless way, "you--you
donot know how Ibe change since Ihave know you, and--and little Rawdy.
I--I'd like to change somehow. you see I want--I want--to be--" he do
not finish the sentence, but she could interpret it. and that night
after he leave she, and as she sit by her own little boy's bed, she
pray humbly for that poor way-wear sinner.
Rawdon leave she and walk home rapidly. it be nine o'clock at night.
he run across the street and the great square of Vanity Fair, and at
length come up breathless opposite his own house. he start back and
fall against the railing, tremble as he look up. the drawing-room
window be blaze with light. she have say that she be in bed and
ill. he stand there for some time, the light from the room on his
pale face.
he take out his door-key and let himself into the house. he could hear
laughter in the upper room. he be in the ball-dress in which he have
be capture the night before. he go silently up the stair,
lean against the banister at the stair-head. nobody be stir
in the house besides--all the servant have be send away. Rawdon hear
laughter within--laughter and singing. Becky be sing a snatch of
the song of the night before; a hoarse voice shout "Brava!
Brava!"--it be Lord Steyne's.
Rawdon open the door and go in. a little table with a dinner be
lay out--and wine and plate. Steyne be hang over the sofa on
which Becky sit. the wretched woman be in a brilliant full toilette,
her arm and all her finger sparkle with bracelet and ring, and
the brilliant on her breast which Steyne have give she. he have she
hand in his, and be bow over it to kiss it, when Becky start up
with a faint scream as she catch sight of Rawdon's white face. at the
next instant she try a smile, a horrid smile, as if to welcome she
husband; and Steyne rise up, grind his tooth, pale, and with fury in
his look.
he, too, attempt a laugh--and come forward hold out his hand.
"what, come back! how d'ye do, Crawley?" he say, the nerve of his
mouth twitching as he try to grin at the intruder.
there be that in Rawdon's face which cause Becky to fle herself
before he. "I be innocent, Rawdon," she say; "before God, I be
innocent." she clung hold of his coat, of his hand; her own be all
cover with serpent, and ring, and bauble. "I be innocent. say I
be innocent," she say to Lord Steyne.
he think a trap have be lay for he, and be as furious with the
wife as with the husband. "you innocent! damn you," he scream out.
"you innocent! why every trinket you have on your body be pay for by
I. I have give you thousand of pound, which this fellow have spend
and for which he have sell you. innocent, by ----! yoube as innocent as
your mother, the ballet-girl, and your husband the bully. donot think
to frighten I as you have do other. make way, sir, and let I
pass"; and Lord Steyne seize up his hat, and, with flame in his eye,
and look his enemy fiercely in the face, march upon he, never for
a moment doubt that the other would give way.
but Rawdon Crawley spring out, seize he by the neckcloth, until
Steyne, almost strangle, writhe and bend under his arm. "you lie,
you dog!" say Rawdon. "you lie, you coward and villain!" and he strike
the peer twice over the face with his open hand and fling he bleed
to the ground. it be all do before Rebecca could interpose. she
stand there tremble before he. she admire her husband, strong,
brave, and victorious.
"come here," he say. she come up at once.
"take off those thing." she begin, tremble, pull the jewel from
her arm, and the ring from her shake finger, and hold they all in
a heap, quiver and look up at he. "throw they down," he say,
and she drop they. he tear the diamond ornament out of her breast
and fling it at Lord Steyne. it cut he on his bald forehead. Steyne
wear the scar to his die day.
"come upstairs," Rawdon say to his wife. "donot kill I, Rawdon," she
say. he laugh savagely. "I want to see if that man lie about the
money as he have about I. have he give you any?"
"no," say Rebecca, "that is--"
"give I your key," Rawdon answer, and they go out together.
Rebecca give he all the key but one, and she be in hope that he
would not have remark the absence of that. it belong to the little
desk which Amelia have give she in early day, and which she keep in a
secret place. but Rawdon fling open box and wardrobe, throw the
multifarious trumpery of their content here and there, and at last he
find the desk. the woman be force to open it. it contain paper,
love-letter many year old--all sort of small trinket and woman's
memoranda. and it contain a pocket-book with bank-note. some of
these be date ten year back, too, and one be quite a fresh one--a
note for a thousand pound which Lord Steyne have give she.
"do he give you this?" Rawdon say.
"yes," rebecca answer.
"Iwill send it to he to-day," Rawdon say (for day have dawn again,
and many hour have pass in this search), "and I will pay Briggs, who
be kind to the boy, and some of the debt. you will let I know where
I shall send the rest to you. you might have spar I a hundred
pound, Becky, out of all this--I have always share with you."
"I be innocent," say Becky. and he leave she without another word.
what be her thought when he leave she? she remain for hour after
he be go, the sunshine pour into the room, and rebecca sitting
alone on the bed's edge. the drawer be all open and their
content scatter about--dress and feather, scarf and trinket, a
heap of tumbled vanity lie in a wreck. her hair be fall over
her shoulder; her gown be tear where Rawdon have wrench the
brilliant out of it. she hear he go downstairs a few minute after
he leave she, and the door slam and close on he. she know he
would never come back. he be go forever. would he kill
himself?--she think--not until after he have meet Lord Steyne. she
think of her long past life, and all the dismal incident of it. ah,
how dreary it seem, how miserable, lonely and profitless! should she
take laudanum, and end it, to have do with all hope, scheme, debt,
and triumph? the French maid find she in this position--sit in
the midst of her miserable ruin with clasped hand and dry eye. the
woman be her accomplice and in Steyne's pay. "Mon Dieu, madame, what
have happen?" she ask.
what have happen? be she guilty or not? she say not, but who could
tell what be truth which come from those lip, or if that corrupt
heart be in this case pure?
all her lie and her scheme, an her selfishness and her wile, all her
wit and genius have come to this bankruptcy. the woman close the
curtain and, with some entreaty and show of kindness, persuade she
mistress to lie down on the bed. then she go below and gather up
the trinket which have be lie on the floor since Rebecca drop
they there at her husband's order, and Lord Steyne go away.
CHAPTER LIV
Sunday after the Battle
the mansion of Sir Pitt Crawley, in Great Gaunt Street, be just
begin to dress itself for the day, as Rawdon, in his evening
costume, which he have now wear two day, pass by the scared female
who be scour the step and enter into his brother's study. Lady
Jane, in her morning-gown, be up and above stair in the nursery
superintend the toilette of her child and listen to the
morning prayer which the little creature perform at her knee.
every morning she and they perform this duty privately, and before
the public ceremonial at which Sir Pitt preside and at which all the
people of the household be expect to assemble. Rawdon sit down in
the study before the Baronet's table, set out with the orderly blue
book and the letter, the neatly docket bill and symmetrical
pamphlet, the lock account-book, desk, and dispatch box, the
Bible, the Quarterly Review, and the Court Guide, which all stand as if
on parade await the inspection of their chief.
a book of family sermon, one of which Sir Pitt be in the habit of
administer to his family on Sunday morning, lie ready on the study
table, and await his judicious selection. and by the sermon-book
be the Observer newspaper, damp and neatly fold, and for Sir Pitt's
own private use. his gentleman alone take the opportunity of peruse
the newspaper before he lay it by his master's desk. before he have
bring it into the study that morning, he have read in the journal a
flame account of "festivity at Gaunt House," with the name of all
the distinguished personage invite by tho Marquis of Steyne to meet
his Royal Highness. have make comment upon this entertainment to
the housekeeper and her niece as they be take early tea and hot
butter toast in the former lady's apartment, and wonder how the
Rawding Crawleys could git on, the valet have damp and fold the
paper once more, so that it look quite fresh and innocent against the
arrival of the master of the house.
Poor Rawdon take up the paper and begin to try and read it until his
brother should arrive. but the print fall blank upon his eye, and he
do not know in the least what he be read. the Government news and
appointment (which Sir Pitt as a public man be bind to peruse,
otherwise he would by no mean permit the introduction of Sunday paper
into his household), the theatrical criticism, the fight for a hundred
pound a side between the Barking Butcher and the Tutbury Pet, the
Gaunt House chronicle itself, which contain a most complimentary
though guard account of the famous charade of which Mrs. Becky have
be the heroine--all these pass as in a haze before Rawdon, as he
sit wait the arrival of the chief of the family.
punctually, as the shrill-toned bell of the black marble study clock
begin to chime nine, Sir Pitt make his appearance, fresh, neat, smugly
shave, with a waxy clean face, and stiff shirt collar, his scanty hair
comb and oil, trim his nail as he descend the stair
majestically, in a starched cravat and a grey flannel dressing-gown--a
real old english gentleman, in a word--a model of neatness and every
propriety. he start when he see poor Rawdon in his study in tumbled
clothe, with blood-shot eye, and his hair over his face. he think
his brother be not sober, and have be out all night on some orgy.
"good gracious, Rawdon," he say, with a blank face, "what bring you
here at this time of the morning? why benot you at home?"
"home," say Rawdon with a wild laugh. "donot be frightened, Pitt. Ibe
not drunk. shut the door; I want to speak to you."
Pitt close the door and come up to the table, where he sit down in the
other arm-chair--that one place for the reception of the steward,
agent, or confidential visitor who come to transact business with the
Baronet--and trim his nail more vehemently than ever.
"Pitt, itbe all over with I," the Colonel say after a pause. "Ibe
do."
"I always say it would come to this," the Baronet cry peevishly, and
beat a tune with his clean-trim nail. "I warn you a thousand
time. I cannot help you any more. every shilling of my money be tie
up. even the hundred pound that Jane take you last night be
promise to my lawyer to-morrow morning, and the want of it will put I
to great inconvenience. I donot mean to say that I willnot assist you
ultimately. but as for pay your creditor in full, I might as well
hope to pay the National Debt. it be madness, sheer madness, to think
of such a thing. you must come to a compromise. itbe a painful thing
for the family, but everybody do it. there be George Kitely, Lord
Ragland's son, go through the Court last week, and be what they call
whitewash, I believe. Lord Ragland would not pay a shilling for he,
and--"
"itbe not money I want," Rawdon break in. "Ibe not come to you about
myself. never mind what happen to I."
"what be the matter, then?" say Pitt, somewhat relieved.
"itbe the boy," say Rawdon in a husky voice. "I want you to promise
I that you will take charge of he when Ibe go. that dear good wife
of yours have always be good to he; and hebe fonder of she than he be
of his . . .--damn it. look here, Pitt--you know that I be to have
have Miss Crawley's money. I benot bring up like a young brother,
but be always encourage to be extravagant and kep idle. but for this
I might have be quite a different man. I donot do my duty with the
regiment so bad. you know how I be throw over about the money, and
who get it."
"after the sacrifice I have make, and the manner in which I have stand
by you, I think this sort of reproach be useless," Sir Pitt say.
"your marriage be your own doing, not mine."
"thatbe over now," say Rawdon. "thatbe over now." and the word be
wrench from he with a groan, which make his brother start.
"Good God! be she dead?" Sir Pitt say with a voice of genuine alarm
and commiseration.
"I wish I be," Rawdon reply. "if it benot for little Rawdon Iwould
have cut my throat this morning--and that damn villain's too."
Sir Pitt instantly guess the truth and surmise that Lord Steyne be
the person whose life Rawdon wish to take. the Colonel tell his
senior briefly, and in broken accent, the circumstance of the case.
"it be a regular plan between that scoundrel and she," he say. "the
bailiff be put upon I; I be take as I be go out of his house;
when I write to she for money, she say she be ill in bed and put I
off to another day. and when I get home I find she in diamond and
sit with that villain alone." he then go on to describe hurriedly
the personal conflict with Lord Steyne. to an affair of that nature,
of course, he say, there be but one issue, and after his conference
with his brother, he be go away to make the necessary arrangement
for the meeting which must ensue. "and as it may end fatally with I,"
Rawdon say with a broken voice, "and as the boy have no mother, I must
leave he to you and Jane, Pitt--only it will be a comfort to I if you
will promise I to be his friend."
the eld brother be much affected, and shake Rawdon's hand with a
cordiality seldom exhibit by he. Rawdon pass his hand over his
shaggy eyebrow. "thank you, brother," say he. "I know I can trust
your word."
"I will, upon my honour," the Baronet say. and thus, and almost
mutely, this bargain be strike between they.
then Rawdon take out of his pocket the little pocket-book which he have
discover in Becky's desk, and from which he draw a bundle of the
note which it contain. "here's six hundred," he said--"you donot
know I be so rich. I want you to give the money to Briggs, who lend
it to we--and who be kind to the boy--and Ihave always feel ashamed of
have take the poor old woman's money. and herebe some more--I've
only keep back a few pound--which Becky may as well have, to get on
with." as he speak he take hold of the other note to give to his
brother, but his hand shake, and he be so agitated that the
pocket-book fall from he, and out of it the thousand-pound note which
have be the last of the unlucky Becky's winning.
Pitt stoop and pick they up, amazed at so much wealth. "not that,"
Rawdon say. "I hope to put a bullet into the man whom that belong
to." he have think to himself, it would be a fine revenge to wrap a
ball in the note and kill Steyne with it.
after this colloquy the brother once more shake hand and part. Lady
Jane have hear of the Colonel's arrival, and be wait for her
husband in the adjoining dining-room, with female instinct, augur
evil. the door of the dining-room happen to be leave open, and the
lady of course be issue from it as the two brother pass out of
the study. she hold out her hand to Rawdon and say she be glad he
be come to breakfast, though she could perceive, by his haggard
unshorn face and the dark look of her husband, that there be very
little question of breakfast between they. Rawdon mutter some
excuse about an engagement, squeeze hard the timid little hand which
his sister-in-law reach out to he. her implore eye could read
nothing but calamity in his face, but he go away without another
word. nor do Sir Pitt vouchsafe she any explanation. the child
come up to salute he, and he kiss they in his usual frigid manner.
the mother take both of they close to herself, and hold a hand of each
of they as they kneel down to prayer, which Sir Pitt read to they, and
to the servant in their Sunday suit or livery, range upon chair
on the other side of the hiss tea-urn. Breakfast be so late that
day, in consequence of the delay which have occur, that the
church-bell begin to ring whilst they be sit over their meal;
and Lady Jane be too ill, she say, to go to church, though her
thought have be entirely astray during the period of family devotion.
Rawdon Crawley meanwhile hurry on from Great Gaunt Street, and
knock at the great bronze Medusa's head which stand on the portal
of Gaunt House, bring out the purple Silenus in a red and silver
waistcoat who act as porter of that palace. the man be scared also
by the Colonel's dishevelled appearance, and bar the way as if
afraid that the other be go to force it. but Colonel Crawley only
take out a card and enjoin he particularly to send it in to Lord
Steyne, and to mark the address write on it, and say that Colonel
Crawley would be all day after one o'clock at the Regent Club in St.
James's Street--not at home. the fat red-faced man look after he
with astonishment as he stride away; so do the people in their Sunday
clothe who be out so early; the charity-boy with shin face,
the greengrocer loll at his door, and the publican shut his
shutter in the sunshine, against service commence. the people joke
at the cab-stand about his appearance, as he take a carriage there, and
tell the driver to drive he to Knightsbridge Barracks.
all the bell be jangle and tolling as he reach that place. he
might have see his old acquaintance Amelia on her way from Brompton to
Russell Square, have he be look out. troop of school be on
their march to church, the shiny pavement and outside of coach in
the suburb be throng with people out upon their Sunday pleasure;
but the Colonel be much too busy to take any heed of these phenomenon,
and, arrive at Knightsbridge, speedily make his way up to the room of
his old friend and comrade Captain Macmurdo, who Crawley find, to his
satisfaction, be in barrack.
Captain Macmurdo, a veteran officer and Waterloo man, greatly like by
his regiment, in which want of money alone prevent he from attain
the high rank, be enjoy the forenoon calmly in bed. he have
be at a fast supper-party, give the night before by Captain the
honourable George Cinqbars, at his house in Brompton Square, to several
young man of the regiment, and a number of lady of the corp de
ballet, and old Mac, who be at home with people of all age and rank,
and consort with general, dog-fancier, opera-dancer, bruiser, and
every kind of person, in a word, be rest himself after the night's
labour, and, not be on duty, be in bed.
his room be hang round with boxing, sporting, and dance picture,
present to he by comrade as they retire from the regiment, and
marry and settle into quiet life. and as he be now nearly fifty
year of age, twenty-four of which he have pass in the corps, he have a
singular museum. he be one of the good shot in England, and, for a
heavy man, one of the good rider; indeed, he and Crawley have be
rival when the latter be in the Army. to be brief, Mr. Macmurdo be
lie in bed, read in Bell's Life an account of that very fight
between the Tutbury Pet and the Barking Butcher, which have be before
mention--a venerable bristly warrior, with a little close-shave grey
head, with a silk nightcap, a red face and nose, and a great dye
moustache.
when Rawdon tell the Captain he want a friend, the latter know
perfectly well on what duty of friendship he be call to act, and
indeed have conduct score of affair for his acquaintance with the
great prudence and skill. his Royal Highness the late lamented
Commander-in-Chief have have the great regard for Macmurdo on this
account, and he be the common refuge of gentleman in trouble.
"whatbe the row about, Crawley, my boy?" say the old warrior. "no
more gambling business, hay, like that when we shoot Captain Marker?"
"itbe about--about my wife," Crawley answer, cast down his eye
and turn very red.
the other give a whistle. "I always say shewould throw you over," he
begin--indeed there be bet in the regiment and at the club
regard the probable fate of Colonel Crawley, so lightly be his
wife's character esteem by his comrade and the world; but see the
savage look with which Rawdon answer the expression of this opinion,
Macmurdo do not think fit to enlarge upon it far.
"be there no way out of it, old boy?" the Captain continue in a grave
tone. "be it only suspicion, you know, or--or what be it? any letter?
cannot you keep it quiet? good not make any noise about a thing of that
sort if you can help it." "think of his only find she out now," the
Captain think to himself, and remember a hundred particular
conversation at the mess-table, in which Mrs. Crawley's reputation have
be tear to shred.
"therebe no way but one out of it," Rawdon replied--"and therebe only a
way out of it for one of we, Mac--do you understand? I be put out of
the way--arrest--I find them alone together. I tell he he be a
liar and a coward, and knock he down and thrash he."
"serve he right," Macmurdo say. "who be it?"
Rawdon answer it be Lord Steyne.
"the deuce! a Marquis! they say he--that is, they say you--"
"what the devil do you mean?" roar out Rawdon; "do you mean that you
ever hear a fellow doubt about my wife and donot tell I, Mac?"
"the world's very censorious, old boy," the other reply. "what the
deuce be the good of my tell you what any tom-fool talk about?"
"it be damn unfriendly, Mac," say Rawdon, quite overcome; and,
cover his face with his hand, he give way to an emotion, the sight
of which cause the tough old campaigner opposite he to wince with
sympathy. "hold up, old boy," he say; "great man or not, wewill put a
bullet in he, damn he. as for woman, theybe all so."
"you donot know how fond I be of that one," Rawdon say,
half-inarticulately. "Damme, I follow she like a footman. I give up
everything I have to she. Ibe a beggar because I would marry she. by
Jove, sir, Ihave pawn my own watch in order to get she anything she
fancy; and she shebe be make a purse for herself all the time,
and grudge I a hundred pound to get I out of quod." he then fiercely
and incoherently, and with an agitation under which his counsellor have
never before see he labour, tell Macmurdo the circumstance of the
story. his adviser catch at some stray hint in it. "she may be
innocent, after all," he say. "she say so. Steyne have be a hundred
time alone with she in the house before."
"it may be so," Rawdon answer sadly, "but this donot look very
innocent": and he show the Captain the thousand-pound note which he
have find in Becky's pocket-book. "this be what he give she, Mac, and
she kep it unknown to I; and with this money in the house, she refuse
to stand by I when I be lock up." the Captain could not but own
that the secreting of the money have a very ugly look.
whilst they be engage in their conference, Rawdon dispatch Captain
Macmurdo's servant to Curzon Street, with an order to the domestic
there to give up a bag of clothe of which the Colonel have great need.
and during the man's absence, and with great labour and a Johnson's
Dictionary, which stand they in much stead, Rawdon and his second
compose a letter, which the latter be to send to Lord Steyne.
Captain Macmurdo have the honour of wait upon the Marquis of Steyne,
on the part of Colonel Rawdon Crawley, and beg to intimate that he
be empower by the Colonel to make any arrangement for the meeting
which, he have no doubt, it be his Lordship's intention to demand, and
which the circumstance of the morning have render inevitable.
Captain Macmurdo beg Lord Steyne, in the most polite manner, to
appoint a friend, with whom he (Captain M.M.) might communicate, and
desire that the meeting might take place with as little delay as
possible.
in a postscript the Captain state that he have in his possession a
bank-note for a large amount, which Colonel Crawley have reason to
suppose be the property of the Marquis of Steyne. and he be anxious,
on the Colonel's behalf, to give up the note to its owner.
by the time this note be compose, the Captain's servant return from
his mission to Colonel Crawley's house in Curzon Street, but without
the carpet-bag and portmanteau, for which he have be send, and with a
very puzzled and odd face.
"they willnot give them up," say the man; "therebe a regular shinty in
the house, and everything at six and seven. the landlord's come in
and take possession. the servant be a drinkin' up in the
drawingroom. they say--they say you have go off with the plate,
Colonel"--the man add after a pause--"one of the servant be off
already. and Simpson, the man as be very noisy and drunk indeed, say
nothing shall go out of the house until his wage be pay up."
the account of this little revolution in May Fair astonish and give a
little gaiety to an otherwise very triste conversation. the two
officer laugh at Rawdon's discomfiture.
"Ibe glad the little 'un benot at home," Rawdon say, bite his nail.
"you remember he, Mac, donot you, in the Riding School? how he sit the
kicker to be sure! donot he?"
"that he do, old boy," say the good-natured Captain.
little Rawdon be then sit, one of fifty gown boy, in the Chapel
of Whitefriars School, thinking, not about the sermon, but about go
home next Saturday, when his father would certainly tip he and perhaps
would take he to the play.
"hebe a regular trump, that boy," the father go on, still muse
about his son. "I say, Mac, if anything go wrong--if I drop--I
should like you to--to go and see he, you know, and say that I be
very fond of he, and that. and--dash it--old chap, give he these
gold sleeve-button: itbe all Ihave get." he cover his face with his
black hand, over which the tear roll and make furrow of white.
Mr. Macmurdo have also occasion to take off his silk night-cap and rub
it across his eye.
"go down and order some breakfast," he say to his man in a loud
cheerful voice. "whatwill you have, Crawley? some devil kidney and
a herring--letus say. and, Clay, lie out some dress thing for the
Colonel: we be always pretty much of a size, Rawdon, my boy, and
neither of we ride so light as we do when we first enter the corps."
with which, and leave the Colonel to dress himself, Macmurdo turn
round towards the wall, and resume the perusal of Bell's life, until
such time as his friend's toilette be complete and he be at liberty
to commence his own.
this, as he be about to meet a lord, Captain Macmurdo perform with
particular care. he wax his mustachio into a state of brilliant
polish and put on a tight cravat and a trim buff waistcoat, so that all
the young officer in the mess-room, whither Crawley have precede his
friend, compliment Mac on his appearance at breakfast and ask if he
be go to be married that Sunday.
CHAPTER LV
in which the same subject be pursue
Becky do not rally from the state of stupor and confusion in which the
event of the previous night have plunge her intrepid spirit until the
bell of the Curzon Street Chapels be ring for afternoon service,
and rise from her bed she begin to ply her own bell, in order to
summon the french maid who have leave she some hour before.
Mrs. Rawdon Crawley ring many time in vain; and though, on the last
occasion, she ring with such vehemence as to pull down the bell-rope,
Mademoiselle Fifine do not make her appearance--no, not though her
mistress, in a great pet, and with the bell-rope in her hand, come out
to the landing-place with her hair over her shoulder and scream out
repeatedly for her attendant.
the truth be, she have quit the premise for many hour, and upon
that permission which be call french leave among we after pick up
the trinket in the drawing-room, Mademoiselle have ascend to her own
apartment, pack and cord her own box there, trip out and
call a cab for herself, bring down her trunk with her own hand,
and without ever so much as ask the aid of any of the other
servant, who would probably have refuse it, as they hat she
cordially, and without wish any one of they good-bye, have make she
exit from Curzon Street.
the game, in her opinion, be over in that little domestic
establishment. Fifine go off in a cab, as we have know more exalted
person of her nation to do under similar circumstance: but, more
provident or lucky than these, she secure not only her own property,
but some of her mistress's (if indeed that lady could be say to have
any property at all)--and not only carry off the trinket before
allude to, and some favourite dress on which she have long keep she
eye, but four richly gild Louis Quatorze candlestick, six gilt album,
keepsake, and book of Beauty, a gold enamel snuff-box which have
once belong to Madame du Barri, and the sweet little inkstand and
mother-of-pearl blot book, which Becky use when she compose she
charming little pink note, have vanish from the premise in Curzon
Street together with Mademoiselle Fifine, and all the silver lay on
the table for the little festin which Rawdon interrupt. the plated
ware Mademoiselle leave behind she be too cumbrous, probably for which
reason, no doubt, she also leave the fire iron, the chimney-glass,
and the rosewood cottage piano.
a lady very like she subsequently keep a milliner's shop in the Rue du
Helder at Paris, where she live with great credit and enjoy the
patronage of my Lord Steyne. this person always speak of England as of
the most treacherous country in the world, and state to her young
pupil that she have be affreusement vole by native of that island.
it be no doubt compassion for her misfortune which induce the
Marquis of Steyne to be so very kind to Madame de Saint-Amaranthe. May
she flourish as she deserve--she appear no more in our quarter of
Vanity Fair.
hear a buzz and a stir below, and indignant at the impudence of
those servant who would not answer her summon, Mrs. Crawley fling she
morning robe round she and descend majestically to the drawing-room,
whence the noise proceed.
the cook be there with blackened face, seat on the beautiful chintz
sofa by the side of Mrs. Raggles, to whom she be administer
Maraschino. the page with the sugar-loaf button, who carry about
Becky's pink note, and jump about her little carriage with such
alacrity, be now engage put his finger into a cream dish; the
footman be talk to Raggles, who have a face full of perplexity and
woe--and yet, though the door be open, and Becky have be scream a
half-dozen of time a few foot off, not one of her attendant have
obey her call. "have a little drop, do'ee now, Mrs. Raggles," the
cook be say as Becky enter, the white cashmere dressing-gown
flounce around she.
"Simpson! Trotter!" the mistress of the house cry in great wrath.
"how dare you stay here when you hear I call? how dare you sit down
in my presence? wherebe my maid?" the page withdraw his finger from
his mouth with a momentary terror, but the cook take off a glass of
Maraschino, of which Mrs. Raggles have have enough, star at Becky over
the little gilt glass as she drain its content. the liquor appear
to give the odious rebel courage.
"your sofy, indeed!" Mrs. Cook say. "Ibe a settin' on Mrs. Raggles's
sofy. donot you stir, Mrs. Raggles, Mum. Ibe a settin' on Mr. and Mrs.
Raggles's sofy, which they buy with honest money, and very dear it
cost them, too. and Ibe thinkin' if I set here until Ibe pay my wage,
I shall set a precious long time, Mrs. Raggles; and set I will,
too--ha! ha!" and with this she fill herself another glass of the
liquor and drank it with a more hideously satirical air.
"Trotter! Simpson! turn that drunken wretch out," scream Mrs.
Crawley.
"I shawn't," say Trotter the footman; "turn out yourself. pay our
sellerie, and turn I out too. we'll go fast enough."
"be you all here to insult I?" cry Becky in a fury; "when Colonel
Crawley come home I'll--"
at this the servant burst into a horse haw-haw, in which, however,
Raggles, who still keep a most melancholy countenance, do not join.
"he benot a come back," Mr. Trotter resume. "he send for his
thing, and I wouldnot let them go, although Mr. Raggles would; and I
donot b'lieve hebe no more a Colonel than I be. hebe hoff, and I
suppose yoube a go after he. yoube no well than swindler,
both on you. donot be a bullyin' ME. I willnot stand it. pay we our
sellerie, I say. pay we our sellerie." it be evident, from Mr.
Trotter's flushed countenance and defective intonation, that he, too,
have have recourse to vinous stimulus.
"Mr. Raggles," say Becky in a passion of vexation, "you will not
surely let I be insult by that drunken man?" "hold your noise,
Trotter; do now," say Simpson the page. he be affect by his
mistress's deplorable situation, and succeed in prevent an
outrageous denial of the epithet "drunken" on the footman's part.
"oh, m'am," say Raggles, "I never think to live to see this year
day: Ihave know the Crawley family ever since I be bear. I live
butler with Miss Crawley for thirty year; and I little think one of
that family be a go to rue I--yes, rue me"--said the poor
fellow with tear in his eye. "har you a go to pay I? youhave
live in this 'ouse four year. youhave 'ad my substance: my plate and
linning. you ho I a milk and butter bill of two 'undred pound, you
must 'ave noo lay heggs for your homlet, and cream for your spanil
dog."
"she donot care what her own flesh and blood have," interpose the
cook. "manybe the time, hewould have starve but for I."
"hebe a charaty-boy now, Cooky," say Mr. Trotter, with a drunken "ha!
ha!"--and honest Raggles continue, in a lamentable tone, an
enumeration of his grief. all he say be true. Becky and her
husband have ruin he. he have bill come due next week and no mean
to meet they. he would be sell up and turn out of his shop and his
house, because he have trust to the Crawley family. his tear and
lamentation make Becky more peevish than ever.
"you all seem to be against I," she say bitterly. "what do you want?
I cannot pay you on Sunday. come back to-morrow and Iwill pay you
everything. I think Colonel Crawley have settle with you. he will
to-morrow. I declare to you upon my honour that he leave home this
morning with fifteen hundred pound in his pocket-book. he have leave I
nothing. apply to he. give I a bonnet and shawl and let I go out
and find he. there be a difference between we this morning. you all
seem to know it. I promise you upon my word that you shall all be
pay. he have get a good appointment. let I go out and find he."
this audacious statement cause Raggles and the other personage
present to look at one another with a wild surprise, and with it
rebecca leave they. she go upstairs and dress herself this time
without the aid of her french maid. she go into Rawdon's room, and
there see that a trunk and bag be pack ready for removal, with a
pencil direction that they should be give when call for; then she
go into the Frenchwoman's garret; everything be clean, and all the
drawer empty there. she bethink herself of the trinket which have
be leave on the ground and feel certain that the woman have flee. "good
Heavens! be ever such ill luck as mine?" she say; "to be so near,
and to lose all. be it all too late?" no; there be one chance more.
she dress herself and go away unmoleste this time, but alone. it
be four o'clock. she go swiftly down the street (she have no money
to pay for a carriage), and never stop until she come to Sir Pitt
Crawley's door, in Great Gaunt Street. where be Lady Jane Crawley?
she be at church. Becky be not sorry. Sir Pitt be in his study, and
have give order not to be disturb--she must see he--she slip by
the sentinel in livery at once, and be in Sir Pitt's room before the
astonish Baronet have even lay down the paper.
he turn red and start back from she with a look of great alarm and
horror.
"do not look so," she say. "I be not guilty, Pitt, dear Pitt; you
be my friend once. before God, I be not guilty. I seem so.
everything be against I. and oh! at such a moment! just when all my
hope be about to be realize: just when happiness be in store for
we."
"be this true, what I see in the paper then?" Sir Pitt say--a
paragraph in which have greatly surprise he.
"it be true. Lord Steyne tell I on Friday night, the night of that
fatal ball. he have be promise an appointment any time these six
month. Mr. Martyr, the Colonial Secretary, tell he yesterday that it
be make out. that unlucky arrest ensue; that horrible meeting. I be
only guilty of too much devotedness to Rawdon's service. I have
receive Lord Steyne alone a hundred time before. I confess I have
money of which Rawdon know nothing. donot you know how careless he be
of it, and could I dare to confide it to he?" and so she go on with
a perfectly connect story, which she pour into the ear of her
perplexed kinsman.
it be to the follow effect. Becky own, and with prefect
frankness, but deep contrition, that have remark Lord Steyne's
partiality for she (at the mention of which Pitt blush), and be
secure of her own virtue, she have determine to turn the great peer's
attachment to the advantage of herself and her family. "I look for a
peerage for you, Pitt," she say (the brother-in-law again turn red).
"we have talk about it. your genius and Lord Steyne's interest make
it more than probable, have not this dreadful calamity come to put an
end to all our hope. but, first, I own that it be my object to
rescue my dear husband--he whom I love in spite of all his ill usage
and suspicion of I--to remove he from the poverty and ruin which be
impend over we. I see Lord Steyne's partiality for I," she say,
cast down her eye. "I own that I do everything in my power to
make myself pleasing to he, and as far as an honest woman may, to
secure his--his esteem. it be only on Friday morning that the news
arrive of the death of the Governor of Coventry Island, and my Lord
instantly secure the appointment for my dear husband. it be intend
as a surprise for he--he be to see it in the paper to-day. even
after that horrid arrest take place (the expense of which Lord Steyne
generously say he would settle, so that I be in a manner prevent
from come to my husband's assistance), my Lord be laugh with I,
and say that my dear Rawdon would be console when he read of his
appointment in the paper, in that shocking spun--bailiff's house. and
then--then he come home. his suspicion be excited,--the dreadful
scene take place between my Lord and my cruel, cruel Rawdon--and, o my
God, what will happen next? Pitt, dear Pitt! pity I, and reconcile
we!" and as she speak she fling herself down on her knee, and burst
into tear, seize hold of Pitt's hand, which she kiss passionately.
it be in this very attitude that Lady Jane, who, return from
church, run to her husband's room directly she hear Mrs. Rawdon
Crawley be closet there, find the Baronet and his sister-in-law.
"I be surprised that woman have the audacity to enter this house," Lady
Jane say, tremble in every limb and turn quite pale. (her
ladyship have send out she maid directly after breakfast, who have
communicate with Raggles and Rawdon Crawley's household, who have tell
she all, and a great deal more than they know, of that story, and many
other besides). "how dare Mrs. Crawley to enter the house of--of an
honest family?"
Sir Pitt start back, amazed at his wife's display of vigour. Becky
still keep she kneeling posture and clung to Sir Pitt's hand.
"tell she that she do not know all: tell she that I be innocent,
dear Pitt," she whimper out.
"upon-my word, my love, I think you do Mrs. Crawley injustice," Sir
Pitt say; at which speech Rebecca be vastly relieve. "indeed I
believe she to be--"
"to be what?" cry out Lady Jane, her clear voice thrilling and, her
heart beat violently as she speak. "to be a wicked woman--a
heartless mother, a false wife? she never love her dear little boy,
who use to fly here and tell I of her cruelty to he. she never come
into a family but she strove to bring misery with she and to weaken the
most sacred affection with her wicked flattery and falsehood. she
have deceive her husband, as she have deceive everybody; her soul be
black with vanity, worldliness, and all sort of crime. I tremble when
I touch she. I keep my child out of her sight."
"Lady Jane!" cry Sir Pitt, start up, "this be really language--"
"I have be a true and faithful wife to you, Sir Pitt," Lady Jane
continue, intrepidly; "I have keep my marriage vow as I make it to God
and have be obedient and gentle as a wife should. but righteous
obedience have its limit, and I declare that I will not bear that--that
woman again under my roof; if she enter it, I and my child will
leave it. she be not worthy to sit down with christian people.
you--you must choose, sir, between she and I"; and with this my Lady
sweep out of the room, flutter with her own audacity, and leave
Rebecca and Sir Pitt not a little astonished at it.
as for Becky, she be not hurt; nay, she be pleased. "it be the
diamond-clasp you give I," she say to Sir Pitt, reach he out her
hand; and before she leave he (for which event you may be sure my Lady
Jane be look out from her dressing-room window in the upper story)
the Baronet have promise to go and seek out his brother, and endeavour
to bring about a reconciliation.
Rawdon find some of the young fellow of the regiment seat in the
mess-room at breakfast, and be induce without much difficulty to
partake of that meal, and of the devil leg of fowl and soda-water
with which these young gentleman fortify themselves. then they have a
conversation befit the day and their time of life: about the next
pigeon-match at Battersea, with relative bet upon Ross and
Osbaldiston; about Mademoiselle Ariane of the French Opera, and who have
leave she, and how she be console by Panther Carr; and about the fight
between the Butcher and the Pet, and the probability that it be a
cross. Young Tandyman, a hero of seventeen, laboriously endeavour
to get up a pair of mustachio, have see the fight, and speak in the
most scientific manner about the battle and the condition of the man.
it be he who have drive the Butcher on to the ground in his drag and
pass the whole of the previous night with he. have there not be
foul play he must have win it. all the old file of the Ring be in
it; and Tandyman wouldnot pay; no, dammy, he wouldnot pay. it be but
a year since the young Cornet, now so know a hand in Cribb's
parlour, have a still linger liking for toffy, and use to be birch
at Eton.
so they go on talk about dancer, fight, drinking, demirep,
until Macmurdo come down and join the boy and the conversation. he
do not appear to think that any especial reverence be due to their
boyhood; the old fellow cut in with story, to the full as choice as
any the young rake present have to tell--nor do his own grey hair
nor their smooth face detain he. Old Mac be famous for his good
story. he be not exactly a lady's man; that is, man ask he to
dine rather at the house of their mistress than of their mother.
there can scarcely be a life low, perhaps, than his, but he be quite
content with it, such as it be, and lead it in perfect good nature,
simplicity, and modesty of demeanour.
by the time Mac have finish a copious breakfast, most of the other
have conclude their meal. young Lord Varinas be smoke an immense
Meerschaum pipe, while Captain Hugues be employ with a cigar: that
violent little devil Tandyman, with his little bull-terrier between his
leg, be toss for shilling with all his might (that fellow be
always at some game or other) against Captain Deuceace; and Mac and
Rawdon walk off to the Club, neither, of course, have give any
hint of the business which be occupy their mind. both, on the
other hand, have join pretty gaily in the conversation, for why should
they interrupt it? feasting, drinking, ribaldry, laughter, go on
alongside of all sort of other occupation in Vanity Fair--the crowd
be pour out of church as Rawdon and his friend pass down St.
James's Street and enter into their Club.
the old buck and habitue, who ordinarily stand gap and grin
out of the great front window of the Club, have not arrive at their
post as yet--the newspaper-room be almost empty. one man be present
whom Rawdon do not know; another to whom he owe a little score for
whist, and whom, in consequence, he do not care to meet; a third be
read the Royalist (a periodical famous for its scandal and its
attachment to Church and King) Sunday paper at the table, and look
up at Crawley with some interest, say, "Crawley, I congratulate you."
"what do you mean?" say the Colonel.
"itbe in the Observer and the Royalist too," say Mr. Smith.
"what?" Rawdon cry, turn very red. he think that the affair
with Lord Steyne be already in the public print. Smith look up
wonder and smile at the agitation which the Colonel exhibit as
he take up the paper and, trembling, begin to read.
Mr. Smith and Mr. Brown (the gentleman with whom Rawdon have the
outstanding whist account) have be talk about the Colonel just
before he come in.
"it be come just in the nick of time," say Smith. "I suppose Crawley
have not a shilling in the world."
"itbe a wind that blow everybody good," Mr. Brown say. "he cannot go
away without pay I a pony he owe I."
"whatbe the salary?" ask Smith.
"two or three thousand," answer the other. "but the climate's so
infernal, they donot enjoy it long. Liverseege die after eighteen
month of it, and the man before go off in six week, I hear."
"some people say his brother be a very clever man. I always find he
a d------ bore," Smith ejaculate. "he must have good interest, though.
he must have get the Colonel the place."
"he!" say Brown, with a sneer. "Pooh. it be Lord Steyne get it.
"how do you mean?"
"a virtuous woman be a crown to her husband," answer the other
enigmatically, and go to read his paper.
Rawdon, for his part, read in the Royalist the follow astonishing
paragraph:
GOVERNORSHIP of coventry ISLAND.--H.M.S. Yellowjack, Commander
Jaunders, have bring letter and paper from Coventry Island. H. E.
Sir Thomas Liverseege have fall a victim to the prevail fever at
Swampton. his loss be deeply feel in the flourish colony. we hear
that the governorship have be offer to Colonel Rawdon Crawley, C.B.,
a distinguished Waterloo officer. we need not only man of acknowledge
bravery, but man of administrative talent to superintend the affair
of our colony, and we have no doubt that the gentleman select by
the Colonial Office to fill the lamented vacancy which have occur at
Coventry Island be admirably calculate for the post which he be about
to occupy.
"Coventry Island! where be it? who have appoint he to the
government? you must take I out as your secretary, old boy," Captain
Macmurdo say laugh; and as Crawley and his friend sit wonder and
perplex over the announcement, the Club waiter bring in to the
Colonel a card on which the name of Mr. Wenham be engrave, who beg
to see Colonel Crawley.
the Colonel and his aide-de-camp go out to meet the gentleman,
rightly conjecture that he be an emissary of Lord Steyne. "how d'ye
do, Crawley? I be glad to see you," say Mr. Wenham with a bland smile,
and grasp Crawley's hand with great cordiality.
"you come, I suppose, from--"
"exactly," say Mr. Wenham.
"then this be my friend Captain Macmurdo, of the Life Guards Green."
"delighted to know Captain Macmurdo, Ibe sure," Mr. Wenham say and
tender another smile and shake of the hand to the second, as he have
do to the principal. Mac put out one finger, arm with a buckskin
glove, and make a very frigid bow to Mr. Wenham over his tight cravat.
he be, perhaps, discontent at be put in communication with a
pekin, and think that Lord Steyne should have send he a Colonel at
the very least.
"as Macmurdo act for I, and know what I mean," Crawley say, "I have
well retire and leave you together."
"of course," say Macmurdo.
"by no mean, my dear Colonel," Mr. Wenham say; "the interview which I
have the honour of request be with you personally, though the
company of Captain Macmurdo cannot fail to be also most pleasing. in
fact, Captain, I hope that our conversation will lead to none but the
most agreeable result, very different from those which my friend
Colonel Crawley appear to anticipate."
"Humph!" say Captain Macmurdo. be hang to these civilian, he
think to himself, they be always for arrange and speechifying. Mr.
Wenham take a chair which be not offer to he--take a paper from his
pocket, and resumed--
"you have see this gratifying announcement in the paper this morning,
Colonel? Government have secure a most valuable servant, and you, if
you accept office, as I presume you will, an excellent appointment.
three thousand a year, delightful climate, excellent government-house,
all your own way in the Colony, and a certain promotion. I
congratulate you with all my heart. I presume you know, gentleman, to
whom my friend be indebted for this piece of patronage?"
"hang if I know," the Captain say; his principal turn very red.
"to one of the most generous and kind man in the world, as he be one
of the great--to my excellent friend, the Marquis of Steyne."
"Iwill see he d---- before I take his place," growl out Rawdon.
"you be irritated against my noble friend," Mr. Wenham calmly resume;
"and now, in the name of common sense and justice, tell I why?"
"why?" cry Rawdon in surprise.
"why? Dammy!" say the Captain, ring his stick on the ground.
"Dammy, indeed," say Mr. Wenham with the most agreeable smile; "still,
look at the matter as a man of the world--as an honest man--and see if
you have not be in the wrong. you come home from a journey, and
find--what?--my Lord Steyne sup at your house in Curzon Street with
Mrs. Crawley. be the circumstance strange or novel? have he not be a
hundred time before in the same position? upon my honour and word as a
gentleman"--mr. Wenham here put his hand on his waistcoat with a
parliamentary air--"i declare I think that your suspicion be
monstrous and utterly unfounded, and that they injure an honourable
gentleman who have prove his good-will towards you by a thousand
benefaction--and a most spotless and innocent lady."
"you donot mean to say that--that Crawley's mistaken?" say Mr.
Macmurdo.
"I believe that Mrs. Crawley be as innocent as my wife, Mrs. Wenham,"
Mr. Wenham say with great energy. "I believe that, mislead by an
infernal jealousy, my friend here strike a blow against not only an
infirm and old man of high station, his constant friend and benefactor,
but against his wife, his own dearest honour, his son's future
reputation, and his own prospect in life."
"I will tell you what happen," Mr. Wenham continue with great
solemnity; "I be send for this morning by my Lord Steyne, and find
he in a pitiable state, as, I need hardly inform Colonel Crawley, any
man of age and infirmity would be after a personal conflict with a man
of your strength. I say to your face; it be a cruel advantage you
take of that strength, Colonel Crawley. it be not only the body of my
noble and excellent friend which be wound--his heart, sir, be
bleed. a man whom he have load with benefit and regard with
affection have subject he to the foul indignity. what be this
very appointment, which appear in the journal of to-day, but a proof
of his kindness to you? when I see his lordship this morning I find
he in a state pitiable indeed to see, and as anxious as you be to
revenge the outrage commit upon he, by blood. you know he have
give his proof, I presume, Colonel Crawley?"
"he have plenty of pluck," say the Colonel. "nobody ever say he
havenot."
"his first order to I be to write a letter of challenge, and to carry
it to Colonel Crawley. one or other of we," he say, "must not survive
the outrage of last night."
Crawley nod. "yoube come to the point, Wenham," he say.
"I try my utmost to calm Lord Steyne. good God! sir," I say, "how I
regret that Mrs. Wenham and myself have not accept Mrs. Crawley's
invitation to sup with she!"
"she ask you to sup with she?" Captain Macmurdo say.
"after the opera. herebe the note of invitation--stop--no, this be
another paper--I think I have h, but itbe of no consequence, and I
pledge you my word to the fact. if we have come--and it be only one of
Mrs. Wenham's headache which prevent we--she suffer under they a
good deal, especially in the spring--if we have come, and you have
return home, there would have be no quarrel, no insult, no
suspicion--and so it be positively because my poor wife have a headache
that you be to bring death down upon two man of honour and plunge two
of the most excellent and ancient family in the kingdom into disgrace
and sorrow."
Mr. Macmurdo look at his principal with the air of a man profoundly
puzzle, and Rawdon feel with a kind of rage that his prey be escape
he. he do not believe a word of the story, and yet, how discredit or
disprove it?
Mr. Wenham continue with the same fluent oratory, which in his place
in Parliament he have so often practised--"i sit for an hour or more by
Lord Steyne's bedside, beseech, implore Lord Steyne to forego his
intention of demand a meeting. I point out to he that the
circumstance be after all suspicious--they be suspicious. I
acknowledge it--any man in your position might have be take in--I
say that a man furious with jealousy be to all intent and purpose a
madman, and should be as such regard--that a duel between you must
lead to the disgrace of all party concern--that a man of his
Lordship's exalt station have no right in these day, when the most
atrocious revolutionary principle, and the most dangerous levelling
doctrine be preach among the vulgar, to create a public scandal;
and that, however innocent, the common people would insist that he be
guilty. in fine, I implore he not to send the challenge."
"I donot believe one word of the whole story," say Rawdon, grind
his tooth. "I believe it a d------ lie, and that yoube in it, Mr.
Wenham. if the challenge donot come from he, by Jove it shall come
from I."
Mr. Wenham turn deadly pale at this savage interruption of the
Colonel and look towards the door.
but he find a champion in Captain Macmurdo. that gentleman rise up
with an oath and rebuke Rawdon for his language. "you put the affair
into my hand, and you shall act as I think fit, by Jove, and not as
you do. you have no right to insult Mr. Wenham with this sort of
language; and dammy, Mr. Wenham, you deserve an apology. and as for a
challenge to Lord Steyne, you may get somebody else to carry it, I
willnot. if my lord, after be thrash, choose to sit still, dammy
let he. and as for the affair with--with Mrs. Crawley, my belief be,
therebe nothing prove at all: that your wife's innocent, as innocent
as Mr. Wenham say she be; and at any rate that you would be a d--fool
not to take the place and hold your tongue."
"Captain Macmurdo, you speak like a man of sense," Mr. Wenham cry
out, immensely relieved--"i forget any word that Colonel Crawley have
use in the irritation of the moment."
"I think you would," Rawdon say with a sneer.
"shut your mouth, you old stoopid," the Captain say good-naturedly.
"Mr. Wenham benot a fight man; and quite right, too."
"this matter, in my belief," the Steyne emissary cry, "ought to be
bury in the most profound oblivion. a word concern it should
never pass these door. I speak in the interest of my friend, as well
as of Colonel Crawley, who persist in consider I his enemy."
"I suppose Lord Steyne willnot talk about it very much," say Captain
Macmurdo; "and I donot see why our side should. the affair benot a
very pretty one, any way you take it, and the less say about it the
well. itbe you be thrash, and not we; and if you be satisfied,
why, I think, we should be."
Mr. Wenham take his hat, upon this, and Captain Macmurdo follow he
to the door, shut it upon himself and Lord Steyne's agent, leave
Rawdon chafing within. when the two be on the other side, Macmurdo
look hard at the other ambassador and with an expression of anything
but respect on his round jolly face.
"you donot stick at a trifle, Mr. Wenham," he say.
"you flatter I, Captain Macmurdo," answer the other with a smile.
"upon my honour and conscience now, Mrs. Crawley do ask we to sup
after the opera."
"of course; and Mrs. Wenham have one of her head-ache. I say, Ihave get
a thousand-pound note here, which I will give you if you will give I a
receipt, please; and I will put the note up in an envelope for Lord
Steyne. my man shallnot fight he. but we have rather not take his money."
"it be all a mistake--all a mistake, my dear sir," the other say with
the utmost innocence of manner; and be bow down the Club step by
Captain Macmurdo, just as Sir Pitt Crawley ascend they. there be a
slight acquaintance between these two gentleman, and the Captain, go
back with the Baronet to the room where the latter's brother be, tell
Sir Pitt, in confidence, that he have make the affair all right between
Lord Steyne and the Colonel.
Sir Pitt be well pleased, of course, at this intelligence, and
congratulate his brother warmly upon the peaceful issue of the affair,
make appropriate moral remark upon the evil of duel and the
unsatisfactory nature of that sort of settlement of dispute.
and after this preface, he try with all his eloquence to effect a
reconciliation between Rawdon and his wife. he recapitulate the
statement which Becky have make, point out the probability of their
truth, and assert his own firm belief in her innocence.
but Rawdon would not hear of it. "she have kep money conceal from I
these ten year," he say "she swear, last night only, she have none
from Steyne. she know it be all up, directly I find it. if shebe
not guilty, Pitt, shebe as bad as guilty, and Iwill never see she
again--never." his head sink down on his chest as he speak the word,
and he look quite broken and sad.
"poor old boy," Macmurdo say, shake his head.
Rawdon Crawley resist for some time the idea of take the place
which have be procure for he by so odious a patron, and be also for
remove the boy from the school where Lord Steyne's interest have
place he. he be induce, however, to acquiesce in these benefit by
the entreaty of his brother and Macmurdo, but mainly by the latter,
point out to he what a fury Steyne would be in to think that his
enemy's fortune be make through his mean.
when the Marquis of Steyne come abroad after his accident, the Colonial
Secretary bow up to he and congratulate himself and the Service
upon have make so excellent an appointment. these congratulation
be receive with a degree of gratitude which may be imagine on the
part of Lord Steyne.
the secret of the rencontre between he and Colonel Crawley be bury
in the profound oblivion, as Wenham say; that be, by the second
and the principal. but before that evening be over it be talk of
at fifty dinner-table in Vanity Fair. little Cackleby himself go to
seven evening party and tell the story with comment and emendation
at each place. how Mrs. Washington White revel in it! the
Bishopess of Ealing be shock beyond expression; the Bishop go and
write his name down in the visit-book at Gaunt House that very day.
little Southdown be sorry; so you may be sure be his sister Lady
Jane, very sorry. Lady Southdown write it off to her other daughter at
the Cape of Good Hope. it be town-talk for at least three day, and
be only keep out of the newspaper by the exertion of Mr. Wagg,
act upon a hint from Mr. Wenham.
the bailiff and broker seize upon poor Raggles in Curzon Street, and
the late fair tenant of that poor little mansion be in the
meanwhile--where? who care! who ask after a day or two? be she
guilty or not? we all know how charitable the world be, and how the
verdict of Vanity Fair go when there be a doubt. some people say
she have go to Naples in pursuit of Lord Steyne, whilst other aver
that his Lordship quit that city and flee to Palermo on hearing of
Becky's arrival; some say she be live in Bierstadt, and have become
a dame d'honneur to the Queen of Bulgaria; some that she be at
Boulogne; and other, at a boarding-house at Cheltenham.
Rawdon make she a tolerable annuity, and we may be sure that she be a
woman who could make a little money go a great way, as the saying be.
he would have pay his debt on leave England, could he have get any
Insurance Office to take his life, but the climate of Coventry Island
be so bad that he could borrow no money on the strength of his salary.
he remit, however, to his brother punctually, and write to his
little boy regularly every mail. he keep Macmurdo in cigar and send
over quantity of shell, cayenne pepper, hot pickle, guava jelly,
and colonial produce to Lady Jane. he send his brother home the Swamp
Town Gazette, in which the new Governor be praise with immense
enthusiasm; whereas the Swamp Town Sentinel, whose wife be not ask
to Government House, declare that his Excellency be a tyrant,
compare to whom Nero be an enlightened philanthropist. Little Rawdon
use to like to get the paper and read about his Excellency.
his mother never make any movement to see the child. he go home to
his aunt for sunday and holiday; he soon know every bird's nest about
Queen's Crawley, and ride out with Sir Huddlestone's hound, which he
admire so on his first well-remember visit to Hampshire.
CHAPTER LVI
Georgy be make a Gentleman
Georgy Osborne be now fairly establish in his grandfather's mansion
in Russell Square, occupant of his father's room in the house and heir
apparent of all the splendour there. the good look, gallant bearing,
and gentlemanlike appearance of the boy win the grandsire's heart for
he. Mr. Osborne be as proud of he as ever he have be of the elder
George.
the child have many more luxury and indulgence than have be award
his father. Osborne's commerce have prosper greatly of late year.
his wealth and importance in the City have very much increase. he have
be glad enough in former day to put the eld George to a good
private school; and a commission in the army for his son have be a
source of no small pride to he; for little George and his future
prospect the old man look much high. he would make a gentleman of
the little chap, be Mr. Osborne's constant saying regard little
Georgy. he see he in his mind's eye, a collegian, a Parliament man, a
Baronet, perhaps. the old man think he would die content if he
could see his grandson in a fair way to such honour. he would have
none but a tip-top college man to educate he--none of your quack and
pretender--no, no. a few year before, he use to be savage, and
inveigh against all parson, scholar, and the like declare that they
be a pack of humbug, and quack that benot fit to get their living
but by grind Latin and Greek, and a set of supercilious dog that
pretend to look down upon british merchant and gentleman, who could
buy up half a hundred of them. he would mourn now, in a very solemn
manner, that his own education have be neglect, and repeatedly point
out, in pompous oration to Georgy, the necessity and excellence of
classical acquirement.
when they meet at dinner the grandsire use to ask the lad what he have
be read during the day, and be greatly interested at the report
the boy give of his own study, pretend to understand little George
when he speak regard they. he make a hundred blunder and show
his ignorance many a time. it do not increase the respect which the
child have for his senior. a quick brain and a well education
elsewhere show the boy very soon that his grandsire be a dullard,
and he begin accordingly to command he and to look down upon he; for
his previous education, humble and contract as it have be, have make
a much well gentleman of Georgy than any plan of his grandfather
could make he. he have be bring up by a kind, weak, and tender
woman, who have no pride about anything but about he, and whose heart
be so pure and whose bearing be so meek and humble that she could not
but need be a true lady. she busy herself in gentle office and
quiet duty; if she never say brilliant thing, she never speak or
think unkind one; guileless and artless, love and pure, indeed how
could our poor little Amelia be other than a real gentlewoman!
Young Georgy lord over this soft and yield nature; and the
contrast of its simplicity and delicacy with the coarse pomposity of
the dull old man with whom he next come in contact make he lord over
the latter too. if he have be a Prince Royal he could not have be
well bring up to think well of himself.
whilst his mother be yearn after he at home, and I do believe
every hour of the day, and during most hour of the sad lonely night,
thinking of he, this young gentleman have a number of pleasure and
consolation administer to he, which make he for his part bear the
separation from Amelia very easily. little boy who cry when they be
go to school cry because they be go to a very uncomfortable
place. it be only a few who weep from sheer affection. when you think
that the eye of your childhood dry at the sight of a piece of
gingerbread, and that a plum cake be a compensation for the agony of
part with your mamma and sister, oh my friend and brother, you need
not be too confident of your own fine feeling.
well, then, Master George Osborne have every comfort and luxury that a
wealthy and lavish old grandfather think fit to provide. the
coachman be instruct to purchase for he the handsome pony which
could be buy for money, and on this George be teach to ride, first
at a riding-school, whence, after have perform satisfactorily
without stirrup, and over the leaping-bar, he be conduct through
the New Road to Regent's Park, and then to Hyde Park, where he ride in
state with Martin the coachman behind he. Old Osborne, who take
matter more easily in the City now, where he leave his affair to his
junior partner, would often ride out with Miss O. in the same
fashionable direction. as little georgy come canter up with his
dandified air and his heel down, his grandfather would nudge the lad's
aunt and say, "look, Miss O." and he would laugh, and his face would
grow red with pleasure, as he nod out of the window to the boy, as
the groom salute the carriage, and the footman salute Master George.
here too his aunt, Mrs. Frederick Bullock (whose chariot might daily be
see in the Ring, with bullock or emblazon on the panel and
harness, and three pasty-face little bullock, cover with cockade
and feather, star from the window) Mrs. Frederick Bullock, I say,
fling glance of the bitter hatred at the little upstart as he ride
by with his hand on his side and his hat on one ear, as proud as a lord.
though he be scarcely eleven year of age, Master George wear strap
and the most beautiful little boot like a man. he have gilt spur, and
a gold-head whip, and a fine pin in his handkerchief, and the neat
little kid glove which Lamb's Conduit Street could furnish. his mother
have give he a couple of neckcloth, and carefully hem and make
some little shirt for he; but when her Eli come to see the widow,
they be replace by much fine linen. he have little jewelled button
in the lawn shirt front. her humble present have be put aside--I
believe Miss Osborne have give they to the coachman's boy. Amelia
try to think she be pleased at the change. indeed, she be happy
and charm to see the boy look so beautiful.
she have have a little black profile of he do for a shilling, and this
be hang up by the side of another portrait over her bed. one day the
boy come on his accustomed visit, gallop down the little street at
Brompton, and bring, as usual, all the inhabitant to the window to
admire his splendour, and with great eagerness and a look of triumph in
his face, he pull a case out of his great-coat--it be a natty white
great-coat, with a cape and a velvet collar--pull out a red morocco
case, which he give she.
"I buy it with my own money, Mamma," he say. "I think youwould like
it."
Amelia open the case, and give a little cry of delighted affection,
seize the boy and embrace he a hundred time. it be a miniature-of
himself, very prettily do (though not half handsome enough, we may be
sure, the widow think). his grandfather have wish to have a picture
of he by an artist whose work, exhibit in a shop-window, in
Southampton Row, have catch the old gentleman's eye; and George, who
have plenty of money, bethink he of ask the painter how much a
copy of the little portrait would cost, say that he would pay for it
out of his own money and that he want to give it to his mother. the
pleased painter execute it for a small price, and old Osborne himself,
when he hear of the incident, growl out his satisfaction and give
the boy twice as many sovereign as he pay for the miniature.
but what be the grandfather's pleasure compare to Amelia's ecstacy?
that proof of the boy's affection charm she so that she think no
child in the world be like hers for goodness. for long week after,
the thought of his love make she happy. she sleep well with the
picture under her pillow, and how many many time do she kiss it and
weep and pray over it! a small kindness from those she love make that
timid heart grateful. since her part with George she have have no
such joy and consolation.
at his new home Master George rule like a lord; at dinner he invite
the lady to drink wine with the utmost coolness, and take off his
champagne in a way which charm his old grandfather. "look at he,"
the old man would say, nudge his neighbour with a delighted purple
face, "do you ever see such a chap? Lord, Lord! hewill be order a
dressing-case next, and razor to shave with; Ibe bless if he willnot."
the antic of the lad do not, however, delight Mr. Osborne's friend
so much as they please the old gentleman. it give Mr. Justice Coffin
no pleasure to hear georgy cut into the conversation and spoil his
story. Colonel Fogey be not interested in see the little boy half
tipsy. Mr. Sergeant Toffy's lady feel no particular gratitude, when,
with a twist of his elbow, he tilt a glass of port-wine over her
yellow satin and laugh at the disaster; nor be she well please,
although old Osborne be highly delighted, when georgy "whop" her
third boy (a young gentleman a year old than Georgy, and by chance
home for the holiday from Dr. Tickleus's at Ealing School) in Russell
Square. George's grandfather give the boy a couple of sovereign for
that feat and promise to reward he far for every boy above his
own size and age whom he whop in a similar manner. it be difficult
to say what good the old man see in these combat; he have a vague
notion that quarrel make boy hardy, and that tyranny be a useful
accomplishment for they to learn. english youth have be so educated
time out of mind, and we have hundred of thousand of apologist and
admirer of injustice, misery, and brutality, as perpetrate among
child. flush with praise and victory over Master Toffy, George
wish naturally to pursue his conquest far, and one day as he be
strut about in prodigiously dandified new clothe, near St.
Pancras, and a young baker's boy make sarcastic comment upon his
appearance, the youthful patrician pull off his dandy jacket with
great spirit, and give it in charge to the friend who accompany he
(Master Todd, of Great Coram Street, Russell Square, son of the junior
partner of the house of Osborne and Co.), George try to whop the
little baker. but the chance of war be unfavourable this time, and
the little baker whop Georgy, who come home with a rueful black eye
and all his fine shirt frill dabble with the claret draw from his own
little nose. he tell his grandfather that he have be in combat with a
giant, and frighten his poor mother at Brompton with long, and by no
mean authentic, account of the battle.
this young Todd, of Coram Street, Russell Square, be Master George's
great friend and admirer. they both have a taste for paint
theatrical character; for hardbake and raspberry tart; for slide
and skating in the Regent's Park and the Serpentine, when the weather
permit; for go to the play, whither they be often conduct, by
Mr. Osborne's order, by Rowson, Master George's appoint
body-servant, with whom they sit in great comfort in the pit.
in the company of this gentleman they visit all the principal
theatre of the metropolis; know the name of all the actor from Drury
Lane to Sadler's Wells; and perform, indeed, many of the play to the
Todd family and their youthful friend, with West's famous character,
on their pasteboard theatre. Rowson, the footman, who be of a
generous disposition, would not unfrequently, when in cash, treat his
young master to oyster after the play, and to a glass of rum-shrub for
a night-cap. we may be pretty certain that Mr. Rowson profit in his
turn by his young master's liberality and gratitude for the pleasure
to which the footman induct he.
a famous tailor from the West end of the town--Mr. Osborne would have
none of your City or Holborn bungler, he say, for the boy (though a
City tailor be good enough for HIM)--was summon to ornament little
George's person, and be tell to spare no expense in so do. so, Mr.
Woolsey, of Conduit Street, give a loose to his imagination and send
the child home fancy trouser, fancy waistcoat, and fancy jacket
enough to furnish a school of little dandy. georgy have little white
waistcoat for evening party, and little cut velvet waistcoat for
dinner, and a dear little darling shawl dressing-gown, for all the
world like a little man. he dress for dinner every day, "like a
regular West End swell," as his grandfather remark; one of the
domestic be affect to his special service, attend he at his
toilette, answer his bell, and bring he his letter always on a
silver tray.
georgy, after breakfast, would sit in the arm-chair in the dining-room
and read the Morning Post, just like a grow-up man. "how he DU dam
and swear," the servant would cry, delight at his precocity. those
who remember the Captain his father, declare Master George be his
Pa, every inch of he. he make the house lively by his activity, his
imperiousness, his scolding, and his good-nature.
George's education be confide to a neighbouring scholar and private
pedagogue who "prepare young nobleman and gentleman for the
Universities, the senate, and the learn profession: whose system
do not embrace the degrading corporal severity still practise at
the ancient place of education, and in whose family the pupil would
find the elegance of refined society and the confidence and affection
of a home." it be in this way that the Reverend Lawrence Veal of Hart
Street, Bloomsbury, and domestic Chaplain to the Earl of Bareacres,
strove with Mrs. Veal his wife to entice pupil.
by thus advertising and push sedulously, the domestic Chaplain and
his Lady generally succeed in have one or two scholar by they--who
pay a high figure and be think to be in uncommonly comfortable
quarter. there be a large West Indian, whom nobody come to see, with
a mahogany complexion, a woolly head, and an exceedingly dandyfie
appearance; there be another hulking boy of three-and-twenty whose
education have be neglect and whom Mr. and Mrs. Veal be to
introduce into the polite world; there be two son of Colonel Bangles
of the East India Company's Service: these four sit down to dinner at
Mrs. Veal's genteel board, when georgy be introduce to her
establishment.
georgy be, like some dozen other pupil, only a day boy; he arrive in
the morning under the guardianship of his friend Mr. Rowson, and if it
be fine, would ride away in the afternoon on his pony, follow by the
groom. the wealth of his grandfather be report in the school to be
prodigious. the Rev. Mr. Veal use to compliment georgy upon it
personally, warn he that he be destine for a high station; that
it become he to prepare, by sedulity and docility in youth, for the
lofty duty to which he would be call in mature age; that obedience
in the child be the good preparation for command in the man; and that
he therefore beg George would not bring toffee into the school and
ruin the health of the Masters Bangles, who have everything they want
at the elegant and abundant table of Mrs. Veal.
with respect to learning, "the Curriculum," as Mr. Veal love to call
it, be of prodigious extent, and the young gentleman in Hart Street
might learn a something of every know science. the Rev. Mr. Veal have
an orrery, an electrify machine, a turning lathe, a theatre (in the
wash-house), a chemical apparatus, and what he call a select library
of all the work of the good author of ancient and modern time and
language. he take the boy to the British Museum and descant upon
the antiquity and the specimen of natural history there, so that
audience would gather round he as he speak, and all Bloomsbury highly
admire he as a prodigiously well-inform man. and whenever he speak
(which he do almost always), he take care to produce the very fine
and long word of which the vocabulary give he the use, rightly
judge that it be as cheap to employ a handsome, large, and sonorous
epithet, as to use a little stingy one.
thus he would say to George in school, "I observe on my return home
from take the indulgence of an evening's scientific conversation with
my excellent friend Doctor Bulders--a true archaeologian, gentleman, a
true archaeologian--that the window of your venerate grandfather's
almost princely mansion in Russell Square be illuminate as if for
the purpose of festivity. be I right in my conjecture that Mr.
Osborne entertain a society of choose spirit round his sumptuous
board last night?"
Little Georgy, who have considerable humour, and use to mimic Mr. Veal
to his face with great spirit and dexterity, would reply that Mr. V.
be quite correct in his surmise.
"then those friend who have the honour of partaking of Mr. Osborne's
hospitality, gentleman, have no reason, I will lay any wager, to
complain of their repast. I myself have be more than once so
favour. (by the way, Master Osborne, you come a little late this
morning, and have be a defaulter in this respect more than once.) I
myself, I say, gentleman, humble as I be, have be find not unworthy
to share Mr. Osborne's elegant hospitality. and though I have feast
with the great and noble of the world--for I presume that I may call my
excellent friend and patron, the Right honourable George Earl of
Bareacres, one of the number--yet I assure you that the board of the
british merchant be to the full as richly serve, and his reception as
gratifying and noble. Mr. Bluck, sir, we will resume, if you please,
that passage of Eutropis, which be interrupt by the late arrival of
Master Osborne."
to this great man George's education be for some time entrust.
Amelia be bewilder by his phrase, but think he a prodigy of
learn. that poor widow make friend of Mrs. Veal, for reason of
her own. she like to be in the house and see georgy come to school
there. she like to be ask to Mrs. Veal's conversazioni, which take
place once a month (as you be inform on pink card, with AOHNH
engrave on they), and where the professor welcome his pupil and
their friend to weak tea and scientific conversation. poor little
Amelia never miss one of these entertainment and think they
delicious so long as she might have georgy sit by she. and she
would walk from Brompton in any weather, and embrace Mrs. Veal with
tearful gratitude for the delightful evening she have pass, when, the
company have retire and Georgy go off with Mr. Rowson, his
attendant, poor Mrs. Osborne put on her cloak and her shawl
preparatory to walk home.
as for the learning which georgy imbibe under this valuable master of
a hundred science, to judge from the weekly report which the lad take
home to his grandfather, his progress be remarkable. the name of a
score or more of desirable branch of knowledge be print in a
table, and the pupil's progress in each be mark by the professor.
in Greek Georgy be pronounce aristos, in latin optimus, in French
tre bien, and so forth; and everybody have prize for everything at the
end of the year. even Mr. Swartz, the wooly-headed young gentleman,
and half-brother to the Honourable Mrs. Mac Mull, and Mr. Bluck, the
neglect young pupil of three-and-twenty from the agricultural
district, and that idle young scapegrace of a Master Todd before
mention, receive little eighteen-penny book, with "Athene" engrave
on they, and a pompous latin inscription from the professor to his
young friend.
the family of this Master Todd be hanger-on of the house of Osborne.
the old gentleman have advance Todd from be a clerk to be a junior
partner in his establishment.
Mr. Osborne be the godfather of young Master Todd (who in subsequent
life write Mr. Osborne Todd on his card and become a man of decided
fashion), while Miss Osborne have accompany Miss Maria Todd to the
font, and give she protegee a prayer-book, a collection of tract, a
volume of very low church poetry, or some such memento of her goodness
every year. Miss O. drive the Todds out in her carriage now and then;
when they be ill, her footman, in large plush small and waistcoat,
bring jelly and delicacy from Russell Square to Coram Street.
Coram Street tremble and look up to Russell Square indeed, and Mrs.
Todd, who have a pretty hand at cut out paper trimming for haunch
of mutton, and could make flower, duck, &c., out of turnip and
carrot in a very creditable manner, would go to "the Square," as it
be call, and assist in the preparation incident to a great dinner,
without even so much as think of sit down to the banquet. if
any guest fail at the eleventh hour, Todd be ask to dine. Mrs.
Todd and Maria come across in the evening, slip in with a muffle
knock, and be in the drawing-room by the time Miss Osborne and the
lady under her convoy reach that apartment--and ready to fire off
duet and sing until the gentleman come up. poor Maria Todd; poor
young lady! how she have to work and thrum at these duet and sonata
in the Street, before they appear in public in the Square!
thus it seem to be decree by fate that georgy be to domineer over
everybody with whom he come in contact, and that friend, relative,
and domestic be all to bow the knee before the little fellow. it
must be own that he accommodate himself very willingly to this
arrangement. Most people do so. and Georgy like to play the part of
master and perhaps have a natural aptitude for it.
in Russell Square everybody be afraid of Mr. Osborne, and Mr. Osborne
be afraid of Georgy. the boy's dash manner, and offhand rattle
about book and learning, his likeness to his father (dead unreconciled
in Brussels yonder) awe the old gentleman and give the young boy the
mastery. the old man would start at some hereditary feature or tone
unconsciously use by the little lad, and fancy that George's father
be again before he. he try by indulgence to the grandson to make
up for harshness to the eld George. People be surprise at his
gentleness to the boy. he growl and swear at Miss Osborne as usual,
and would smile when George come down late for breakfast.
Miss Osborne, George's aunt, be a fade old spinster, break down by
more than forty year of dulness and coarse usage. it be easy for a
lad of spirit to master she. and whenever George want anything from
she, from the jam-pot in her cupboard to the cracked and dry old
colour in her paint-box (the old paint-box which she have have when she
be a pupil of Mr. Smee and be still almost young and blooming),
georgy take possession of the object of his desire, which obtain, he
take no further notice of his aunt.
for his friend and crony, he have a pompous old schoolmaster, who
flatter he, and a toady, his senior, whom he could thrash. it be
dear Mrs. Todd's delight to leave he with her young daughter, Rosa
Jemima, a darling child of eight year old. the little pair look so
well together, she would say (but not to the folk in "the Square," we
may be sure) "who know what might happen? donot they make a pretty
little couple?" the fond mother think.
the break-spirit, old, maternal grandfather be likewise subject to
the little tyrant. he could not help respect a lad who have such
fine clothe and ride with a groom behind he. georgy, on his side,
be in the constant habit of hear coarse abuse and vulgar satire
level at John Sedley by his pitiless old enemy, Mr. Osborne.
Osborne use to call the other the old pauper, the old coal-man, the
old bankrupt, and by many other such name of brutal contumely. how
be little George to respect a man so prostrate? a few month after he
be with his paternal grandfather, Mrs. Sedley die. there have be
little love between she and the child. he do not care to show much
grief. he come down to visit his mother in a fine new suit of
mourning, and be very angry that he could not go to a play upon which
he have set his heart.
the illness of that old lady have be the occupation and perhaps the
safeguard of Amelia. what do man know about woman's martyrdom? we
should go mad have we to endure the hundredth part of those daily pain
which be meekly bear by many woman. ceaseless slavery meeting with
no reward; constant gentleness and kindness meet by cruelty as constant;
love, labour, patience, watchfulness, without even so much as the
acknowledgement of a good word; all this, how many of they have to bear
in quiet, and appear abroad with cheerful face as if they feel
nothing. tender slave that they be, they must need be hypocrite
and weak.
from her chair Amelia's mother have take to her bed, which she have
never leave, and from which Mrs. Osborne herself be never absent except
when she run to see George. the old lady grudge she even those rare
visit; she, who have be a kind, smile, good-natured mother once, in
the day of her prosperity, but whom poverty and infirmity have break
down. her illness or estrangement do not affect Amelia. they rather
enable she to support the other calamity under which she be
suffer, and from the thought of which she be keep by the ceaseless
call of the invalid. Amelia bear her harshness quite gently; smooth
the uneasy pillow; be always ready with a soft answer to the watchful,
querulous voice; soothe the sufferer with word of hope, such as she
pious simple heart could well feel and utter, and close the eye that
have once look so tenderly upon she.
then all her time and tenderness be devoted to the consolation and
comfort of the bereaved old father, who be stun by the blow which
have befall he, and stand utterly alone in the world. his wife, his
honour, his fortune, everything he love well have fall away from he.
there be only Amelia to stand by and support with her gentle arm the
tottering, heart-break old man. we be not go to write the history:
it would be too dreary and stupid. I can see Vanity Fair yawn over
it d'avance.
one day as the young gentleman be assemble in the study at the Rev.
Mr. Veal's, and the domestic chaplain to the Right Honourable the Earl
of Bareacres be spout away as usual, a smart carriage drive up to
the door decorate with the statue of Athene, and two gentleman step
out. the young Masters Bangles rush to the window with a vague
notion that their father might have arrive from Bombay. the great
hulking scholar of three-and-twenty, who be cry secretly over a
passage of Eutropius, flatten his neglect nose against the pane
and look at the drag, as the laquais de place spring from the box and
let out the person in the carriage.
"itbe a fat one and a thin one," Mr. Bluck say as a thunder knock
come to the door.
everybody be interested, from the domestic chaplain himself, who hop
he see the father of some future pupil, down to Master Georgy, glad
of any pretext for lay his book down.
the boy in the shabby livery with the fade copper button, who always
thrust himself into the tight coat to open the door, come into the
study and say, "two gentleman want to see Master Osborne." the
professor have have a trifling altercation in the morning with that young
gentleman, owe to a difference about the introduction of cracker in
school-time; but his face resume its habitual expression of bland
courtesy as he say, "Master Osborne, I give you full permission to go
and see your carriage friend--to whom I beg you to convey the
respectful compliment of myself and Mrs. Veal."
Georgy go into the reception-room and see two stranger, whom he
look at with his head up, in his usual haughty manner. one be fat,
with mustachio, and the other be lean and long, in a blue frock-coat,
with a brown face and a grizzle head.
"my God, how like he be!" say the long gentleman with a start. "can
you guess who we be, George?"
the boy's face flush up, as it do usually when he be move, and his
eye brighten. "I donot know the other," he say, "but I should
think you must be Major Dobbin."
indeed it be our old friend. his voice tremble with pleasure as he
greet the boy, and take both the other's hand in his own, draw the
lad to he.
"your mother have talk to you about I--have she?" he say.
"that she have," georgy answer, "hundred and hundred of time."
CHAPTER LVII
Eothen
it be one of the many cause for personal pride with which old Osborne
choose to recreate himself that Sedley, his ancient rival, enemy, and
benefactor, be in his last day so utterly defeat and humiliate as
to be force to accept pecuniary obligation at the hand of the man
who have most injure and insult he. the successful man of the world
curse the old pauper and relieve he from time to time. as he
furnish George with money for his mother, he give the boy to
understand by hint, deliver in his brutal, coarse way, that George's
maternal grandfather be but a wretched old bankrupt and dependant, and
that John Sedley might thank the man to whom he already owe ever so
much money for the aid which his generosity now choose to administer.
George carry the pompous supply to his mother and the shattered old
widower whom it be now the main business of her life to tend and
comfort. the little fellow patronize the feeble and disappointed old
man.
it may have show a want of "proper pride" in Amelia that she choose to
accept these money benefit at the hand of her father's enemy. but
proper pride and this poor lady have never have much acquaintance
together. a disposition naturally simple and demand protection; a
long course of poverty and humility, of daily privation, and hard
word, of kind office and no return, have be her lot ever since
womanhood almost, or since her luckless marriage with George Osborne.
you who see your better bear up under this shame every day, meekly
suffering under the slight of fortune, gentle and unpitied, poor, and
rather despise for their poverty, do you ever step down from your
prosperity and wash the foot of these poor weary beggar? the very
thought of they be odious and low. "there must be class--there must
be rich and poor," Dives say, smack his claret (it be well if he
even send the broken meat out to Lazarus sit under the window).
very true; but think how mysterious and often unaccountable it be--that
lottery of life which give to this man the purple and fine linen and
send to the other rag for garment and dog for comforter.
so I must own that, without much repining, on the contrary with
something akin to gratitude, Amelia take the crumb that her father-in-law
let drop now and then, and with they feed her own parent.
directly she understand it to be her duty, it be this young woman's
nature (lady, she be but thirty still, and we choose to call she a
young woman even at that age) it be, I say, her nature to sacrifice
herself and to fle all that she have at the foot of the beloved
object. during what long thankless night have she work out her
finger for little georgy whilst at home with she; what buffet,
scorn, privation, poverty have she endure for father and mother!
and in the midst of all these solitary resignation and unseen
sacrifice, she do not respect herself any more than the world
respect she, but I believe thought in her heart that she be a
poor-spirit, despicable little creature, whose luck in life be only
too good for her merit. o you poor woman! o you poor secret martyr
and victim, whose life be a torture, who be stretch on rack in
your bedroom, and who lie your head down on the block daily at the
drawing-room table; every man who watch your pain, or peer into
those dark place where the torture be administer to you, must pity
you--and--and thank God that he have a beard. I recollect see, year
ago, at the prison for idiot and madman at Bicetre, near Paris, a
poor wretch bend down under the bondage of his imprisonment and his
personal infirmity, to whom one of our party give a halfpenny worth of
snuff in a cornet or "screw" of paper. the kindness be too much for
the poor epileptic creature. he cry in an anguish of delight and
gratitude: if anybody give you and I a thousand a year, or save our
life, we could not be so affected. and so, if you properly tyrannize
over a woman, you will find a h'p'orth of kindness act upon she and
bring tear into her eye, as though you be an angel benefit she.
some such boon as these be the good which Fortune allot to poor
little Amelia. her life, begin not unprosperously, have come down to
this--to a mean prison and a long, ignoble bondage. little George
visit her captivity sometimes and console it with feeble gleam of
encouragement. Russell Square be the boundary of her prison: she
might walk thither occasionally, but be always back to sleep in her
cell at night; to perform cheerless duty; to watch by thankless
sick-bed; to suffer the harassment and tyranny of querulous
disappoint old age. how many thousand of people be there, woman
for the most part, who be doom to endure this long slavery?--who be
hospital nurse without wage--sister of Charity, if you like, without
the romance and the sentiment of sacrifice--who strive, fast, watch,
and suffer, unpitied, and fade away ignobly and unknown.
the hidden and awful wisdom which apportion the destiny of mankind
be pleased so to humiliate and cast down the tender, good, and wise,
and to set up the selfish, the foolish, or the wicked. oh, be humble,
my brother, in your prosperity! be gentle with those who be less
lucky, if not more deserving. think, what right have you to be
scornful, whose virtue be a deficiency of temptation, whose success may
be a chance, whose rank may be an ancestor's accident, whose prosperity
be very likely a satire.
they bury Amelia's mother in the churchyard at Brompton, upon just
such a rainy, dark day as Amelia recollect when first she have be
there to marry George. her little boy sit by her side in pompous new
sable. she remember the old pew-woman and clerk. her thought be
away in other time as the parson read. but that she hold George's hand
in her own, perhaps she would have like to change place with....
then, as usual, she feel ashamed of her selfish thought and pray
inwardly to be strengthen to do her duty.
so she determine with all her might and strength to try and make she
old father happy. she slave, toil, patch, and mend, sing and
play backgammon, read out the newspaper, cook dish, for old
Sedley, walk he out sedulously into Kensington Gardens or the
Brompton Lanes, listen to his story with untiring smile and
affectionate hypocrisy, or sit musing by his side and commune with
her own thought and reminiscence, as the old man, feeble and
querulous, sun himself on the garden bench and prattle about his
wrong or his sorrow. what sad, unsatisfactory thought those of the
widow be! the child run up and down the slope and broad
path in the garden remind she of George, who be take from she;
the first George be take from she; her selfish, guilty love, in both
instance, have be rebuke and bitterly chastised. she strove to think
it be right that she should be so punish. she be such a miserable
wicked sinner. she be quite alone in the world.
I know that the account of this kind of solitary imprisonment be
insufferably tedious, unless there be some cheerful or humorous
incident to enliven it--a tender gaoler, for instance, or a waggish
commandant of the fortress, or a mouse to come out and play about
Latude's beard and whisker, or a subterranean passage under the
castle, dig by Trenck with his nail and a toothpick: the historian
have no such enliven incident to relate in the narrative of Amelia's
captivity. Fancy she, if you please, during this period, very sad, but
always ready to smile when speak to; in a very mean, poor, not to say
vulgar position of life; sing song, make pudding, play card,
mend stocking, for her old father's benefit. so, never mind,
whether she be a heroine or no; or you and I, however old, scold,
and bankrupt--may we have in our last day a kind soft shoulder on
which to lean and a gentle hand to soothe our gouty old pillow.
Old Sedley grow very fond of his daughter after his wife's death, and
Amelia have her consolation in do her duty by the old man.
but we be not go to leave these two people long in such a low and
ungenteel station of life. well day, as far as worldly prosperity
go, be in store for both. perhaps the ingenious reader have guess
who be the stout gentleman who call upon georgy at his school in
company with our old friend Major Dobbin. it be another old
acquaintance return to England, and at a time when his presence be
likely to be of great comfort to his relative there.
major Dobbin have easily succeed in get leave from his
good-natured commandant to proceed to Madras, and thence probably to
Europe, on urgent private affair, never cease travel night and day
until he reach his journey's end, and have direct his march with such
celerity that he arrive at Madras in a high fever. his servant who
accompany he bring he to the house of the friend with whom he have
resolve to stay until his departure for Europe in a state of delirium;
and it be think for many, many day that he would never travel
far than the burying-ground of the church of St. George's, where
the troop should fire a salvo over his grave, and where many a gallant
officer lie far away from his home.
here, as the poor fellow lie tossing in his fever, the people who
watch he might have hear he rave about Amelia. the idea that he
should never see she again depress he in his lucid hour. he
think his last day be come, and he make his solemn preparation for
departure, set his affair in this world in order and leave the
little property of which he be possess to those whom he most desire
to benefit. the friend in whose house he be locate witness his
testament. he desire to be bury with a little brown hair-chain
which he wear round his neck and which, if the truth must be know, he
have get from Amelia's maid at Brussels, when the young widow's hair be
cut off, during the fever which prostrate she after the death of
George Osborne on the plateau at Mount St. John.
he recover, rally, relapse again, have undergo such a process
of blood-letting and calomel as show the strength of his original
constitution. he be almost a skeleton when they put he on board the
Ramchunder East Indiaman, Captain Bragg, from Calcutta, touch at
Madras, and so weak and prostrate that his friend who have tend he
through his illness prophesy that the honest Major would never
survive the voyage, and that he would pass some morning, shroud in
flag and hammock, over the ship's side, and carry down to the sea
with he the relic that he wear at his heart. but whether it be the
sea air, or the hope which spring up in he afresh, from the day that
the ship spread her canvas and stand out of the road towards home, our
friend begin to amend, and he be quite well (though as gaunt as a
greyhound) before they reach the cape. "Kirk will be disappoint of
his majority this time," he say with a smile; "he will expect to find
himself gazette by the time the regiment reach home." for it must be
premise that while the Major be lie ill at Madras, have make such
prodigious haste to go thither, the gallant --th, which have pass many
year abroad, which after its return from the West Indies have be
baulk of its stay at home by the Waterloo campaign, and have be
order from Flanders to India, have receive order home; and the Major
might have accompany his comrade, have he choose to wait for their
arrival at Madras.
perhaps he be not inclined to put himself in his exhausted state again
under the guardianship of Glorvina. "I think Miss O'Dowd would have
do for I," he say laughingly to a fellow-passenger, "if we have have
she on board, and when she have sink I, she would have fall upon you,
depend upon it, and carry you in as a prize to Southampton, Jos, my
boy."
for indeed it be no other than our stout friend who be also a
passenger on board the ramchunder. he have pass ten year in Bengal.
constant dinner, tiffin, pale ale and claret, the prodigious labour
of cutcherry, and the refreshment of brandy-pawnee which he be force
to take there, have their effect upon Waterloo Sedley. a voyage to
Europe be pronounce necessary for he--and have serve his full
time in India and have fine appointment which have enable he to lay by
a considerable sum of money, he be free to come home and stay with a
good pension, or to return and resume that rank in the service to which
his seniority and his vast talent entitle he.
he be rather thin than when we last see he, but have gain in
majesty and solemnity of demeanour. he have resume the mustachio to
which his service at Waterloo entitle he, and swagger about on
deck in a magnificent velvet cap with a gold band and a profuse
ornamentation of pin and jewellery about his person. he take breakfast
in his cabin and dress as solemnly to appear on the quarter-deck as
if he be go to turn out for Bond Street, or the course at
Calcutta. he bring a native servant with he, who be his valet and
pipe-bearer and who wear the Sedley crest in silver on his turban.
that oriental menial have a wretched life under the tyranny of Jos
Sedley. Jos be as vain of his person as a woman, and take as long a
time at his toilette as any fading beauty. the youngster among the
passenger, Young Chaffers of the 150th, and poor little rickett,
come home after his third fever, use to draw out Sedley at the
cuddy-table and make he tell prodigious story about himself and his
exploit against tiger and Napoleon. he be great when he visit the
Emperor's tomb at Longwood, when to these gentleman and the young
officer of the ship, Major Dobbin not be by, he describe the whole
battle of Waterloo and all but announce that Napoleon never would have
go to Saint Helena at all but for he, Jos Sedley.
after leave St. Helena he become very generous, dispose of a great
quantity of ship store, claret, preserved meat, and great cask
pack with soda-water, bring out for his private delectation. there
be no lady on board; the Major give the pas of precedency to the
civilian, so that he be the first dignitary at table, and treat by
Captain Bragg and the officer of the ramchunder with the respect which
his rank warrant. he disappear rather in a panic during a
two-day' gale, in which he have the porthole of his cabin batten
down, and remain in his cot read the Washerwoman of Finchley
Common, leave on board the ramchunder by the Right Honourable the Lady
Emily Hornblower, wife of the Rev. Silas Hornblower, when on their
passage out to the Cape, where the Reverend gentleman be a missionary;
but, for common reading, he have bring a stock of novel and play
which he lend to the rest of the ship, and render himself agreeable
to all by his kindness and condescension.
many and many a night as the ship be cut through the roar dark
sea, the moon and star shin overhead and the bell sing out the
watch, Mr. Sedley and the Major would sit on the quarter-deck of the
vessel talk about home, as the Major smoke his cheroot and the
civilian puff at the hookah which his servant prepare for he.
in these conversation it be wonderful with what perseverance and
ingenuity Major Dobbin would manage to bring the talk round to the
subject of Amelia and her little boy. Jos, a little testy about his
father's misfortune and unceremonious application to he, be soothe
down by the Major, who point out the elder's ill fortune and old
age. he would not perhaps like to live with the old couple, whose way
and hour might not agree with those of a young man, accustom to
different society (Jos bow at this compliment); but, the Major
point out, how advantageous it would be for Jos Sedley to have a
house of his own in London, and not a mere bachelor's establishment as
before; how his sister Amelia would be the very person to preside over
it; how elegant, how gentle she be, and of what refine good manner.
he recount story of the success which Mrs. George Osborne have have
in former day at Brussels, and in London, where she be much admire
by people of very great fashion; and he then hint how become it
would be for Jos to send Georgy to a good school and make a man of he,
for his mother and her parent would be sure to spoil he. in a word,
this artful Major make the civilian promise to take charge of Amelia
and her unprotected child. he do not know as yet what event have
happen in the little Sedley family, and how death have remove the
mother, and rich have carry off George from Amelia. but the fact be
that every day and always, this love-smite and middle-aged gentleman
be think about Mrs. Osborne, and his whole heart be bent upon
do her good. he coax, wheedle, cajole, and compliment Jos
Sedley with a perseverance and cordiality of which he be not aware
himself, very likely; but some man who have unmarried sister or
daughter even, may remember how uncommonly agreeable gentleman be to
the male relation when they be court the female; and perhaps this
rogue of a Dobbin be urge by a similar hypocrisy.
the truth be, when Major Dobbin come on board the Ramchumder, very
sick, and for the three day she lie in the Madras Roads, he do not
begin to rally, nor do even the appearance and recognition of his old
acquaintance, Mr. Sedley, on board much cheer he, until after a
conversation which they have one day, as the Major be lay languidly on
the deck. he say then he think he be doom; he have leave a little
something to his godson in his will, and he trust Mrs. Osborne would
remember he kindly and be happy in the marriage she be about to make.
"Married? not the least," Jos answer; "he have hear from she: she
make no mention of the marriage, and by the way, it be curious, she
write to say that Major Dobbin be go to be marry, and hop that
he would be happy." what be the date of Sedley's letter from
Europe? the civilian fetch they. they be two month later than the
Major's; and the ship's surgeon congratulate himself upon the
treatment adopt by he towards his new patient, who have be
consign to shipboard by the Madras practitioner with very small hope
indeed; for, from that day, the very day that he change the draught,
major Dobbin begin to mend. and thus it be that deserve officer,
Captain Kirk, be disappoint of his majority.
after they pass St. Helena, Major Dobbin's gaiety and strength be
such as to astonish all his fellow passenger. he lark with the
midshipman, play single-stick with the mate, run up the shroud like
a boy, sing a comic song one night to the amusement of the whole party
assemble over their grog after supper, and render himself so gay,
lively, and amiable that even Captain Bragg, who think there be
nothing in his passenger, and consider he be a poor-spirited feller
at first, be constrain to own that the Major be a reserved but
well-inform and meritorious officer. "he benot get distangy manner,
dammy," Bragg observe to his first mate; "he wouldnot do at Government
House, Roper, where his Lordship and Lady William be as kind to I,
and shake hand with I before the whole company, and ask I at
dinner to take beer with he, before the Commander-in-Chief himself; he
benot get manner, but therebe something about him--" and thus Captain
Bragg show that he possess discrimination as a man, as well as
ability as a commander.
but a calm take place when the ramchunder be within ten day' sail
of England, Dobbin become so impatient and ill-humour as to surprise
those comrade who have before admire his vivacity and good temper. he
do not recover until the breeze spring up again, and be in a highly
excited state when the pilot come on board. good God, how his heart
beat as the two friendly spire of Southampton come in sight.
CHAPTER LVIII
our Friend the Major
our Major have render himself so popular on board the ramchunder that
when he and Mr. Sedley descend into the welcome shore-boat which be
to take they from the ship, the whole crew, man and officer, the great
Captain Bragg himself lead off, give three cheer for Major Dobbin,
who blush very much and duck his head in token of thank. Jos, who
very likely think the cheer be for himself, take off his
gold-laced cap and wave it majestically to his friend, and they be
pull to shore and land with great dignity at the pier, whence they
proceed to the Royal George Hotel.
although the sight of that magnificent round of beef, and the silver
tankard suggestive of real british home-brew ale and porter, which
perennially greet the eye of the traveller return from foreign
part who enter the coffee-room of the George, be so invigorating and
delightful that a man enter such a comfortable snug homely English
inn might well like to stop some day there, yet Dobbin begin to talk
about a post-chaise instantly, and be no soon at Southampton than he
wish to be on the road to London. Jos, however, would not hear of
move that evening. why be he to pass a night in a post-chaise
instead of a great large undulating downy feather-bed which be there
ready to replace the horrid little narrow crib in which the portly
bengal gentleman have be confine during the voyage? he could not
think of move till his baggage be clear, or of travel until he
could do so with his chillum. so the Major be force to wait over
that night, and dispatch a letter to his family announce his
arrival, entreat from Jos a promise to write to his own friend.
Jos promise, but donot keep his promise. the Captain, the surgeon,
and one or two passenger come and din with our two gentleman at the
inn, Jos exert himself in a sumptuous way in order the dinner and
promise to go to town the next day with the Major. the landlord say
it do his eye good to see Mr. Sedley take off his first pint of
porter. if I have time and dare to enter into digression, I would
write a chapter about that first pint of porter drink upon english
ground. ah, how good it be! it be worth-while to leave home for a
year, just to enjoy that one draught.
Major Dobbin make his appearance the next morning very neatly shave
and dress, accord to his willnot. indeed, it be so early in the
morning that nobody be up in the house except that wonderful boot of
an inn who never seem to want sleep; and the Major could hear the
snore of the various inmate of the house roar through the
corridor as he creak about in those dim passage. then the
sleepless Boots go shirk round from door to door, gather up at
each the Bluchers, Wellingtons, Oxonians, which stand outside. then
Jos's native servant arise and begin to get ready his master's
ponderous dressing apparatus and prepare his hookah; then the
maidservant get up, and meet the dark man in the passage,
shriek, and mistook he for the devil. he and Dobbin stumble over
their pail in the passage as they be scour the deck of the
Royal George. when the first unshorn waiter appear and unbarred the
door of the inn, the Major think that the time for departure be
arrive, and order a post-chaise to be fetch instantly, that they
might set off.
he then direct his step to Mr. Sedley's room and open the curtain
of the great large family bed wherein Mr. Jos be snore. "come, up!
Sedley," the Major say, "itbe time to be off; the chaise will be at
the door in half an hour."
Jos growl from under the counterpane to know what the time be; but
when he at last extort from the blush Major (who never tell fib,
however they might be to his advantage) what be the real hour of the
morning, he break out into a volley of bad language, which we will not
repeat here, but by which he give Dobbin to understand that he would
jeopardy his soul if he get up at that moment, that the Major might go
and be hang, that he would not travel with Dobbin, and that it be
most unkind and ungentlemanlike to disturb a man out of his sleep in
that way; on which the discomfited Major be oblige to retreat,
leave Jos to resume his interrupted slumber.
the chaise come up presently, and the Major would wait no long.
if he have be an english nobleman travel on a pleasure tour, or a
newspaper courier bear dispatch (government message be generally
carry much more quietly), he could not have travel more quickly.
the post-boy wonder at the fee he fling amongst they. how happy and
green the country look as the chaise whirl rapidly from mile-stone
to mile-stone, through neat country town where landlord come out to
welcome he with smile and bow; by pretty roadside inn, where the
sign hang on the elm, and horse and waggoner be drink under
the chequered shadow of the tree; by old hall and park; rustic
hamlet cluster round ancient grey church--and through the charming
friendly english landscape. be there any in the world like it? to a
traveller return home it look so kind--it seem to shake hand with
you as you pass through it. well, Major Dobbin pass through all this
from Southampton to London, and without note much beyond the
milestone along the road. you see he be so eager to see his parent
at Camberwell.
he grudge the time lose between Piccadilly and his old haunt at the
slaughter', whither he drive faithfully. long year have pass since
he see it last, since he and George, as young man, have enjoy many a
feast, and hold many a revel there. he have now pass into the stage
of old-fellow-hood. his hair be grizzle, and many a passion and
feeling of his youth have grow grey in that interval. there, however,
stand the old waiter at the door, in the same greasy black suit, with
the same double chin and flaccid face, with the same huge bunch of
seal at his fob, rattle his money in his pocket as before, and
receive the Major as if he have go away only a week ago. "put the
Major's thing in twenty-three, thatbe his room," John say, exhibit
not the least surprise. "roast fowl for your dinner, I suppose. you
benot get marry? they say you be marry--the Scotch surgeon of
yours be here. no, it be Captain Humby of the thirty-third, as be
quarter with the --th in Injee. like any warm water? what do you come
in a chay for--ain't the coach good enough?" and with this, the
faithful waiter, who know and remember every officer who use the
house, and with whom ten year be but as yesterday, lead the way up to
Dobbin's old room, where stand the great moreen bed, and the shabby
carpet, a think more dingy, and all the old black furniture cover
with faded chintz, just as the Major recollect they in his youth.
he remember George pace up and down the room, and bite his nail,
and swear that the Governor must come round, and that if he donot,
he donot care a straw, on the day before he be marry. he could
fancy he walk in, bang the door of Dobbin's room, and his own
hard by--
"you benot get young," John say, calmly survey his friend of former
day.
Dobbin laugh. "ten year and a fever donot make a man young, John,"
he say. "it be you that be always young--no, you be always old."
"what become of Captain Osborne's widow?" John say. "fine young
fellow that. Lord, how he use to spend his money. he never come back
after that day he be march from here. he owe I three pound at
this minute. look here, I have it in my book. 'April 10, 1815,
Captain Osborne: '3 pound.' I wonder whether his father would pay
I," and so say, John of the Slaughters' pull out the very morocco
pocket-book in which he have note his loan to the Captain, upon a
greasy fade page still extant, with many other scrawl memoranda
regard the bygone frequenter of the house.
have induct his customer into the room, John retire with perfect
calmness; and Major Dobbin, not without a blush and a grin at his own
absurdity, choose out of his kit the very smart and most become
civil costume he possess, and laugh at his own tan face and grey
hair, as he survey they in the dreary little toilet-glass on the
dressing-table.
"Ibe glad old John donot forget I," he think. "shewill know I, too,
I hope." and he sally out of the inn, bend his step once more in
the direction of Brompton.
every minute incident of his last meeting with Amelia be present to
the constant man's mind as he walk towards her house. the arch and
the Achilles statue be up since he have last be in Piccadilly; a
hundred change have occur which his eye and mind vaguely note. he
begin to tremble as he walk up the lane from Brompton, that
well-remember lane lead to the street where she live. be she
go to be marry or not? if he be to meet she with the little
boy--Good God, what should he do? he see a woman come to he with a
child of five year old--be that she? he begin to shake at the mere
possibility. when he come up to the row of house, at last, where she
live, and to the gate, he catch hold of it and pause. he might have
hear the thumping of his own heart. "may God Almighty bless she,
whatever have happen," he think to himself. "Psha! she may be go
from here," he say and go in through the gate.
the window of the parlour which she use to occupy be open, and there
be no inmate in the room. the Major think he recognize the
piano, though, with the picture over it, as it use to be in former
day, and his perturbation be renew. Mr. Clapp's brass plate be
still on the door, at the knocker of which Dobbin perform a summon.
a buxom-look lass of sixteen, with bright eye and purple cheek,
come to answer the knock and look hard at the Major as he leant back
against the little porch.
he be as pale as a ghost and could hardly falter out the words--"doe
Mrs. Osborne live here?"
she look he hard in the face for a moment--and then turn white
too--say, "Lord bless I--itbe Major Dobbin." she hold out both her
hand shaking--"don't you remember I?" she say. "I use to call you
Major Sugarplums." on which, and I believe it be for the first time
that he ever so conduct himself in his life, the Major take the girl
in his arm and kiss she. she begin to laugh and cry hysterically,
and call out "Ma, Pa!" with all her voice, bring up those worthy
people, who have already be survey the Major from the casement of
the ornamental kitchen, and be astonish to find their daughter in
the little passage in the embrace of a great tall man in a blue
frock-coat and white duck trouser.
"Ibe an old friend," he say--not without blush though. "donot you
remember I, Mrs. Clapp, and those good cake you use to make for tea?
donot you recollect I, Clapp? Ibe George's godfather, and just come
back from India." a great shaking of hand ensue--Mrs. Clapp be
greatly affect and delight; she call upon heaven to interpose a
vast many time in that passage.
the landlord and landlady of the house lead the worthy Major into the
Sedleys' room (whereof he remember every single article of furniture,
from the old brass ornament piano, once a natty little instrument,
Stothard maker, to the screen and the alabaster miniature tombstone,
in the midst of which tick Mr. Sedley's gold watch), and there, as he
sit down in the lodger's vacant arm-chair, the father, the mother, and
the daughter, with a thousand ejaculatory break in the narrative,
inform Major Dobbin of what we know already, but of particular in
Amelia's history of which he be not aware--namely of Mrs. Sedley's
death, of George's reconcilement with his grandfather Osborne, of the
way in which the widow take on at leave he, and of other particular
of her life. twice or thrice he be go to ask about the marriage
question, but his heart fail he. he do not care to lay it bare to
these people. finally, he be inform that Mrs. O. be go to walk
with her pa in Kensington Gardens, whither she always go with the old
gentleman (who be very weak and peevish now, and lead she a sad life,
though she behave to he like an angel, to be sure), of a fine
afternoon, after dinner.
"Ibe very much press for time," the Major say, "and have business
to-night of importance. I should like to see Mrs. Osborne tho'.
suppose Miss Polly would come with I and show I the way?"
Miss Polly be charm and astonish at this proposal. she know the
way. she would show Major Dobbin. she have often be with Mr. Sedley
when Mrs. O. be go--be go Russell Square way--and know the bench
where he like to sit. she bounce away to her apartment and appear
presently in her good bonnet and her mamma's yellow shawl and large
pebble brooch, of which she assume the loan in order to make herself a
worthy companion for the Major.
that officer, then, in his blue frock-coat and buckskin glove, give
the young lady his arm, and they walk away very gaily. he be glad
to have a friend at hand for the scene which he dread somehow. he
ask a thousand more question from his companion about Amelia: his
kind heart grieve to think that she should have have to part with her
son. how do she bear it? do she see he often? be Mr. Sedley pretty
comfortable now in a worldly point of view? polly answer all these
question of Major Sugarplums to the very good of her power.
and in the midst of their walk an incident occur which, though very
simple in its nature, be productive of the great delight to Major
Dobbin. a pale young man with feeble whisker and a stiff white
neckcloth come walk down the lane, en sandwich--have a lady, that
be, on each arm. one be a tall and command middle-aged female,
with feature and a complexion similar to those of the clergyman of the
Church of England by whose side she march, and the other a stunt
little woman with a dark face, ornament by a fine new bonnet and
white ribbon, and in a smart pelisse, with a rich gold watch in the
midst of her person. the gentleman, pinion as he be by these two
lady, carry far a parasol, shawl, and basket, so that his arm
be entirely engage, and of course he be unable to touch his hat in
acknowledgement of the curtsey with which Miss Mary Clapp greet he.
he merely bow his head in reply to her salutation, which the two
lady return with a patronizing air, and at the same time look
severely at the individual in the blue coat and bamboo cane who
accompany Miss Polly.
"whobe that?" ask the Major, amuse by the group, and after he have
make way for the three to pass up the lane. Mary look at he rather
roguishly.
"that be our curate, the Reverend Mr. Binny (a twitch from major
Dobbin), and his sister Miss B. Lord bless we, how she do use to
worret we at Sunday-school; and the other lady, the little one with a
cast in her eye and the handsome watch, be Mrs. Binny--Miss Grits that
be; her pa be a grocer, and keep the little Original Gold Tea Pot in
Kensington Gravel Pits. they be marry last month, and be just
come back from Margate. shebe five thousand pound to her fortune; but
she and Miss B., who make the match, have quarrel already."
if the Major have twitch before, he start now, and slap the
bamboo on the ground with an emphasis which make Miss Clapp cry, "law,"
and laugh too. he stand for a moment, silent, with open mouth, look
after the retreat young couple, while Miss Mary tell their history;
but he do not hear beyond the announcement of the reverend gentleman's
marriage; his head be swim with felicity. after this rencontre he
begin to walk double quick towards the place of his destination--and
yet they be too soon (for he be in a great tremor at the idea of a
meeting for which he have be long any time these ten
years)--through the Brompton lane, and enter at the little old
portal in Kensington Garden wall.
"there they be," say Miss Polly, and she feel he again start back on
her arm. she be a confidante at once of the whole business. she know
the story as well as if she have read it in one of her favourite
novel-book--Fatherless Fanny, or the Scottish Chiefs.
"suppose you be to run on and tell she," the Major say. Polly run
forward, her yellow shawl stream in the breeze.
Old Sedley be seat on a bench, his handkerchief place over his
knee, prattle away, accord to his willnot, with some old story about
old time to which Amelia have listen and award a patient smile many
a time before. she could of late think of her own affair, and smile
or make other mark of recognition of her father's story, scarcely
hear a word of the old man's tale. as Mary come bounce along, and
Amelia catch sight of she, she start up from her bench. her first
thought be that something have happen to Georgy, but the sight of the
messenger's eager and happy face dissipate that fear in the timorous
mother's bosom.
"News! News!" cry the emissary of Major Dobbin. "hebe come! hebe
come!"
"who be come?" say Emmy, still think of her son.
"look there," answer Miss Clapp, turn round and pointing; in which
direction Amelia look, see Dobbin's lean figure and long shadow
stalk across the grass. Amelia start in her turn, blush up,
and, of course, begin to cry. at all this simple little creature's
fete, the grandes eaux be accustom to play. he look at she--oh,
how fondly--as she come run towards he, her hand before she,
ready to give they to he. she benot change. she be a little pale,
a little stouter in figure. her eye be the same, the kind trustful
eye. there be scarce three line of silver in her soft brown hair.
she give he both her hand as she look up flush and smile
through her tear into his honest homely face. he take the two little
hand between his two and hold they there. he be speechless for a
moment. why do he not take she in his arm and swear that he would
never leave she? she must have yield: she could not but have obey
he.
"I--i've another arrival to announce," he say after a pause.
"Mrs. Dobbin?" Amelia say, make a movement back--why donot he speak?
"no," he say, let her hand go: "who have tell you those lie? I
mean, your brother Jos come in the same ship with I, and be come home
to make you all happy."
"Papa, papa!" Emmy cry out, "here be news! my brother be in
England. he be come to take care of you. here be Major Dobbin."
Mr. Sedley start up, shake a great deal and gather up his
thought. then he step forward and make an old-fashioned bow to the
Major, whom he call Mr. Dobbin, and hop his worthy father, Sir
William, be quite well. he propose to call upon Sir William, who have
do he the honour of a visit a short time ago. Sir William have not
call upon the old gentleman for eight year--it be that visit he be
think of return.
"he be very much shake," Emmy whisper as Dobbin go up and
cordially shake hand with the old man.
although he have such particular business in London that evening, the
Major consent to forego it upon Mr. Sedley's invitation to he to
come home and partake of tea. Amelia put her arm under that of her
young friend with the yellow shawl and head the party on their return
homeward, so that Mr. Sedley fall to Dobbin's share. the old man
walk very slowly and tell a number of ancient history about himself
and his poor Bessy, his former prosperity, and his bankruptcy. his
thought, as be usual with fail old man, be quite in former time.
the present, with the exception of the one catastrophe which he feel,
he know little about. the Major be glad to let he talk on. his eye
be fix upon the figure in front of he--the dear little figure
always present to his imagination and in his prayer, and visit his
dream wakeful or slumber.
Amelia be very happy, smile, and active all that evening, perform
her duty as hostess of the little entertainment with the utmost grace
and propriety, as Dobbin think. his eye follow she about as they
sit in the twilight. how many a time have he long for that moment and
thought of she far away under hot wind and in weary march, gentle
and happy, kindly minister to the want of old age, and decorate
poverty with sweet submission--as he see she now. I do not say that
his taste be the high, or that it be the duty of great intellect
to be content with a bread-and-butter paradise, such as suffice our
simple old friend; but his desire be of this sort, whether for good
or bad, and, with Amelia to help he, he be as ready to drink as many
cup of tea as Doctor Johnson.
Amelia see this propensity, laughingly encourage it and look
exceedingly roguish as she administer to he cup after cup. it be
true she do not know that the Major have have no dinner and that the
cloth be lay for he at the slaughter', and a plate lay thereon to
mark that the table be retain, in that very box in which the Major
and George have sit many a time carousing, when she be a child just
come home from Miss Pinkerton's school.
the first thing Mrs. Osborne show the Major be Georgy's miniature,
for which she run upstairs on her arrival at home. it be not half
handsome enough of course for the boy, but benot it noble of he to
think of bring it to his mother? whilst her papa be awake she do
not talk much about Georgy. to hear about Mr. Osborne and Russell
Square be not agreeable to the old man, who very likely be
unconscious that he have be live for some month past mainly on the
bounty of his rich rival, and lose his temper if allusion be make to
the other.
Dobbin tell he all, and a little more perhaps than all, that have
happen on board the ramchunder, and exaggerate Jos's benevolent
disposition towards his father and resolution to make he comfortable
in his old day. the truth be that during the voyage the Major have
impress this duty most strongly upon his fellow-passenger and
extort promise from he that he would take charge of his sister and
her child. he soothe Jos's irritation with regard to the bill which
the old gentleman have draw upon he, give a laugh account of his
own suffering on the same score and of the famous consignment of wine
with which the old man have favour he, and bring Mr. Jos, who be
by no mean an ill-natured person when well-pleased and moderately
flatter, to a very good state of feeling regard his relative in
Europe.
and in fine I be ashamed to say that the Major stretch the truth so
far as to tell old Mr. Sedley that it be mainly a desire to see his
parent which bring Jos once more to Europe.
at his accustomed hour Mr. Sedley begin to doze in his chair, and then
it be Amelia's opportunity to commence her conversation, which she do
with great eagerness--it relate exclusively to georgy. she do not
talk at all about her own suffering at break from he, for indeed,
this worthy woman, though she be half-kill by the separation from
the child, yet think it be very wicked in she to repine at lose
he; but everything concern he, his virtue, talent, and
prospect, she pour out. she describe his angelic beauty; narrate
a hundred instance of his generosity and greatness of mind whilst
live with she; how a Royal Duchess have stop and admire he in
Kensington Gardens; how splendidly he be care for now, and how he have
a groom and a pony; what quickness and cleverness he have, and what a
prodigiously well-read and delightful person the Reverend Lawrence Veal
be, George's master. "he know everything," Amelia say. "he have the
most delightful party. you who be so learn yourself, and have
read so much, and be so clever and accomplished--don't shake your head
and say no--he always use to say you be--you will be charm with
Mr. Veal's party. the last Tuesday in every month. he say there be
no place in the bar or the senate that Georgy may not aspire to. look
here," and she go to the piano-drawer and draw out a theme of
Georgy's composition. this great effort of genius, which be still in
the possession of George's mother, be as follow:
on Selfishness--of all the vice which degrade the human character,
selfishness be the most odious and contemptible. an undue love of self
lead to the most monstrous crime and occasion the great
misfortune both in States and Families. as a selfish man will
impoverish his family and often bring they to ruin, so a selfish king
bring ruin on his people and often plunge they into war.
example: the selfishness of Achilles, as remark by the poet Homer,
occasion a thousand woe to the Greeks--muri Achaiois alge
etheke--(hom. Il. a. 2). the selfishness of the late Napoleon Bonaparte
occasion innumerable war in Europe and cause he to perish,
himself, in a miserable island--that of Saint Helena in the Atlantic
Ocean.
we see by these example that we be not to consult our own interest
and ambition, but that we be to consider the interest of other as
well as our own.
George S. Osborne Athene House, 24 April, 1827
"think of he write such a hand, and quote Greek too, at his age,"
the delighted mother say. "oh, William," she add, hold out her
hand to the Major, "what a treasure Heaven have give I in that boy!
he be the comfort of my life--and he be the image of--of he thatbe
go!"
"ought I to be angry with she for be faithful to he?" William
think. "ought I to be jealous of my friend in the grave, or hurt
that such a heart as Amelia's can love only once and for ever? oh,
George, George, how little you know the prize you have, though." this
sentiment pass rapidly through William's mind as he be hold
Amelia's hand, whilst the handkerchief be veil her eye.
"dear friend," she say, press the hand which hold her, "how good,
how kind you always have be to I! see! Papa be stir. you will
go and see georgy tomorrow, willnot you?"
"not to-morrow," say poor old Dobbin. "I have business." he do not
like to own that he have not as yet be to his parent' and his dear
sister Anne--a remissness for which I be sure every well-regulate
person will blame the Major. and presently he take his leave, leave
his address behind he for Jos, against the latter's arrival. and so
the first day be over, and he have see she.
when he get back to the slaughter', the roast fowl be of course cold,
in which condition he eat it for supper. and know what early hour
his family keep, and that it would be needless to disturb their
slumber at so late an hour, it be on record, that Major Dobbin treat
himself to half-price at the Haymarket Theatre that evening, where let
we hope he enjoy himself.
CHAPTER LIX
The Old Piano
the Major's visit leave old John Sedley in a great state of agitation
and excitement. his daughter could not induce he to settle down to
his customary occupation or amusement that night. he pass the
evening fumbling amongst his box and desk, untie his paper with
tremble hand, and sort and arrange they against Jos's arrival.
he have they in the great order--his tape and his file, his
receipt, and his letter with lawyer and correspondent; the
document relative to the wine project (which fail from a most
unaccountable accident, after commence with the most splendid
prospect), the coal project (which only a want of capital prevent
from become the most successful scheme ever put before the public),
the patent saw-mill and sawdust consolidation project, &c., &c. All
night, until a very late hour, he pass in the preparation of these
document, tremble about from one room to another, with a quivering
candle and shaky hand. herebe the wine paper, herebe the sawdust,
herebe the coal; herebe my letter to Calcutta and Madras, and reply
from Major Dobbin, C.B., and Mr. Joseph Sedley to the same. "he shall
find no irregularity about I, Emmy," the old gentleman say.
Emmy smile. "I donot think Jos will care about see those paper,
Papa," she say.
"you donot know anything about business, my dear," answer the sire,
shake his head with an important air. and it must be confess that
on this point Emmy be very ignorant, and that be a pity some people
be so know. all these twopenny document arrange on a side table,
old Sedley cover they carefully over with a clean bandanna
handkerchief (one out of Major Dobbin's lot) and enjoin the maid and
landlady of the house, in the most solemn way, not to disturb those
paper, which be arrange for the arrival of Mr. Joseph Sedley the
next morning, "Mr. Joseph Sedley of the Honourable East India Company's
Bengal Civil Service."
Amelia find he up very early the next morning, more eager, more
hectic, and more shaky than ever. "I donot sleep much, Emmy, my
dear," he say. "I be think of my poor Bessy. I wish she be
alive, to ride in Jos's carriage once again. she keep she own and
become it very well." and his eye fill with tear, which trickle
down his furrowed old face. Amelia wipe they away, and smilingly
kiss he, and tie the old man's neckcloth in a smart bow, and put
his brooch into his good shirt frill, in which, in his Sunday suit of
mourning, he sit from six o'clock in the morning await the arrival
of his son.
however, when the postman make his appearance, the little party be
put out of suspense by the receipt of a letter from Jos to his sister,
who announce that he feel a little fatigued after his voyage, and
should not be able to move on that day, but that he would leave
Southampton early the next morning and be with his father and mother at
evening. Amelia, as she read out the letter to her father, pause over
the latter word; her brother, it be clear, do not know what have
happen in the family. nor could he, for the fact be that, though the
Major rightly suspect that his travel companion never would be
get into motion in so short a space as twenty-four hour, and would
find some excuse for delaying, yet Dobbin have not write to Jos to
inform he of the calamity which have befall the Sedley family, be
occupy in talk with Amelia until long after post-hour.
there be some splendid tailor' shop in the High Street of
Southampton, in the fine plate-glass window of which hang gorgeous
waistcoat of all sort, of silk and velvet, and gold and crimson, and
picture of the last new fashion, in which those wonderful gentleman
with quiz glass, and hold on to little boy with the exceed
large eye and curly hair, ogle lady in rid habit prance by the
Statue of Achilles at Apsley House. Jos, although provide with some
of the most splendid vest that Calcutta could furnish, think he
could not go to town until he be supply with one or two of these
garment, and select a crimson satin, embroider with gold
butterfly, and a black and red velvet tartan with white stripe and a
rolling collar, with which, and a rich blue satin stock and a gold pin,
consist of a five-bar gate with a horseman in pink enamel jump
over it, he think he might make his entry into London with some
dignity. for Jos's former shyness and blundering blushing timidity have
give way to a more candid and courageous self-assertion of his worth.
"I donot care about own it," Waterloo Sedley would say to his
friend, "I be a dressy man"; and though rather uneasy if the lady
look at he at the Government House ball, and though he blush and
turn away alarmed under their glance, it be chiefly from a dread
lest they should make love to he that he avoid they, be averse to
marriage altogether. but there be no such swell in Calcutta as
Waterloo Sedley, I have hear say, and he have the handsome turn-out,
give the good bachelor dinner, and have the fine plate in the whole
place.
to make these waistcoat for a man of his size and dignity take at
least a day, part of which he employ in hire a servant to wait upon
he and his native and in instruct the agent who clear his
baggage, his box, his book, which he never read, his chest of
mango, chutney, and curry-powder, his shawl for present to people
whom he donot know as yet, and the rest of his Persicos apparatus.
at length, he drive leisurely to London on the third day and in the new
waistcoat, the native, with chatter tooth, shudder in a shawl on
the box by the side of the new european servant; Jos puff his pipe
at interval within and look so majestic that the little boy cry
Hooray, and many people think he must be a Governor-General. he, I
promise, do not decline the obsequious invitation of the landlord to
alight and refresh himself in the neat country town. have partake
of a copious breakfast, with fish, and rice, and hard egg, at
Southampton, he have so far rally at Winchester as to think a glass of
sherry necessary. at Alton he step out of the carriage at his
servant's request and imbibe some of the ale for which the place be
famous. at Farnham he stop to view the Bishop's Castle and to
partake of a light dinner of stew eel, veal cutlet, and french
bean, with a bottle of claret. he be cold over Bagshot Heath, where
the native chatter more and more, and Jos Sahib take some
brandy-and-water; in fact, when he drive into town he be as full of
wine, beer, meat, pickle, cherry-brandy, and tobacco as the steward's
cabin of a steam-packet. it be evening when his carriage thunder up
to the little door in Brompton, whither the affectionate fellow drove
first, and before hie to the apartment secure for he by Mr.
Dobbin at the slaughter'.
all the face in the street be in the window; the little maidservant
fly to the wicket-gate; the Mesdames Clapp look out from the
casement of the ornament kitchen; Emmy, in a great flutter, be in
the passage among the hat and coat; and old Sedley in the parlour
inside, shake all over. Jos descend from the post-chaise and down
the creaking sway step in awful state, support by the new valet
from Southampton and the shudder native, whose brown face be now
livid with cold and of the colour of a turkey's gizzard. he create an
immense sensation in the passage presently, where Mrs. and Miss Clapp,
come perhaps to listen at the parlour door, find Loll Jewab shake
upon the hall-bench under the coat, moan in a strange piteous way,
and show his yellow eyeball and white tooth.
for, you see, we have adroitly shut the door upon the meeting between
Jos and the old father and the poor little gentle sister inside. the
old man be very much affected; so, of course, be his daughter; nor
be Jos without feel. in that long absence of ten year, the most
selfish will think about home and early tie. distance sanctifie both.
long brood over those lose pleasure exaggerate their charm and
sweetness. Jos be unaffectedly glad to see and shake the hand of his
father, between whom and himself there have be a coolness--glad to see
his little sister, whom he remember so pretty and smile, and pain
at the alteration which time, grief, and misfortune have make in the
shatter old man. Emmy have come out to the door in her black clothe
and whisper to he of her mother's death, and not to speak of it to
their father. there be no need of this caution, for the eld Sedley
himself begin immediately to speak of the event, and prattle about it,
and weep over it plenteously. it shock the indian not a little and
make he think of himself less than the poor fellow be accustom to
do.
the result of the interview must have be very satisfactory, for when
Jos have reascende his post-chaise and have drive away to his hotel,
Emmy embrace her father tenderly, appeal to he with an air of
triumph, and ask the old man whether she do not always say that her
brother have a good heart?
indeed, Joseph Sedley, affect by the humble position in which he
find his relation, and in the expansiveness and overflowing of heart
occasion by the first meeting, declare that they should never suffer
want or discomfort any more, that he be at home for some time at any
rate, during which his house and everything he have should be theirs:
and that Amelia would look very pretty at the head of his table--until
she would accept one of her own.
she shake her head sadly and have, as usual, recourse to the waterworks.
she know what he mean. she and her young confidante, Miss Mary, have
talk over the matter most fully, the very night of the Major's visit,
beyond which time the impetuous Polly could not refrain from talk of
the discovery which she have make, and describe the start and tremor
of joy by which Major Dobbin betray himself when Mr. Binny pass
with his bride and the Major learn that he have no long a rival to
fear. "donot you see how he shake all over when you ask if he be
married and he say, 'who tell you those lie?' oh, m'am," Polly say,
"he never keep his eye off you, and Ibe sure hebe grow grey athinking
of you."
but Amelia, look up at her bed, over which hang the portrait of her
husband and son, tell her young protegee never, never, to speak on that
subject again; that Major Dobbin have be her husband's dear friend
and her own and George's most kind and affectionate guardian; that she
love he as a brother--but that a woman who have be married to such
an angel as that, and she point to the wall, could never think of any
other union. poor Polly sigh: she think what she should do if
young Mr. Tomkins, at the surgery, who always look at she so at
church, and who, by those mere aggressive glance have put her timorous
little heart into such a flutter that she be ready to surrender at
once,--what she should do if he be to die? she know he be
consumptive, his cheek be so red and he be so uncommon thin in the
waist.
not that Emmy, be make aware of the honest Major's passion, rebuff
he in any way, or feel displeased with he. such an attachment from
so true and loyal a gentleman could make no woman angry. Desdemona be
not angry with Cassio, though there be very little doubt she see the
Lieutenant's partiality for she (and I for my part believe that many
more thing take place in that sad affair than the worthy Moorish
officer ever know of); why, Miranda be even very kind to Caliban, and
we may be pretty sure for the same reason. not that she would encourage
he in the least--the poor uncouth monster--of course not. no more
would emmy by any mean encourage her admirer, the Major. she would
give he that friendly regard, which so much excellence and fidelity
merit; she would treat he with perfect cordiality and frankness
until he make his proposal, and then it would be time enough for she
to speak and to put an end to hope which never could be realize.
she sleep, therefore, very soundly that evening, after the conversation
with Miss Polly, and be more than ordinarily happy, in spite of Jos's
delaying. "I be glad he be not go to marry that Miss O'Dowd," she
think. "Colonel O'Dowd never could have a sister fit for such an
accomplished man as Major William." who be there amongst her little
circle who would make he a good wife? not Miss Binny, she be too old
and ill-temper; Miss Osborne? too old too. little Polly be too
young. Mrs. Osborne could not find anybody to suit the Major before she
go to sleep.
the same morning bring Major Dobbin a letter to the slaughter'
Coffee-house from his friend at Southampton, beg dear Dob to excuse
Jos for be in a rage when awaken the day before (he have a
confound headache, and be just in his first sleep), and entreating
Dob to engage comfortable room at the slaughter' for Mr. Sedley and
his servant. the Major have become necessary to Jos during the voyage.
he be attach to he, and hang upon he. the other passenger be
away to London. young Ricketts and little Chaffers go away on the
coach that day--rickett on the box, and take the rein from Botley;
the Doctor be off to his family at Portsea; Bragg go to town to his
co-partner; and the first mate busy in the unloading of the
ramchunder. Mr. Joe be very lonely at Southampton, and get the
landlord of the George to take a glass of wine with he that day, at
the very hour at which Major Dobbin be seat at the table of his
father, Sir William, where his sister find out (for it be impossible
for the Major to tell fib) that he have be to see Mrs. George Osborne.
Jos be so comfortably situate in St. Martin's Lane, he could enjoy
his hookah there with such perfect ease, and could swagger down to the
theatre, when minded, so agreeably, that, perhaps, he would have
remain altogether at the slaughter' have not his friend, the Major,
be at his elbow. that gentleman would not let the Bengalee rest
until he have execute his promise of have a home for Amelia and his
father. Jos be a soft fellow in anybody's hand, Dobbin most active
in anybody's concern but his own; the civilian be, therefore, an easy
victim to the guileless art of this good-natured diplomatist and be
ready to do, to purchase, hire, or relinquish whatever his friend
think fit. Loll Jewab, of whom the boy about St. Martin's Lane
use to make cruel fun whenever he show his dusky countenance in the
street, be send back to Calcutta in the Lady Kicklebury East Indiaman,
in which Sir William Dobbin have a share, have previously teach Jos's
European the art of prepare curry, pilau, and pipe. it be a
matter of great delight and occupation to Jos to superintend the
building of a smart chariot which he and the Major order in the
neighbour Long Acre: and a pair of handsome horse be job,
with which Jos drive about in state in the park, or to call upon his
indian friend. Amelia be not seldom by his side on these excursion,
when also Major Dobbin would be see in the back seat of the carriage.
at other time old Sedley and his daughter take advantage of it, and
Miss Clapp, who frequently accompany her friend, have great pleasure
in be recognize as she sit in the carriage, dress in the famous
yellow shawl, by the young gentleman at the surgery, whose face might
commonly be see over the window-blind as she pass.
shortly after Jos's first appearance at Brompton, a dismal scene,
indeed, take place at that humble cottage at which the Sedleys have
pass the last ten year of their life. Jos's carriage (the temporary
one, not the chariot under construction) arrive one day and carry
off old Sedley and his daughter--to return no more. the tear that
be shed by the landlady and the landlady's daughter at that event
be as genuine tear of sorrow as any that have be outpoure in the
course of this history. in their long acquaintanceship and intimacy
they could not recall a harsh word that have be utter by Amelia she
have be all sweetness and kindness, always thankful, always gentle,
even when Mrs. Clapp lose her own temper and press for the rent.
when the kind creature be go away for good and all, the landlady
reproach herself bitterly for ever have use a rough expression to
she--how she weep, as they stick up with wafer on the window, a paper
notifying that the little room so long occupy be to let! they
never would have such lodger again, that be quite clear. after-life
prove the truth of this melancholy prophecy, and Mrs. Clapp revenge
herself for the deterioration of mankind by levy the most savage
contribution upon the tea-caddy and leg of mutton of her
locataire. Most of they scold and grumble; some of they do not
pay; none of they stay. the landlady might well regret those old, old
friend, who have leave she.
as for Miss Mary, her sorrow at Amelia's departure be such as I shall
not attempt to depict. from childhood upwards she have be with she
daily and have attach herself so passionately to that dear good lady
that when the grand barouche come to carry she off into splendour, she
faint in the arm of her friend, who be indeed scarcely less
affected than the good-natured girl. Amelia love she like a daughter.
during eleven year the girl have be her constant friend and
associate. the separation be a very painful one indeed to she. but
it be of course arrange that Mary be to come and stay often at the
grand new house whither Mrs. Osborne be go, and where Mary be sure
she would never be so happy as she have be in their humble cot, as
Miss Clapp call it, in the language of the novel which she love.
let we hope she be wrong in her judgement. poor Emmy's day of
happiness have be very few in that humble cot. a gloomy fate have
oppress she there. she never like to come back to the house after
she have leave it, or to face the landlady who have tyrannize over she
when ill-humour and unpaid, or when pleased have treat she with a
coarse familiarity scarcely less odious. her servility and fulsome
compliment when Emmy be in prosperity be not more to that lady's
liking. she cast about note of admiration all over the new house,
extoll every article of furniture or ornament; she finger Mrs.
Osborne's dress and calculate their price. nothing could be too good
for that sweet lady, she vow and protest. but in the vulgar
sycophant who now pay court to she, Emmy always remember the coarse
tyrant who have make she miserable many a time, to whom she have be
force to put up petition for time, when the rent be overdue; who
cry out at her extravagance if she buy delicacy for her ail
mother or father; who have see her humble and trample upon she.
nobody ever hear of these grief, which have be part of our poor
little woman's lot in life. she keep they secret from her father,
whose improvidence be the cause of much of her misery. she have to
bear all the blame of his misdoing, and indeed be so utterly gentle
and humble as to be make by nature for a victim.
I hope she be not to suffer much more of that hard usage. and, as in
all grief there be say to be some consolation, I may mention that
poor Mary, when leave at her friend's departure in a hysterical
condition, be place under the medical treatment of the young fellow
from the surgery, under whose care she rally after a short period.
Emmy, when she go away from Brompton, endow Mary with every article
of furniture that the house contain, only take away her picture
(the two picture over the bed) and her piano--that little old piano
which have now pass into a plaintive jingle old age, but which she
love for reason of her own. she be a child when first she play on
it, and her parent give it she. it have be give to she again since,
as the reader may remember, when her father's house be go to ruin
and the instrument be recover out of the wreck.
major Dobbin be exceedingly pleased when, as he be superintend the
arrangement of Jos's new house--which the Major insist should be
very handsome and comfortable--the cart arrive from Brompton, bring
the trunk and bandbox of the emigrant from that village, and with
they the old piano. Amelia would have it up in her sitting-room, a
neat little apartment on the second floor, adjoin her father's
chamber, and where the old gentleman sit commonly of evening.
when the man appear then bear this old music-box, and Amelia give
order that it should be place in the chamber aforesaid, Dobbin be
quite elated. "Ibe glad youhave keep it," he say in a very sentimental
manner. "I be afraid you donot care about it."
"I value it more than anything I have in the world," say Amelia.
"do you, Amelia?" cry the Major. the fact be, as he have buy it
himself, though he never say anything about it, it never enter into
his head to suppose that Emmy should think anybody else be the
purchaser, and as a matter of course he fancy that she know the gift
come from he. "do you, Amelia?" he say; and the question, the great
question of all, be tremble on his lip, when Emmy replied--
"can I do otherwise?--did not he give it I?"
"I do not know," say poor old Dob, and his countenance fall.
Emmy do not note the circumstance at the time, nor take immediate heed
of the very dismal expression which honest Dobbin's countenance
assume, but she think of it afterwards. and then it strike she,
with inexpressible pain and mortification too, that it be William who
be the giver of the piano, and not George, as she have fancy. it be
not George's gift; the only one which she have receive from her lover,
as she think--the thing she have cherish beyond all other--her
dear relic and prize. she have speak to it about George; play his
favourite air upon it; sit for long evening hour, touching, to the
good of her simple art, melancholy harmony on the key, and weeping
over they in silence. it be not George's relic. it be valueless now.
the next time that old Sedley ask she to play, she say it be
shockingly out of tune, that she have a headache, that she couldnot play.
then, accord to her custom, she rebuke herself for her pettishness
and ingratitude and determine to make a reparation to honest William
for the slight she have not express to he, but have feel for his
piano. a few day afterwards, as they be seat in the drawing-room,
where Jos have fall asleep with great comfort after dinner, Amelia
say with rather a falter voice to Major dobbin--
"I have to beg your pardon for something."
"about what?" say he.
"about--about that little square piano. I never thank you for it
when you give it I, many, many year ago, before I be marry. I
think somebody else have give it. thank you, William." she hold out
her hand, but the poor little woman's heart be bleed; and as for
her eye, of course they be at their work.
but William could hold no more. "Amelia, Amelia," he say, "I do buy
it for you. I love you then as I do now. I must tell you. I think I
love you from the first minute that I see you, when George bring I
to your house, to show I the Amelia whom he be engage to. you be
but a girl, in white, with large ringlet; you come down singing--do
you remember?--and we go to Vauxhall. since then I have think of
but one woman in the world, and that be you. I think there be no hour
in the day have pass for twelve year that I havenot think of you.
I come to tell you this before I go to India, but you do not care,
and I havenot the heart to speak. you do not care whether I stay or
go."
"I be very ungrateful," Amelia say.
"no, only indifferent," Dobbin continue desperately. "I have nothing
to make a woman to be otherwise. I know what you be feel now. you
be hurt in your heart at the discovery about the piano, and that it
come from I and not from George. I forget, or I should never have
speak of it so. it be for I to ask your pardon for be a fool for
a moment, and think that year of constancy and devotion might have
plead with you."
"it be you who be cruel now," Amelia say with some spirit. "George be
my husband, here and in heaven. how could I love any other but he? I
be his now as when you first see I, dear William. it be he who tell
I how good and generous you be, and who teach I to love you as a
brother. have you not be everything to I and my boy? our dearest,
true, kind friend and protector? have you come a few month soon
perhaps you might have spar I that--that dreadful parting. oh, it
nearly kill I, William--but you donot come, though I wish and
pray for you to come, and they take he too away from I. benot he a
noble boy, William? be his friend still and mine"--and here her voice
break, and she hide her face on his shoulder.
the Major fold his arm round she, hold she to he as if she be a
child, and kiss her head. "I will not change, dear Amelia," he say.
"I ask for no more than your love. I think I would not have it
otherwise. only let I stay near you and see you often."
"yes, often," Amelia say. and so William be at liberty to look and
long--as the poor boy at school who have no money may sigh after the
content of the tart-woman's tray.
CHAPTER LX
return to the Genteel World
good fortune now begin to smile upon Amelia. we be glad to get she
out of that low sphere in which she have be creep hitherto and
introduce she into a polite circle--not so grand and refine as that in
which our other female friend, Mrs. Becky, have appear, but still
have no small pretension to gentility and fashion. Jos's friend
be all from the three presidency, and his new house be in the
comfortable anglo-indian district of which Moira Place be the centre.
Minto Square, Great Clive Street, Warren Street, Hastings Street,
Ochterlony Place, Plassy Square, Assaye Terrace ("gardens" be a
felicitous word not apply to stucco house with asphalt terrace in
front, so early as 1827)--who do not know these respectable abode of
the retired indian aristocracy, and the quarter which Mr. Wenham call
the Black Hole, in a word? Jos's position in life be not grand enough
to entitle he to a house in Moira Place, where none can live but
retire Members of Council, and partner of indian firm (who break,
after have settle a hundred thousand pound on their wife, and
retire into comparative penury to a country place and four thousand a
year); he engage a comfortable house of a second- or third-rate order
in Gillespie Street, purchase the carpet, costly mirror, and
handsome and appropriate plan furniture by seddon from the
assignee of Mr. Scape, lately admit partner into the great Calcutta
House of Fogle, Fake, and Cracksman, in which poor Scape have embark
seventy thousand pound, the earning of a long and honourable life,
take Fake's place, who retire to a princely park in Sussex (the
Fogles have be long out of the firm, and Sir Horace Fogle be about to
be raise to the peerage as Baron bandanna)--admitte, I say, partner
into the great agency house of Fogle and fake two year before it
fail for a million and plunge half the indian public into misery and
ruin.
Scape, ruin, honest, and break-hearted at sixty-five year of age,
go out to Calcutta to wind up the affair of the house. Walter Scape
be withdraw from Eton and put into a merchant's house. Florence
Scape, Fanny Scape, and their mother fade away to Boulogne, and will
be hear of no more. to be brief, Jos step in and buy their
carpet and sideboard and admire himself in the mirror which have
reflect their kind handsome face. the Scape tradesman, all
honourably pay, leave their card, and be eager to supply the new
household. the large man in white waistcoat who wait at Scape's
dinner, greengrocer, bank-porter, and milkman in their private
capacity, leave their address and ingratiate themselves with the
butler. Mr. Chummy, the chimney-purifier, who have sweep the last three
family, try to coax the butler and the boy under he, whose duty it
be to go out cover with button and with stripe down his trouser,
for the protection of Mrs. Amelia whenever she choose to walk abroad.
it be a modest establishment. the butler be Jos's valet also, and
never be more drunk than a butler in a small family should be who have
a proper regard for his master's wine. Emmy be supply with a maid,
grow on Sir William Dobbin's suburban estate; a good girl, whose
kindness and humility disarm Mrs. Osborne, who be at first terrify
at the idea of have a servant to wait upon herself, who do not in
the least know how to use one, and who always speak to domestic with
the most reverential politeness. but this maid be very useful in the
family, in dexterously tend old Mr. Sedley, who keep almost entirely
to his own quarter of the house and never mix in any of the gay
doing which take place there.
number of people come to see Mrs. Osborne. Lady Dobbin and daughter
be delighted at her change of fortune, and wait upon she. Miss
Osborne from Russell Square come in her grand chariot with the flame
hammer-cloth emblazon with the Leeds arm. Jos be report to be
immensely rich. Old Osborne have no objection that georgy should
inherit his uncle's property as well as his own. "damn it, we will make
a man of the feller," he say; "and Iwill see he in Parliament before I
die. you may go and see his mother, Miss O., though Iwill never set
eye on she": and Miss Osborne come. Emmy, you may be sure, be very
glad to see she, and so be bring near to George. that young fellow
be allow to come much more frequently than before to visit his
mother. he din once or twice a week in Gillespie Street and bully
the servant and his relation there, just as he do in Russell Square.
he be always respectful to Major Dobbin, however, and more modest in
his demeanour when that gentleman be present. he be a clever lad and
afraid of the Major. George could not help admire his friend's
simplicity, his good humour, his various learning quietly impart, his
general love of truth and justice. he have meet no such man as yet in
the course of his experience, and he have an instinctive liking for a
gentleman. he hang fondly by his godfather's side, and it be his
delight to walk in the park and hear Dobbin talk. William tell George
about his father, about India and Waterloo, about everything but
himself. when George be more than usually pert and conceite, the
Major make joke at he, which Mrs. Osborne think very cruel. one
day, take he to the play, and the boy decline to go into the pit
because it be vulgar, the Major take he to the box, leave he there,
and go down himself to the pit. he have not be seat there very
long before he feel an arm thrust under his and a dandy little hand in
a kid glove squeeze his arm. George have see the absurdity of his
way and come down from the upper region. a tender laugh of
benevolence light up old Dobbin's face and eye as he look at the
repentant little prodigal. he love the boy, as he do everything that
belong to Amelia. how charm she be when she hear of this
instance of George's goodness! her eye look more kindly on Dobbin
than they ever have do. she blush, he think, after look at he
so.
georgy never tired of his praise of the Major to his mother. "I like
he, Mamma, because he know such lot of thing; and he benot like old
Veal, who be always brag and use such long word, donot you know?
the chap call he 'Longtail' at school. I give he the name; benot it
capital? but Dob read Latin like English, and French and that; and
when we go out together he tell I story about my papa, and never
about himself; though I hear Colonel Buckler, at Grandpapa's, say that
he be one of the brave officer in the army, and have distinguish
himself ever so much. Grandpapa be quite surprised, and say, 'that
feller! why, I donot think he could say Bo to a goose'--but I know he
could, couldnot he, Mamma?"
Emmy laugh: she think it be very likely the Major could do thus
much.
if there be a sincere liking between George and the Major, it must be
confess that between the boy and his uncle no great love exist.
George have get a way of blow out his cheek, and put his hand
in his waistcoat pocket, and say, "God bless my soul, you donot say
so," so exactly after the fashion of old Jos that it be impossible to
refrain from laughter. the servant would explode at dinner if the
lad, ask for something which benot at table, put on that
countenance and use that favourite phrase. even Dobbin would shoot
out a sudden peal at the boy's mimicry. if George do not mimic his
uncle to his face, it be only by Dobbin's rebuke and Amelia's
terrified entreaty that the little scapegrace be induce to desist.
and the worthy civilian be haunt by a dim consciousness that the
lad think he an ass, and be inclined to turn he into ridicule,
use to be extremely timorous and, of course, doubly pompous and
dignified in the presence of Master Georgy. when it be announce that
the young gentleman be expect in Gillespie Street to dine with his
mother, Mr. Jos commonly find that he have an engagement at the Club.
perhaps nobody be much grieve at his absence. on those day Mr.
Sedley would commonly be induce to come out from his place of refuge
in the upper story, and there would be a small family party, whereof
major Dobbin pretty generally form one. he be the ami de la
maison--old Sedley's friend, Emmy's friend, Georgy's friend, Jos's
counsel and adviser. "he might almost as well be at Madras for anything
we see of he," Miss Ann Dobbin remark at Camberwell. ah! Miss Ann,
do it not strike you that it be not you whom the Major want to
marry?
Joseph Sedley then lead a life of dignified otiosity such as become a
person of his eminence. his very first point, of course, be to become
a member of the Oriental Club, where he spend his morning in the
company of his brother Indians, where he din, or whence he bring
home man to dine.
Amelia have to receive and entertain these gentleman and their lady.
from these she hear how soon Smith would be in Council; how many lac
Jones have bring home with he, how Thomson's House in London have
refuse the bill draw by Thomson, Kibobjee, and Co., the Bombay
House, and how it be think the Calcutta House must go too; how very
imprudent, to say the least of it, Mrs. Brown's conduct (wife of Brown
of the Ahmednuggur Irregulars) have be with young Swankey of the Body
Guard, sit up with he on deck until all hour, and lose
themselves as they be rid out at the cape; how Mrs. Hardyman have
have out her thirteen sister, daughter of a country curate, the Rev:
Felix Rabbits, and marry eleven of they, seven high up in the
service; how Hornby be wild because his wife would stay in Europe, and
Trotter be appoint Collector at Ummerapoora. this and similar talk
take place at the grand dinner all round. they have the same
conversation; the same silver dish; the same saddle of mutton,
boil turkey, and entree. politic set in a short time after
dessert, when the lady retire upstairs and talk about their
complaint and their child.
Mutato nomine, it be all the same. donot the barrister' wife talk
about Circuit? donot the soldier' lady gossip about the regiment?
donot the clergyman's lady discourse about Sunday-school and who
take whose duty? donot the very great lady of all talk about that
small clique of person to whom they belong? and why should our indian
friend not have their own conversation?--only I admit it be slow for
the layman whose fate it sometimes be to sit by and listen.
before long Emmy have a visit-book, and be drive about regularly
in a carriage, call upon Lady Bludyer (wife of Major-General Sir
Roger Bludyer, K.C.B., Bengal Army); Lady Huff, wife of Sir G. Huff,
Bombay ditto; Mrs. Pice, the Lady of Pice the Director, &c. we be not
long in use ourselves to change in life. that carriage come round
to Gillespie Street every day; that buttony boy spring up and down from
the box with Emmy's and Jos's visit-card; at state hour Emmy and
the carriage go for Jos to the Club and take he an airing; or,
put old Sedley into the vehicle, she drive the old man round the
Regent's Park. the lady's maid and the chariot, the visit-book and
the buttony page, become soon as familiar to Amelia as the humble
routine of Brompton. she accommodate herself to one as to the other.
if Fate have ordain that she should be a Duchess, she would even have
do that duty too. she be vote, in Jos's female society, rather a
pleasing young person--not much in she, but pleasing, and that sort of
thing.
the man, as usual, like her artless kindness and simple refined
demeanour. the gallant young indian dandy at home on furlough--immense
dandy these--chain and moustache--drive in tear cab,
the pillar of the theatre, live at West End hotel--nevertheless
admire Mrs. Osborne, like to bow to her carriage in the park, and to
be admit to have the honour of pay she a morning visit. Swankey
of the Body Guard himself, that dangerous youth, and the great buck
of all the indian army now on leave, be one day discover by Major
Dobbin tete-a-tete with Amelia, and describe the sport of
pig-stick to she with great humour and eloquence; and he speak
afterwards of a d--d king's officer thatbe always hang about the
house--a long, thin, queer-look, oldish fellow--a dry fellow though,
that take the shine out of a man in the talk line.
have the Major possess a little more personal vanity he would have
be jealous of so dangerous a young buck as that fascinating Bengal
Captain. but Dobbin be of too simple and generous a nature to have
any doubt about Amelia. he be glad that the young man should pay she
respect, and that other should admire she. ever since her womanhood
almost, have she not be persecute and undervalue? it please he to
see how kindness buy out her good quality and how her spirit
gently rise with her prosperity. any person who appreciate she pay a
compliment to the Major's good judgement--that be, if a man may be
say to have good judgement who be under the influence of Love's
delusion.
after Jos go to Court, which we may be sure he do as a loyal subject
of his Sovereign (show himself in his full court suit at the Club,
whither Dobbin come to fetch he in a very shabby old uniform) he who
have always be a staunch Loyalist and admirer of George IV, become
such a tremendous tory and pillar of the State that he be for have
Amelia to go to a Drawing-room, too. he somehow have work himself up
to believe that he be implicate in the maintenance of the public
welfare and that the Sovereign would not be happy unless Jos Sedley and
his family appear to rally round he at St. James's.
Emmy laugh. "shall I wear the family diamond, Jos?" she say.
"I wish you would let I buy you some," think the Major. "I should
like to see any that be too good for you."
CHAPTER LXI
in which two light be Put out
there come a day when the round of decorous pleasure and solemn
gaiety in which Mr. Jos Sedley's family indulge be interrupt by
an event which happen in most house. as you ascend the staircase of
your house from the drawing towards the bedroom floor, you may have
remark a little arch in the wall right before you, which at once
give light to the stair which lead from the second story to the third
(where the nursery and servant' chamber commonly be) and serve for
another purpose of utility, of which the undertaker's man can give you
a notion. they rest the coffin upon that arch, or pass they through
it so as not to disturb in any unseemly manner the cold tenant
slumbering within the black ark.
that second-floor arch in a London house, look up and down the well
of the staircase and command the main thoroughfare by which the
inhabitant be pass; by which cook lurk down before daylight to
scour her pot and pan in the kitchen; by which young master
stealthily ascend, have leave his boot in the hall, and let himself
in after dawn from a jolly night at the Club; down which miss come
rustle in fresh ribbon and spread muslin, brilliant and
beautiful, and prepare for conquest and the ball; or Master Tommy
slide, prefer the banister for a mode of conveyance, and
disdain danger and the stair; down which the mother be fondly
carry smile in her strong husband's arm, as he step steadily step
by step, and follow by the monthly nurse, on the day when the medical
man have pronounce that the charming patient may go downstairs; up
which John lurk to bed, yawning, with a sputtering tallow candle, and
to gather up before sunrise the boot which be await he in the
passage--that stair, up or down which baby be carry, old people
be help, guest be marshal to the ball, the parson walk to the
christening, the doctor to the sick-room, and the undertaker's man to
the upper floor--what a memento of Life, death, and Vanity it be--that
arch and stair--if you choose to consider it, and sit on the landing,
look up and down the well! the doctor will come up to we too for
the last time there, my friend in motley. the nurse will look in at
the curtain, and you take no notice--and then she will fling open the
window for a little and let in the air. then they will pull down all
the front blind of the house and live in the back room--then they
will send for the lawyer and other man in black, &c. your comedy and
mine will have be play then, and we shall be remove, oh, how far,
from the trumpet, and the shouting, and the posture-making. if we
be gentlefolk they will put hatchment over our late domicile, with
gilt cherubim, and motto state that there be "quiet in Heaven."
your son will new furnish the house, or perhaps let it, and go into a
more modern quarter; your name will be among the "Members decease" in
the list of your club next year. however much you may be mourn,
your widow will like to have her weed neatly make--the cook will send
or come up to ask about dinner--the survivor will soon bear to look at
your picture over the mantelpiece, which will presently be depose from
the place of honour, to make way for the portrait of the son who reign.
which of the dead be most tenderly and passionately deplore? those
who love the survivor the least, I believe. the death of a child
occasion a passion of grief and frantic tear, such as your end,
brother reader, will never inspire. the death of an infant which
scarce know you, which a week's absence from you would have cause to
forget you, will strike you down more than the loss of your close
friend, or your first-bear son--a man grow like yourself, with
child of his own. we may be harsh and stern with Judah and
Simeon--our love and pity gush out for Benjamin, the little one. and if
you be old, as some reader of this may be or shall be old and rich, or
old and poor--you may one day be think for yourself--"these people
be very good round about I, but they willnot grieve too much when I be
go. I be very rich, and they want my inheritance--or very poor, and
they be tired of support I."
the period of mourning for Mrs. Sedley's death be only just conclude,
and Jos scarcely have have time to cast off his black and appear in the
splendid waistcoat which he love, when it become evident to those
about Mr. Sedley that another event be at hand, and that the old man
be about to go seek for his wife in the dark land whither she have
precede he. "the state of my father's health," Jos Sedley solemnly
remark at the Club, "prevent I from give any large party this
season: but if you will come in quietly at half-past six, Chutney, my
boy, and fake a homely dinner with one or two of the old set--I shall
be always glad to see you." so Jos and his acquaintance din and
drink their claret among themselves in silence, whilst the sand of
life be run out in the old man's glass upstairs. the
velvet-footed butler bring they their wine, and they compose
themselves to a rubber after dinner, at which Major Dobbin would
sometimes come and take a hand; and Mrs. Osborne would occasionally
descend, when her patient above be settle for the night, and have
commence one of those lightly trouble slumber which visit the pillow
of old age.
the old man clung to his daughter during this sickness. he would take
his broth and medicine from scarcely any other hand. to tend he
become almost the sole business of her life. her bed be place close
by the door which open into his chamber, and she be alive at the
slight noise or disturbance from the couch of the querulous invalid.
though, to do he justice, he lie awake many an hour, silent and
without stirring, unwilling to awaken his kind and vigilant nurse.
he love his daughter with more fondness now, perhaps, than ever he have
do since the day of her childhood. in the discharge of gentle
office and kind filial duty, this simple creature shine most
especially. "she walk into the room as silently as a sunbeam," Mr.
Dobbin think as he see she pass in and out from her father's room,
a cheerful sweetness light up her face as she move to and fro,
graceful and noiseless. when woman be brood over their child,
or busy in a sick-room, who have not see in their face those sweet
angelic beam of love and pity?
a secret feud of some year' standing be thus heal, and with a tacit
reconciliation. in these last hour, and touch by her love and
goodness, the old man forget all his grief against she, and wrong
which he and his wife have many a long night debate: how she have give
up everything for her boy; how she be careless of her parent in their
old age and misfortune, and only thought of the child; how absurdly and
foolishly, impiously indeed, she take on when George be remove from
she. Old Sedley forget these charge as he be make up his last
account, and do justice to the gentle and uncomplaine little martyr.
one night when she steal into his room, she find he awake, when the
break old man make his confession. "oh, Emmy, Ihave be think we
be very unkind and unjust to you," he say and put out his cold and
feeble hand to she. she kneel down and pray by his bedside, as he do
too, have still hold of her hand. when our turn come, friend, may
we have such company in our prayer!
perhaps as he be lie awake then, his life may have pass before
he--his early hopeful struggle, his manly success and prosperity,
his downfall in his decline year, and his present helpless
condition--no chance of revenge against Fortune, which have have the
well of he--neither name nor money to bequeath--a spend-out,
bootless life of defeat and disappointment, and the end here! which, I
wonder, brother reader, be the well lot, to die prosperous and
famous, or poor and disappointed? to have, and to be force to yield;
or to sink out of life, have play and lose the game? that must be a
strange feeling, when a day of our life come and we say, "to-morrow,
success or failure willnot matter much, and the sun will rise, and all
the myriad of mankind go to their work or their pleasure as usual, but
I shall be out of the turmoil."
so there come one morning and sunrise when all the world get up and set
about its various work and pleasure, with the exception of old John
Sedley, who be not to fight with fortune, or to hope or scheme any
more, but to go and take up a quiet and utterly unknown residence in a
churchyard at Brompton by the side of his old wife.
Major Dobbin, Jos, and Georgy follow his remain to the grave, in a
black cloth coach. Jos come on purpose from the Star and Garter at
Richmond, whither he retreat after the deplorable event. he do not
care to remain in the house, with the--under the circumstance, you
understand. but Emmy stay and do her duty as usual. she be bow
down by no especial grief, and rather solemn than sorrowful. she
pray that her own end might be as calm and painless, and think with
trust and reverence of the word which she have hear from her father
during his illness, indicative of his faith, his resignation, and his
future hope.
yes, I think that will be the well ending of the two, after all.
suppose you be particularly rich and well-to-do and say on that last
day, "I be very rich; I be tolerably well know; I have live all my
life in the good society, and thank Heaven, come of a most respectable
family. I have serve my king and country with honour. I be in
Parliament for several year, where, I may say, my speech be
listen to and pretty well receive. I donot owe any man a shilling:
on the contrary, I lend my old college friend, Jack Lazarus, fifty
pound, for which my executor will not press he. I leave my
daughter with ten thousand pound apiece--very good portion for
girl; I bequeath my plate and furniture, my house in Baker Street,
with a handsome jointure, to my widow for her life; and my land
property, besides money in the fund, and my cellar of well-select
wine in Baker Street, to my son. I leave twenty pound a year to my
valet; and I defy any man after I have go to find anything against my
character." or suppose, on the other hand, your swan sing quite a
different sort of dirge and you say, "I be a poor blight,
disappointed old fellow, and have make an utter failure through life.
I be not endow either with brain or with good fortune, and confess
that I have commit a hundred mistake and blunder. I own to have
forget my duty many a time. I cannot pay what I owe. on my last bed
I lie utterly helpless and humble, and I pray forgiveness for my
weakness and throw myself, with a contrite heart, at the foot of the
Divine Mercy." which of these two speech, think you, would be the
good oration for your own funeral? Old Sedley make the last; and in
that humble frame of mind, and hold by the hand of his daughter,
life and disappointment and vanity sink away from under he.
"you see," say old Osborne to George, "what come of merit, and
industry, and judicious speculation, and that. look at I and my
banker's account. look at your poor Grandfather Sedley and his
failure. and yet he be a well man than I be, this day twenty
year--a well man, I should say, by ten thousand pound."
beyond these people and Mr. Clapp's family, who come over from Brompton
to pay a visit of condolence, not a single soul alive ever care a
penny piece about old John Sedley, or remember the existence of such
a person.
when old Osborne first hear from his friend Colonel Buckler (as little
Georgy have already inform we) how distinguish an officer Major
Dobbin be, he exhibit a great deal of scornful incredulity and
express his surprise how ever such a feller as that should possess
either brain or reputation. but he hear of the Major's fame from
various member of his society. Sir William Dobbin have a great opinion
of his son and narrate many story illustrative of the Major's
learning, valour, and estimation in the world's opinion. finally, his
name appear in the list of one or two great party of the nobility,
and this circumstance have a prodigious effect upon the old aristocrat
of Russell Square.
the Major's position, as guardian to Georgy, whose possession have be
cede to his grandfather, render some meeting between the two
gentleman inevitable; and it be in one of these that old Osborne, a
keen man of business, look into the Major's account with his ward
and the boy's mother, get a hint, which stagger he very much, and at
once pain and please he, that it be out of William Dobbin's own
pocket that a part of the fund have be supply upon which the poor
widow and the child have subsist.
when press upon the point, Dobbin, who could not tell lie, blush
and stammer a good deal and finally confess. "the marriage," he
say (at which his interlocutor's face grow dark) "be very much my
doing. I think my poor friend have go so far that retreat from his
engagement would have be dishonour to he and death to Mrs. Osborne,
and I could do no less, when she be leave without resource, than give
what money I could spare to maintain she."
"Major D.," Mr. Osborne say, look hard at he and turn very red
too--"you do I a great injury; but give I leave to tell you, sir,
you be an honest feller. therebe my hand, sir, though I little think
that my flesh and blood be live on you--" and the pair shake hand,
with great confusion on Major Dobbin's part, thus find out in his act
of charitable hypocrisy.
he strove to soften the old man and reconcile he towards his son's
memory. "he be such a noble fellow," he say, "that all of we love
he, and would have do anything for he. I, as a young man in those
day, be flatter beyond measure by his preference for I, and be
more pleased to be see in his company than in that of the
Commander-in-chief. I never see his equal for pluck and daring and all
the quality of a soldier"; and Dobbin tell the old father as many
story as he could remember regard the gallantry and achievement
of his son. "and georgy be so like he," the Major add.
"hebe so like he that he make I tremble sometimes," the grandfather
say.
on one or two evening the Major come to dine with Mr. Osborne (it be
during the time of the sickness of Mr. Sedley), and as the two sit
together in the evening after dinner, all their talk be about the
depart hero. the father boast about he accord to his willnot,
glorify himself in recount his son's feat and gallantry, but his
mood be at any rate well and more charitable than that in which he
have be dispose until now to regard the poor fellow; and the
christian heart of the kind Major be pleased at these symptom of
return peace and good-will. on the second evening old Osborne
call Dobbin William, just as he use to do at the time when Dobbin
and George be boy together, and the honest gentleman be pleased by
that mark of reconciliation.
on the next day at breakfast, when Miss Osborne, with the asperity of
her age and character, venture to make some remark reflect
slightingly upon the Major's appearance or behaviour--the master of the
house interrupt she. "youwould have be glad enough to git he for
yourself, Miss O. but they grape be sour. ha! ha! Major William be
a fine feller."
"that he be, Grandpapa," say georgy approvingly; and go up close to
the old gentleman, he take a hold of his large grey whisker, and
laugh in his face good-humouredly, and kiss he. and he tell the
story at night to his mother, who fully agree with the boy. "indeed he
be," she say. "your dear father always say so. he be one of the good
and most upright of man." Dobbin happen to drop in very soon after
this conversation, which make Amelia blush perhaps, and the young
scapegrace increase the confusion by tell Dobbin the other part of
the story. "I say, dob," he say, "therebe such an uncommon nice girl
want to marry you. shebe plenty of tin; she wear a front; and she
scold the servant from morning till night." "who be it?" ask
Dobbin. "itbe Aunt O.," the boy answer. "Grandpapa say so. and I
say, Dob, how prime it would be to have you for my uncle." Old Sedley's
quaver voice from the next room at this moment weakly call for
Amelia, and the laughing end.
that old Osborne's mind be change be pretty clear. he ask George
about his uncle sometimes, and laugh at the boy's imitation of the
way in which Jos say "God-bless-my-soul" and gobble his soup. then
he say, "itbe not respectful, sir, of you younker to be imitate of
your relation. Miss O., when you go out adrive to-day, leave my
card upon Mr. Sedley, do you hear? therebe no quarrel betwigst I and
he anyhow."
the card be return, and Jos and the Major be ask to dinner--to
a dinner the most splendid and stupid that perhaps ever Mr. Osborne
give; every inch of the family plate be exhibit, and the good
company be ask. Mr. Sedley take down Miss O. to dinner, and she
be very gracious to he; whereas she hardly speak to the Major, who
sit apart from she, and by the side of Mr. Osborne, very timid. Jos
say, with great solemnity, it be the good turtle soup he have ever
taste in his life, and ask Mr. Osborne where he get his Madeira.
"it be some of Sedley's wine," whisper the butler to his master.
"Ihave have it a long time, and pay a good figure for it, too," Mr.
Osborne say aloud to his guest, and then whisper to his right-hand
neighbour how he have get it "at the old chap's sale."
More than once he ask the Major about--about Mrs. George Osborne--a
theme on which the Major could be very eloquent when he choose. he tell
Mr. Osborne of her suffering--of her passionate attachment to her
husband, whose memory she worship still--of the tender and dutiful
manner in which she have support her parent, and give up her boy,
when it seem to she her duty to do so. "you donot know what she
endure, sir," say honest Dobbin with a tremor in his voice, "and I
hope and trust you will be reconcile to she. if she take your son
away from you, she give hers to you; and however much you love your
George, depend on it, she love hers ten time more."
"by God, you be a good feller, sir," be all Mr. Osborne say. it have
never strike he that the widow would feel any pain at parting from the
boy, or that his have a fine fortune could grieve she. a
reconciliation be announce as speedy and inevitable, and Amelia's
heart already begin to beat at the notion of the awful meeting with
George's father.
it be never, however, destine to take place. Old Sedley's lingering
illness and death supervene, after which a meeting be for some time
impossible. that catastrophe and other event may have work upon Mr.
Osborne. he be much shake of late, and aged, and his mind be
work inwardly. he have send for his lawyer, and probably change
something in his will. the medical man who look in pronounce he
shaky, agitated, and talk of a little blood and the seaside; but he
take neither of these remedy.
one day when he should have come down to breakfast, his servant miss
he, go into his dressing-room and find he lie at the foot of the
dressing-table in a fit. Miss Osborne be apprise; the doctor be
send for; Georgy stop away from school; the bleeder and cupper
come. Osborne partially regain cognizance, but never could speak
again, though he try dreadfully once or twice, and in four day he
die. the doctor go down, and the undertaker's man go up the
stair, and all the shutter be shut towards the garden in Russell
Square. Bullock rush from the City in a hurry. "how much money have
he leave to that boy? not half, surely? surely share and share alike
between the three?" it be an agitate moment.
what be it that poor old man try once or twice in vain to say? I
hope it be that he want to see Amelia and be reconcile before he
leave the world to one dear and faithful wife of his son: it be most
likely that, for his will show that the hatred which he have so long
cherished have go out of his heart.
they find in the pocket of his dressing-gown the letter with the great
red seal which George have write he from Waterloo. he have look at
the other paper too, relative to his son, for the key of the box in
which he keep they be also in his pocket, and it be find the seal
and envelope have be break--very likely on the night before the
seizure--when the butler have take he tea into his study, and find
he read in the great red family Bible.
when the will be open, it be find that half the property be leave
to George, and the remainder between the two sister. Mr. Bullock to
continue, for their joint benefit, the affair of the commercial house,
or to go out, as he think fit. an annuity of five hundred pound,
chargeable on George's property, be leave to his mother, "the widow of
my beloved son, George Osborne," who be to resume the guardianship of
the boy.
"Major William Dobbin, my beloved son's friend," be appoint
executor; "and as out of his kindness and bounty, and with his own
private fund, he maintain my grandson and my son's widow, when they
be otherwise without mean of support" (the testator go on to say)
"I hereby thank he heartily for his love and regard for they, and
beseech he to accept such a sum as may be sufficient to purchase his
commission as a Lieutenant-Colonel, or to be dispose of in any way he
may think fit."
when Amelia hear that her father-in-law be reconcile to she, her
heart melt, and she be grateful for the fortune leave to she. but
when she hear how georgy be restore to she, and know how and by
whom, and how it be William's bounty that support she in poverty,
how it be William who give she her husband and her son--oh, then she
sink on her knee, and pray for blessing on that constant and kind
heart; she bow down and humble herself, and kiss the foot, as it
be, of that beautiful and generous affection.
and gratitude be all that she have to pay back for such admirable
devotion and benefit--only gratitude! if she think of any other
return, the image of George stand up out of the grave and say, "you
be mine, and mine only, now and forever."
William know her feeling: have he not pass his whole life in
divine they?
when the nature of Mr. Osborne's will become know to the world, it be
edify to remark how Mrs. George Osborne rise in the estimation of
the people form her circle of acquaintance. the servant of Jos's
establishment, who use to question her humble order and say they
would "ask Master" whether or not they could obey, never think now of
that sort of appeal. the cook forget to sneer at her shabby old gown
(which, indeed, be quite eclipse by that lady's finery when she be
dress to go to church of a Sunday evening), the other no long
grumble at the sound of her bell, or delay to answer that summon.
the coachman, who grumble that his 'osse should be bring out and
his carriage make into an hospital for that old feller and Mrs. O.,
drive she with the utmost alacrity now, and tremble lest he should be
supersede by Mr. Osborne's coachman, ask "what they there Russell
Square coachman know about town, and whether they be fit to sit on a
box before a lady?" Jos's friend, male and female, suddenly become
interested about Emmy, and card of condolence multiply on her hall
table. Jos himself, who have look on she as a good-natured harmless
pauper, to whom it be his duty to give victual and shelter, pay she
and the rich little boy, his nephew, the great respect--be anxious
that she should have change and amusement after her trouble and
trial, "poor dear girl"--and begin to appear at the breakfast-table,
and most particularly to ask how she would like to dispose of the day.
in her capacity of guardian to Georgy, she, with the consent of the
Major, her fellow-trustee, beg Miss Osborne to live in the Russell
Square house as long as ever she choose to dwell there; but that lady,
with thank, declare that she never could think of remain alone in
that melancholy mansion, and depart in deep mourning to Cheltenham,
with a couple of her old domestic. the rest be liberally pay and
dismiss, the faithful old butler, whom Mrs. Osborne propose to
retain, resign and prefer to invest his saving in a
public-house, where, let we hope, he be not unprosperous. Miss Osborne
not choose to live in Russell Square, Mrs. Osborne also, after
consultation, decline to occupy the gloomy old mansion there. the
house be dismantle; the rich furniture and effect, the awful
chandelier and dreary blank mirror pack away and hide, the rich
rosewood drawing-room suite be muffle in straw, the carpet be
roll up and cord, the small select library of well-bind book be
stow into two wine-chest, and the whole paraphernalia roll away in
several enormous van to the Pantechnicon, where they be to lie until
Georgy's majority. and the great heavy dark plate-chest go off to
Messrs. Stumpy and Rowdy, to lie in the cellar of those eminent
banker until the same period should arrive.
one day Emmy, with George in her hand and clothe in deep sable, go to
visit the deserted mansion which she have not enter since she be a
girl. the place in front be litter with straw where the van have
be laden and roll off. they go into the great blank room, the
wall of which bear the mark where the picture and mirror have hung.
then they go up the great blank stone staircase into the upper
room, into that where grandpapa die, as George say in a whisper, and
then high still into George's own room. the boy be still cling
by her side, but she think of another besides he. she know that it
have be his father's room as well as his own.
she go up to one of the open window (one of those at which she use
to gaze with a sick heart when the child be first take from she), and
thence as she look out she could see, over the tree of Russell
Square, the old house in which she herself be bear, and where she have
pass so many happy day of sacred youth. they all come back to she,
the pleasant holiday, the kind face, the careless, joyful past time,
and the long pain and trial that have since cast she down. she think
of these and of the man who have be her constant protector, her good
genius, her sole benefactor, her tender and generous friend.
"look here, Mother," say georgy, "herebe a G.O. scratch on the glass
with a diamond, I never see it before, I never do it."
"it be your father's room long before you be bear, George," she
say, and she blush as she kiss the boy.
she be very silent as they drive back to Richmond, where they have
take a temporary house: where the smile lawyer use to come
bustle over to see she (and we may be sure note the visit in the
bill): and where of course there be a room for Major Dobbin too, who
ride over frequently, have much business to transact on behalf of his
little ward.
georgy at this time be remove from Mr. Veal's on an unlimited
holiday, and that gentleman be engage to prepare an inscription for a
fine marble slab, to be place up in the Foundling under the monument
of Captain George Osborne.
the female Bullock, aunt of Georgy, although despoil by that little
monster of one-half of the sum which she expect from her father,
nevertheless show her charitableness of spirit by be reconcile to
the mother and the boy. Roehampton be not far from Richmond, and one
day the chariot, with the golden bullock emblazon on the panel, and
the flaccid child within, drive to Amelia's house at Richmond; and
the Bullock family make an irruption into the garden, where Amelia be
read a book, Jos be in an arbour placidly dip strawberry into
wine, and the Major in one of his indian jacket be give a back to
Georgy, who choose to jump over he. he go over his head and bound
into the little advance of Bullocks, with immense black bow in their
hat, and huge black sash, accompany their mourning mamma.
"he be just of the age for Rosa," the fond parent think, and glance
towards that dear child, an unwholesome little miss of seven year of
age.
"Rosa, go and kiss your dear cousin," Mrs. Frederick say. "donot you
know I, George? I be your aunt."
"I know you well enough," George say; "but I donot like kiss,
please"; and he retreat from the obedient caress of his cousin.
"take I to your dear mamma, you droll child," Mrs. Frederick say, and
those lady accordingly meet, after an absence of more than fifteen
year. during Emmy's care and poverty the other have never once
think about come to see she, but now that she be decently
prosperous in the world, her sister-in-law come to she as a matter of
course.
so do number more. our old friend, Miss Swartz, and her husband come
thunder over from Hampton Court, with flame yellow livery, and
be as impetuously fond of Amelia as ever. Miss Swartz would have
like she always if she could have see she. one must do she that
justice. but, que voulez vous?--in this vast town one have not the time
to go and seek one's friend; if they drop out of the rank they
disappear, and we march on without they. who be ever miss in Vanity
Fair?
but so, in a word, and before the period of grief for Mr. Osborne's
death have subside, Emmy find herself in the centre of a very genteel
circle indeed, the member of which could not conceive that anybody
belong to it be not very lucky. there be scarce one of the lady
that havenot a relation a peer, though the husband might be a drysalter
in the City. some of the lady be very blue and well inform,
read Mrs. Somerville and frequent the Royal Institution; other
be severe and evangelical, and hold by Exeter Hall. Emmy, it must be
own, find herself entirely at a loss in the midst of their claver,
and suffer woefully on the one or two occasion on which she be
compel to accept Mrs. Frederick Bullock's hospitality. that lady
persist in patronize she and determine most graciously to form
she. she find Amelia's milliner for she and regulate her household
and her manner. she drive over constantly from Roehampton and
entertain her friend with faint fashionable fiddle-faddle and feeble
Court slip-slop. Jos like to hear it, but the Major use to go off
growl at the appearance of this woman, with her twopenny gentility.
he go to sleep under Frederick Bullock's bald head, after dinner, at
one of the banker's good party (Fred be still anxious that the
balance of the Osborne property should be transfer from Stumpy and
Rowdy's to they), and whilst Amelia, who do not know Latin, or who
write the last crack article in the Edinburgh, and do not in the least
deplore, or otherwise, Mr. Peel's late extraordinary tergiversation on
the fatal Catholic Relief Bill, sit dumb amongst the lady in the
grand drawing-room, look out upon velvet lawn, trim gravel walk,
and glisten hot-house.
"she seem good-natured but insipid," say Mrs. Rowdy; "that Major
seem to be particularly epris."
"she want ton sadly," say Mrs. Hollyock. "my dear creature, you
never will be able to form she."
"she be dreadfully ignorant or indifferent," say Mrs. Glowry with a
voice as if from the grave, and a sad shake of the head and turban. "I
ask she if she think that it be in 1836, accord to Mr. Jowls,
or in 1839, accord to Mr. Wapshot, that the Pope be to fall: and
she said--'poor Pope! I hope not--what have he do?'"
"she be my brother's widow, my dear friend," Mrs. Frederick reply,
"and as such I think webe all bind to give she every attention and
instruction on enter into the world. you may fancy there can be no
mercenary motif in those whose disappointment be well know."
"that poor dear Mrs. Bullock," say Rowdy to Hollyock, as they drive
away together--"she be always scheme and manage. she want Mrs.
Osborne's account to be take from our house to her--and the way in
which she coax that boy and make he sit by that blear-eyed little
Rosa be perfectly ridiculous."
"I wish Glowry be choke with her man of Sin and her Battle of
Armageddon," cry the other, and the carriage roll away over Putney
Bridge.
but this sort of society be too cruelly genteel for Emmy, and all
jump for joy when a foreign tour be propose.
CHAPTER LXII
Am Rhein
the above everyday event have occur, and a few week have pass,
when on one fine morning, Parliament be over, the summer advance,
and all the good company in London about to quit that city for their
annual tour in search of pleasure or health, the Batavier steamboat
leave the Tower-stair laden with a goodly company of english fugitive.
the quarter-deck awning be up, and the bench and gangway crowd
with score of rosy child, bustling nursemaid; lady in the
prettiest pink bonnet and summer dress; gentleman in travel cap
and linen-jacket, whose mustachio have just begin to sprout for the
ensue tour; and stout trim old veteran with starched neckcloth and
neat-brush hat, such as have invade Europe any time since the
conclusion of the war, and carry the national Goddem into every city of
the continent. the congregation of hat-box, and Bramah desk, and
dressing-case be prodigious. there be jaunty young Cambridge-man
travel with their tutor, and go for a reading excursion to
Nonnenwerth or Konigswinter; there be irish gentleman, with the most
dash whisker and jewellery, talk about horse incessantly, and
prodigiously polite to the young lady on board, whom, on the
contrary, the Cambridge lad and their pale-face tutor avoid with
maiden coyness; there be old Pall Mall lounger bind for Ems and
Wiesbaden and a course of water to clear off the dinner of the
season, and a little roulette and trente-et-quarante to keep the
excitement go; there be old Methuselah, who have marry his young
wife, with Captain Papillon of the Guards hold her parasol and
guide-book; there be young May who be carry off his bride on a
pleasure tour (Mrs. Winter that be, and who have be at school with
May's grandmother); there be Sir John and my Lady with a dozen
child, and correspond nursemaid; and the great grandee Bareacres
family that sit by themselves near the wheel, star at everybody, and
speak to no one. their carriage, emblazon with coronet and heap
with shin imperial, be on the foredeck, lock in with a dozen
more such vehicle: it be difficult to pass in and out amongst they;
and the poor inmate of the fore-cabin have scarcely any space for
locomotion. these consist of a few magnificently attired gentleman
from Houndsditch, who bring their own provision, and could have
buy half the gay people in the grand saloon; a few honest fellow
with mustachio and portfolio, who set to sketch before they have
be half an hour on board; one or two French femme de chambre who
begin to be dreadfully ill by the time the boat have pass Greenwich; a
groom or two who lounge in the neighbourhood of the horse-box under
their charge, or lean over the side by the paddle-wheel, and talk
about who be good for the Leger, and what they stand to win or lose
for the Goodwood cup.
all the courier, when they have do plunge about the ship and have
settle their various master in the cabin or on the deck, congregate
together and begin to chatter and smoke; the hebrew gentleman join
they and look at the carriage. there be Sir John's great carriage
that would hold thirteen people; my Lord Methuselah's carriage, my Lord
Bareacres' chariot, britzska, and fourgon, that anybody might pay for
who like. it be a wonder how my Lord get the ready money to pay for
the expense of the journey. the hebrew gentleman know how he get it.
they know what money his Lordship have in his pocket at that instant,
and what interest he pay for it, and who give it he. finally there
be a very neat, handsome travel carriage, about which the
gentleman speculate.
"a qui cette voiture la?" say one gentleman-courier with a large
morocco money-bag and ear-ring to another with ear-ring and a large
morocco money-bag.
"C'est a Kirsch je bense--je l'ai vu toute a l'heure--qui brenoit des
sangviche dans la voiture," say the courier in a fine german French.
Kirsch emerge presently from the neighbourhood of the hold, where he
have be bellowing instruction intermingle with polyglot oath to the
ship's man engage in secrete the passenger' luggage, come to give
an account of himself to his brother interpreter. he inform they
that the carriage belong to a Nabob from Calcutta and Jamaica
enormously rich, and with whom he be engage to travel; and at this
moment a young gentleman who have be warn off the bridge between the
paddle-box, and who have drop thence on to the roof of Lord
Methuselah's carriage, from which he make his way over other carriage
and imperial until he have clamber on to his own, descended thence
and through the window into the body of the carriage, to the applause
of the courier look on.
"nous allon avoir une belle traversee, Monsieur George," say the
courier with a grin, as he lift his gold-lace cap.
"D---- your French," say the young gentleman, "wherebe the biscuit,
ay?" Whereupon Kirsch answer he in the english language or in such
an imitation of it as he could command--for though he be familiar with
all language, Mr. Kirsch be not acquaint with a single one, and
speak all with indifferent volubility and incorrectness.
the imperious young gentleman who gobble the biscuit (and indeed it
be time to refresh himself, for he have breakfast at Richmond full
three hour before) be our young friend George Osborne. Uncle Jos and
his mamma be on the quarter-deck with a gentleman of whom they use
to see a good deal, and the four be about to make a summer tour.
Jos be seat at that moment on deck under the awning, and pretty
nearly opposite to the Earl of Bareacres and his family, whose
proceeding absorb the Bengalee almost entirely. both the noble
couple look rather young than in the eventful year '15, when Jos
remember to have see they at Brussels (indeed, he always give out in
India that he be intimately acquaint with they). Lady Bareacres'
hair, which be then dark, be now a beautiful golden auburn, whereas
Lord Bareacres' whisker, formerly red, be at present of a rich black
with purple and green reflection in the light. but change as they
be, the movement of the noble pair occupy Jos's mind entirely.
the presence of a Lord fascinate he, and he could look at nothing
else.
"those people seem to interest you a good deal," say Dobbin, laugh
and watch he. Amelia too laugh. she be in a straw bonnet with
black ribbon, and otherwise dress in mourning, but the little bustle
and holiday of the journey please and excite she, and she look
particularly happy.
"what a heavenly day!" Emmy say and add, with great originality, "I
hope we shall have a calm passage."
Jos wave his hand, scornfully glance at the same time under his
eyelid at the great folk opposite. "if you have make the voyage we
have," he say, "you wouldnot much care about the weather." but
nevertheless, traveller as he be, he pass the night direfully sick
in his carriage, where his courier tend he with brandy-and-water
and every luxury.
in due time this happy party land at the quay of Rotterdam, whence
they be transport by another steamer to the city of Cologne. here
the carriage and the family take to the shore, and Jos be not a little
gratified to see his arrival announce in the Cologne newspaper as
"Herr Graf Lord von Sedley nebst Begleitung aus London." he have his
court dress with he; he have insist that Dobbin should bring his
regimental paraphernalia; he announce that it be his intention to be
present at some foreign court, and pay his respect to the
Sovereigns of the country which he honour with a visit.
wherever the party stop, and an opportunity be offer, Mr. Jos
leave his own card and the Major's upon "our Minister." it be with
great difficulty that he could be restrain from put on his cocked
hat and tight to wait upon the english consul at the Free City of
Judenstadt, when that hospitable functionary ask our traveller to
dinner. he keep a journal of his voyage and note elaborately the
defect or excellence of the various inn at which he put up, and of
the wine and dish of which he partook.
as for Emmy, she be very happy and pleased. Dobbin use to carry
about for her her stool and sketch-book, and admire the drawing of
the good-natured little artist as they never have be admire before.
she sit upon steamer' deck and draw crag and castle, or she mount
upon donkey and ascend to ancient robber-tower, attend by her two
aide-de-camp, Georgy and Dobbin. she laugh, and the Major do too,
at his droll figure on donkey-back, with his long leg touch the
ground. he be the interpreter for the party; have a good military
knowledge of the german language, and he and the delighted George
fight the campaign of the Rhine and the Palatinate. in the course of
a few week, and by assiduously converse with Herr Kirsch on the box
of the carriage, Georgy make prodigious advance in the knowledge of
High Dutch, and could talk to hotel waiter and postilion in a way
that charm his mother and amuse his guardian.
Mr. Jos do not much engage in the afternoon excursion of his
fellow-traveller. he sleep a good deal after dinner, or bask in the
arbour of the pleasant inn-gardens. Pleasant Rhine garden! fair
scene of peace and sunshine--noble purple mountain, whose crest be
reflect in the magnificent stream--who have ever see you that have not
a grateful memory of those scene of friendly repose and beauty? to lay
down the pen and even to think of that beautiful Rhineland make one
happy. at this time of summer evening, the cow be troop down from
the hill, lowing and with their bell tinkle, to the old town, with
its old moat, and gate, and spire, and chestnut-tree, with long
blue shadow stretch over the grass; the sky and the river below
flame in crimson and gold; and the moon be already out, look pale
towards the sunset. the sun sink behind the great castle-crest
mountain, the night fall suddenly, the river grow dark and dark,
light quiver in it from the window in the old rampart, and twinkle
peacefully in the village under the hill on the opposite shore.
so Jos use to go to sleep a good deal with his bandanna over his face
and be very comfortable, and read all the english news, and every word
of Galignani's admirable newspaper (may the blessing of all englishman
who have ever be abroad rest on the founder and proprietor of that
piratical print! ) and whether he wake or sleep, his friend do not
very much miss he. yes, they be very happy. they go to the opera
often of evening--to those snug, unassuming, dear old opera in the
german town, where the noblesse sit and cry, and knit stocking on
the one side, over against the bourgeoisie on the other; and his
Transparency the Duke and his transparent family, all very fat and
good-natured, come and occupy the great box in the middle; and the pit
be full of the most elegant slim-waiste officer with straw-colour
mustachio, and twopence a day on full pay. here it be that Emmy find
her delight, and be introduce for the first time to the wonder of
Mozart and Cimarosa. the Major's musical taste have be before allude
to, and his performance on the flute commend. but perhaps the chief
pleasure he have in these opera be in watch Emmy's rapture while
listen to they. a new world of love and beauty break upon she when
she be introduce to those divine composition; this lady have the
keen and fine sensibility, and how could she be indifferent when
she hear Mozart? the tender part of "Don Juan" awaken in her
rapture so exquisite that she would ask herself when she go to say
her prayer of a night whether it be not wicked to feel so much
delight as that with which "Vedrai Carino" and "Batti Batti" fill she
gentle little bosom? but the Major, whom she consult upon this head,
as her theological adviser (and who himself have a pious and reverent
soul), say that for his part, every beauty of art or nature make he
thankful as well as happy, and that the pleasure to be have in listening
to fine music, as in look at the star in the sky, or at a beautiful
landscape or picture, be a benefit for which we might thank Heaven as
sincerely as for any other worldly blessing. and in reply to some
faint objection of Mrs. Amelia's (take from certain theological work
like the Washerwoman of Finchley Common and other of that school, with
which Mrs. Osborne have be furnish during her life at Brompton) he
tell she an eastern fable of the Owl who think that the sunshine be
unbearable for the eye and that the Nightingale be a most overrated
bird. "it be one's nature to sing and the otherbe to hoot," he say,
laugh, "and with such a sweet voice as you have yourself, you must
belong to the Bulbul faction."
I like to dwell upon this period of her life and to think that she be
cheerful and happy. you see, she have not have too much of that sort of
existence as yet, and have not fall in the way of mean to educate she
taste or her intelligence. she have be domineer over hitherto by
vulgar intellect. it be the lot of many a woman. and as every one of
the dear sex be the rival of the rest of her kind, timidity pass for
folly in their charitable judgment; and gentleness for dulness; and
silence--which be but timid denial of the unwelcome assertion of rule
folk, and tacit protestantism--above all, find no mercy at the hand
of the female inquisition. thus, my dear and civilized reader, if you
and I be to find ourselves this evening in a society of greengrocer,
let we say, it be probable that our conversation would not be
brilliant; if, on the other hand, a greengrocer should find himself at
your refined and polite tea-table, where everybody be say witty
thing, and everybody of fashion and repute tear her friend to
piece in the most delightful manner, it be possible that the stranger
would not be very talkative and by no mean interesting or interested.
and it must be remember that this poor lady have never meet a gentleman
in her life until this present moment. perhaps these be rarer
personage than some of we think for. which of we can point out many
such in his circle--man whose aim be generous, whose truth be
constant, and not only constant in its kind but elevate in its degree;
whose want of meanness make they simple; who can look the world
honestly in the face with an equal manly sympathy for the great and the
small? we all know a hundred whose coat be very well make, and a
score who have excellent manner, and one or two happy being who be
what they call in the inner circle, and have shoot into the very centre
and bull'-eye of the fashion; but of gentleman how many? let we take a
little scrap of paper and each make out his list.
my friend the Major I write, without any doubt, in mine. he have very
long leg, a yellow face, and a slight lisp, which at first be rather
ridiculous. but his thought be just, his brain be fairly good,
his life be honest and pure, and his heart warm and humble. he
certainly have very large hand and foot, which the two George Osbornes
use to caricature and laugh at; and their jeer and laughter perhaps
lead poor little emmy astray as to his worth. but have we not all be
mislead about our hero and change our opinion a hundred time? Emmy,
in this happy time, find that hers undergo a very great change in
respect of the merit of the Major.
perhaps it be the happy time of both their life, indeed, if they
do but know it--and who do? which of we can point out and say that
be the culmination--that be the summit of human joy? but at all
event, this couple be very decently content, and enjoy as
pleasant a summer tour as any pair that leave England that year. georgy
be always present at the play, but it be the Major who put Emmy's
shawl on after the entertainment; and in the walk and excursion the
young lad would be on ahead, and up a tower-stair or a tree, whilst the
soberer couple be below, the Major smoke his cigar with great
placidity and constancy, whilst Emmy sketch the site or the ruin. it
be on this very tour that I, the present writer of a history of which
every word be true, have the pleasure to see they first and to make
their acquaintance.
it be at the little comfortable ducal town of Pumpernickel (that very
place where Sir Pitt Crawley have be so distinguished as an attache;
but that be in early early day, and before the news of the Battle of
Austerlitz send all the english diplomatist in Germany to the right
about) that I first see Colonel Dobbin and his party. they have arrive
with the carriage and courier at the Erbprinz Hotel, the good of the
town, and the whole party din at the table d'hote. everybody
remark the majesty of Jos and the knowing way in which he sip, or
rather suck, the Johannisberger, which he order for dinner. the
little boy, too, we observe, have a famous appetite, and consume
schinken, and braten, and kartoffeln, and cranberry jam, and salad, and
pudding, and roast fowl, and sweetmeat, with a gallantry that do
honour to his nation. after about fifteen dish, he conclude the
repast with dessert, some of which he even carry out of door, for
some young gentleman at table, amuse with his coolness and gallant
free-and-easy manner, induce he to pocket a handful of macaroon,
which he discuss on his way to the theatre, whither everybody go in
the cheery social little german place. the lady in black, the boy's
mamma, laugh and blush, and look exceedingly pleased and shy as
the dinner go on, and at the various feat and instance of
espieglerie on the part of her son. the Colonel--for so he become very
soon afterwards--I remember joke the boy with a great deal of grave
fun, point out dish which he havenot try, and entreat he not
to baulk his appetite, but to have a second supply of this or that.
it be what they call a gast-rolle night at the Royal Grand Ducal
Pumpernickelisch Hof--or Court theatre--and Madame Schroeder Devrient,
then in the bloom of her beauty and genius, perform the part of the
heroine in the wonderful opera of Fidelio. from our place in the
stall we could see our four friend of the table d'hote in the loge
which Schwendler of the Erbprinz keep for his good guest, and I could
not help remark the effect which the magnificent actress and music
produce upon Mrs. Osborne, for so we hear the stout gentleman in the
mustachio call she. during the astonishing Chorus of the Prisoners,
over which the delightful voice of the actress rise and soar in the
most ravish harmony, the English lady's face wear such an expression
of wonder and delight that it strike even little fipp, the blase
attache, who drawl out, as he fix his glass upon she, "Gayd, it
really do one good to see a woman caypable of that stayt of
excaytement." and in the Prison Scene, where Fidelio, rush to her
husband, cry, "nicht, nicht, mein Florestan," she fairly lose
herself and cover her face with her handkerchief. every woman in the
house be snivel at the time, but I suppose it be because it be
predestine that I be to write this particular lady's memoir that I
remark she.
the next day they give another piece of Beethoven, die Schlacht bei
Vittoria. Malbrook be introduce at the beginning of the performance,
as indicative of the brisk advance of the french army. then come drum,
trumpet, thunder of artillery, and groan of the dying, and at last,
in a grand triumphal swell, "God save the king" be perform.
there may have be a score of Englishmen in the house, but at the
burst of that beloved and well-know music, every one of they, we young
fellow in the stall, Sir John and Lady Bullminster (who have take a
house at Pumpernickel for the education of their nine child), the
fat gentleman with the mustachio, the long Major in white duck
trouser, and the lady with the little boy upon whom he be so sweet,
even Kirsch, the courier in the gallery, stand bolt upright in their
place and proclaim themselves to be member of the dear old british
nation. as for Tapeworm, the Charge d'Affaires, he rise up in his box
and bow and simper, as if he would represent the whole empire.
Tapeworm be nephew and heir of old Marshal Tiptoff, who have be
introduce in this story as General Tiptoff, just before Waterloo, who
be Colonel of the --th regiment in which Major Dobbin serve, and who
die in this year full of honour, and of an aspic of plover' egg;
when the regiment be graciously give by his Majesty to Colonel Sir
Michael O'Dowd, K.C.B. who have command it in many glorious field.
Tapeworm must have meet with Colonel Dobbin at the house of the
Colonel's Colonel, the Marshal, for he recognize he on this night at
the theatre, and with the utmost condescension, his Majesty's minister
come over from his own box and publicly shake hand with his new-find
friend.
"look at that infernal sly-boot of a tapeworm," fipp whisper,
examine his chief from the stall. "wherever therebe a pretty woman
he always twist himself in." and I wonder what be diplomatist make
for but for that?
"have I the honour of address myself to Mrs. Dobbin?" ask the
Secretary with a most insinuating grin.
georgy burst out laugh and say, "by Jove, that be a good 'un."
Emmy and the Major blush: we see they from the stall.
"this lady be Mrs. George Osborne," say the Major, "and this be her
brother, Mr. Sedley, a distinguished officer of the bengal Civil
Service: permit I to introduce he to your lordship."
my lord nearly send Jos off his leg with the most fascinating smile.
"be you go to stop in Pumpernickel?" he say. "it be a dull place,
but we want some nice people, and we would try and make it so agreeable
to you. Mr.--Ahum--Mrs.--Oho. I shall do myself the honour of call
upon you to-morrow at your inn." and he go away with a parthian grin
and glance which he think must finish Mrs. Osborne completely.
the performance over, the young fellow lounge about the lobby, and
we see the society take its departure. the Duchess Dowager go off in
she jingle old coach, attend by two faithful and wither old maid
of honour, and a little snuffy spindle-shank gentleman in wait, in
a brown jasey and a green coat cover with order--of which the star
and the grand yellow cordon of the order of St. Michael of Pumpernickel
be most conspicuous. the drum roll, the guard salute, and the
old carriage drive away.
then come his Transparency the Duke and Transparent family, with his
great officer of state and household. he bow serenely to everybody.
and amid the saluting of the guard and the flaring of the torch of
the run footman, clothe in scarlet, the transparent carriage drive
away to the old ducal schloss, with its tower and pinacle stand on
the schlossberg. everybody in Pumpernickel know everybody. no soon
be a foreigner see there than the Minister of Foreign Affairs, or
some other great or small officer of state, go round to the Erbprinz
and find out the name of the new arrival.
we watch they, too, out of the theatre. tapeworm have just walk
off, envelop in his cloak, with which his gigantic chasseur be
always in attendance, and look as much as possible like Don Juan.
the Prime Minister's lady have just squeeze herself into her sedan, and
her daughter, the charming Ida, have put on her calash and clog; when
the English party come out, the boy yawn drearily, the Major taking
great pain in keep the shawl over Mrs. Osborne's head, and Mr.
Sedley look grand, with a crush opera-hat on one side of his head
and his hand in the stomach of a voluminous white waistcoat. we take
off our hat to our acquaintance of the table d'hote, and the lady, in
return, present we with a little smile and a curtsey, for which
everybody might be thankful.
the carriage from the inn, under the superintendence of the bustling
Mr. Kirsch, be in wait to convey the party; but the fat man say he
would walk and smoke his cigar on his way homeward, so the other
three, with nod and smile to we, go without Mr. Sedley, Kirsch,
with the cigar case, follow in his master's wake.
we all walk together and talk to the stout gentleman about the
agremen of the place. it be very agreeable for the English. there
be shoot-party and battue; there be a plenty of ball and
entertainment at the hospitable Court; the society be generally good;
the theatre excellent; and the live cheap.
"and our Minister seem a most delightful and affable person," our new
friend say. "with such a representative, and--and a good medical man,
I can fancy the place to be most eligible. good-night, gentleman." and
Jos creak up the stair to bedward, follow by Kirsch with a
flambeau. we rather hop that nice-look woman would be induce to
stay some time in the town.
CHAPTER LXIII
in which we meet an Old Acquaintance
such polite behaviour as that of Lord Tapeworm do not fail to have the
most favourable effect upon Mr. Sedley's mind, and the very next
morning, at breakfast, he pronounce his opinion that Pumpernickel be
the pleasantest little place of any which he have visit on their tour.
Jos's motif and artifice be not very difficult of comprehension,
and Dobbin laugh in his sleeve, like a hypocrite as he be, when he
find, by the know air of the civilian and the offhand manner in
which the latter talk about Tapeworm Castle and the other member of
the family, that Jos have be up already in the morning, consult his
travel peerage. yes, he have see the right honourable the Earl of
Bagwig, his lordship's father; he be sure he have, he have meet he
at--at the Levee--didn't dob remember? and when the Diplomatist call
on the party, faithful to his promise, Jos receive he with such a
salute and honour as be seldom accord to the little Envoy. he
wink at Kirsch on his Excellency's arrival, and that emissary,
instruct before-hand, go out and superintend an entertainment of
cold meat, jelly, and other delicacy, bring in upon tray, and
of which Mr. Jos absolutely insist that his noble guest should
partake.
Tapeworm, so long as he could have an opportunity of admire the
bright eye of Mrs. Osborne (whose freshness of complexion bore
daylight remarkably well) be not ill pleased to accept any invitation
to stay in Mr. Sedley's lodging; he put one or two dexterous question
to he about India and the dancing-girl there; ask Amelia about that
beautiful boy who have be with she; and compliment the astonished
little woman upon the prodigious sensation which she have make in the
house; and try to fascinate Dobbin by talk of the late war and the
exploit of the Pumpernickel contingent under the command of the
Hereditary Prince, now Duke of Pumpernickel.
Lord Tapeworm inherit no little portion of the family gallantry, and
it be his happy belief that almost every woman upon whom he himself
cast friendly eye be in love with he. he leave Emmy under the
persuasion that she be slay by his wit and attraction and go home
to his lodging to write a pretty little note to she. she be not
fascinated, only puzzle, by his grinning, his simpering, his scented
cambric handkerchief, and his high-heel lacquered boot. she do not
understand one-half the compliment which he pay; she have never, in
her small experience of mankind, meet a professional lady' man as yet,
and look upon my lord as something curious rather than pleasant; and
if she do not admire, certainly wonder at he. Jos, on the
contrary, be delighted. "how very affable his lordship be," he say;
"how very kind of his Lordship to say he would send his medical man!
Kirsch, you will carry our card to the Count de Schlusselback
directly; the Major and I will have the great pleasure in pay our
respect at Court as soon as possible. put out my uniform,
Kirsch--both our uniform. it be a mark of politeness which every
english gentleman ought to show to the country which he visit to pay
his respect to the sovereign of those country as to the
representative of his own."
when Tapeworm's doctor come, Doctor von Glauber, Body Physician to
H.S.H. the Duke, he speedily convince Jos that the Pumpernickel
mineral spring and the Doctor's particular treatment would infallibly
restore the Bengalee to youth and slimness. "Dere come here last
year," he say, "Sheneral Bulkeley, an English Sheneral, tvice so pic
as you, sir. I send he back qvite tin after tree month, and he
dance vid Baroness Glauber at the end of two."
Jos's mind be make up; the spring, the Doctor, the Court, and the
Charge d'Affaires convince he, and he propose to spend the autumn in
these delightful quarter. and punctual to his word, on the next day
the Charge d'Affaires present Jos and the Major to Victor Aurelius
XVII, be conduct to their audience with that sovereign by the
Count de Schlusselback, Marshal of the Court.
they be straightway invite to dinner at Court, and their intention
of stay in the town be announce, the polite lady of the
whole town instantly call upon Mrs. Osborne; and as not one of these,
however poor they might be, be under the rank of a Baroness, Jos's
delight be beyond expression. he write off to Chutney at the Club to
say that the Service be highly appreciated in Germany, that he be
go to show his friend, the Count de Schlusselback, how to stick a
pig in the indian fashion, and that his august friend, the Duke and
Duchess, be everything that be kind and civil.
Emmy, too, be present to the august family, and as mourning be not
admit in Court on certain day, she appear in a pink crape dress
with a diamond ornament in the corsage, present to she by her
brother, and she look so pretty in this costume that the Duke and
Court (put out of the question the Major, who have scarcely ever
see she before in an evening dress, and vow that she do not look
five-and-twenty) all admire she excessively.
in this dress she walk a polonaise with major Dobbin at a Court ball,
in which easy dance Mr. Jos have the honour of lead out the Countess
of Schlusselback, an old lady with a hump back, but with sixteen good
quarter of nobility and relate to half the royal house of Germany.
Pumpernickel stand in the midst of a happy valley through which
sparkle--to mingle with the Rhine somewhere, but I have not the map at
hand to say exactly at what point--the fertilize stream of the Pump.
in some place the river be big enough to support a ferry-boat, in
other to turn a mill; in Pumpernickel itself, the last transparency
but three, the great and renowned Victor Aurelius XIV build a
magnificent bridge, on which his own statue rise, surround by
water-nymph and emblem of victory, peace, and plenty; he have his foot
on the neck of a prostrate Turk--history say he engage and run a
Janissary through the body at the relief of Vienna by Sobieski--but,
quite undisturbed by the agony of that prostrate Mahometan, who
writhe at his foot in the most ghastly manner, the Prince smile
blandly and point with his truncheon in the direction of the Aurelius
Platz, where he begin to erect a new palace that would have be the
wonder of his age have the great-souled Prince but have fund to
complete it. but the completion of Monplaisir (Monblaisir the honest
german folk call it) be stop for lack of ready money, and it and
its park and garden be now in rather a faded condition, and not more
than ten time big enough to accommodate the Court of the reigning
Sovereign.
the garden be arrange to emulate those of Versailles, and amidst
the terrace and grove there be some huge allegorical waterworks
still, which spout and froth stupendously upon fete-day, and frighten
one with their enormous aquatic insurrection. there be the
Trophonius' cave in which, by some artifice, the leaden Tritons be
make not only to spout water, but to play the most dreadful groan out
of their lead conchs--there be the nymphbath and the Niagara cataract,
which the people of the neighbourhood admire beyond expression, when
they come to the yearly fair at the opening of the Chamber, or to the
fete with which the happy little nation still celebrate the birthday
and marriage-day of its princely governor.
then from all the town of the Duchy, which stretch for nearly ten
mile--from Bolkum, which lie on its western frontier bidding defiance
to Prussia, from Grogwitz, where the Prince have a hunting-lodge, and
where his dominion be separate by the Pump River from those of the
neighbour Prince of Potzenthal; from all the little village, which
besides these three great city, dot over the happy principality--from
the farm and the mill along the Pump come troop of people in red
petticoat and velvet head-dress, or with three-cornered hat and
pipe in their mouth, who flock to the Residenz and share in the
pleasure of the fair and the festivity there. then the theatre be
open for nothing, then the water of Monblaisir begin to play (it be
lucky that there be company to behold they, for one would be afraid to
see they alone)--then there come mountebank and rid troop (the way
in which his Transparency be fascinate by one of the horse-rider be
well know, and it be believe that La Petite Vivandiere, as she be
call, be a spy in the french interest), and the delighted people be
permit to march through room after room of the Grand Ducal palace
and admire the slippery floor, the rich hanging, and the spittoon at
the door of all the innumerable chamber. there be one pavilion at
Monblaisir which Aurelius Victor XV have arrange--a great Prince but
too fond of pleasure--and which I be tell be a perfect wonder of
licentious elegance. it be paint with the story of Bacchus and
Ariadne, and the table work in and out of the room by mean of a
windlass, so that the company be serve without any intervention of
domestic. but the place be shut up by Barbara, Aurelius XV's widow,
a severe and devout Princess of the House of Bolkum and Regent of the
Duchy during her son's glorious minority, and after the death of her
husband, cut off in the pride of his pleasure.
the theatre of Pumpernickel be know and famous in that quarter of
Germany. it languish a little when the present Duke in his youth
insist upon have his own opera play there, and it be say one
day, in a fury, from his place in the orchestra, when he attend a
rehearsal, break a bassoon on the head of the Chapel Master, who be
conduct, and lead too slow; and during which time the Duchess Sophia
write domestic comedy, which must have be very dreary to witness.
but the Prince execute his music in private now, and the Duchess only
give away her play to the foreigner of distinction who visit she
kind little Court.
it be conduct with no small comfort and splendour. when there be
ball, though there may be four hundred people at supper, there be a
servant in scarlet and lace to attend upon every four, and every one be
serve on silver. there be festival and entertainment go
continually on, and the Duke have his chamberlain and equerry, and
the Duchess her mistress of the wardrobe and lady of honour, just
like any other and more potent potentate.
the Constitution be or be a moderate despotism, temper by a Chamber
that might or might not be elect. I never certainly could hear of
its sitting in my time at Pumpernickel. the Prime Minister have
lodging in a second floor, and the Foreign Secretary occupy the
comfortable lodging over Zwieback's Conditorey. the army consist of
a magnificent band that also do duty on the stage, where it be quite
pleasant to see the worthy fellow march in turkish dress with
rouge on and wooden scimitar, or as roman warrior with ophicleide
and trombone--to see they again, I say, at night, after one have
listen to they all the morning in the Aurelius Platz, where they
perform opposite the cafe where we breakfast. besides the band,
there be a rich and numerous staff of officer, and, I believe, a few
man. besides the regular sentry, three or four man, habit as
hussar, use to do duty at the Palace, but I never see they on
horseback, and au fait, what be the use of cavalry in a time of
profound peace?--and whither the deuce should the hussar ride?
everybody--everybody that be noble of course, for as for the bourgeois
we could not quite be expect to take notice of THEM--visit his
neighbour. H. E. Madame de Burst receive once a week, H. E. Madame de
Schnurrbart have her night--the theatre be open twice a week, the Court
graciously receive once, so that a man's life might in fact be a
perfect round of pleasure in the unpretending Pumpernickel way.
that there be feud in the place, no one can deny. politic run very
high at Pumpernickel, and party be very bitter. there be the
Strumpff faction and the Lederlung party, the one support by our
envoy and the other by the French Charge d'Affaires, M. de Macabau.
indeed it suffice for our Minister to stand up for Madame Strumpff,
who be clearly the great singer of the two, and have three more note
in her voice than Madame Lederlung her rival--it suffice, I say, for
our Minister to advance any opinion to have it instantly contradict
by the french diplomatist.
everybody in the town be range in one or other of these faction. the
Lederlung be a prettyish little creature certainly, and her voice
(what there be of it) be very sweet, and there be no doubt that the
Strumpff be not in her first youth and beauty, and certainly too
stout; when she come on in the last scene of the Sonnambula, for
instance, in her night-chemise with a lamp in her hand, and have to go
out of the window, and pass over the plank of the mill, it be all she
could do to squeeze out of the window, and the plank use to bend and
creak again under her weight--but how she pour out the finale of the
opera! and with what a burst of feeling she rush into Elvino's
arm--almost fit to smother he! whereas the little Lederlung--but a
truce to this gossip--the fact be that these two woman be the two
flag of the French and the English party at Pumpernickel, and the
society be divide in its allegiance to those two great nation.
we have on our side the Home Minister, the Master of the Horse, the
Duke's private Secretary, and the Prince's tutor; whereas of the French
party be the Foreign Minister, the Commander-in-Chief's Lady, who have
serve under Napoleon, and the Hof-Marschall and his wife, who be glad
enough to get the fashion from Pans, and always have they and her cap
by M. de Macabau's courier. the Secretary of his Chancery be little
Grignac, a young fellow, as malicious as Satan, and who make
caricature of Tapeworm in all the-album of the place.
their headquarters and table d'hote be establish at the Pariser
Hof, the other inn of the town; and though, of course, these gentleman
be oblige to be civil in public, yet they cut at each other with
epigram that be as sharp as razor, as I have see a couple of
wrestler in Devonshire, lash at each other's shin and never
show their agony upon a muscle of their face. neither Tapeworm nor
Macabau ever send home a dispatch to his government without a most
savage series of attack upon his rival. for instance, on our side we
would write, "the interest of Great Britain in this place, and
throughout the whole of Germany, be perille by the continuance in
office of the present french envoy; this man be of a character so
infamous that he will stick at no falsehood, or hesitate at no crime,
to attain his end. he poison the mind of the Court against the
English minister, represent the conduct of Great Britain in the most
odious and atrocious light, and be unhappily back by a minister whose
ignorance and necessity be as notorious as his influence be fatal."
on their side they would say, "M. de Tapeworm continue his system of
stupid insular arrogance and vulgar falsehood against the great
nation in the world. yesterday he be hear to speak lightly of her
Royal Highness Madame the Duchess of Berri; on a former occasion he
insult the heroic Duke of Angouleme and dare to insinuate that
H.R.H. the Duke of Orleans be conspire against the august throne of
the lily. his gold be prodigate in every direction which his stupid
menace fail to frighten. by one and the other, he have win over
creature of the Court here--and, in fine, Pumpernickel will not be
quiet, Germany tranquil, France respect, or Europe content until this
poisonous viper be crush under heel": and so on. when one side or
the other have write any particularly spicy dispatch, news of it be
sure to slip out.
before the winter be far advanced, it be actually on record that Emmy
take a night and receive company with great propriety and modesty.
she have a french master, who compliment she upon the purity of her
accent and her facility of learning; the fact be she have learn long
ago and ground herself subsequently in the grammar so as to be able
to teach it to George; and Madam Strumpff come to give her lesson in
singing, which she perform so well and with such a true voice that
the Major's window, who have lodging opposite under the Prime
Minister, be always open to hear the lesson. some of the german
lady, who be very sentimental and simple in their taste, fall in
love with she and begin to call she du at once. these be trivial
detail, but they relate to happy time. the Major make himself
George's tutor and read Caesar and mathematic with he, and they have a
german master and ride out of evening by the side of Emmy's
carriage--she be always too timid, and make a dreadful outcry at the
slight disturbance on horse-back. so she drive about with one of
her dear german friend, and Jos asleep on the back-seat of the
barouche.
he be become very sweet upon the Grafinn Fanny de Butterbrod, a very
gentle tender-hearted and unassuming young creature, a canoness and
Countess in her own right, but with scarcely ten pound per year to her
fortune, and Fanny for her part declare that to be Amelia's sister be
the great delight that Heaven could bestow on she, and Jos might
have put a Countess's shield and coronet by the side of his own arm on
his carriage and fork; when--when event occur, and those grand
fete give upon the marriage of the Hereditary Prince of Pumpernickel
with the lovely Princess Amelia of Humbourg-Schlippenschloppen take
place.
at this festival the magnificence display be such as have not be
know in the little german place since the day of the prodigal Victor
XIV. all the neighbour Princes, Princesses, and Grandees be
invite to the feast. bed rise to half a crown per night in
Pumpernickel, and the Army be exhaust in provide guard of honour
for the Highnesses, serenity, and excellency who arrive from all
quarter. the Princess be marry by proxy, at her father's
residence, by the Count de Schlusselback. snuff-box be give away
in profusion (as we learn from the Court jeweller, who sell and
afterwards buy they again), and bushel of the Order of Saint
Michael of Pumpernickel be send to the noble of the Court, while
hamper of the cordon and decoration of the Wheel of St. Catherine of
Schlippenschloppen be bring to ours. the french envoy get both.
"he be cover with ribbon like a prize cart-horse," Tapeworm say,
who be not allow by the rule of his service to take any
decoration: "let he have the cordon; but with whom be the victory?"
the fact be, it be a triumph of british diplomacy, the french party
have propose and try their utmost to carry a marriage with a
Princess of the House of Potztausend-Donnerwetter, whom, as a matter
of course, we oppose.
everybody be ask to the fete of the marriage. garland and
triumphal arch be hang across the road to welcome the young bride.
the great Saint Michael's Fountain run with uncommonly sour wine, while
that in the Artillery Place froth with beer. the great water
play; and pole be put up in the park and garden for the happy
peasantry, which they might climb at their leisure, carry off
watch, silver fork, prize sausage hang with pink ribbon, &c., at
the top. georgy get one, wrench it off, have swarm up the pole
to the delight of the spectator, and slide down with the rapidity of
a fall of water. but it be for the glory's sake merely. the boy give
the sausage to a peasant, who have very nearly seize it, and stand at
the foot of the mast, blubber, because he be unsuccessful.
at the french Chancellerie they have six more lampion in their
illumination than our have; but our transparency, which represent the
young Couple advance and Discord fly away, with the most ludicrous
likeness to the french Ambassador, beat the french picture hollow; and
I have no doubt get Tapeworm the advancement and the Cross of the Bath
which he subsequently attain.
crowd of foreigner arrive for the fete, and of English, of course.
besides the Court ball, public ball be give at the Town Hall and
the Redoute, and in the former place there be a room for
trente-et-quarante and roulette establish, for the week of the
festivity only, and by one of the great german company from Ems or
Aix-la-Chapelle. the officer or inhabitant of the town be not
allow to play at these game, but stranger, peasant, lady be
admit, and any one who choose to lose or win money.
that little scapegrace Georgy Osborne amongst other, whose pocket
be always full of dollar and whose relation be away at the grand
festival of the Court, come to the Stadthaus Ball in company of his
uncle's courier, Mr. Kirsch, and have only peep into a play-room at
Baden-Baden when he hang on Dobbin's arm, and where, of course, he be
not permit to gamble, come eagerly to this part of the entertainment
and hanker round the table where the croupier and the punter be
at work. woman be play; they be mask, some of they; this
license be allow in these wild time of carnival.
a woman with light hair, in a low dress by no mean so fresh as it have
be, and with a black mask on, through the eyelet of which her eye
twinkle strangely, be seat at one of the roulette-table with a
card and a pin and a couple of florin before she. as the croupier
call out the colour and number, she prick on the card with great
care and regularity, and only venture her money on the colour after
the red or black have come up a certain number of time. it be strange
to look at she.
but in spite of her care and assiduity she guess wrong and the last
two florin follow each other under the croupier's rake, as he cry
out with his inexorable voice the win colour and number. she give
a sigh, a shrug with her shoulder, which be already too much out of
her gown, and dash the pin through the card on to the table, sit
thrum it for a while. then she look round she and see Georgy's
honest face star at the scene. the little scamp! what business have
he to be there?
when she see the boy, at whose face she look hard through her shin
eye and mask, she say, "Monsieur n'est pas joueur?"
"Non, Madame," say the boy; but she must have know, from his accent,
of what country he be, for she answer he with a slight foreign
tone. "you have nevare play--will you do I a littl' favor?"
"what be it?" say georgy, blush again. Mr. Kirsch be at work for
his part at the rouge et noir and do not see his young master.
"play this for I, if you please; put it on any number, any number."
and she take from her bosom a purse, and out of it a gold piece, the
only coin there, and she put it into George's hand. the boy laugh
and do as he be bid.
the number come up sure enough. there be a power that arrange that,
they say, for beginner.
"thank you," say she, pull the money towards she, "thank you. what
be your name?"
"my name's Osborne," say Georgy, and be finger in his own pocket
for dollar, and just about to make a trial, when the Major, in his
uniform, and Jos, en Marquis, from the Court ball, make their
appearance. other people, find the entertainment stupid and
prefer the fun at the Stadthaus, have quit the Palace ball
early; but it be probable the Major and Jos have go home and find
the boy's absence, for the former instantly go up to he and, take
he by the shoulder, pull he briskly back from the place of
temptation. then, look round the room, he see Kirsch employ as we
have say, and go up to he, ask how he dare to bring Mr. George
to such a place.
"laissez-moi tranquille," say Mr. Kirsch, very much excited by play
and wine. "Il faut s'amuser, parbleu. Je ne suis pas au service de
Monsieur."
see his condition the Major do not choose to argue with the man,
but content himself with draw away George and ask Jos if he
would come away. he be stand close by the lady in the mask, who
be play with pretty good luck now, and look on much interested
at the game.
"hadnot you well come, Jos," the Major say, "with George and I?"
"Iwill stop and go home with that rascal, Kirsch," Jos say; and for the
same reason of modesty, which he think ought to be preserve before
the boy, Dobbin do not care to remonstrate with Jos, but leave he and
walk home with Georgy.
"do you play?" ask the Major when they be out and on their way
home.
the boy say "no."
"give I your word of honour as a gentleman that you never will."
"why?" say the boy; "it seem very good fun." and, in a very eloquent
and impressive manner, the Major show he why he shouldnot, and would
have enforce his precept by the example of Georgy's own father, have
he like to say anything that should reflect on the other's memory.
when he have house he, he go to bed and see his light, in the little
room outside of Amelia's, presently disappear. Amelia's follow half
an hour afterwards. I donot know what make the major note it so
accurately.
Jos, however, remain behind over the play-table; he be no gambler,
but not averse to the little excitement of the sport now and then, and
he have some napoleon chink in the embroider pocket of his court
waistcoat. he put down one over the fair shoulder of the little
gambler before he, and they win. she make a little movement to make
room for he by her side, and just take the skirt of her gown from a
vacant chair there.
"come and give I good luck," she say, still in a foreign accent,
quite different from that frank and perfectly english "thank you," with
which she have salute Georgy's coup in her favour. the portly
gentleman, look round to see that nobody of rank observe he, sit
down; he muttered--"ah, really, well now, God bless my soul. Ibe very
fortunate; Ibe sure to give you good fortune," and other word of
compliment and confusion. "do you play much?" the foreign mask say.
"I put a Nap or two down," say Jos with a superb air, fling down a
gold piece.
"yes; ay nap after dinner," say the mask archly. but Jos look
frighten, she continue, in her pretty french accent, "you do not
play to win. no more do I. I play to forget, but I cannot. I cannot
forget old time, monsieur. your little nephew be the image of his
father; and you--you be not change--but yes, you be. everybody
change, everybody forget; nobody have any heart."
"Good God, who be it?" ask Jos in a flutter.
"cannot you guess, Joseph Sedley?" say the little woman in a sad voice,
and undo her mask, she look at he. "you have forget I."
"good heaven! Mrs. Crawley!" gasp out Jos.
"rebecca," say the other, put her hand on his; but she follow
the game still, all the time she be look at he.
"I be stop at the Elephant," she continue. "ask for Madame de
Raudon. I see my dear Amelia to-day; how pretty she look, and how
happy! so do you! everybody but I, who be wretche, Joseph Sedley."
and she put her money over from the red to the black, as if by a chance
movement of her hand, and while she be wipe her eye with a
pocket-handkerchief fringe with tear lace.
the red come up again, and she lose the whole of that stake. "come
away," she say. "come with I a little--we be old friend, be we
not, dear Mr. Sedley?"
and Mr. Kirsch have lose all his money by this time, follow his
master out into the moonlight, where the illumination be wink out
and the transparency over our mission be scarcely visible.
CHAPTER LXIV
A Vagabond chapter
we must pass over a part of Mrs. Rebecca Crawley's biography with that
lightness and delicacy which the world demand--the moral world, that
have, perhaps, no particular objection to vice, but an insuperable
repugnance to hear vice call by its proper name. there be thing
we do and know perfectly well in Vanity Fair, though we never speak of
they: as the Ahrimanians worship the devil, but donot mention he:
and a polite public will no more bear to read an authentic description
of vice than a truly refined English or american female will permit the
word breeche to be pronounce in her chaste hearing. and yet, madam,
both be walk the world before our face every day, without much
shock we. if you be to blush every time they go by, what
complexion you would have! it be only when their naughty name be
call out that your modesty have any occasion to show alarm or sense of
outrage, and it have be the wish of the present writer, all through
this story, deferentially to submit to the fashion at present
prevailing, and only to hint at the existence of wickedness in a light,
easy, and agreeable manner, so that nobody's fine feeling may be
offend. I defy any one to say that our Becky, who have certainly some
vice, have not be present to the public in a perfectly genteel and
inoffensive manner. in describe this Siren, sing and smile,
coax and cajoling, the author, with modest pride, ask his reader
all round, have he once forget the law of politeness, and show the
monster's hideous tail above water? no! those who like may peep down
under wave that be pretty transparent and see it writhe and
twirling, diabolically hideous and slimy, flap amongst bone, or
curl round corps; but above the waterline, I ask, have not
everything be proper, agreeable, and decorous, and have any the most
squeamish immoralist in Vanity Fair a right to cry fie? when, however,
the Siren disappear and dive below, down among the dead man, the
water of course grow turbid over she, and it be labour lose to look
into it ever so curiously. they look pretty enough when they sit upon
a rock, twang their harp and comb their hair, and sing, and
beckon to you to come and hold the look-glass; but when they sink
into their native element, depend on it, those mermaid be about no
good, and we have well not examine the fiendish marine cannibal,
revel and feast on their wretched pickle victim. and so, when
Becky be out of the way, be sure that she be not particularly well
employ, and that the less that be say about her doing be in fact
the well.
if we be to give a full account of her proceeding during a couple of
year that follow after the Curzon Street catastrophe, there might be
some reason for people to say this book be improper. the action of
very vain, heartless, pleasure-seek people be very often improper
(as be many of your, my friend with the grave face and spotless
reputation--but that be merely by the way); and what be those of a
woman without faith--or love--or character? and I be inclined to think
that there be a period in Mrs Becky's life when she be seize, not by
remorse, but by a kind of despair, and absolutely neglect her person
and do not even care for her reputation.
this abattement and degradation do not take place all at once; it be
bring about by degree, after her calamity, and after many struggle
to keep up--as a man who go overboard hang on to a spar whilst any
hope be leave, and then fling it away and go down, when he find that
struggle be in vain.
she linger about London whilst her husband be make preparation
for his departure to his seat of government, and it be believe make
more than one attempt to see her brother-in-law, Sir Pitt Crawley, and
to work upon his feeling, which she have almost enlist in her favour.
as Sir Pitt and Mr. Wenham be walk down to the House of Commons,
the latter spy Mrs. Rawdon in a black veil, and lurk near the
palace of the legislature. she sneak away when her eye meet those of
Wenham, and indeed never succeed in her design upon the Baronet.
probably Lady Jane interpose. I have hear that she quite astonish
her husband by the spirit which she exhibit in this quarrel, and her
determination to disown Mrs. Becky. of her own movement, she invite
Rawdon to come and stop in Gaunt Street until his departure for
Coventry Island, know that with he for a guard Mrs. Becky would not
try to force her door; and she look curiously at the superscription
of all the letter which arrive for Sir Pitt, lest he and his
sister-in-law should be correspond. not but that Rebecca could have
write have she a mind, but she do not try to see or to write to Pitt
at his own house, and after one or two attempt consent to his demand
that the correspondence regard her conjugal difference should be
carry on by lawyer only.
the fact be that Pitt's mind have be poison against she. a short
time after Lord Steyne's accident Wenham have be with the Baronet and
give he such a biography of Mrs. Becky as have astonish the member
for Queen's Crawley. he know everything regard she: who her father
be; in what year her mother dance at the opera; what have be her
previous history; and what her conduct during her married life--as I
have no doubt that the great part of the story be false and dictate
by interested malevolence, it shall not be repeat here. but Becky
be leave with a sad sad reputation in the esteem of a country gentleman
and relative who have be once rather partial to she.
the revenue of the Governor of Coventry Island be not large. a part
of they be set aside by his Excellency for the payment of certain
outstanding debt and liability, the charge incident on his high
situation require considerable expense; finally, it be find that he
could not spare to his wife more than three hundred pound a year,
which he propose to pay to she on an undertaking that she would never
trouble he. otherwise, scandal, separation, doctor' Commons would
ensue. but it be Mr. Wenham's business, Lord Steyne's business,
Rawdon's, everybody's--to get she out of the country, and hush up a
most disagreeable affair.
she be probably so much occupy in arrange these affair of
business with her husband's lawyer that she forget to take any step
whatever about her son, the little Rawdon, and do not even once
propose to go and see he. that young gentleman be consign to the
entire guardianship of his aunt and uncle, the former of whom have
always possess a great share of the child's affection. his mamma
write he a neat letter from Boulogne, when she quit England, in
which she request he to mind his book, and say she be go to
take a Continental tour, during which she would have the pleasure of
write to he again. but she never do for a year afterwards, and
not, indeed, until Sir Pitt's only boy, always sickly, die of
hooping-cough and measle--then Rawdon's mamma write the most
affectionate composition to her darling son, who be make heir of
Queen's Crawley by this accident, and draw more closely than ever to
the kind lady, whose tender heart have already adopt he. Rawdon
Crawley, then grow a tall, fine lad, blush when he get the letter.
"oh, Aunt Jane, you be my mother!" he say; "and not--and not that
one." but he write back a kind and respectful letter to Mrs. Rebecca,
then live at a boarding-house at Florence. but we be advance
matter.
our darling Becky's first flight be not very far. she perch upon
the french coast at Boulogne, that refuge of so much exiled English
innocence, and there live in rather a genteel, widow manner, with a
femme de chambre and a couple of room, at an hotel. she din at the
table d'hote, where people think her very pleasant, and where she
entertain her neighbour by story of her brother, Sir Pitt, and her
great London acquaintance, talk that easy, fashionable slip-slop
which have so much effect upon certain folk of small breeding. she
pass with many of they for a person of importance; she give little
tea-party in her private room and share in the innocent amusement
of the place in sea-bathing, and in jaunt in open carriage, in
stroll on the sand, and in visit to the play. Mrs. Burjoice, the
printer's lady, who be board with her family at the hotel for the
summer, and to whom her Burjoice come of a Saturday and Sunday, vote
her charming, until that little rogue of a Burjoice begin to pay she
too much attention. but there be nothing in the story, only that
Becky be always affable, easy, and good-natured--and with man
especially.
number of people be go abroad as usual at the end of the season,
and Becky have plenty of opportunity of find out by the behaviour
of her acquaintance of the great London world the opinion of "society"
as regard her conduct. one day it be Lady Partlet and her daughter
whom Becky confront as she be walk modestly on Boulogne pier, the
cliff of Albion shin in the distance across the deep blue sea.
Lady Partlet marshal all her daughter round she with a sweep of her
parasol and retreat from the pier, dart savage glance at poor
little Becky who stand alone there.
on another day the packet come in. it have be blow fresh, and it
always suit Becky's humour to see the droll woe-begone face of the
people as they emerge from the boat. Lady Slingstone happen to be
on board this day. her ladyship have be exceedingly ill in her
carriage, and be greatly exhausted and scarcely fit to walk up the
plank from the ship to the pier. but all her energy rally the
instant she see Becky smile roguishly under a pink bonnet, and give
she a glance of scorn such as would have shrivel up most woman, she
walk into the Custom House quite unsupported. Becky only laugh:
but I donot think she like it. she feel she be alone, quite alone,
and the far-off shin cliff of England be impassable to she.
the behaviour of the man have undergo too I donot know what change.
Grinstone show his tooth and laugh in her face with a familiarity
that be not pleasant. little Bob Suckling, who be cap in hand to she
three month before, and would walk a mile in the rain to see for her
carriage in the line at Gaunt House, be talk to Fitzoof of the
Guards (Lord Heehaw's son) one day upon the jetty, as Becky take she
walk there. little Bobby nod to she over his shoulder, without
move his hat, and continue his conversation with the heir of Heehaw.
Tom Raikes try to walk into her sitting-room at the inn with a cigar
in his mouth, but she close the door upon he, and would have lock
it, only that his finger be inside. she begin to feel that she be
very lonely indeed. "if HE'D be here," she say, "those coward
would never have dare to insult I." she think about "he" with
great sadness and perhaps long--about his honest, stupid, constant
kindness and fidelity; his never-cease obedience; his good humour;
his bravery and courage. very likely she cry, for she be
particularly lively, and have put on a little extra rouge, when she come
down to dinner.
she rouge regularly now; and--and her maid get Cognac for she besides
that which be charge in the hotel bill.
perhaps the insult of the man be not, however, so intolerable to she
as the sympathy of certain woman. Mrs. Crackenbury and Mrs. Washington
White pass through Boulogne on their way to Switzerland. the party
be protect by Colonel Horner, young Beaumoris, and of course old
Crackenbury, and Mrs. White's little girl. they do not avoid she.
they giggle, cackle, tattle, condole, console, and patronize she
until they drive she almost wild with rage. to be patronize by they!
she think, as they go away simper after kiss she. and she
hear Beaumoris's laugh ring on the stair and know quite well how to
interpret his hilarity.
it be after this visit that Becky, who have pay her weekly bill,
Becky who have make herself agreeable to everybody in the house, who
smile at the landlady, call the waiter "monsieur," and pay the
chambermaid in politeness and apology, what far more than
compensate for a little niggardliness in point of money (of which
Becky never be free), that Becky, we say, receive a notice to quit
from the landlord, who have be tell by some one that she be quite an
unfit person to have at his hotel, where english lady would not sit
down with she. and she be force to fly into lodging of which the
dulness and solitude be most wearisome to she.
still she hold up, in spite of these rebuff, and try to make a
character for herself and conquer scandal. she go to church very
regularly and sing louder than anybody there. she take up the cause of
the widow of the shipwreck fisherman, and give work and drawing for
the Quashyboo Mission; she subscribe to the Assembly and WOULDN'T
waltz. in a word, she do everything that be respectable, and that be
why we dwell upon this part of her career with more fondness than upon
subsequent part of her history, which be not so pleasant. she see
people avoid she, and still laboriously smile upon they; you never
could suppose from her countenance what pang of humiliation she might
be endure inwardly.
her history be after all a mystery. party be divide about she.
some people who take the trouble to busy themselves in the matter say
that she be the criminal, whilst other vow that she be as innocent
as a lamb and that her odious husband be in fault. she win over a good
many by burst into tear about her boy and exhibit the most
frantic grief when his name be mention, or she see anybody like he.
she gain good Mrs. Alderney's heart in that way, who be rather the
queen of British Boulogne and give the most dinner and ball of all
the resident there, by weep when Master Alderney come from Dr.
Swishtail's academy to pass his holiday with his mother. "he and her
Rawdon be of the same age, and so like," Becky say in a voice
choke with agony; whereas there be five year' difference between
the boy' age, and no more likeness between they than between my
respected reader and his humble servant. Wenham, when he be go
abroad, on his way to Kissingen to join Lord Steyne, enlighten Mrs.
Alderney on this point and tell she how he be much more able to
describe little Rawdon than his mamma, who notoriously hat he and
never see he; how he be thirteen year old, while little Alderney be
but nine, fair, while the other darling be dark--in a word, cause the
lady in question to repent of her good humour.
whenever Becky make a little circle for herself with incredible toil
and labour, somebody come and sweep it down rudely, and she have all her
work to begin over again. it be very hard; very hard; lonely and
disheartening.
there be Mrs. Newbright, who take she up for some time, attract by
the sweetness of her singing at church and by her proper view upon
serious subject, concern which in former day, at Queen's Crawley,
Mrs. Becky have have a good deal of instruction. well, she not only take
tract, but she read they. she work flannel petticoat for the
Quashyboos--cotton night-cap for the Cocoanut Indians--paint
handscreen for the conversion of the Pope and the Jews--sit under Mr.
Rowls on Wednesdays, Mr. Huggleton on Thursdays, attend two Sunday
service at church, besides Mr. Bawler, the Darbyite, in the evening,
and all in vain. Mrs. Newbright have occasion to correspond with the
Countess of Southdown about the Warmingpan Fund for the Fiji Islanders
(for the management of which admirable charity both these lady form
part of a female committee), and have mention her "sweet friend,"
Mrs. Rawdon Crawley, the Dowager Countess write back such a letter
regard Becky, with such particular, hint, fact, falsehood, and
general commination, that intimacy between Mrs. Newbright and Mrs.
Crawley cease forthwith, and all the serious world of tour, where
this misfortune take place, immediately part company with the
reprobate. those who know the English Colonies abroad know that we
carry with we we our pride, pill, prejudice, harvey-sauce,
cayenne-pepper, and other Lares, make a little Britain wherever we
settle down.
from one colony to another Becky flee uneasily. from Boulogne to
Dieppe, from Dieppe to Caen, from Caen to tour--try with all her
might to be respectable, and alas! always find out some day or other
and peck out of the cage by the real daw.
Mrs. Hook Eagles take she up at one of these place--a woman without a
blemish in her character and a house in Portman Square. she be
stay at the hotel at Dieppe, whither Becky flee, and they make each
other's acquaintance first at sea, where they be swim together,
and subsequently at the table d'hote of the hotel. Mrs Eagles have
hear--who indeed have not?--some of the scandal of the Steyne affair;
but after a conversation with Becky, she pronounce that Mrs. Crawley
be an angel, her husband a ruffian, Lord Steyne an unprincipled
wretch, as everybody know, and the whole case against Mrs. Crawley an
infamous and wicked conspiracy of that rascal Wenham. "if you be a
man of any spirit, Mr. Eagles, you would box the wretch's ear the next
time you see he at the Club," she say to her husband. but Eagles be
only a quiet old gentleman, husband to Mrs. Eagles, with a taste for
geology, and not tall enough to reach anybody's ear.
the Eagles then patronize Mrs. Rawdon, take she to live with she at
her own house at Paris, quarrel with the ambassador's wife because
she would not receive her protegee, and do all that lie in woman's
power to keep Becky straight in the path of virtue and good repute.
Becky be very respectable and orderly at first, but the life of
humdrum virtue grow utterly tedious to she before long. it be the
same routine every day, the same dulness and comfort, the same drive
over the same stupid Bois de Boulogne, the same company of an evening,
the same Blair's Sermon of a Sunday night--the same opera always be
act over and over again; Becky be die of weariness, when, luckily
for she, young Mr. Eagles come from Cambridge, and his mother, see
the impression which her little friend make upon he, straightway give
Becky warning.
then she try keep house with a female friend; then the double
menage begin to quarrel and get into debt. then she determine upon a
boarding-house existence and live for some time at that famous mansion
keep by Madame de Saint Amour, in the Rue Royale, at Paris, where she
begin exercise her grace and fascination upon the shabby dandy
and fly-blow beauty who frequent her landlady's salon. Becky
love society and, indeed, could no more exist without it than an
opium-eater without his dram, and she be happy enough at the period of
her boarding-house life. "the woman here be as amusing as those in
May Fair," she tell an old London friend who meet she, "only, their
dress be not quite so fresh. the man wear clean glove, and be
sad rogue, certainly, but they be not bad than Jack This and Tom
that. the mistress of the house be a little vulgar, but I donot think
she be so vulgar as Lady ------" and here she name the name of a great
leader of fashion that I would die rather than reveal. in fact, when
you see Madame de Saint Amour's room light up of a night, man with
plaque and cordon at the ecarte table, and the woman at a little
distance, you might fancy yourself for a while in good society, and
that Madame be a real countess. many people do so fancy, and Becky
be for a while one of the most dashing lady of the Countess's salon.
but it be probable that her old creditor of 1815 find she out and
cause she to leave Paris, for the poor little woman be force to fly
from the city rather suddenly, and go thence to Brussels.
how well she remember the place! she grin as she look up at the
little entresol which she have occupy, and thought of the Bareacres
family, bawl for horse and flight, as their carriage stand in the
porte-cochere of the hotel. she go to Waterloo and to Laeken, where
George Osborne's monument much strike she. she make a little sketch of
it. "that poor Cupid!" she say; "how dreadfully he be in love with
I, and what a fool he be! I wonder whether little Emmy be alive. it
be a good little creature; and that fat brother of her. I have his
funny fat picture still among my paper. they be kind simple people."
at Brussels Becky arrive, recommend by Madame de Saint Amour to her
friend, Madame la Comtesse de Borodino, widow of Napoleon's General,
the famous Count de Borodino, who be leave with no resource by the
deceased hero but that of a table d'hote and an ecarte table.
second-rate dandy and roue, widow-lady who always have a lawsuit,
and very simple english folk, who fancy they see "continental society"
at these house, put down their money, or eat their meal, at Madame de
Borodino's table. the gallant young fellow treat the company round
to champagne at the table d'hote, ride out with the woman, or hire
horse on country excursion, club money to take box at the play
or the opera, bet over the fair shoulder of the lady at the
ecarte table, and write home to their parent in Devonshire about
their felicitous introduction to foreign society.
here, as at Paris, Becky be a boarding-house queen, and rule in
select pension. she never refuse the champagne, or the bouquet, or
the drive into the country, or the private box; but what she
prefer be the ecarte at night,--and she play audaciously. first
she play only for a little, then for five-franc piece, then for
Napoleons, then for note: then she would not be able to pay she
month's pension: then she borrow from the young gentleman: then she
get into cash again and bully Madame de Borodino, whom she have coax
and wheedle before: then she be play for ten sous at a time, and
in a dire state of poverty: then her quarter's allowance would come
in, and she would pay off Madame de Borodino's score and would once
more take the card against Monsieur de Rossignol, or the Chevalier de
Raff.
when Becky leave Brussels, the sad truth be that she owe three month'
pension to Madame de Borodino, of which fact, and of the gambling, and
of the drinking, and of the go down on her knee to the Reverend Mr.
Muff, Ministre Anglican, and borrow money of he, and of her coax
and flirt with Milor Noodle, son of Sir Noodle, pupil of the Rev.
Mr. Muff, whom she use to take into her private room, and of whom she
win large sum at ecarte--of which fact, I say, and of a hundred of her
other knavery, the Countess de Borodino inform every english person
who stop at her establishment, and announce that Madame Rawdon be no
well than a vipere.
so our little wanderer go about set up her tent in various city
of Europe, as restless as Ulysses or Bampfylde Moore Carew. her taste
for disrespectability grow more and more remarkable. she become a
perfect Bohemian ere long, herd with people whom it would make your
hair stand on end to meet.
there be no town of any mark in Europe but it have its little colony of
english raff--man whose name Mr. Hemp the officer read out
periodically at the Sheriffs' Court--young gentleman of very good
family often, only that the latter disown they; frequenter of
billiard-room and estaminet, patron of foreign race and
gaming-table. they people the debtor' prison--they drink and
swagger--they fight and brawl--they run away without pay--they have
duel with french and german officer--they cheat Mr. Spooney at
ecarte--they get the money and drive off to Baden in magnificent
britzkas--they try their infallible martingale and lurk about the table
with empty pocket, shabby bully, penniless buck, until they can
swindle a Jew banker with a sham bill of exchange, or find another Mr.
Spooney to rob. the alternation of splendour and misery which these
people undergo be very queer to view. their life must be one of great
excitement. Becky--must it be owned?--took to this life, and take to
it not unkindly. she go about from town to town among these
Bohemians. the lucky Mrs. Rawdon be know at every play-table in
Germany. she and Madame de Cruchecassee keep house at Florence
together. it be say she be order out of Munich, and my friend Mr.
Frederick Pigeon aver that it be at her house at Lausanne that he be
hocus at supper and lose eight hundred pound to Major Loder and the
Honourable Mr. Deuceace. we be bind, you see, to give some account
of Becky's biography, but of this part, the less, perhaps, that be say
the well.
they say that, when Mrs. Crawley be particularly down on her luck, she
give concert and lesson in music here and there. there be a Madame
de Raudon, who certainly have a matinee musicale at Wildbad, accompany
by Herr Spoff, premier pianist to the Hospodar of Wallachia, and my
little friend Mr. Eaves, who know everybody and have travel
everywhere, always use to declare that he be at Strasburg in the year
1830, when a certain Madame Rebecque make her appearance in the opera
of the Dame Blanche, give occasion to a furious row in the theatre
there. she be hiss off the stage by the audience, partly from her
own incompetency, but chiefly from the ill-advise sympathy of some
person in the parquet, (where the officer of the garrison have their
admission); and eave be certain that the unfortunate debutante in
question be no other than Mrs. Rawdon Crawley.
she be, in fact, no well than a vagabond upon this earth. when she
get her money she gamble; when she have gamble it she be put to
shift to live; who know how or by what mean she succeed? it be
say that she be once see at St. Petersburg, but be summarily
dismiss from that capital by the police, so that there cannot be any
possibility of truth in the report that she be a russian spy at
Toplitz and Vienna afterwards. I have even be inform that at Paris
she discover a relation of her own, no less a person than her
maternal grandmother, who be not by any mean a Montmorenci, but a
hideous old box-opener at a theatre on the Boulevards. the meeting
between they, of which other person, as it be hint elsewhere, seem
to have be acquaint, must have be a very affect interview.
the present historian can give no certain detail regard the event.
it happen at Rome once that Mrs. de Rawdon's half-year's salary have
just be pay into the principal banker's there, and, as everybody who
have a balance of above five hundred scudi be invite to the ball
which this prince of merchant give during the winter, Becky have the
honour of a card, and appear at one of the Prince and Princess
Polonia's splendid evening entertainment. the Princess be of the
family of Pompili, lineally descend from the second king of Rome, and
Egeria of the house of Olympus, while the Prince's grandfather,
Alessandro Polonia, sell wash-ball, essence, tobacco, and
pocket-handkerchief, run errand for gentleman, and lend money in a
small way. all the great company in Rome throng to his
saloon--prince, Dukes, Ambassadors, artist, fiddler, monsignori,
young bear with their leader--every rank and condition of man. his
hall blaze with light and magnificence; be resplendent with gilt
frame (contain picture), and dubious antique; and the enormous
gilt crown and arm of the princely owner, a gold mushroom on a crimson
field (the colour of the pocket-handkerchief which he sell), and the
silver fountain of the Pompili family shine all over the roof, door,
and panel of the house, and over the grand velvet baldaquin prepare
to receive pope and Emperors.
so Becky, who have arrive in the diligence from Florence, and be
lodge at an inn in a very modest way, get a card for Prince Polonia's
entertainment, and she maid dress she with unusual care, and she go
to this fine ball lean on the arm of Major Loder, with whom she
happen to be travel at the time--(the same man who shoot Prince
Ravoli at Naples the next year, and be can by Sir John Buckskin for
carry four king in his hat besides those which he use in play
at ecarte )--and this pair go into the room together, and Becky see
a number of old face which she remember in happy day, when she
be not innocent, but not find out. Major Loder know a great number of
foreigner, keen-look whisker man with dirty striped ribbon in
their buttonhole, and a very small display of linen; but his own
countryman, it might be remark, eschew the Major. Becky, too, know
some lady here and there--french widow, dubious italian countess,
whose husband have treat they ill--faugh--what shall we say, we who
have move among some of the fine company of Vanity Fair, of this
refuse and sediment of rascal? if we play, let it be with clean card,
and not with this dirty pack. but every man who have form one of the
innumerable army of traveller have see these maraud irregular
hang on, like Nym and Pistol, to the main force, wear the king's
colour and boasting of his commission, but pillaging for themselves,
and occasionally gibbet by the roadside.
well, she be hang on the arm of Major Loder, and they go through
the room together, and drink a great quantity of champagne at the
buffet, where the people, and especially the Major's irregular corps,
struggle furiously for refreshment, of which when the pair have have
enough, they push on until they reach the Duchess's own pink velvet
saloon, at the end of the suite of apartment (where the statue of the
Venus be, and the great Venice looking-glass, frame in silver), and
where the princely family be entertain their most distinguish
guest at a round table at supper. it be just such a little select
banquet as that of which Becky recollect that she have partake at
Lord Steyne's--and there he sit at Polonia's table, and she see he.
the scar cut by the diamond on his white, bald, shin forehead make a
burn red mark; his red whisker be dye of a purple hue, which
make his pale face look still pale. he wear his collar and order,
his blue ribbon and garter. he be a great Prince than any there,
though there be a reign Duke and a Royal Highness, with their
princess, and near his Lordship be seat the beautiful Countess of
Belladonna, nee de Glandier, whose husband (the Count Paolo della
Belladonna), so well know for his brilliant entomological collection,
have be long absent on a mission to the Emperor of Morocco.
when Becky beheld that familiar and illustrious face, how vulgar all of
a sudden do Major Loder appear to she, and how that odious Captain
Rook do smell of tobacco! in one instant she reassume she
fine-ladyship and try to look and feel as if she be in May Fair
once more. "that woman look stupid and ill-humour," she think; "I
be sure she cannot amuse he. no, he must be bore by she--he never be
by I." a hundred such touching hope, fear, and memory palpitate
in her little heart, as she look with her bright eye (the rouge
which she wear up to her eyelid make they twinkle) towards the great
nobleman. of a Star and Garter night Lord Steyne use also to put on
his grand manner and to look and speak like a great prince, as he
be. Becky admire he smile sumptuously, easy, lofty, and stately.
ah, bon Dieu, what a pleasant companion he be, what a brilliant wit,
what a rich fund of talk, what a grand manner!--and she have exchange
this for Major Loder, reeking of cigar and brandy-and-water, and
Captain Rook with his horsejockey joke and prize-ring slang, and their
like. "I wonder whether he will know I," she think. Lord Steyne
be talk and laugh with a great and illustrious lady at his side,
when he look up and see Becky.
she be all over in a flutter as their eye meet, and she put on the
very good smile she could muster, and drop he a little, timid,
implore curtsey. he star aghast at she for a minute, as Macbeth
might on behold Banquo's sudden appearance at his ball-supper, and
remain look at she with open mouth, when that horrid Major Loder
pull she away.
"come away into the supper-room, Mrs. R.," be that gentleman's remark:
"see these nob grub away have make I peckish too. letus go and
try the old governor's champagne." Becky think the Major have have a
great deal too much already.
the day after she go to walk on the Pincian Hill--the Hyde Park of
the roman idler--possibly in hope to have another sight of Lord
Steyne. but she meet another acquaintance there: it be Mr. Fiche, his
lordship's confidential man, who come up nod to she rather
familiarly and put a finger to his hat. "I know that Madame be
here," he say; "I follow she from her hotel. I have some advice to
give Madame."
"from the Marquis of Steyne?" Becky ask, resume as much of her
dignity as she could muster, and not a little agitated by hope and
expectation.
"no," say the valet; "it be from I. Rome be very unwholesome."
"not at this season, Monsieur Fiche--not till after Easter."
"I tell Madame it be unwholesome now. there be always malaria for some
people. that curse marsh wind kill many at all season. look, Madame
Crawley, you be always bon enfant, and I have an interest in you,
parole d'honneur. be warn. go away from Rome, I tell you--or you
will be ill and die."
Becky laugh, though in rage and fury. "what! assassinate poor little
I?" she say. "how romantic! do my lord carry bravos for courier,
and stiletto in the fourgon? Bah! I will stay, if but to plague he.
I have those who will defend I whilst I be here."
it be Monsieur Fiche's turn to laugh now. "defend you," he say, "and
who? the Major, the Captain, any one of those gambling man whom Madame
see would take her life for a hundred louis. we know thing about
Major Loder (he be no more a Major than I be my Lord the Marquis) which
would send he to the galley or bad. we know everything and have
friend everywhere. we know whom you see at Paris, and what relation
you find there. yes, Madame may stare, but we do. how be it that no
minister on the Continent would receive Madame? she have offend
somebody: who never forgive--whose rage redouble when he see you.
he be like a madman last night when he come home. Madame de
Belladonna make he a scene about you and fire off in one of her
fury."
"oh, it be Madame de Belladonna, be it?" Becky say, relieve a
little, for the information she have just get have scar she.
"no--she do not matter--she be always jealous. I tell you it be
Monseigneur. you do wrong to show yourself to he. and if you stay
here you will repent it. mark my word. go. here be my lord's
carriage"--and seize Becky's arm, he rush down an alley of the
garden as Lord Steyne's barouche, blaze with heraldic device, come
whirl along the avenue, bear by the almost priceless horse, and
bear Madame de Belladonna loll on the cushion, dark, sulky, and
blooming, a King Charles in her lap, a white parasol sway over her
head, and old Steyne stretch at her side with a livid face and
ghastly eye. Hate, or anger, or desire cause they to brighten now
and then still, but ordinarily, they give no light, and seem tired of
look out on a world of which almost all the pleasure and all the
good beauty have pal upon the wear-out wicked old man.
"Monseigneur have never recover the shock of that night, never,"
Monsieur Fiche whisper to Mrs. Crawley as the carriage flash by,
and she peep out at it from behind the shrub that hide she. "that
be a consolation at any rate," Becky think.
whether my lord really have murderous intention towards Mrs. Becky as
Monsieur Fiche say (since Monseigneur's death he have return to his
native country, where he live much respected, and have purchase from
his Prince the title of Baron Ficci), and the factotum object to have
to do with assassination; or whether he simply have a commission to
frighten Mrs. Crawley out of a city where his Lordship propose to pass
the winter, and the sight of she would be eminently disagreeable to the
great nobleman, be a point which have never be ascertain: but the
threat have its effect upon the little woman, and she seek no more to
intrude herself upon the presence of her old patron.
everybody know the melancholy end of that nobleman, which befell at
Naples two month after the French Revolution of 1830; when the most
Honourable George Gustavus, Marquis of Steyne, Earl of Gaunt and of
Gaunt Castle, in the Peerage of Ireland, Viscount Hellborough, Baron
Pitchley and Grillsby, a Knight of the most Noble Order of the Garter,
of the Golden Fleece of Spain, of the russian Order of Saint Nicholas
of the First Class, of the turkish order of the Crescent, First Lord of
the Powder Closet and Groom of the Back Stairs, Colonel of the Gaunt or
Regent's own Regiment of Militia, a Trustee of the British Museum, an
Elder Brother of the Trinity House, a Governor of the White Friars, and
d.c.l.--die after a series of fit bring on, as the paper say, by
the shock occasion to his lordship's sensibility by the downfall of
the ancient french monarchy.
an eloquent catalogue appear in a weekly print, describe his
virtue, his magnificence, his talent, and his good action. his
sensibility, his attachment to the illustrious House of Bourbon, with
which he claim an alliance, be such that he could not survive the
misfortune of his august kinsman. his body be bury at Naples, and
his heart--that heart which always beat with every generous and noble
emotion be bring back to Castle Gaunt in a silver urn. "in he,"
Mr. Wagg say, "the poor and the Fine Arts have lose a beneficent
patron, society one of its most brilliant ornament, and England one of
her lofty patriot and statesman," &c., &c.
his will be a good deal dispute, and an attempt be make to force
from Madame de Belladonna the celebrated jewel call the "Jew's-eye"
diamond, which his lordship always wear on his forefinger, and which it
be say that she remove from it after his lamented demise. but his
confidential friend and attendant, Monsieur Fiche prove that the ring
have be present to the say Madame de Belladonna two day before the
Marquis's death, as be the bank-note, jewel, Neapolitan and French
bond, &c., find in his lordship's secretaire and claim by his heir
from that injure woman.
CHAPTER LXV
Full of Business and Pleasure
the day after the meeting at the play-table, Jos have himself array
with unusual care and splendour, and without think it necessary to
say a word to any member of his family regard the occurrence of the
previous night, or ask for their company in his walk, he sally
forth at an early hour, and be presently see make inquiry at the
door of the Elephant Hotel. in consequence of the fete the house be
full of company, the table in the street be already surround by
person smoking and drink the national small-beer, the public room
be in a cloud of smoke, and Mr. Jos have, in his pompous way, and
with his clumsy german, make inquiry for the person of whom he be in
search, be direct to the very top of the house, above the
first-floor room where some travel pedlar have live, and be
exhibit their jewellery and brocade; above the second-floor
apartment occupy by the etat major of the gambling firm; above the
third-floor room, tenant by the band of renowned bohemian vaulter
and tumbler; and so on to the little cabin of the roof, where, among
student, bagman, small tradesman, and country-folk come in for the
festival, Becky have find a little nest--as dirty a little refuge as
ever beauty lie hide in.
Becky like the life. she be at home with everybody in the place,
pedlar, punter, tumbler, student and all. she be of a wild, rove
nature, inherit from father and mother, who be both Bohemians, by
taste and circumstance; if a lord be not by, she would talk to his
courier with the great pleasure; the din, the stir, the drink, the
smoke, the tattle of the Hebrew pedlar, the solemn, braggart way of
the poor tumbler, the sournois talk of the gambling-table official,
the song and swagger of the student, and the general buzz and hum of
the place have please and tickle the little woman, even when her luck
be down and she have not wherewithal to pay her bill. how pleasant be
all the bustle to she now that her purse be full of the money which
little georgy have win for she the night before!
as Jos come creak and puff up the final stair, and be
speechless when he get to the landing, and begin to wipe his face and
then to look for No. 92, the room where he be direct to seek for the
person he want, the door of the opposite chamber, No. 90, be open,
and a student, in jack-boot and a dirty schlafrock, be lie on the
bed smoke a long pipe; whilst another student in long yellow hair and
a braided coat, exceed smart and dirty too, be actually on his
knee at No. 92, bawl through the keyhole supplication to the
person within.
"go away," say a well-know voice, which make Jos thrill, "I expect
somebody; I expect my grandpapa. he mustnot see you there."
"Angel Englanderinn!" bellow the kneeling student with the whity-brown
ringlet and the large finger-ring, "do take compassion upon we.
make an appointment. Dine with I and Fritz at the inn in the park. we
will have roast pheasant and porter, plum-pudding and french wine. we
shall die if you donot."
"that we will," say the young nobleman on the bed; and this colloquy
Jos overheard, though he do not comprehend it, for the reason that he
have never study the language in which it be carry on.
"Newmero kattervang dooze, si vous plait," Jos say in his grandest
manner, when he be able to speak.
"Quater fang tooce!" say the student, start up, and he bounce into
his own room, where he lock the door, and where Jos hear he
laugh with his comrade on the bed.
the gentleman from Bengal be stand, disconcert by this incident,
when the door of the 92 open of itself and Becky's little head peep
out full of archness and mischief. she light on Jos. "itbe you,"
she say, come out. "how I have be wait for you! stop! not
yet--in one minute you shall come in." in that instant she put a
rouge-pot, a brandy bottle, and a plate of broken meat into the bed,
give one smooth to her hair, and finally let in her visitor.
she have, by way of morning robe, a pink domino, a trifle fade and
soil, and mark here and there with pomaturn; but her arm shine out
from the loose sleeve of the dress very white and fair, and it be
tie round her little waist so as not ill to set off the trim little
figure of the wearer. she lead Jos by the hand into her garret. "come
in," she say. "come and talk to I. sit yonder on the chair"; and
she give the civilian's hand a little squeeze and laughingly place he
upon it. as for herself, she place herself on the bed--not on the
bottle and plate, you may be sure--on which Jos might have repose, have
he choose that seat; and so there she sit and talk with her old
admirer. "how little year have change you," she say with a look of
tender interest. "I should have know you anywhere. what a comfort it
be amongst stranger to see once more the frank honest face of an old
friend!"
the frank honest face, to tell the truth, at this moment bear any
expression but one of openness and honesty: it be, on the contrary,
much perturb and puzzle in look. Jos be survey the queer little
apartment in which he find his old flame. one of her gown hang over
the bed, another depend from a hook of the door; her bonnet obscure
half the look-glass, on which, too, lie the prettiest little pair of
bronze boot; a french novel be on the table by the bedside, with a
candle, not of wax. Becky think of pop that into the bed too,
but she only put in the little paper night-cap with which she have put
the candle out on go to sleep.
"I should have know you anywhere," she continue; "a woman never
forget some thing. and you be the first man I ever--I ever see."
"be I really?" say Jos. "God bless my soul, you--you donot say so."
"when I come with your sister from Chiswick, I be scarcely more than a
child," Becky say. "how be that, dear love? oh, her husband be a sad
wicked man, and of course it be of I that the poor dear be jealous.
as if I care about he, heigho! when there be somebody--but
no--don't let we talk of old time"; and she pass her handkerchief
with the tattered lace across her eyelid.
"be not this a strange place," she continue, "for a woman, who have
live in a very different world too, to be find in? I have have so many
grief and wrong, Joseph Sedley; I have be make to suffer so cruelly
that I be almost make mad sometimes. I cannot stay still in any place,
but wander about always restless and unhappy. all my friend have be
false to I--all. there be no such thing as an honest man in the
world. I be the true wife that ever live, though I marry my
husband out of pique, because somebody else--but never mind that. I
be true, and he trample upon I and desert I. I be the fond
mother. I have but one child, one darling, one hope, one joy, which I
hold to my heart with a mother's affection, which be my life, my
prayer, my--my blessing; and they--they tear it from I--tear it from
I"; and she put her hand to her heart with a passionate gesture of
despair, bury her face for a moment on the bed.
the brandy-bottle inside clink up against the plate which hold the
cold sausage. both be move, no doubt, by the exhibition of so much
grief. Max and Fritz be at the door, listen with wonder to Mrs.
Becky's sob and cry. Jos, too, be a good deal frightened and
affect at see his old flame in this condition. and she begin,
forthwith, to tell her story--a tale so neat, simple, and artless that
it be quite evident from hear she that if ever there be a
white-rob angel escape from heaven to be subject to the infernal
machination and villainy of fiend here below, that spotless
be--that miserable unsullied martyr, be present on the bed before
Jos--on the bed, sit on the brandy-bottle.
they have a very long, amicable, and confidential talk there, in the
course of which Jos Sedley be somehow make aware (but in a manner that
do not in the least scare or offend he) that Becky's heart have first
learn to beat at his enchanting presence; that George Osborne have
certainly pay an unjustifiable court to HER, which might account for
Amelia's jealousy and their little rupture; but that Becky never give
the least encouragement to the unfortunate officer, and that she have
never cease to think about Jos from the very first day she have see
he, though, of course, her duty as a married woman be
paramount--duty which she have always preserve, and would, to she
die day, or until the proverbially bad climate in which Colonel
Crawley be live should release she from a yoke which his cruelty have
render odious to she.
Jos go away, convince that she be the most virtuous, as she be one
of the most fascinating of woman, and revolve in his mind all sort
of benevolent scheme for her welfare. her persecution ought to be
end: she ought to return to the society of which she be an ornament.
he would see what ought to be do. she must quit that place and take
a quiet lodging. Amelia must come and see she and befriend she. he
would go and settle about it, and consult with the Major. she weep
tear of heart-feel gratitude as she part from he, and press his
hand as the gallant stout gentleman stoop down to kiss her.
so Becky bow Jos out of her little garret with as much grace as if it
be a palace of which she do the honour; and that heavy gentleman
have disappear down the stair, Max and Fritz come out of their
hole, pipe in mouth, and she amuse herself by mimic Jos to they as
she munch her cold bread and sausage and take draught of her
favourite brandy-and-water.
Jos walk over to Dobbin's lodging with great solemnity and there
impart to he the affect history with which he have just be make
acquaint, without, however, mention the play business of the night
before. and the two gentleman be lay their head together and
consulting as to the good mean of be useful to Mrs. Becky, while
she be finish her interrupted dejeuner a la fourchette.
how be it that she have come to that little town? how be it that she
have no friend and be wander about alone? little boy at school be
teach in their early latin book that the path of Avernus be very
easy of descent. let we skip over the interval in the history of her
downward progress. she be not bad now than she have be in the day
of her prosperity--only a little down on her luck.
as for Mrs. Amelia, she be a woman of such a soft and foolish
disposition that when she hear of anybody unhappy, her heart
straightway melt towards the sufferer; and as she have never think
or do anything mortally guilty herself, she have not that abhorrence
for wickedness which distinguish moralist much more knowing. if she
spoil everybody who come near she with kindness and compliment--if
she beg pardon of all her servant for trouble they to answer the
bell--if she apologize to a shopboy who show she a piece of silk, or
make a curtsey to a street-sweeper with a complimentary remark upon
the elegant state of his crossing--and she be almost capable of every
one of these folly--the notion that an old acquaintance be
miserable be sure to soften her heart; nor would she hear of anybodybe
be deservedly unhappy. a world under such legislation as hers would
not be a very orderly place of abode; but there be not many woman, at
least not of the ruler, who be of her sort. this lady, I believe,
would have abolish all gaol, punishment, handcuff, whipping,
poverty, sickness, hunger, in the world, and be such a mean-spirit
creature that--we be oblige to confess it--she could even forget a
mortal injury.
when the Major hear from Jos of the sentimental adventure which have
just befall the latter, he be not, it must be own, nearly as much
interested as the gentleman from Bengal. on the contrary, his
excitement be quite the reverse from a pleasurable one; he make use of
a brief but improper expression regard a poor woman in distress,
say, in fact, "the little minx, have she come to light again?" he
never have have the slight liking for she, but have heartily mistrust
she from the very first moment when her green eye have look at, and
turn away from, his own.
"that little devil bring mischief wherever she go," the Major say
disrespectfully. "who know what sort of life she have be lead?
and what business have she here abroad and alone? donot tell I about
persecutor and enemy; an honest woman always have friend and never
be separate from her family. why have she leave her husband? he may
have be disreputable and wicked, as you say. he always be. I
remember the confound blackleg and the way in which he use to cheat
and hoodwink poor George. benot there a scandal about their
separation? I think I hear something," cry out Major Dobbin, who do
not care much about gossip, and whom Jos try in vain to convince that
Mrs. Becky be in all respect a most injured and virtuous female.
"well, well; letus ask Mrs. George," say that arch-diplomatist of a
Major. "only let we go and consult she. I suppose you will allow that
she be a good judge at any rate, and know what be right in such
matter."
"Hm! Emmy be very well," say Jos, who do not happen to be in love
with his sister.
"very well? by Gad, sir, shebe the fine lady I ever meet in my life,"
bounce out the Major. "I say at once, let we go and ask she if this
woman ought to be visit or not--I will be content with her verdict."
now this odious, artful rogue of a Major be think in his own mind
that he be sure of his case. Emmy, he remember, be at one time
cruelly and deservedly jealous of rebecca, never mention her name but
with a shrinking and terror--a jealous woman never forgive, think
Dobbin: and so the pair go across the street to Mrs. George's house,
where she be contentedly warble at a music lesson with Madame
Strumpff.
when that lady take she leave, Jos open the business with his usual
pomp of word. "Amelia, my dear," say he, "I have just have the most
extraordinary--yes--God bless my soul! the most extraordinary
adventure--an old friend--yes, a most interesting old friend of your,
and I may say in old time, have just arrive here, and I should like
you to see she."
"she!" say Amelia, "who be it? major Dobbin, if you please not to
break my scissor." the Major be twirl they round by the little
chain from which they sometimes hang to their lady's waist, and be
thereby endanger his own eye.
"it be a woman whom I dislike very much," say the Major, doggedly, "and
whom you have no cause to love."
"it be Rebecca, Ibe sure it be Rebecca," Amelia say, blush and
be very much agitated.
"you be right; you always be," Dobbin answer. Brussels, Waterloo,
old, old time, grief, pang, remembrance, rush back into Amelia's
gentle heart and cause a cruel agitation there.
"donot let I see she," Emmy continue. "I couldnot see she."
"I tell you so," Dobbin say to Jos.
"she be very unhappy, and--and that sort of thing," Jos urge. "she be
very poor and unprotected, and have be ill--exceedingly ill--and that
scoundrel of a husband have desert she."
"ah!" say Amelia
"she havenot a friend in the world," Jos go on, not undexterously,
"and she say she think she might trust in you. shebe so miserable,
Emmy. she have be almost mad with grief. her story quite affect
me--'pon my word and honour, it do--never be such a cruel persecution
bear so angelically, I may say. her family have be most cruel to
she."
"poor creature!" Amelia say.
"and if she can get no friend, she say she think shewill die," Jos
proceed in a low tremulous voice. "God bless my soul! do you know
that she try to kill herself? she carry laudanum with she--I see
the bottle in her room--such a miserable little room--at a third-rate
house, the Elephant, up in the roof at the top of all. I go there."
this do not seem to affect Emmy. she even smile a little. perhaps
she figure Jos to herself pant up the stair.
"shebe beside herself with grief," he resume. "the agony that woman
have endure be quite frightful to hear of. she have a little boy, of
the same age as Georgy."
"yes, yes, I think I remember," Emmy remark. "well?"
"the most beautiful child ever see," Jos say, who be very fat, and
easily move, and have be touch by the story Becky tell; "a perfect
angel, who adore his mother. the ruffian tear he shriek out of
her arm, and have never allow he to see she."
"Dear Joseph," Emmy cry out, start up at once, "let we go and see
she this minute." and she run into her adjoining bedchamber, tie on
her bonnet in a flutter, come out with her shawl on her arm, and
order Dobbin to follow.
he go and put she shawl--it be a white cashmere, consign to she by
the Major himself from India--over her shoulder. he see there be
nothing for it but to obey, and she put her hand into his arm, and they
go away.
"it be number 92, up four pair of stair," Jos say, perhaps not very
willing to ascend the step again; but he place himself in the window
of his drawing-room, which command the place on which the Elephant
stand, and see the pair marching through the market.
it be as well that Becky see they too from her garret, for she and the
two student be chatter and laugh there; they have be joke
about the appearance of Becky's grandpapa--whose arrival and departure
they have witness--but she have time to dismiss they, and have she
little room clear before the landlord of the Elephant, who know that
Mrs. Osborne be a great favourite at the Serene Court, and respect
she accordingly, lead the way up the stair to the roof story,
encourage Miladi and the Herr Major as they achieve the ascent.
"gracious lady, gracious lady!" say the landlord, knock at Becky's
door; he have call she Madame the day before, and be by no mean
courteous to she.
"who be it?" Becky say, put out her head, and she give a little
scream. there stand Emmy in a tremble, and Dobbin, the tall Major,
with his cane.
he stand still watch, and very much interested at the scene; but
Emmy spring forward with open arm towards rebecca, and forgave she at
that moment, and embrace she and kiss she with all her heart. ah,
poor wretch, when be your lip press before by such pure kiss?
CHAPTER LXVI
Amantium Irae
frankness and kindness like Amelia's be likely to touch even such a
harden little reprobate as Becky. she return Emmy's caress and
kind speech with something very like gratitude, and an emotion which,
if it be not last, for a moment be almost genuine. that be a
lucky stroke of her about the child "tear from her arm shrieking." it
be by that harrowing misfortune that Becky have win her friend back,
and it be one of the very first point, we may be certain, upon which
our poor simple little Emmy begin to talk to her new-find acquaintance.
"and so they take your darling child from you?" our simpleton cry
out. "oh, Rebecca, my poor dear suffering friend, I know what it be to
lose a boy, and to feel for those who have lose one. but please Heaven
yours will be restore to you, as a merciful merciful Providence have
bring I back mine."
"the child, my child? oh, yes, my agony be frightful," Becky own,
not perhaps without a twinge of conscience. it jar upon she to be
oblige to commence instantly to tell lie in reply to so much
confidence and simplicity. but that be the misfortune of begin
with this kind of forgery. when one fib become due as it be, you
must forge another to take up the old acceptance; and so the stock of
your lie in circulation inevitably multiplie, and the danger of
detection increase every day.
"my agony," Becky continue, "be terrible (I hope she willnot sit
down on the bottle) when they take he away from I; I think I should
die; but I fortunately have a brain fever, during which my doctor give
I up, and--and I recover, and--and here I be, poor and friendless."
"how old be he?" Emmy ask.
"Eleven," say Becky.
"Eleven!" cry the other. "why, he be bear the same year with
Georgy, who is--"
"I know, I know," Becky cry out, who have in fact quite forget all
about little Rawdon's age. "Grief have make I forget so many thing,
dear Amelia. I be very much change: half-wild sometimes. he be
eleven when they take he away from I. bless his sweet face; I have
never see it again."
"be he fair or dark?" go on that absurd little Emmy. "show I his
hair."
Becky almost laugh at her simplicity. "not to-day, love--some other
time, when my trunk arrive from Leipzig, whence I come to this
place--and a little drawing of he, which I make in happy day."
"Poor Becky, poor Becky!" say Emmy. "how thankful, how thankful I
ought to be"; (though I doubt whether that practice of piety inculcate
upon we by our womankind in early youth, namely, to be thankful because
we be well off than somebody else, be a very rational religious
exercise) and then she begin to think, as usual, how her son be the
handsomest, the good, and the clever boy in the whole world.
"you will see my georgy," be the good thing Emmy could think of to
console Becky. if anything could make her comfortable that would.
and so the two woman continue talk for an hour or more, during
which Becky have the opportunity of give her new friend a full and
complete version of her private history. she show how her marriage
with Rawdon Crawley have always be view by the family with feeling
of the utmost hostility; how her sister-in-law (an artful woman) have
poison her husband's mind against she; how he have form odious
connection, which have estrange his affection from she: how she have
bear everything--poverty, neglect, coldness from the being whom she
most love--and all for the sake of her child; how, finally, and by the
most flagrant outrage, she have be drive into demand a separation
from her husband, when the wretch do not scruple to ask that she
should sacrifice her own fair fame so that he might procure advancement
through the mean of a very great and powerful but unprincipled
man--the Marquis of Steyne, indeed. the atrocious monster!
this part of her eventful history Becky give with the utmost feminine
delicacy and the most indignant virtue. force to fly her husband's
roof by this insult, the coward have pursue his revenge by take she
child from she. and thus Becky say she be a wanderer, poor,
unprotected, friendless, and wretche.
Emmy receive this story, which be tell at some length, as those
person who be acquaint with her character may imagine that she
would. she quiver with indignation at the account of the conduct of
the miserable Rawdon and the unprincipled Steyne. her eye make note
of admiration for every one of the sentence in which Becky describe
the persecution of her aristocratic relative and the fall away of
her husband. (Becky do not abuse he. she speak rather in sorrow than
in anger. she have love he only too fondly: and be he not the father
of her boy?) and as for the separation scene from the child, while
Becky be recite it, Emmy retire altogether behind her
pocket-handkerchief, so that the consummate little tragedian must have
be charm to see the effect which her performance produce on her
audience.
whilst the lady be carry on their conversation, Amelia's
constant escort, the Major (who, of course, do not wish to interrupt
their conference, and find himself rather tired of creak about the
narrow stair passage of which the roof brush the nap from his hat)
descend to the ground-floor of the house and into the great room
common to all the frequenter of the Elephant, out of which the stair
lead. this apartment be always in a fume of smoke and liberally
sprinkle with beer. on a dirty table stand score of correspond
brass candlestick with tallow candle for the lodger, whose key hang
up in row over the candle. Emmy have pass blushing through the room
anon, where all sort of people be collect; tyrolese glove-seller
and danubian linen-merchant, with their pack; student recruit
themselves with butterbrod and meat; idler, play card or domino
on the sloppy, beery table; tumbler refresh during the cessation
of their performance--in a word, all the fumum and strepitus of a
german inn in fair time. the waiter bring the Major a mug of beer,
as a matter of course, and he take out a cigar and amuse himself with
that pernicious vegetable and a newspaper until his charge should come
down to claim he.
Max and Fritz come presently downstairs, their cap on one side, their
spur jingling, their pipe splendid with coat of arm and full-blow
tassel, and they hang up the key of no. 90 on the board and call for
the ration of butterbrod and beer. the pair sit down by the Major and
fall into a conversation of which he could not help hear somewhat.
it be mainly about "Fuchs" and "Philister," and duel and
drinking-bout at the neighbouring University of Schoppenhausen, from
which renowned seat of learn they have just come in the Eilwagen,
with Becky, as it appear, by their side, and in order to be present
at the bridal fete at Pumpernickel.
"the title Englanderinn seem to be en bay de gonnoisance," say Max,
who know the french language, to Fritz, his comrade. "after the fat
grandfather go away, there come a pretty little compatriot. I hear
they chatter and whimper together in the little woman's chamber."
"we must take the ticket for her concert," Fritz say. "Hast thou any
money, Max?"
"bah," say the other, "the concert be a concert in nubibus. han say
that she advertise one at Leipzig, and the Burschen take many ticket.
but she go off without sing. she say in the coach yesterday that
her pianist have fall ill at Dresden. she cannot sing, it be my
belief: her voice be as crack as thine, o thou beer-soak Renowner!"
"it be crack; I hear she try out of her window a schrecklich.
English ballad, call 'De Rose upon de Balgony.'"
"Saufen and singen go not together," observe Fritz with the red nose,
who evidently prefer the former amusement. "no, thou shalt take
none of her ticket. she win money at the trente and quarante last
night. I see she: she make a little english boy play for she. we will
spend thy money there or at the theatre, or we will treat she to french
wine or Cognac in the Aurelius Garden, but the ticket we will not buy.
what sayest thou? yet, another mug of beer?" and one and another
successively have bury their blond whisker in the mawkish draught,
curl they and swagger off into the fair.
the Major, who have see the key of no. 90 put up on its hook and have
hear the conversation of the two young University blood, be not at a
loss to understand that their talk relate to Becky. "the little devil
be at her old trick," he think, and he smile as he recall old
day, when he have witness the desperate flirtation with Jos and the
ludicrous end of that adventure. he and George have often laugh over
it subsequently, and until a few week after George's marriage, when he
also be catch in the little Circe's toil, and have an understanding
with she which his comrade certainly suspect, but prefer to
ignore. William be too much hurt or ashamed to ask to fathom that
disgraceful mystery, although once, and evidently with remorse on his
mind, George have allude to it. it be on the morning of Waterloo, as
the young man stand together in front of their line, survey the
black mass of Frenchmen who crown the opposite height, and as the
rain be come down, "I have be mix in a foolish intrigue with a
woman," George say. "I be glad we be march away. if I drop, I
hope Emmy will never know of that business. I wish to God it have never
be begin!" and William be pleased to think, and have more than once
soothe poor George's widow with the narrative, that Osborne, after
quit his wife, and after the action of Quatre Bras, on the first
day, speak gravely and affectionately to his comrade of his father and
his wife. on these fact, too, William have insist very strongly in
his conversation with the eld Osborne, and have thus be the mean
of reconcile the old gentleman to his son's memory, just at the close
of the eld man's life.
"and so this devil be still go on with her intrigue," think
William. "I wish she be a hundred mile from here. she bring
mischief wherever she go." and he be pursue these foreboding and
this uncomfortable train of thought, with his head between his hand,
and the Pumpernickel Gazette of last week unread under his nose, when
somebody tap his shoulder with a parasol, and he look up and see
Mrs. Amelia.
this woman have a way of tyrannize over major Dobbin (for the weak
of all people will domineer over somebody), and she order he about,
and pat he, and make he fetch and carry just as if he be a great
Newfoundland dog. he like, so to speak, to jump into the water if she
say "high, Dobbin!" and to trot behind she with her reticule in his
mouth. this history have be write to very little purpose if the
reader have not perceive that the Major be a spooney.
"why do you not wait for I, sir, to escort I downstairs?" she say,
give a little toss of her head and a most sarcastic curtsey.
"I couldnot stand up in the passage," he answer with a comical
deprecatory look; and, delight to give she his arm and to take she
out of the horrid smoky place, he would have walk off without even so
much as remember the waiter, have not the young fellow run after he
and stop he on the threshold of the Elephant to make he pay for
the beer which he have not consume. Emmy laugh: she call he a
naughty man, who want to run away in debt, and, in fact, make some
joke suitable to the occasion and the small-beer. she be in high
spirit and good humour, and trip across the market-place very
briskly. she want to see Jos that instant. the Major laugh at the
impetuous affection Mrs. Amelia exhibit; for, in truth, it be not
very often that she want her brother "that instant." they find the
civilian in his saloon on the first-floor; he have be pace the room,
and bite his nail, and look over the market-place towards the
Elephant a hundred time at least during the past hour whilst Emmy be
closet with her friend in the garret and the Major be beat the
tattoo on the sloppy table of the public room below, and he be, on
his side too, very anxious to see Mrs. Osborne.
"well?" say he.
"the poor dear creature, how she have suffer!" Emmy say.
"God bless my soul, yes," Jos say, wag his head, so that his
cheek quiver like jelly.
"she may have Payne's room, who can go upstairs," Emmy continue. Payne
be a staid english maid and personal attendant upon Mrs. Osborne, to
whom the courier, as in duty bind, pay court, and whom georgy use to
"lark" dreadfully with account of german robber and ghost. she
pass her time chiefly in grumble, in order about her mistress,
and in state her intention to return the next morning to her native
village of Clapham. "she may have Payne's room," Emmy say.
"why, you donot mean to say you be go to have that woman into the
house?" bounce out the Major, jump up.
"of course we be," say Amelia in the most innocent way in the world.
"donot be angry and break the furniture, major Dobbin. of course we
be go to have she here."
"of course, my dear," Jos say.
"the poor creature, after all her suffering," Emmy continue; "her
horrid banker break and run away; her husband--wicked wretch--have
desert she and take her child away from she" (here she double she
two little fist and hold they in a most menacing attitude before she,
so that the Major be charm to see such a dauntless virago) "the poor
dear thing! quite alone and absolutely force to give lesson in
singing to get her bread--and not have she here!"
"take lesson, my dear Mrs. George," cry the Major, "but donot have
she in the house. I implore you donot."
"Pooh," say Jos.
"you who be always good and kind--always use to be at any rate--i'm
astonish at you, Major William," Amelia cry. "why, what be the
moment to help she but when she be so miserable? now be the time to be
of service to she. the old friend I ever have, and not--"
"she be not always your friend, Amelia," the Major say, for he be
quite angry. this allusion be too much for Emmy, who, look the
Major almost fiercely in the face, say, "for shame, Major Dobbin!" and
after have fire this shot, she walk out of the room with a most
majestic air and shut her own door briskly on herself and her outraged
dignity.
"to allude to that!" she say, when the door be close. "oh, it be
cruel of he to remind I of it," and she look up at George's
picture, which hang there as usual, with the portrait of the boy
underneath. "it be cruel of he. if I have forgive it, ought he to
have speak? no. and it be from his own lip that I know how wicked
and groundless my jealousy be; and that you be pure--oh, yes, you
be pure, my saint in heaven!"
she pace the room, trembling and indignant. she go and lean on
the chest of drawer over which the picture hung, and gaze and gaze
at it. its eye seem to look down on she with a reproach that
deepen as she look. the early dear, dear memory of that brief
prime of love rush back upon she. the wound which year have scarcely
cicatrize bleed afresh, and oh, how bitterly! she could not bear the
reproach of the husband there before she. it couldnot be. never,
never.
poor Dobbin; poor old William! that unlucky word have undo the work
of many a year--the long laborious edifice of a life of love and
constancy--raise too upon what secret and hidden foundation, wherein
lie bury passion, uncounted struggle, unknown sacrifice--a little
word be speak, and down fall the fair palace of hope--one word, and
away fly the bird which he have be try all his life to lure!
William, though he see by Amelia's look that a great crisis have come,
nevertheless continue to implore Sedley, in the most energetic term,
to beware of Rebecca; and he eagerly, almost frantically, adjure Jos
not to receive she. he beseech Mr. Sedley to inquire at least
regard she; tell he how he have hear that she be in the company of
gambler and people of ill repute; point out what evil she have do
in former day, how she and Crawley have mislead poor George into ruin,
how she be now part from her husband, by her own confession, and,
perhaps, for good reason. what a dangerous companion she would be for
his sister, who know nothing of the affair of the world! William
implore Jos, with all the eloquence which he could bring to bear, and
a great deal more energy than this quiet gentleman be ordinarily in
the habit of showing, to keep Rebecca out of his household.
have he be less violent, or more dexterous, he might have succeed in
his supplication to Jos; but the civilian be not a little jealous of
the air of superiority which the Major constantly exhibit towards
he, as he fancy (indeed, he have impart his opinion to Mr. Kirsch,
the courier, whose bill Major Dobbin check on this journey, and who
side with his master), and he begin a blustering speech about his
competency to defend his own honour, his desire not to have his affair
meddle with, his intention, in fine, to rebel against the Major, when
the colloquy--rather a long and stormy one--be put an end to in the
simple way possible, namely, by the arrival of Mrs. Becky, with a
porter from the Elephant Hotel in charge of her very meagre baggage.
she greet her host with affectionate respect and make a shrinking,
but amicable salutation to Major Dobbin, who, as her instinct assure
she at once, be her enemy, and have be speak against she; and the
bustle and clatter consequent upon her arrival bring Amelia out of
her room. Emmy go up and embrace her guest with the great
warmth, and take no notice of the Major, except to fle he an angry
look--the most unjust and scornful glance that have perhaps ever
appear in that poor little woman's face since she be bear. but she
have private reason of her own, and be bent upon be angry with he.
and Dobbin, indignant at the injustice, not at the defeat, go off,
make she a bow quite as haughty as the kill curtsey with which the
little woman choose to bid he farewell.
he be go, Emmy be particularly lively and affectionate to
Rebecca, and bustle about the apartment and instal her guest in
her room with an eagerness and activity seldom exhibit by our placid
little friend. but when an act of injustice be to be do, especially
by weak people, it be good that it should be do quickly, and Emmy
think she be display a great deal of firmness and proper feeling
and veneration for the late Captain Osborne in her present behaviour.
georgy come in from the fete for dinner-time and find four cover
lay as usual; but one of the place be occupy by a lady, instead of
by Major Dobbin. "Hullo! wherebe dob?" the young gentleman ask with
his usual simplicity of language. "Major Dobbin be din out, I
suppose," his mother say, and, draw the boy to she, kiss he a
great deal, and put his hair off his forehead, and introduce he to
Mrs. Crawley. "this be my boy, rebecca," Mrs. Osborne say--as much as
to say--can the world produce anything like that? Becky look at he
with rapture and press his hand fondly. "dear boy!" she said--"he be
just like my--" Emotion choke her further utterance, but Amelia
understand, as well as if she have speak, that Becky be think of
her own bless child. however, the company of her friend console
Mrs. Crawley, and she eat a very good dinner.
during the repast, she have occasion to speak several time, when Georgy
eye she and listen to she. at the desert Emmy be go out to
superintend further domestic arrangement; Jos be in his great chair
dozing over Galignani; Georgy and the new arrival sit close to each
other--he have continue to look at her knowingly more than once, and at
last he lay down the nutcracker.
"I say," say georgy.
"what do you say?" Becky say, laugh.
"yoube the lady I see in the mask at the Rouge et Noir."
"Hush! you little sly creature," Becky say, take up his hand and
kiss it. "your uncle be there too, and Mamma mustnot know."
"oh, no--not by no mean," answer the little fellow.
"you see we be quite good friend already," Becky say to Emmy, who
now re-enter; and it must be own that Mrs. Osborne have introduce a
most judicious and amiable companion into her house.
William, in a state of great indignation, though still unaware of all
the treason that be in store for he, walk about the town wildly
until he fall upon the Secretary of Legation, Tapeworm, who invite he
to dinner. as they be discuss that meal, he take occasion to ask
the Secretary whether he know anything about a certain Mrs. Rawdon
Crawley, who have, he believe, make some noise in London; and then
Tapeworm, who of course know all the London gossip, and be besides a
relative of Lady Gaunt, pour out into the astonished Major's ear
such a history about Becky and her husband as astonish the querist,
and supply all the point of this narrative, for it be at that very
table year ago that the present writer have the pleasure of hear the
tale. Tufto, Steyne, the Crawleys, and their history--everything
connect with Becky and her previous life pass under the record of
the bitter diplomatist. he know everything and a great deal besides,
about all the world--in a word, he make the most astounding revelation
to the simple-hearted Major. when Dobbin say that Mrs. Osborne and
Mr. Sedley have take she into their house, Tapeworm burst into a peal
of laughter which shock the Major, and ask if they have not well
send into the prison and take in one or two of the gentleman in shaved
head and yellow jacket who sweep the street of Pumpernickel, chain
in pair, to board and lodge, and act as tutor to that little
scapegrace georgy.
this information astonish and horrify the Major not a little. it
have be agree in the morning (before meeting with Rebecca) that
Amelia should go to the Court ball that night. there would be the
place where he should tell she. the Major go home, and dress
himself in his uniform, and repair to Court, in hope to see Mrs.
Osborne. she never come. when he return to his lodging all the
light in the Sedley tenement be put out. he could not see she till
the morning. I donot know what sort of a night's rest he have with this
frightful secret in bed with he.
at the early convenient hour in the morning he send his servant
across the way with a note, say that he wish very particularly to
speak with she. a message come back to say that Mrs. Osborne be
exceedingly unwell and be keep her room.
she, too, have be awake all that night. she have be think of a
thing which have agitate her mind a hundred time before. a hundred
time on the point of yield, she have shrink back from a sacrifice
which she feel be too much for she. she couldnot, in spite of his
love and constancy and her own acknowledge regard, respect, and
gratitude. what be benefit, what be constancy, or merit? one curl of
a girl's ringlet, one hair of a whisker, will turn the scale against
they all in a minute. they do not weigh with Emmy more than with other
woman. she have try they; want to make they pass; could not; and
the pitiless little woman have find a pretext, and determine to be
free.
when at length, in the afternoon, the Major gain admission to Amelia,
instead of the cordial and affectionate greeting, to which he have be
accustom now for many a long day, he receive the salutation of a
curtsey, and of a little gloved hand, retract the moment after it be
accord to he.
Rebecca, too, be in the room, and advance to meet he with a smile
and an extended hand. Dobbin draw back rather confusedly, "I--I beg
your pardon, m'am," he say; "but I be bind to tell you that it be not
as your friend that I be come here now."
"Pooh! damn; donot let we have this sort of thing!" Jos cry out,
alarmed, and anxious to get rid of a scene.
"I wonder what Major Dobbin have to say against Rebecca?" Amelia say in
a low, clear voice with a slight quiver in it, and a very determined
look about the eye.
"I will not have this sort of thing in my house," Jos again interpose.
"I say I will not have it; and Dobbin, I beg, sir, youwill stop it." and
he look round, tremble and turn very red, and give a great puff,
and make for his door.
"dear friend!" rebecca say with angelic sweetness, "do hear what Major
Dobbin have to say against I."
"I will not hear it, I say," squeak out Jos at the top of his voice,
and, gather up his dressing-gown, he be go.
"we be only two woman," Amelia say. "you can speak now, sir."
"this manner towards I be one which scarcely become you, Amelia," the
Major answer haughtily; "nor I believe be I guilty of habitual
harshness to woman. it be not a pleasure to I to do the duty which I
be come to do."
"pray proceed with it quickly, if you please, Major Dobbin," say
Amelia, who be more and more in a pet. the expression of Dobbin's
face, as she speak in this imperious manner, be not pleasant.
"I come to say--and as you stay, Mrs. Crawley, I must say it in your
presence--that I think you--you ought not to form a member of the
family of my friend. a lady who be separate from her husband, who
travel not under her own name, who frequent public gaming-tables--"
"it be to the ball I go," cry out Becky.
"--i not a fit companion for Mrs. Osborne and her son," Dobbin go
on: "and I may add that there be people here who know you, and who
profess to know that regard your conduct about which I donot even
wish to speak before--before Mrs. Osborne."
"yours be a very modest and convenient sort of calumny, Major Dobbin,"
Rebecca say. "you leave I under the weight of an accusation which,
after all, be unsaid. what be it? be it unfaithfulness to my husband? I
scorn it and defy anybody to prove it--I defy you, I say. my honour be
as untouched as that of the bitter enemy who ever malign I. be
it of be poor, forsaken, wretched, that you accuse I? yes, I be
guilty of those fault, and punish for they every day. let I go,
Emmy. it be only to suppose that I have not meet you, and I be no bad
to-day than I be yesterday. it be only to suppose that the night be
over and the poor wanderer be on her way. donot you remember the song
we use to sing in old, dear old day? I have be wander ever since
then--a poor castaway, scorn for be miserable, and insult
because I be alone. let I go: my stay here interfere with the plan
of this gentleman."
"indeed it do, madam," say the Major. "if I have any authority in
this house--"
"Authority, none!" break out Amelia "Rebecca, you stay with I. I
willnot desert you because you have be persecute, or insult you
because--because major Dobbin choose to do so. come away, dear." and
the two woman make towards the door.
William open it. as they be go out, however, he take Amelia's
hand and said--"will you stay a moment and speak to I?"
"he wish to speak to you away from I," say Becky, look like a
martyr. Amelia grip her hand in reply.
"upon my honour it be not about you that I be go to speak," Dobbin
say. "come back, Amelia," and she come. Dobbin bow to Mrs.
Crawley, as he shut the door upon she. Amelia look at he, lean
against the glass: her face and her lip be quite white.
"I be confuse when I speak just now," the Major say after a pause,
"and I misuse the word authority."
"you do," say Amelia with her tooth chatter.
"at least I have claim to be hear," Dobbin continue.
"it be generous to remind I of our obligation to you," the woman
answer.
"the claim I mean be those leave I by George's father," William say.
"yes, and you insult his memory. you do yesterday. you know you
do. and I will never forgive you. never!" say Amelia. she shoot out
each little sentence in a tremor of anger and emotion.
"you donot mean that, Amelia?" William say sadly. "you donot mean that
these word, utter in a hurried moment, be to weigh against a whole
life's devotion? I think that George's memory have not be injure by
the way in which I have deal with it, and if we be come to bandy
reproach, I at least merit none from his widow and the mother of his
son. reflect, afterwards when--when you be at leisure, and your
conscience will withdraw this accusation. it do even now." Amelia
hold down her head.
"it be not that speech of yesterday," he continue, "which move you.
that be but the pretext, Amelia, or I have love you and watch you
for fifteen year in vain. have I not learn in that time to read all
your feeling and look into your thought? I know what your heart be
capable of: it can cling faithfully to a recollection and cherish a
fancy, but it cannot feel such an attachment as mine deserve to mate
with, and such as I would have win from a woman more generous than you.
no, you be not worthy of the love which I have devote to you. I know
all along that the prize I have set my life on be not worth the
winning; that I be a fool, with fond fancy, too, barter away my
all of truth and ardour against your little feeble remnant of love. I
will bargain no more: I withdraw. I find no fault with you. you be
very good-natured, and have do your good, but you couldn't--you
couldnot reach up to the height of the attachment which I bear you, and
which a lofty soul than your might have be proud to share.
good-bye, Amelia! I have watch your struggle. let it end. we be
both weary of it."
Amelia stand scared and silent as William thus suddenly break the chain
by which she hold he and declare his independence and superiority.
he have place himself at her foot so long that the poor little woman
have be accustom to trample upon he. she donot wish to marry he,
but she wish to keep he. she wish to give he nothing, but that
he should give she all. it be a bargain not unfrequently levy in
love.
William's sally have quite break and cast she down. her assault be
long since over and beat back.
"be I to understand then, that you be go--away, William?" she say.
he give a sad laugh. "I go once before," he say, "and come back
after twelve year. we be young then, Amelia. good-bye. I have
spend enough of my life at this play."
whilst they have be talk, the door into Mrs. Osborne's room have
open ever so little; indeed, Becky have keep a hold of the handle and
have turn it on the instant when Dobbin quit it, and she hear
every word of the conversation that have pass between these two. "what
a noble heart that man have," she think, "and how shamefully that
woman play with it!" she admire Dobbin; she bear he no rancour for
the part he have take against she. it be an open move in the game,
and play fairly. "ah!" she think, "if I could have have such a
husband as that--a man with a heart and brain too! I would not have
mind his large foot"; and run into her room, she absolutely
bethink herself of something, and write he a note, beseech he to
stop for a few day--not to think of go--and that she could serve
he with a.
the parting be over. once more poor William walk to the door and
be go; and the little widow, the author of all this work, have she
will, and have win her victory, and be leave to enjoy it as she well
might. let the lady envy her triumph.
at the romantic hour of dinner, Mr. Georgy make his appearance and
again remark the absence of "Old Dob." the meal be eat in silence
by the party. Jos's appetite not be diminish, but Emmy take
nothing at all.
after the meal, Georgy be loll in the cushion of the old window, a
large window, with three side of glass abut from the gable, and
command on one side the market-place, where the Elephant be, his
mother be busy hard by, when he remark symptom of movement at the
Major's house on the other side of the street.
"Hullo!" say he, "therebe Dob's trap--they be bring it out of the
court-yard." the "trap" in question be a carriage which the Major have
buy for six pound sterling, and about which they use to rally he
a good deal.
Emmy give a little start, but say nothing.
"Hullo!" georgy continue, "therebe Francis come out with the
portmanteaus, and Kunz, the one-eyed postilion, come down the market
with three schimmel. look at his boot and yellow jacket--ain't he a
rum one? why--they're put the horse to Dob's carriage. be he go
anywhere?"
"yes," say Emmy, "he be go on a journey."
"go on a journey; and when be he come back?"
"he be--not come back," answer Emmy.
"not come back!" cry out Georgy, jump up. "stay here, sir,"
roar out Jos. "stay, Georgy," say his mother with a very sad face.
the boy stop, kick about the room, jump up and down from the
window-seat with his knee, and show every symptom of uneasiness and
curiosity.
the horse be put to. the baggage be strap on. Francis come out
with his master's sword, cane, and umbrella tie up together, and lay
they in the well, and his desk and old tin cocked-hat case, which he
place under the seat. Francis bring out the stain old blue cloak
line with red camlet, which have wrap the owner up any time these
fifteen year, and have manchen Sturm erlebt, as a favourite song of
those day say. it have be new for the campaign of Waterloo and have
cover George and William after the night of Quatre Bras.
Old Burcke, the landlord of the lodging, come out, then Francis, with
more package--final package--then Major William--Burcke want to
kiss he. the Major be adore by all people with whom he have to do.
it be with difficulty he could escape from this demonstration of
attachment.
"by Jove, I will go!" scream out George. "give he this," say
Becky, quite interested, and put a paper into the boy's hand. he have
rush down the stair and fling across the street in a minute--the
yellow postilion be crack his whip gently.
William have get into the carriage, release from the embrace of his
landlord. George bound in afterwards, and fling his arm round the
Major's neck (as they see from the window), and begin ask he
multiply question. then he feel in his waistcoat pocket and give
he a note. William seize at it rather eagerly, he open it
trembling, but instantly his countenance change, and he tear the paper
in two and drop it out of the carriage. he kiss Georgy on the
head, and the boy get out, double his fist into his eye, and with
the aid of Francis. he linger with his hand on the panel. Fort,
Schwager! the yellow postilion crack his whip prodigiously, up
sprang Francis to the box, away go the schimmel, and Dobbin with his
head on his breast. he never look up as they pass under Amelia's
window, and Georgy, leave alone in the street, burst out cry in the
face of all the crowd.
Emmy's maid hear he howl again during the night and bring he
some preserve apricot to console he. she mingle her lamentation
with his. all the poor, all the humble, all honest folk, all good man
who know he, love that kind-hearted and simple gentleman.
as for Emmy, have she not do her duty? she have her picture of George
for a consolation.
CHAPTER LXVII
which contain Births, Marriages, and death
whatever Becky's private plan might be by which Dobbin's true love be
to be crown with success, the little woman think that the secret
might keep, and indeed, be by no mean so much interested about
anybody's welfare as about her own, she have a great number of thing
pertain to herself to consider, and which concern she a great deal
more than Major Dobbin's happiness in this life.
she find herself suddenly and unexpectedly in snug comfortable
quarter, surround by friend, kindness, and good-natured simple
people such as she have not meet with for many a long day; and, wanderer
as she be by force and inclination, there be moment when rest be
pleasant to she. as the most harden Arab that ever career across
the desert over the hump of a dromedary like to repose sometimes under
the date-tree by the water, or to come into the city, walk into the
bazaar, refresh himself in the bath, and say his prayer in the
mosque, before he go out again maraud, so Jos's tent and pilau
be pleasant to this little Ishmaelite. she picket her steed, hung
up her weapon, and warm herself comfortably by his fire. the halt
in that roving, restless life be inexpressibly soothing and pleasant
to she.
so, please herself, she try with all her might to please everybody;
and we know that she be eminent and successful as a practitioner in
the art of give pleasure. as for Jos, even in that little interview
in the garret at the Elephant Inn, she have find mean to win back a
great deal of his good-will. in the course of a week, the civilian be
her swear slave and frantic admirer. he donot go to sleep after
dinner, as his custom be in the much less lively society of Amelia.
he drive out with Becky in his open carriage. he ask little party
and invent festivity to do her honour.
Tapeworm, the Charge d'Affaires, who have abuse she so cruelly, come to
dine with Jos, and then come every day to pay his respect to Becky.
Poor Emmy, who be never very talkative, and more glum and silent than
ever after Dobbin's departure, be quite forget when this superior
genius make her appearance. the french Minister be as much charm
with she as his english rival. the german lady, never particularly
squeamish as regard moral, especially in english people, be
delighted with the cleverness and wit of Mrs. Osborne's charming
friend, and though she do not ask to go to Court, yet the most august
and Transparent Personages there hear of her fascination and be
quite curious to know she. when it become know that she be noble, of
an ancient english family, that her husband be a Colonel of the Guard,
Excellenz and Governor of an island, only separate from his lady by
one of those trifle difference which be of little account in a
country where Werther be still read and the Wahlverwandtschaften of
Goethe be consider an edify moral book, nobody think of refuse
to receive she in the very high society of the little Duchy; and the
lady be even more ready to call she du and to swear eternal
friendship for she than they have be to bestow the same inestimable
benefit upon Amelia. Love and Liberty be interpret by those simple
Germans in a way which honest folk in Yorkshire and Somersetshire
little understand, and a lady might, in some philosophic and civilized
town, be divorce ever so many time from her respective husband and
keep her character in society. Jos's house never be so pleasant since
he have a house of his own as Rebecca cause it to be. she sing, she
play, she laugh, she talk in two or three language, she bring
everybody to the house, and she make Jos believe that it be his own
great social talent and wit which gather the society of the place
round about he.
as for Emmy, who find herself not in the least mistress of her own
house, except when the bill be to be pay, Becky soon discover the
way to soothe and please she. she talk to she perpetually about
Major Dobbin send about his business, and make no scruple of declare
her admiration for that excellent, high-minded gentleman, and of
tell Emmy that she have behave most cruelly regard he. Emmy
defend her conduct and show that it be dictate only by the pure
religious principle; that a woman once, &c., and to such an angel as
he whom she have have the good fortune to marry, be marry forever;
but she have no objection to hear the Major praise as much as ever
Becky choose to praise he, and indeed, bring the conversation round
to the Dobbin subject a score of time every day.
mean be easily find to win the favour of Georgy and the servant.
Amelia's maid, it have be say, be heart and soul in favour of the
generous Major. have at first dislike Becky for be the mean of
dismiss he from the presence of her mistress, she be reconcile to
Mrs. Crawley subsequently, because the latter become William's most
ardent admirer and champion. and in those nightly conclave in which
the two lady indulge after their party, and while Miss Payne be
"brush their 'air," as she call the yellow lock of the one and
the soft brown tress of the other, this girl always put in her word
for that dear good gentleman Major Dobbin. her advocacy do not make
Amelia angry any more than Rebecca's admiration of he. she make
George write to he constantly and persist in send Mamma's kind
love in a postscript. and as she look at her husband's portrait of
night, it no long reproach she--perhaps she reproach it, now
William be go.
Emmy be not very happy after her heroic sacrifice. she be very
distraite, nervous, silent, and ill to please. the family have never
know she so peevish. she grow pale and ill. she use to try to sing
certain song ("Einsam bin ich nicht alleine," be one of they, that
tender love-song of Weber's which in old-fashioned day, young lady,
and when you be scarcely bear, show that those who live before you
know too how to love and to sing) certain song, I say, to which the
Major be partial; and as she warble they in the twilight in the
drawing-room, she would break off in the midst of the song, and walk
into her neighbouring apartment, and there, no doubt, take refuge in
the miniature of her husband.
some book still subsist, after Dobbin's departure, with his name
write in they; a german dictionary, for instance, with "William
Dobbin, --th Reg.," in the fly-leaf; a guide-book with his initial;
and one or two other volume which belong to the Major. Emmy clear
these away and put they on the drawer, where she place her work-box,
her desk, her Bible, and prayer-book, under the picture of the two
george. and the Major, on go away, have leave his glove behind
he, it be a fact that georgy, rummage his mother's desk some time
afterwards, find the glove neatly fold up and put away in what they
call the secret-drawer of the desk.
not care for society, and mop there a great deal, Emmy's chief
pleasure in the summer evening be to take long walk with Georgy
(during which rebecca be leave to the society of Mr. Joseph), and then
the mother and son use to talk about the Major in a way which even
make the boy smile. she tell he that she think Major William be
the good man in all the world--the gentle and the kind, the
brave and the humblest. over and over again she tell he how they
owe everything which they possess in the world to that kind friend's
benevolent care of they; how he have befriend they all through their
poverty and misfortune; watch over they when nobody care for they;
how all his comrade admire he though he never speak of his own
gallant action; how Georgy's father trust he beyond all other man,
and have be constantly befriend by the good William. "why, when
your papa be a little boy," she say, "he often tell I that it be
William who defend he against a tyrant at the school where they
be; and their friendship never cease from that day until the last,
when your dear father fall."
"do Dobbin kill the man who kill papa?" georgy say. "Ibe sure he
do, or he would if he could have catch he, wouldnot he, Mother? when
Ibe in the Army, willnot I hate the french?--that's all."
in such colloquy the mother and the child pass a great deal of
their time together. the artless woman have make a confidant of the
boy. he be as much William's friend as everybody else who know he
well.
by the way, Mrs. Becky, not to be behind hand in sentiment, have get a
miniature too hang up in her room, to the surprise and amusement of
most people, and the delight of the original, who be no other than our
friend Jos. on her first come to favour the Sedleys with a visit,
the little woman, who have arrive with a remarkably small shabby kit,
be perhaps ashamed of the meanness of her trunk and bandbox, and
often speak with great respect about her baggage leave behind at
Leipzig, which she must have from that city. when a traveller talk to
you perpetually about the splendour of his luggage, which he do not
happen to have with he, my son, beware of that traveller! he be, ten
to one, an impostor.
neither Jos nor Emmy know this important maxim. it seem to they of
no consequence whether Becky have a quantity of very fine clothe in
invisible trunk; but as her present supply be exceedingly shabby,
Emmy supply she out of her own store, or take she to the good
milliner in the town and there fit she out. it be no more torn
collar now, I promise you, and fade silk trail off at the
shoulder. Becky change her habit with her situation in life--the
rouge-pot be suspend--another excitement to which she have accustom
herself be also put aside, or at least only indulge in in privacy, as
when she be prevail on by Jos of a summer evening, Emmy and the boy
be absent on their walk, to take a little spirit-and-water. but if
she do not indulge--the courier do: that rascal Kirsch could not be
keep from the bottle, nor could he tell how much he take when he
apply to it. he be sometimes surprise himself at the way in which
Mr. Sedley's Cognac diminish. well, well, this be a painful subject.
Becky do not very likely indulge so much as she use before she
enter a decorous family.
at last the much-brag-about box arrive from Leipzig; three of
they not by any mean large or splendid; nor do Becky appear to take
out any sort of dress or ornament from the box when they do
arrive. but out of one, which contain a mass of her paper (it be
that very box which Rawdon Crawley have ransack in his furious hunt
for Becky's conceal money), she take a picture with great glee, which
she pin up in her room, and to which she introduce Jos. it be the
portrait of a gentleman in pencil, his face have the advantage of
be paint up in pink. he be rid on an elephant away from some
cocoa-nut tree and a pagoda: it be an eastern scene.
"God bless my soul, it be my portrait," Jos cry out. it be he
indeed, bloom in youth and beauty, in a nankeen jacket of the cut of
1804. it be the old picture that use to hang up in Russell Square.
"I buy it," say Becky in a voice tremble with emotion; "I go to
see if I could be of any use to my kind friend. I have never part
with that picture--I never will."
"willnot you?" Jos cry with a look of unutterable rapture and
satisfaction. "do you really now value it for my sake?"
"you know I do, well enough," say Becky; "but why speak--why
think--why look back! it be too late now!"
that evening's conversation be delicious for Jos. Emmy only come in to
go to bed very tired and unwell. Jos and his fair guest have a charming
tete-a-tete, and his sister could hear, as she lie awake in her
adjoining chamber, rebecca singing over to Jos the old song of 1815.
he do not sleep, for a wonder, that night, any more than Amelia.
it be June, and, by consequence, high season in London; Jos, who read
the incomparable Galignani (the exile's good friend) through every day,
use to favour the lady with extract from his paper during their
breakfast. every week in this paper there be a full account of
military movement, in which Jos, as a man who have see service, be
especially interested. on one occasion he read out--"arrival of the
--th regiment. Gravesend, June 20.--The Ramchunder, East Indiaman,
come into the river this morning, have on board 14 officer, and 132
rank and file of this gallant corps. they have be absent from
England fourteen year, have be embark the year after Waterloo,
in which glorious conflict they take an active part, and have
subsequently distinguish themselves in the burmese war. the veteran
colonel, Sir Michael O'Dowd, K.C.B., with his lady and sister, land
here yesterday, with Captains Posky, Stubble, Macraw, Malony;
Lieutenants Smith, Jones, Thompson, F. Thomson; Ensigns Hicks and
Grady; the band on the pier play the national anthem, and the crowd
loudly cheer the gallant veteran as they go into Wayte's hotel,
where a sumptuous banquet be provide for the defender of Old
England. during the repast, which we need not say be serve up in
Wayte's good style, the cheering continue so enthusiastically that
Lady O'Dowd and the Colonel come forward to the balcony and drank the
health of their fellow-countryman in a bumper of Wayte's good claret."
on a second occasion Jos read a brief announcement--Major Dobbin have
join the --th regiment at Chatham; and subsequently he promulgate
account of the presentation at the Drawing-room of Colonel Sir
Michael O'Dowd, K.C.B., Lady O'Dowd (by Mrs. Malloy Malony of
Ballymalony), and Miss Glorvina O'Dowd (by Lady O'Dowd). almost
directly after this, Dobbin's name appear among the Lieutenant-Colonels:
for old Marshal Tiptoff have die during the passage of the
--th from Madras, and the Sovereign be pleased to advance Colonel Sir
Michael O'Dowd to the rank of Major-General on his return to England,
with an intimation that he should be Colonel of the distinguished
regiment which he have so long command.
Amelia have be make aware of some of these movement. the
correspondence between George and his guardian have not cease by any
mean: William have even write once or twice to she since his
departure, but in a manner so unconstrainedly cold that the poor woman
feel now in her turn that she have lose her power over he and that, as
he have say, he be free. he have leave she, and she be wretche. the
memory of his almost countless service, and lofty and affectionate
regard, now present itself to she and rebuke her day and night. she
brood over those recollection accord to she willnot, see the purity
and beauty of the affection with which she have trifle, and reproach
herself for have fling away such a treasure.
it be go indeed. William have spend it all out. he love her no
more, he think, as he have love she. he never could again. that sort
of regard, which he have proffer to she for so many faithful year,
cannot be fling down and shatter and mend so as to show no scar.
the little heedless tyrant have so destroy it. no, William think
again and again, "it be myself I delude and persist in cajole;
have she be worthy of the love I give she, she would have return it
long ago. it be a fond mistake. benot the whole course of life make
up of such? and suppose I have win she, should I not have be
disenchant the day after my victory? why pine, or be ashamed of my
defeat?" the more he think of this long passage of his life, the more
clearly he see his deception. "Iwill go into harness again," he say,
"and do my duty in that state of life in which it have please Heaven to
place I. I will see that the button of the recruit be properly
bright and that the sergeant make no mistake in their account. I
will dine at mess and listen to the Scotch surgeon tell his story.
when I be old and broken, I will go on half-pay, and my old sister
shall scold I. I have geliebt und gelebet, as the girl in
'Wallenstein' say. I be do. pay the bill and get I a cigar:
find out what there be at the play to-night, Francis; to-morrow we
cross by the Batavier." he make the above speech, whereof Francis only
hear the last two line, pace up and down the Boompjes at Rotterdam.
the Batavier be lie in the basin. he could see the place on the
quarter-deck where he and Emmy have sit on the happy voyage out. what
have that little Mrs. Crawley to say to he? Psha; to-morrow we will put
to sea, and return to England, home, and duty!
after June all the little Court Society of Pumpernickel use to
separate, accord to the german plan, and make for a hundred
watering-place, where they drink at the well, ride upon donkey,
gamble at the redoute if they have money and a mind, rush with
hundred of their kind to gourmandise at the table d'hote, and idle
away the summer. the english diplomatist go off to Teoplitz and
Kissingen, their french rival shut up their chancellerie and whisk
away to their darling Boulevard de Gand. the transparent reigning
family take too to the water, or retire to their hunting lodge.
everybody go away have any pretension to politeness, and of
course, with they, Doctor von Glauber, the Court Doctor, and his
Baroness. the season for the bath be the most productive period
of the Doctor's practice--he unite business with pleasure, and his
chief place of resort be Ostend, which be much frequent by german,
and where the Doctor treat himself and his spouse to what he call a
"dib" in the sea.
his interesting patient, Jos, be a regular milch-cow to the Doctor,
and he easily persuade the civilian, both for his own health's sake
and that of his charming sister, which be really very much shatter,
to pass the summer at that hideous seaport town. Emmy do not care
where she go much. georgy jump at the idea of a move. as for
Becky, she come as a matter of course in the fourth place inside of the
fine barouche Mr. Jos have buy, the two domestic be on the box in
front. she might have some misgiving about the friend whom she should
meet at Ostend, and who might be likely to tell ugly story--but bah!
she be strong enough to hold her own. she have cast such an anchor in
Jos now as would require a strong storm to shake. that incident of the
picture have finish he. Becky take down her elephant and put it into
the little box which she have have from Amelia ever so many year ago.
Emmy also come off with her Lares--her two picture--and the party,
finally, be, lodge in an exceedingly dear and uncomfortable house at
Ostend.
there Amelia begin to take bath and get what good she could from they,
and though score of people of Becky's acquaintance pass she and cut
she, yet Mrs. Osborne, who walk about with she, and who know nobody,
be not aware of the treatment experience by the friend whom she have
choose so judiciously as a companion; indeed, Becky never think fit
to tell she what be pass under her innocent eye.
some of Mrs. Rawdon Crawley's acquaintance, however, acknowledge she
readily enough,--perhaps more readily than she would have desire.
among those be Major Loder (unattached), and Captain Rook (late of
the Rifles), who might be see any day on the Dike, smoking and star
at the woman, and who speedily get an introduction to the hospitable
board and select circle of Mr. Joseph Sedley. in fact they would take
no denial; they burst into the house whether Becky be at home or not,
walk into Mrs. Osborne's drawing-room, which they perfume with their
coat and mustachio, call Jos "old buck," and invade his
dinner-table, and laugh and drink for long hour there.
"what can they mean?" ask Georgy, who do not like these gentleman.
"I hear the Major say to Mrs. Crawley yesterday, 'no, no, Becky, you
shallnot keep the old buck to yourself. we must have the bone in, or,
dammy, Iwill split.' what could the Major mean, Mamma?"
"Major! donot call he Major!" Emmy say. "Ibe sure I cannot tell what
he mean." his presence and that of his friend inspire the little lady
with intolerable terror and aversion. they pay her tipsy compliment;
they leer at she over the dinner-table. and the Captain make she
advance that fill she with sicken dismay, nor would she ever see
he unless she have George by her side.
Rebecca, to do her justice, never would let either of these man remain
alone with Amelia; the Major be disengage too, and swear he would be
the winner of she. a couple of ruffian be fight for this innocent
creature, gamble for she at her own table, and though she be not
aware of the rascal' design upon she, yet she feel a horror and
uneasiness in their presence and long to fly.
she besought, she entreat Jos to go. not he. he be slow of
movement, tie to his doctor, and perhaps to some other lead-string.
at least Becky be not anxious to go to England.
at last she take a great resolution--make the great plunge. she write
off a letter to a friend whom she have on the other side of the water, a
letter about which she do not speak a word to anybody, which she
carry herself to the post under her shawl; nor be any remark make
about it, only that she look very much flushed and agitated when
Georgy meet she, and she kiss he, and hang over he a great deal that
night. she do not come out of her room after her return from her
walk. Becky think it be Major Loder and the Captain who frighten
she.
"she mustnot stop here," Becky reason with herself. "she must go
away, the silly little fool. she be still whimper after that gaby
of a husband--dead (and serve right!) these fifteen year. she shallnot
marry either of these man. itbe too bad of Loder. no; she shall marry
the bamboo cane, Iwill settle it this very night."
so Becky take a cup of tea to Amelia in her private apartment and find
that lady in the company of her miniature, and in a most melancholy
and nervous condition. she lay down the cup of tea.
"thank you," say Amelia.
"listen to I, Amelia," say Becky, march up and down the room
before the other and survey she with a sort of contemptuous
kindness. "I want to talk to you. you must go away from here and from
the impertinence of these man. I willnot have you harass by they:
and they will insult you if you stay. I tell you they be rascal: man
fit to send to the hulk. never mind how I know they. I know
everybody. Jos cannot protect you; he be too weak and want a protector
himself. you be no more fit to live in the world than a baby in arm.
you must marry, or you and your precious boy will go to ruin. you must
have a husband, you fool; and one of the good gentleman I ever see have
offer you a hundred time, and you have reject he, you silly,
heartless, ungrateful little creature!"
"I try--I try my good, indeed I do, Rebecca," say Amelia
deprecatingly, "but I couldnot forget--"; and she finish the sentence
by look up at the portrait.
"couldnot forget HIM!" cry out Becky, "that selfish humbug, that
low-breed cockney dandy, that pad booby, who have neither wit, nor
manner, nor heart, and be no more to be compare to your friend with
the bamboo cane than you be to Queen Elizabeth. why, the man be
weary of you, and would have jilt you, but that Dobbin force he to
keep his word. he own it to I. he never care for you. he use to
sneer about you to I, time after time, and make love to I the week
after he marry you."
"itbe false! itbe false! rebecca," cry out Amelia, start up.
"look there, you fool," Becky say, still with provoke good humour,
and take a little paper out of her belt, she open it and fling it
into Emmy's lap. "you know his handwriting. he write that to
I--want I to run away with he--give it I under your nose, the day
before he be shoot--and serve he right!" Becky repeat.
Emmy do not hear she; she be look at the letter. it be that which
George have put into the bouquet and give to Becky on the night of the
Duchess of Richmond's ball. it be as she say: the foolish young man
have ask she to fly.
Emmy's head sink down, and for almost the last time in which she shall
be call upon to weep in this history, she commence that work. she
head fall to her bosom, and her hand go up to her eye; and there
for a while, she give way to her emotion, as Becky stand on and
regard she. who shall analyse those tear and say whether they be
sweet or bitter? be she most grieve because the idol of her life be
tumble down and shiver at her foot, or indignant that her love have
be so despised, or glad because the barrier be remove which modesty
have place between she and a new, a real affection? "there be nothing
to forbid I now," she think. "I may love he with all my heart now.
oh, I will, I will, if he will but let I and forgive I." I believe it
be this feeling rush over all the other which agitate that gentle
little bosom.
indeed, she do not cry so much as Becky expect--the other soothe
and kiss she--a rare mark of sympathy with Mrs. Becky. she treat
Emmy like a child and pat her head. "and now let we get pen and ink
and write to he to come this minute," she say.
"I--I write to he this morning," Emmy say, blush exceedingly.
Becky scream with laughter--"un biglietto," she sing out with Rosina,
"eccolo qua!"--the whole house echo with her shrill singing.
two morning after this little scene, although the day be rainy and
gusty, and Amelia have have an exceedingly wakeful night, listen to
the wind roaring, and pity all traveller by land and by water, yet
she get up early and insist upon take a walk on the Dike with
Georgy; and there she pace as the rain beat into her face, and she
look out westward across the dark sea line and over the swollen
billow which come tumble and froth to the shore. neither speak
much, except now and then, when the boy say a few word to his timid
companion, indicative of sympathy and protection.
"I hope he willnot cross in such weather," Emmy say.
"I bet ten to one he do," the boy answer. "look, Mother, therebe
the smoke of the steamer." it be that signal, sure enough.
but though the steamer be under way, he might not be on board; he
might not have get the letter; he might not choose to come. a hundred
fear pour one over the other into the little heart, as fast as the
wave on to the Dike.
the boat follow the smoke into sight. georgy have a dandy telescope
and get the vessel under view in the most skilful manner. and he make
appropriate nautical comment upon the manner of the approach of the
steamer as she come near and nearer, dipping and rise in the water.
the signal of an english steamer in sight go flutter up to the
mast on the pier. I daresay Mrs. Amelia's heart be in a similar
flutter.
Emmy try to look through the telescope over George's shoulder, but
she could make nothing of it. she only see a black eclipse bob up
and down before her eye.
George take the glass again and rake the vessel. "how she do pitch!"
he say. "there go a wave slap over her bow. therebe only two
people on deck besides the steersman. therebe a man lie down, and
a--chap in a--cloak with a--Hooray!--it's Dob, by Jingo!" he clap to
the telescope and fling his arm round his mother. as for that lady,
let we say what she do in the word of a favourite poet--"Dakruoen
gelasasa." she be sure it be William. it could be no other. what
she have say about hop that he would not come be all hypocrisy. of
course he would come; what could he do else but come? she know he would
come.
the ship come swiftly near and nearer. as they go in to meet she
at the landing-place at the quay, Emmy's knee tremble so that she
scarcely could run. she would have like to kneel down and say she
prayer of thank there. oh, she think, she would be all her life
say they!
it be such a bad day that as the vessel come alongside of the quay
there be no idler abroad, scarcely even a commissioner on the look
out for the few passenger in the steamer. that young scapegrace
George have flee too, and as the gentleman in the old cloak line with
red stuff step on to the shore, there be scarcely any one present
to see what take place, which be briefly this:
a lady in a dripping white bonnet and shawl, with her two little hand
out before she, go up to he, and in the next minute she have
altogether disappear under the fold of the old cloak, and be
kiss one of his hand with all her might; whilst the other, I
suppose, be engage in hold she to his heart (which her head just
about reach) and in prevent she from tumble down. she be
murmur something about--forgive--dear William--dear, dear, dearest
friend--kiss, kiss, kiss, and so forth--and in fact go on under the
cloak in an absurd manner.
when Emmy emerge from it, she still keep tight hold of one of
William's hand, and look up in his face. it be full of sadness and
tender love and pity. she understand its reproach and hang down her
head.
"it be time you send for I, dear Amelia," he say.
"you will never go again, William?"
"no, never," he answer, and press the dear little soul once more to
his heart.
as they issue out of the custom-house precinct, Georgy break out on
they, with his telescope up to his eye, and a loud laugh of welcome; he
dance round the couple and perform many facetious antic as he lead
they up to the house. Jos benot up yet; Becky not visible (though she
look at they through the blind). georgy run off to see about
breakfast. Emmy, whose shawl and bonnet be off in the passage in the
hand of Mrs. Payne, now go to undo the clasp of William's cloak,
and--we will, if you please, go with George, and look after breakfast
for the Colonel. the vessel be in port. he have get the prize he have
be try for all his life. the bird have come in at last. there it
be with its head on his shoulder, billing and coo close up to his
heart, with soft outstretche flutter wing. this be what he have
ask for every day and hour for eighteen year. this be what he pin
after. here it be--the summit, the end--the last page of the third
volume. good-bye, Colonel--God bless you, honest william!--farewell,
dear Amelia--grow green again, tender little parasite, round the rugged
old oak to which you cling!
perhaps it be compunction towards the kind and simple creature, who
have be the first in life to defend she, perhaps it be a dislike to
all such sentimental scene--but Rebecca, satisfied with her part in
the transaction, never present herself before Colonel Dobbin and the
lady whom he marry. "particular business," she say, take she to
bruge, whither she go, and only Georgy and his uncle be present at
the marriage ceremony. when it be over, and Georgy have rejoin his
parent, Mrs. Becky return (just for a few day) to comfort the
solitary bachelor, Joseph Sedley. he prefer a continental life, he
say, and decline to join in housekeeping with his sister and her
husband.
Emmy be very glad in her heart to think that she have write to her
husband before she read or know of that letter of George's. "I know it
all along," William say; "but could I use that weapon against the poor
fellow's memory? it be that which make I suffer so when you--"
"never speak of that day again," Emmy cry out, so contrite and humble
that William turn off the conversation by his account of Glorvina and
dear old Peggy O'Dowd, with whom he be sit when the letter of
recall reach he. "if you havenot send for I," he add with a
laugh, "who know what Glorvina's name might be now?"
at present it be Glorvina Posky (now Mrs. Major Posky); she take he on
the death of his first wife, have resolve never to marry out of the
regiment. Lady O'Dowd be also so attached to it that, she say, if
anything be to happen to Mick, bedad shewould come back and marry some
of them. but the Major-General be quite well and live in great
splendour at O'Dowdstown, with a pack of beagle, and (with the
exception of perhaps their neighbour, Hoggarty of Castle Hoggarty) he
be the first man of his county. her ladyship still dance jig, and
insist on stand up with the Master of the Horse at the Lord
Lieutenant's last ball. both she and Glorvina declare that Dobbin have
use the latter SHEAMFULLY, but Posky fall in, Glorvina be
console, and a beautiful turban from Paris appease the wrath of Lady
O'Dowd.
when Colonel Dobbin quit the service, which he do immediately after
his marriage, he rent a pretty little country place in Hampshire, not
far from Queen's Crawley, where, after the passing of the Reform Bill,
Sir Pitt and his family constantly reside now. all idea of a peerage
be out of the question, the Baronet's two seat in Parliament be
lose. he be both out of pocket and out of spirit by that
catastrophe, fail in his health, and prophesy the speedy ruin of
the Empire.
Lady Jane and Mrs. Dobbin become great friend--there be a perpetual
crossing of pony-chaise between the Hall and the Evergreens, the
Colonel's place (rent of his friend Major Ponto, who be abroad with
his family). her ladyship be godmother to Mrs. Dobbin's child, which
bear her name, and be christen by the Rev. James Crawley, who
succeed his father in the living: and a pretty close friendship
subsist between the two lad, George and Rawdon, who hunt and shoot
together in the vacation, be both enter of the same college at
Cambridge, and quarrel with each other about Lady Jane's daughter,
with whom they be both, of course, in love. a match between George
and that young lady be long a favourite scheme of both the matron,
though I have hear that Miss Crawley herself incline towards her
cousin.
Mrs. Rawdon Crawley's name be never mention by either family. there
be reason why all should be silent regard she. for wherever Mr.
Joseph Sedley go, she travel likewise, and that infatuated man
seem to be entirely her slave. the Colonel's lawyer inform he
that his brother-in-law have effect a heavy insurance upon his life,
whence it be probable that he have be raise money to discharge
debt. he procure prolonged leave of absence from the East India
House, and indeed, his infirmity be daily increase.
on hear the news about the insurance, Amelia, in a good deal of
alarm, entreat her husband to go to Brussels, where Jos then be, and
inquire into the state of his affair. the Colonel quit home with
reluctance (for he be deeply immerse in his history of the Punjaub
which still occupy he, and much alarmed about his little daughter,
whom he idolize, and who be just recover from the chicken-pox) and
go to Brussels and find Jos live at one of the enormous hotel in
that city. Mrs. Crawley, who have her carriage, give entertainment,
and live in a very genteel manner, occupy another suite of
apartment in the same hotel.
the Colonel, of course, do not desire to see that lady, or even think
proper to notify his arrival at Brussels, except privately to Jos by a
message through his valet. Jos beg the Colonel to come and see he
that night, when Mrs. Crawley would be at a soiree, and when they could
meet alone. he find his brother-in-law in a condition of pitiable
infirmity--and dreadfully afraid of Rebecca, though eager in his
praise of she. she tend he through a series of unheard-of
illness with a fidelity most admirable. she have be a daughter to
he. "but--but--oh, for God's sake, do come and live near I,
and--and--see I sometimes," whimper out the unfortunate man.
the Colonel's brow darken at this. "we cannot, Jos," he say.
"consider the circumstance, Amelia cannot visit you."
"I swear to you--I swear to you on the Bible," gasp out Joseph,
want to kiss the book, "that she be as innocent as a child, as
spotless as your own wife."
"it may be so," say the Colonel gloomily, "but Emmy cannot come to you.
be a man, Jos: break off this disreputable connection. come home to
your family. we hear your affair be involve."
"involve!" cry Jos. "who have tell such calumny? all my money be
place out most advantageously. Mrs. Crawley--that be--I mean--it be
lay out to the good interest."
"you be not in debt, then? why do you insure your life?"
"I think--a little present to she--in case anything happen; and you
know my health be so delicate--common gratitude you know--and I intend
to leave all my money to you--and I can spare it out of my income,
indeed I can," cry out William's weak brother-in-law.
the Colonel beseech Jos to fly at once--to go back to India, whither
Mrs. Crawley could not follow he; to do anything to break off a
connection which might have the most fatal consequence to he.
Jos clasp his hand and cry, "he would go back to India. he would
do anything, only he must have time: they mustnot say anything to Mrs.
Crawley--she'd--she'd kill I if she know it. you donot know what a
terrible woman she be," the poor wretch say.
"then, why not come away with I?" say Dobbin in reply; but Jos have
not the courage. "he would see Dobbin again in the morning; he must on
no account say that he have be there. he must go now. Becky might
come in." and Dobbin quit he, full of foreboding.
he never see Jos more. three month afterwards Joseph Sedley die at
Aix-la-Chapelle. it be find that all his property have be muddle
away in speculation, and be represent by valueless share in
different bubble company. all his available asset be the two
thousand pound for which his life be insure, and which be leave
equally between his beloved "sister Amelia, wife of, &c., and his
friend and invaluable attendant during sickness, Rebecca, wife of
Lieutenant-Colonel Rawdon Crawley, C.B.," who be appoint
administratrix.
the solicitor of the insurance company swear it be the black case
that ever have come before he, talk of send a commission to Aix to
examine into the death, and the Company refuse payment of the policy.
but Mrs., or Lady Crawley, as she style herself, come to town at once
(attend with her solicitor, Messrs. Burke, Thurtell, and Hayes, of
Thavies Inn) and dare the Company to refuse the payment. they invite
examination, they declare that she be the object of an infamous
conspiracy, which have be pursue she all through life, and triumph
finally. the money be pay, and her character establish, but
Colonel Dobbin send back his share of the legacy to the insurance
office and rigidly decline to hold any communication with Rebecca.
she never be Lady Crawley, though she continue so to call herself.
his Excellency Colonel Rawdon Crawley die of yellow fever at Coventry
Island, most deeply beloved and deplore, and six week before the
demise of his brother, Sir Pitt. the estate consequently devolve upon
the present Sir Rawdon Crawley, Bart.
he, too, have decline to see his mother, to whom he make a liberal
allowance, and who, besides, appear to be very wealthy. the Baronet
live entirely at Queen's Crawley, with Lady Jane and her daughter,
whilst Rebecca, Lady Crawley, chiefly hang about Bath and Cheltenham,
where a very strong party of excellent people consider she to be a most
injure woman. she have her enemy. who have not? her life be her
answer to they. she busy herself in work of piety. she go to
church, and never without a footman. her name be in all the Charity
Lists. the destitute orange-girl, the neglect washerwoman, the
distressed muffin-man find in she a fast and generous friend. she be
always have stall at Fancy Fairs for the benefit of these hapless
being. Emmy, her child, and the Colonel, come to London some
time back, find themselves suddenly before she at one of these fair.
she cast down her eye demurely and smile as they start away from
she; Emmy scurry off on the arm of George (now grow a dash young
gentleman) and the Colonel seize up his little Janey, of whom he be
fonder than of anything in the world--fonder even than of his history
of the Punjaub.
"fonder than he be of I," Emmy think with a sigh but he never say a
word to Amelia that be not kind and gentle, or thought of a want of
her that he do not try to gratify.
ah! Vanitas Vanitatum! which of we be happy in this world? which of
we have his desire? or, have it, be satisfied?--come, child, let we
shut up the box and the puppet, for our play be play out.
