 William Makepeace Thackeray
the history of PENDENNIS
CHAPTER I
show how First Love may interrupt Breakfast
one fine morning in the full London season, Major Arthur Pendennis come over from his lodging, accord to his custom, to breakfast at a certain Club in Pall Mall, of which he be a chief ornament. as he be one of the fine judge of wine in England, and a man of active, dominating, and inquire spirit, he have be very properly choose to be a member of the Committee of this Club, and indeed be almost the manager of the institution; and the steward and waiter bow before he as reverentially as to a Duke or a Field-Marshal.
at a quarter past ten the Major invariably make his appearance in the good black boot in all London, with a check morning cravat that never be rumple until dinner time, a buff waistcoat which bear the crown of his sovereign on the button, and linen so spotless that Mr. Brummel himself ask the name of his laundress, and would probably have employ she have not misfortune compel that great man to fly the country. Pendennis's coat, his white glove, his whisker, his very cane, be perfect of their kind as specimen of the costume of a military man en retraite. at a distance, or see his back merely, you would have take he to be not more than thirty year old: it be only by a nearer inspection that you see the factitious nature of his rich brown hair, and that there be a few crow'-foot round about the somewhat fade eye of his handsome mottled face. his nose be of the Wellington pattern. his hand and wristband be beautifully long and white. on the latter he wear handsome gold button give to he by his Royal Highness the Duke of York, and on the other more than one elegant ring, the chief and large of they be emblazon with the famous arm of Pendennis.
he always take possession of the same table in the same corner of the room, from which nobody ever now think of oust he. one or two mad wag and wild fellow have in former day, and in freak or bravado, endeavour twice or thrice to deprive he of this place; but there be a quiet dignity in the Major's manner as he take his seat at the next table, and survey the interloper, which render it impossible for any man to sit and breakfast under his eye; and that table--by the fire, and yet near the window--become his own. his letter be lay out there in expectation of his arrival, and many be the young fellow about town who look with wonder at the number of those note, and at the seal and frank which they bore. if there be any question about etiquette, society, who be married to whom, of what age such and such a duke be, Pendennis be the man to whom every one appeal. marchioness use to drive up to the Club, and leave note for he, or fetch he out. he be perfectly affable. the young man like to walk with he in the Park or down Pall Mall; for he touch his hat to everybody, and every other man he meet be a lord.
the Major sate down at his accustomed table then, and while the waiter go to bring he his toast and his hot newspaper, he survey his letter through his gold double eye-glass. he carry it so gaily, you would hardly have know it be spectacle in disguise, and examine one pretty note after another, and lay they by in order. there be large solemn dinner card, suggestive of three course and heavy conversation; there be neat little confidential note, convey female entreaty; there be a note on thick official paper from the Marquis of Steyne, tell he to come to Richmond to a little party at the Star and Garter, and speak French, which language the Major possess very perfectly; and another from the Bishop of Ealing and Mrs. Trail, request the honour of Major Pendennis's company at Ealing House, all of which letter Pendennis read gracefully, and with the more satisfaction, because Glowry, the Scotch surgeon, breakfast opposite to he, be look on, and hat he for have so many invitation, which nobody ever send to Glowry.
these peruse, the Major take out his pocket-book to see on what day he be disengage, and which of these many hospitable call he could afford to accept or decline.
he throw over Cutler, the East India Director, in Baker Street, in order to dine with Lord Steyne and the little french party at the Star and Garter--the Bishop he accept, because, though the dinner be slow, he like to dine with bishop--and so go through his list and dispose of they accord to his fancy or interest. then he take his breakfast and look over the paper, the gazette, the birth and death, and the fashionable intelligence, to see that his name be down among the guest at my Lord so-and-sobe fete, and in the interval of these occupation carry on cheerful conversation with his acquaintance about the room.
among the letter which form Major Pendennis's budget for that morning there be only one unread, and which lie solitary and apart from all the fashionable London letter, with a country postmark and a homely seal. the superscription be in a pretty delicate female hand, and though mark 'Immediate' by the fair writer, with a strong dash of anxiety under the word, yet the Major have, for reason of his own, neglect up to the present moment his humble rural petitioner, who to be sure could hardly hope to get a hearing among so many grand folk who attend his levee. the fact be, this be a letter from a female relative of Pendennis, and while the grandee of her brother's acquaintance be receive and get their interview, and drive off, as it be, the patient country letter remain for a long time wait for an audience in the ante-chamber under the slop-bason.
at last it come to be this letter's turn, and the Major break a seal with 'Fairoaks' engrave upon it, and 'Clavering St. Mary's' for a postmark. it be a double letter, and the Major commence peruse the envelope before he attack the inner epistle.
"be it a letter from another Jook," growl Mr. Glowry, inwardly, "Pendennis would not be leave that to the last, Ibe think."
"my dear Major Pendennis," the letter run, "I beg and implore you to come to I immediately "--very likely, think Pendennis, and Steyne's dinner to-day--"i be in the very great grief and perplexity. my dear boy, who have be hitherto everything the fond mother could wish, be grieve I dreadfully. he have form--I can hardly write it--a passion, an infatuation,"--the Major grinned--"for an actress who have be perform here. she be at least twelve year old than Arthur--who will not be eighteen till next February--and the wretched boy insist upon marry she."
"Hay! whatbe make Pendennis swear now?"--mr. Glowry ask of himself, for rage and wonder be concentrate in the Major's open mouth, as he read this astounding announcement.
"do, my dear friend," the grief-stricken lady go on, "come to I instantly on the receipt of this; and, as Arthur's guardian, entreat, command, the wretched child to give up this most deplorable resolution." and, after more entreaty to the above effect, the writer conclude by sign herself the Major's 'unhappy affectionate sister, Helen Pendennis.'
"Fairoaks, tuesday"--the Major conclude, read the last word of the letter--"A d---d pretty business at Fairoaks, Tuesday; now let we see what the boy have to say;" and he take the other letter, which be write in a great floundering boy's hand, and seal with the large signet of the Pendennises, even large than the Major's own, and with supplementary wax sputter all round the seal, in token of the writer's tremulousness and agitation.
the epistle run thus:
"Fairoaks, Monday, Midnight.
"my dear Uncle,--In inform you of my engagement with Miss Costigan, daughter of J. Chesterfield Costigan, Esq., of Costiganstown, but, perhaps, well know to you under her professional name of Miss Fotheringay, of the Theatres Royal Drury Lane and Crow Street, and of the Norwich and Welsh Circuit, I be aware that I make an announcement which cannot, accord to the present prejudice of society at least, be welcome to my family. my dear mother, on whom, God know, I would wish to inflict no needless pain, be deeply move and grieve, I be sorry to say, by the intelligence which I have this night convey to she. I beseech you, my dear Sir, to come down and reason with she and console she. although oblige by poverty to earn an honourable maintenance by the exercise of her splendid talent, Miss Costigan's family be as ancient and noble as our own. when our ancestor, Ralph Pendennis, land with Richard II. in Ireland, my Emily's forefather be king of that country. I have the information from Mr. Costigan, who, like yourself, be a military man.
"it be in vain I have attempt to argue with my dear mother, and prove to she that a young lady of irreproachable character and lineage, endow with the most splendid gift of beauty and genius, who devote herself to the exercise of one of the noble profession, for the sacred purpose of maintain her family, be a be whom we should all love and reverence, rather than avoid;--my poor mother have prejudice which it be impossible for my logic to overcome, and refuse to welcome to her arm one who be disposed to be her most affectionate daughter through life.
"although Miss Costigan be some year old than myself, that circumstance do not operate as a barrier to my affection, and I be sure will not influence its duration. a love like mine, Sir, I feel, be contract once and for ever. as I never have dream of love until I see she--I feel now that I shall die without ever know another passion. it be the fate of my life. it be Miss C.'s own delicacy which suggest that the difference of age, which I never feel, might operate as a bar to our union. but have love once, I should despise myself, and be unworthy of my name as a gentleman, if I hesitate to abide by my passion: if I do not give all where I feel all, and endow the woman who love I fondly with my whole heart and my whole fortune.
"I press for a speedy marriage with my Emily--for why, in truth, should it be delay? a delay imply a doubt, which I cast from I as unworthy. it be impossible that my sentiment can change towards Emily--that at any age she can be anything but the sole object of my love. why, then, wait? I entreat you, my dear Uncle, to come down and reconcile my dear mother to our union, and I address you as a man of the world, qui more hominum multorum vidit et urbe, who will not feel any of the weak scruple and fear which agitate a lady who have scarcely ever leave her village.
"pray, come down to we immediately. I be quite confident that--apart from consideration of fortune--you will admire and approve of my emily.--your affectionate Nephew, Arthur Pendennis, Jr."
when the Major have conclude the perusal of this letter, his countenance assume an expression of such rage and horror that Glowry, the surgeon-official, feel in his pocket for his lancet, which he always carry in his card-case, and think his respected friend be go into a fit. the intelligence be indeed sufficient to agitate Pendennis. the head of the Pendennises go to marry an actress ten year his senior,-- a headstrong boy go to plunge into matrimony. "the mother have spoil the young rascal," groan the Major inwardly, "with her cursed sentimentality and romantic rubbish. my nephew marry a tragedy queen! gracious mercy, people will laugh at I so that I shall not dare show my head!" and he think with an inexpressible pang that he must give up Lord Steyne's dinner at Richmond, and must lose his rest and pass the night in an abominable tight mail-coach, instead of take pleasure, as he have promise himself, in some of the most agreeable and select society in England.
and he must not only give up this but all other engagement for some time to come. who know how long the business might detain he. he quit his breakfast table for the adjoining writing-room, and there ruefully write off refusal to the Marquis, the Earl, the Bishop, and all his entertainer; and he order his servant to take place in the mail-coach for that evening, of course charge the sum which he disburse for the seat to the account of the widow and the young scapegrace of whom he be guardian.
CHAPTER II
A Pedigree and other Family matter
early in the Regency of George the Magnificent, there live in a small town in the west of England, call Clavering, a gentleman whose name be Pendennis. there be those alive who remember have see his name paint on a board, which be surmount by a gilt pestle and mortar over the door of a very humble little shop in the city of Bath, where Mr. Pendennis exercise the profession of apothecary and surgeon; and where he not only attend gentleman in their sick-room, and lady at the most interesting period of their life, but would condescend to sell a brown-paper plaster to a farmer's wife across the counter,--or to vend tooth-brush, hair-powder, and London perfumery. for these fact a few folk at Clavering could vouch, where people's memory be more tenacious, perhaps, than they be in a great bustling metropolis.
and yet that little apothecary who sell a stray customer a pennyworth of salt, or a more fragrant cake of Windsor soap, be a gentleman of good education, and of as old a family as any in the whole county of Somerset. he have a Cornish pedigree which carry the Pendennises up to the time of the Druids, and who know how much far back? they have intermarry with the Normans at a very late period of their family existence, and they be relate to all the great family of Wales and Brittany. Pendennis have have a piece of University education too, and might have pursue that career with great honour, but that in his second year at Cambridge his father die insolvent, and poor Pen be oblige to betake himself to the pestle and apron. he always detest the trade, and it be only necessity, and the offer of his mother's brother, a London apothecary of low family, into which Pendennis's father have demean himself by marry, that force John Pendennis into so odious a calling.
he quickly after his apprenticeship part from the coarse-minded practitioner his relative, and set up for himself at Bath with his modest medical ensign. he have for some time a hard struggle with poverty; and it be all he could do to keep the shop and its gilt ornament in decent repair, and his bed-ride mother in comfort: but Lady Ribstone happen to be pass to the Rooms with an intoxicated irish chairman who bump her ladyship up against Pen's very door-post, and drive his chair-pole through the handsome pink bottle in the surgeon's window, alight scream from her vehicle, and be accommodate with a chair in Mr. Pendennis's shop, where she be bring round with cinnamon and sal-volatile.
Mr. Pendennis's manner be so uncommonly gentlemanlike and soothing, that her ladyship, the wife of Sir Pepin Ribstone, of Codlingbury, in the county of Somerset, Bart., appoint her preserver, as she call he, apothecary to her person and family, which be very large. Master Ribstone come home for the Christmas holiday from Eton, over-eat himself and have a fever, in which Mr. Pendennis treat he with the great skill and tenderness. in a word, he get the good grace of the Codlingbury family, and from that day begin to prosper. the good company of Bath patronise he, and amongst the lady especially he be beloved and admire. first his humble little shop become a smart one: then he discard the selling of tooth-brush and perfumery, as unworthy of a gentleman of an ancient lineage: then he shut up the shop altogether, and only have a little surgery attend by a genteel young man: then he have a gig with a man to drive he; and, before her exit from this world, his poor old mother have the happiness of see from her bedroom window to which her chair be roll, her beloved John step into a close carriage of his own, a one-horse carriage it be true, but with the arm of the family of Pendennis handsomely emblazon on the panel. "what would Arthur say now?" she ask, speak of a young son of hers--"who never so much as once come to see my dearest Johnny through all the time of his poverty and struggle!"
"Captain Pendennis be with his regiment in India, mother," Mr. Pendennis remark, "and, if you please, I wish you would not call I Johnny before the young man--before Mr. Parkins."
presently the day come when she cease to call her son by the name of Johnny, or by any other title of endearment or affection; and his house be very lonely without that kind though querulous voice. he have his night-bell alter and place in the room in which the good old lady have grumble for many a long year, and he sleep in the great large bed there. he be upwards of forty year old when these event befell; before the war be over; before George the Magnificent come to the throne; before this history indeed: but what be a gentleman without his pedigree? Pendennis, by this time, have his handsomely frame and glaze, and hang up in his drawing-room between the picture of Codlingbury House in Somersetshire, and St. Boniface's College, Cambridge, where he have pass the brief and happy day of his early manhood. as for the pedigree he have take it out of a trunk, as Sterne's officer call for his sword, now that he be a gentleman and could show it.
about the time of Mrs. Pendennis's demise, another of her son's patient likewise die at Bath; that virtuous woman, old Lady Pontypool, daughter of Reginald twelfth Earl of Bareacres, and by consequence great-grand-aunt to the present Earl, and widow of John second Lord Pontypool, and likewise of the Reverend Jonas Wales, of the Armageddon Chapel, Clifton. for the last five year of her life her ladyship have be attend by Miss Helen Thistlewood, a very distant relative of the noble house of Bareacres, before mention, and daughter of Lieutenant R. Thistlewood, R.N., kill at the battle of Copenhagen. under Lady Pontypool's roof Miss Thistlewood find a comfortable shelter, as far as boarding and lodging go, but suffer under such an infernal tyranny as only woman can inflict on, or bear from, one another: the Doctor, who pay his visit to my Lady Pontypool at least twice a day, could not but remark the angelical sweetness and kindness with which the young lady bear her elderly relative's insult; and it be, as they be go in the fourth mourning coach to attend her ladyship's venerate remain to Bath Abbey, where they now repose, that he look at her sweet pale face and resolve upon put a certain question to she, the very nature of which make his pulse beat ninety, at least.
he be old than she by more than twenty year, and at no time the most ardent of man. perhaps he have have a love affair in early life which he have to strangle--perhaps all early love affair ought to be strangle or drown, like so many blind kitten: well, at three-and-forty he be a collect quiet little gentleman in black stocking with a bald head, and a few day after the ceremony he call to see she, and, as he feel her pulse, he keep hold of her hand in his, and ask she where she be go to live now that the Pontypool family have come down upon the property, which be be nail into box, and pack into hamper, and swaddle up with hayband, and bury in straw, and lock under three key in green baize plate-chest, and cart away under the eye of poor Miss Helen,--he ask she where she be go to live finally.
her eye fill with tear, and she say she do not know. she have a little money. the old lady have leave she a thousand pound, indeed; and she would go into a boarding-house or into a school: in fine, she do not know where.
then Pendennis, look into her pale face, and keep hold of her cold little hand, ask she if she would come and live with he? he be old compare to--to so bloom a young lady as Miss Thistlewood (Pendennis be of the grave old complimentary school of gentleman and apothecary), but he be of good birth, and, he flatter himself, of good principle and temper. his prospect be good, and daily mending. he be alone in the world, and have need of a kind and constant companion, whom it would be the study of his life to make happy; in a word, he recite to she a little speech, which he have compose that morning in bed, and rehearse and perfect in his carriage, as he be come to wait upon the young lady.
perhaps if he have have an early love-passage, she too have one day hop for a different lot than to be wed to a little gentleman who rap his tooth and smile artificially, who be laboriously polite to the butler as he slide upstairs into the drawing-room, and profusely civil to the lady's-maid, who wait at the bed-room door; for whom her old patroness use to ring as for a servant, and who come with even more eagerness; who get up story, as he send in draught, for his patient's amusement and his own profit: perhaps she would have choose a different man--but she know, on the other hand, how worthy Pendennis be, how prudent, how honourable; how good he have be to his mother, and constant in his care of she; and the upshot of this interview be, that she, blush very much, make Pendennis an extremely low curtsey, and ask leave to--to consider his very kind proposal.
they be marry in the dull Bath season, which be the height of the season in London. and Pendennis have previously, through a professional friend, M.R.C.S., secured lodging in Holles Street, Cavendish Square, take his wife thither in a chaise and pair; conduct she to the theatre, the Parks, and the Chapel Royal; show she the folk go to a drawing-room, and, in a word, give she all the pleasure of the town. he likewise leave card upon Lord Pontypool, upon the Right Honourable the Earl of Bareacres, and upon Sir Pepin and Lady Ribstone, his early and kind patron. bareacre take no notice of the card. Pontypool call, admire Mrs. Pendennis, and say Lady Pontypool would come and see she, which her ladyship do, per proxy of John her footman, who bring her card, and an invitation to a concert five week off. Pendennis be back in his little one-horse carriage, dispense draught and pill at that time: but the Ribstones ask he and Mrs. Pendennis to an entertainment, of which Mr. Pendennis brag to the last day of his life.
the secret ambition of Mr. Pendennis have always be to be a gentleman. it take much time and careful saving for a provincial doctor, whose gain be not very large, to lay by enough money wherewith to purchase a house and land: but besides our friend's own frugality and prudence, fortune aid he considerably in his endeavour, and bring he to the point which he so panted to attain. he lay out some money very advantageously in the purchase of a house and small estate close upon the village of Clavering before mention. word cannot describe, nor do he himself ever care to confess to any one, his pride when he find himself a real land proprietor, and could walk over acre of which he be the master. a lucky purchase which he have make of share in a copper-mine add very considerably to his wealth, and he realise with great prudence while this mine be still at its full vogue. finally, he sell his business at Bath, to Mr. Parkins, for a handsome sum of ready money, and for an annuity to be pay to he during a certain number of year after he have for ever retire from the handling of the mortar and pestle.
Arthur Pendennis, his son, be eight year old at the time of this event, so that it be no wonder that the latter, who leave Bath and the surgery so young, should forget the existence of such a place almost entirely, and that his father's hand have ever be dirty by the compounding of odious pill, or the preparation of filthy plaster. the old man never speak about the shop himself, never allude to it; call in the medical practitioner of Clavering to attend his family when occasion arrive; sink the black breech and stocking altogether; attend market and session, and wear a bottle-green coat and brass button with drab gaiter, just as if he have be an english gentleman all his life. he use to stand at his lodge-gate, and see the coach come in, and bow gravely to the guard and coachman as they touch their hat and drive by. it be he who found the Clavering Book Club: and set up the Samaritan Soup and Blanket Society. it be he who bring the mail, which use to run through Cacklefield before, away from that village and through Clavering. at church he be equally active as a vestryman and a worshipper. at market every Thursday, he go from pen to stall, look at sample of oat, and munch corn, feel beast, punch geese in the breast, and weigh they with a knowing air, and do business with the farmer at the Clavering Arms, as well as the old frequenter of that house of call. it be now his shame, as it formerly be his pride, to be call Doctor, and those who wish to please he always give he the title of Squire.
Heaven know where they come from, but a whole range of Pendennis portrait presently hang round the Doctor's oak dining-room; Lelys and Vandykes he vow all the portrait to be, and when question as to the history of the original, would vaguely say they be 'ancestor of his.' you could see by his wife's look that she disbelieve in these genealogical legend, for she generally endeavour to turn the conversation when he commence they. but his little boy believe they to their full extent, and Roger Pendennis of Agincourt, Arthur Pendennis of Crecy, General Pendennis of Blenheim and Oudenarde, be as real and actual being for this young gentleman as--whom shall we say?--as Robinson Crusoe, or Peter Wilkins, or the Seven Champions of Christendom, whose history be in his library.
Pendennis's fortune, which, at the good, be not above eight hundred pound a year, do not, with the good economy and management, permit of his live with the great folk of the county; but he have a decent comfortable society of the second-good sort. if they be not the rose, they live near the rose, as it be, and have a good deal of the odour of genteel life. they have out their plate, and din each other round in the moonlight night twice a year, come a dozen mile to these festival; and besides the county, the Pendennises have the society of the town of Clavering, as much as, nay, more than they like: for Mrs. Pybus be always poke about Helen's conservatory, and intercept the operation of her soup-ticket and coal-club Captain Glanders (H. P., 50th Dragoon Guards) be for ever swagger about the Squire's stable and garden, and endeavour to enlist he in his quarrel with the Vicar, with the Postmaster, with the Reverend F. Wapshot of Clavering Grammar School, for overflogge his son, Anglesea Glanders,--with all the village in fine. and Pendennis and his wife often bless themselves, that their house of Fairoaks be nearly a mile out of Clavering, or their premise would never have be free from the pry eye and prattle of one or other of the male and female inhabitant there.
fairoak lawn come down to the little river Brawl, and on the other side be the plantation and wood (as much as be leave of they) of Clavering Park, Sir Francis Clavering, Bart. the park be let out in pasture and feed down by sheep and cattle, when the Pendennises come first to live at Fairoaks. shutter be up in the house; a splendid freestone palace, with great stair, statue, and portico, whereof you may see a picture in the 'Beauties of England and Wales.' Sir Richard Clavering, Sir Francis's-grandfather, have commence the ruin of the family by the building of this palace: his successor have achieve the ruin by live in it. the present Sir Francis be abroad somewhere; nor could anybody be find rich enough to rent that enormous mansion, through the deserted room, mouldy clank hall, and dismal gallery of which, Arthur Pendennis many a time walk tremble when he be a boy. at sunset, from the lawn of Fairoaks, there be a pretty sight: it and the opposite park of Clavering be in the habit of put on a rich golden tinge, which become they both wonderfully. the upper window of the great house flame so as to make your eye wink; the little river run off noisily westward, and be lose in a sombre wood, behind which the tower of the old abbey church of Clavering (whereby that town be call Clavering St. Mary's to the present day) rise up in purple splendour. Little Arthur's figure and his mother's, cast long blue shadow over the grass; and he would repeat in a low voice (for a scene of great natural beauty always move the boy, who inherit this sensibility from his mother) certain line begin, "these be thy glorious work, Parent of Good; Almighty! thine this universal frame," greatly to Mrs. Pendennis's delight. such walk and conversation generally end in a profusion of filial and maternal embrace; for to love and to pray be the main occupation of this dear woman's life; and I have often hear Pendennis say in his wild way, that he feel that he be sure of go to heaven, for his mother never could be happy there without he.
as for John Pendennis, as the father of the family, and that sort of thing, everybody have the great respect for he: and his order be obey like those of the Medes and Persians. his hat be as well brush, perhaps, as that of any man in this empire. his meal be serve at the same minute every day, and woe to those who come late, as little Pen, a disorderly little rascal, sometimes do. prayer be recite, his letter be read, his business dispatch, his stable and garden inspect, his hen-house and kennel, his barn and pigstye visit, always at regular hour. after dinner he always have a nap with the Globe newspaper on his knee, and his yellow bandanna handkerchief on his face (Major Pendennis send the yellow handkerchief from India, and his brother have help in the purchase of his majority, so that they be good friend now). and so, as his dinner take place at six o'clock to a minute, and the sunset business allude to may be suppose to have occur at about half-past seven, it be probable that he do not much care for the view in front of his lawn window or take any share in the poetry and caress which be take place there.
they seldom occur in his presence. however frisky they be before, mother and child be hush and quiet when Mr. Pendennis walk into the drawing-room, his newspaper under his arm. and here, while little Pen, bury in a great chair, read all the book of which he could lay hold, the Squire peruse his own article in the 'Gardener's Gazette,' or take a solemn hand at picquet with Mrs. Pendennis, or an occasional friend from the village.
Pendennis usually take care that at least one of his grand dinner should take place when his brother, the Major, who, on the return of his regiment from India and New South Wales, have sell out and go upon half-pay, come to pay his biennial visit to Fairoaks. "my brother, Major Pendennis," be a constant theme of the retired doctor's conversation. all the family delight in my brother the Major. he be the link which bind they to the great world of London, and the fashion. he always bring down the last news of the nobility, and be in the constant habit of dining with lord and great folk. he speak of such with soldierlike respect and decorum. he would say, "my Lord Bareacres have be good enough to invite I to Bareacres for the pheasant shooting," or, "my Lord Steyne be so kind as to wish for my presence at Stillbrook for the Easter holiday;" and you may be sure the whereabouts of my brother the Major be carefully make known by worthy Mr. Pendennis to his friend at the Clavering Reading room, at Justice-meeting, or at the County-town. their carriage would come from ten mile round to call upon Major Pendennis in his visit to Fairoaks; the fame of his fashion as a man about town be establish throughout the county. there be a talk of his marry Miss Hunkle, of Lilybank, old Hunkle the Attorney's daughter, with at least fifteen hundred a-year to her fortune: but my brother the Major refuse this negotiation, advantageous as it might seem to most person. "as a bachelor," he say, "nobody care how poor I be. I have the happiness to live with people who be so highly place in the world, that a few hundred or thousand a year more or less can make no difference in the estimation in which they be pleased to hold I. Miss Hunkle, though a most respectable lady, be not in possession of either the birth or the manner, which would entitle she to be receive into the sphere in which I have the honour to move. I shall live and die an old bachelor, John: and your worthy friend, Miss Hunkle, I have no doubt, will find some more worthy object of her affection, than a wear-out old soldier on half-pay." Time show the correctness of the surmise of the old man of the world; Miss Hunkle marry a young french nobleman, and be now at this moment live at Lilybank, under the title of Baroness de Carambole, have be separate from her wild young scapegrace of a Baron very shortly after their union.
the Major be a great favourite with almost all the little establishment of Fairoaks. he be as good-natured as he be well breed, and have a sincere liking and regard for his sister-in-law, whom he pronounce, and with perfect truth, to be as fine a lady as any in England, and an honour to the family. indeed, Mrs. Pendennis's tranquil beauty, her natural sweetness and kindness, and that simplicity and dignity which a perfect purity and innocence be sure to bestow upon a handsome woman, render she quite worthy of her brother's praise. I think it be not national prejudice which make I believe that a high-breed english lady be the most complete of all Heaven's subject in this world. in whom else do you see so much grace, and so much virtue; so much faith, and so much tenderness; with such a perfect refinement and chastity? and by high-breed lady I donot mean duchess and countess. be they ever so high in station, they can be but lady, and no more. but almost every man who live in the world have the happiness, let we hope, of count a few such person amongst his circle of acquaintance--woman, in whose angelical nature, there be something awful, as well as beautiful, to contemplate; at whose foot the wild and fiercest of we must fall down and humble ourselves;--in admiration of that adorable purity which never seem to do or to think wrong.
Arthur Pendennis have the good fortune to have a mother endow with these happy quality. during his childhood and youth, the boy think of she as little less than an angel,--as a supernatural being, all wisdom, love, and beauty. when her husband drive she into the county town, or to the assize ball or concert there, he would step into the assembly with his wife on his arm, and look the great folk in the face, as much as to say, "look at that, my lord; can any of you show I a woman like that?" she enrage some country lady with three time her money, by a sort of desperate perfection which they find in she. Miss Pybus say she be cold and haughty; Miss Pierce, that she be too proud for her station; Mrs. Wapshot, as a doctor of divinity's lady, would have the pas of she, who be only the wife of a medical practitioner. in the meanwhile, this lady move through the world quite regardless of all the comment that be make in her praise or disfavour. she do not seem to know that she be admire or hat for be so perfect: but carry on calmly through life, say her prayer, love her family, help her neighbour, and do her duty.
that even a woman should be faultless, however, be an arrangement not permit by nature, which assign to we mental defect, as it award to us headache, illness, or death; without which the scheme of the world could not be carry on,--nay, some of the good quality of mankind could not be bring into exercise. as pain produce or elicit fortitude and endurance; difficulty, perseverance; poverty, industry and ingenuity; danger, courage and what not; so the very virtue, on the other hand, will generate some vice: and, in fine, Mrs. Pendennis have that vice which Miss Pybus and Miss Pierce discover in she, namely, that of pride; which do not vest itself so much in her own person, as in that of her family. she speak about Mr. Pendennis (a worthy little gentleman enough, but there be other as good as he) with an awful reverence, as if he have be the Pope of Rome on his throne, and she a cardinal kneeling at his foot, and give he incense. the Major she hold to be a sort of Bayard among Majors: and as for her son Arthur she worship that youth with an ardour which the young scapegrace accept almost as coolly as the statue of the Saint in Saint Peter's receive the rapturous osculation which the faithful deliver on his toe.
this unfortunate superstition and idol-worship of this good woman be the cause of a great deal of the misfortune which befell the young gentleman who be the hero of this history, and deserve therefore to be mention at the outset of his story.
Arthur Pendennis's schoolfellow at the Greyfriars School state that, as a boy, he be in no way remarkable either as a dunce or as a scholar. he do, in fact, just as much as be require of he, and no more. if he be distinguish for anything it be for verse-writing: but be his enthusiasm ever so great, it stop when he have compose the number of line demand by the regulation (unlike young Swettenham, for instance, who, with no more of poetry in his composition than Mr. Wakley, yet would bring up a hundred dreary hexameter to the master after a half-holiday; or young Fluxmore, who not only do his own verse, but all the fifth form's besides). he never read to improve himself out of school-hour, but, on the contrary, devour all the novel, play, and poetry, on which he could lay his hand. he never be flogged, but it be a wonder how he escape the whipping-post. when he have money he spend it royally in tart for himself and his friend; he have be know to disburse nine and sixpence out of ten shilling award to he in a single day. when he have no fund he go on tick. when he could get no credit he go without, and be almost as happy. he have be know to take a thrashing for a crony without say a word; but a blow, ever so slight from a friend, would make he roar. to fight he be averse from his early youth, as indeed to physic, the Greek Grammar, or any other exertion, and would engage in none of they, except at the last extremity. he seldom if ever tell lie, and never bully little boy. those master or senior who be kind to he, he love with boyish ardour. and though the Doctor, when he do not know his horace, or could not construe his greek play, say that that boy Pendennis be a disgrace to the school, a candidate for ruin in this world, and perdition in the next; a profligate who would most likely bring his venerable father to ruin and his mother to a dishonoured grave, and the like--yet as the Doctor make use of these compliment to most of the boy in the place (which have not turn out an unusual number of felon and pickpocket), little Pen, at first uneasy and terrify by these charge, become gradually accustomed to hear they; and he have not, in fact, either murder his parent, or commit any act worthy of transportation or hang up to the present day.
tutu
there be many of the upper boy, among the Cistercians with whom Pendennis be educate, who assume all the privilege of man long before they quit that seminary. many of they, for example, smoke cigar--and some have already begin the practice of inebriation. one have fight a duel with an ensign in a marching, in consequence of a row at the theatre-- another actually keep a buggy and horse at a livery stable in Covent Garden, and might be see drive any Sunday in Hyde Park with a groom with square arm and armorial button by his side. many of the senior be in love, and show each other in confidence poem address to, or letter and lock of hair receive from, young lady--but Pen, a modest and timid youth, rather envy these than imitate they as yet. he have not get beyond the theory as yet--the practice of life be all to come. and by the way, ye tender mother and sober father of christian family, a prodigious thing that theory of life be as orally learn at a great public school. why, if you could hear those boy of fourteen who blush before mother and sneak off in silence in the presence of their daughter, talk among each other--it would be the woman's turn to blush then. before he be twelve year old and if while his mother fancy he an angel of candour, little Pen have hear talk enough to make he quite awfully wise upon certain point--and so, Madam, have your pretty little rosy-cheeked son, who be come home from school for the ensue Christmas holiday. I donot say that the boy be lose, or that the innocence have leave he which he have from 'Heaven, which be our home,' but that the shade of the prison-house be close very fast over he, and that we be help as much as possible to corrupt he.
well--Pen have just make his public appearance in a coat with a tail, or cauda virili, and be look most anxiously in his little study-glass to see if his whisker be grow, like those of more fortunate youth his companion; and, instead of the treble voice with which he use to speak and sing (for his singing voice be a very sweet one, and he use when little to be make to perform 'home, sweet home,' 'my pretty page,' and a french song or two which his mother have teach he, and other ballad for the delectation of the senior boy), have suddenly plunge into a deep bass diversify by a squeak, which when he be call upon to construe in school set the master and scholar laugh he be about sixteen year old, in a word, when he be suddenly call away from his academic study.
it be at the close of the forenoon school, and Pen have be unnoticed all the previous part of the morning till now, when the doctor put he on to construe in a greek play. he do not know a word of it, though little timmin, his form-fellow, be prompt he with all his might. Pen have make a sad blunder or two when the awful Chief break out upon he.
"Pendennis, sir," he say, "your idleness be incorrigible and your stupidity beyond example. you be a disgrace to your school, and to your family, and I have no doubt will prove so in after-life to your country. if that vice, sir, which be describe to we as the root of all evil, be really what moralist have represent (and I have no doubt of the correctness of their opinion), for what a prodigious quantity of future crime and wickedness be you, unhappy boy, lay the seed! miserable trifl! a boy who construe de and, instead of de but, at sixteen year of age be guilty not merely of folly, and ignorance, and dulness inconceivable, but of crime, of deadly crime, of filial ingratitude, which I tremble to contemplate. a boy, sir, who do not learn his greek play cheat the parent who spend money for his education. a boy who cheat his parent be not very far from rob or forge upon his neighbour. a man who forge on his neighbour pay the penalty of his crime at the gallow. and it be not such a one that I pity (for he will be deservedly cut off), but his maddened and heart-break parent, who be drive to a premature grave by his crime, or, if they live, drag on a wretched and dishonour old age. go on, sir, and I warn you that the very next mistake that you make shall subject you to the punishment of the rod. whobe that laugh? what ill-condition boy be there that dare to laugh?" shout the Doctor.
indeed, while the master be make this oration, there be a general titter behind he in the schoolroom. the orator have his back to the door of this ancient apartment, which be open, and a gentleman who be quite familiar with the place, for both Major Arthur and Mr. John Pendennis have be at the school, be ask the fifth-form boy who sate by the door for Pendennis. the lad grinning point to the culprit against whom the Doctor be pour out the thunder of his just wrath--Major Pendennis could not help laugh. he remember have stand under that very pillar where Pen the young now stand, and have be assault by the Doctor's predecessor year and year ago. the intelligence be 'pass round' that it be Pendennis's uncle in an instant, and a hundred young face wonder and giggling, between terror and laughter, turn now to the new-comer and then to the awful Doctor.
the Major ask the fifth-form boy to carry his card up to the Doctor, which the lad do with an arch look. Major Pendennis have write on the card, "I must take A. P. home; his father be very ill."
as the doctor receive the card, and stop his harangue with rather a seared look, the laughter of the boy, half constrain until then, burst out in a general shout. "silence!" roar out the doctor stamp with his foot. Pen look up and see who be his deliverer; the Major beckon to he gravely with one of his white glove, and tumble down his book, Pen go across.
the Doctor take out his watch. it be two minute to one. "we will take the Juvenal at afternoon school," he say, nod to the Captain, and all the boy understand the signal gather up their book and pour out of the hall.
Young Pen see by his uncle's face that something have happen at home. "be there anything the matter with my mother?" he say. he could hardly speak, though, for emotion, and the tear which be ready to start.
"no," say the Major, "but your father's very ill. go and pack your trunk directly; I have get a postchaise at the gate."
Pen go off quickly to his boarding-house to do as his uncle bid he; and the Doctor, now leave alone in the schoolroom, come out to shake hand with his old schoolfellow. you would not have think it be the same man. as Cinderella at a particular hour become, from a blazing and magnificent Princess, quite an ordinary little maid in a grey petticoat, so, as the clock strike one, all the thunder majesty and awful wrath of the schoolmaster disappear.
"there be nothing serious, I hope," say the Doctor. "it be a pity to take the boy away unless there be. he be a very good boy, rather idle and unenergetic, but he be a very honest gentlemanlike little fellow, though I cannot get he to construe as I wish. willnot you come in and have some luncheon? my wife will be very happy to see you."
but Major Pendennis decline the luncheon. he say his brother be very ill, have have a fit the day before, and it be a great question if they should see he alive.
"therebe no other son, be there?" say the Doctor. the Major answer "no."
"and therebe a good eh--a good eh--property I believe?" ask the other in an off-hand way.
"H'm--so so," say the Major. whereupon this colloquy come to an end. and Arthur Pendennis get into the postchaise with his uncle never to come back to school any more.
as the chaise drive through Clavering, the hostler stand whistle under the archway of the Clavering Arms, wink the postilion ominously, as much as to say all be over. the gardener's wife come and open the lodge-gate, and let the traveller through with a silent shake of the head. all the blind be down at Fairoaks--the face of the old footman be as blank when he let they in. Arthur's face be white too, with terror more than with grief. whatever of warmth and love the deceased man might have have, and he adore his wife and love and admire his son with all his heart, he have shut they up within himself; nor have the boy be ever able to penetrate that frigid outward barrier. but Arthur have be his father's pride and glory through life, and his name the last which John Pendennis have try to articulate whilst he lie with his wife's hand clasp his own cold and clammy palm, as the flickering spirit go out into the darkness of death, and life and the world pass away from he.
the little girl, whose face have peer for a moment under the blind as the chaise come up, open the door from the stair into the hall, and take Arthur's hand silently as he stoop down to kiss she, lead he upstairs to his mother. Old John open the dining-room door for the Major. the room be darken with the blind down, and surround by all the gloomy picture of the Pendennises. he drink a glass of wine. the bottle have be open for the Squire four day before. his hat be brush, and lay on the hall table: his newspaper, and his letter-bag, with John Pendennis, Esquire, Fairoaks, engrave upon the brass plate, be there in waiting. the doctor and the lawyer from Clavering, who have see the chaise pass through, come up in a gig half an hour after the Major's arrival, and enter by the back door. the former give a detailed account of the seizure and demise of Mr. Pendennis, enlarge on his virtue and the estimation in which the neighbourhood hold he; on what a loss he would be to the magistrate' bench, the County Hospital, etc. Mrs. Pendennis bear up wonderfully, he say, especially since Master Arthur's arrival. the lawyer stay and din with Major Pendennis, and they talk business all the evening. the Major be his brother's executor, and joint guardian to the boy with Mrs. Pendennis. everything be leave unreservedly to she, except in case of a second marriage,--an occasion which might offer itself in the case of so young and handsome a woman, Mr. Tatham gallantly say, when different provision be enact by the deceased. the Major would of course take entire superintendence of everything under this most impressive and melancholy occasion. Aware of this authority, old John the footman, when he bring Major Pendennis the candle to go to bed, follow afterwards with the plate-basket; and the next morning bring he the key of the hall clock--the Squire always use to wind it up of a Thursday, John say. Mrs. Pendennis's maid bring he message from her mistress. she confirm the doctor's report, of the comfort which Master Arthur's arrival have cause to his mother.
what pass between that lady and the boy be not of import. a veil should be throw over those sacred emotion of love and grief. the maternal passion be a sacred mystery to I. what one see symbolise in the roman church in the image of the Virgin Mother with a bosom bleed with love, I think one may witness (and admire the Almighty bounty for) every day. I see a jewish lady, only yesterday, with a child at her knee, and from whose face towards the child there shine a sweetness so angelical, that it seem to form a sort of glory round both. I protest I could have kneel before she too, and adore in her the divine beneficence in endow we with the maternal storge, which begin with our race and sanctify the history of mankind.
so it be with this, in a word, that Mrs. Pendennis comfort herself on the death of her husband, whom, however, she always reverence as the good, the most upright, wise, high-minded, accomplished, and awful of man. if the woman do not make idol of we, and if they see we as we see each other, would life be bearable, or could society go on? let a man pray that none of his womankind should form a just estimation of he. if your wife know you as you be, neighbour, she would not grieve much about be your widow, and would let your grave-lamp go out very soon, or perhaps not even take the trouble to light it. whereas Helen Pendennis put up the handsome of memorial to her husband, and constantly renew it with the most precious oil.
as for Arthur Pendennis, after that awful shock which the sight of his dead father must have produce on he, and the pity and feeling which such an event no doubt occasion, I be not sure that in the very moment of the grief, and as he embrace his mother and tenderly console she, and promise to love she for ever, there be not spring up in his breast a feeling of secret triumph and exultation. he be the chief now and lord. he be Pendennis; and all round about he be his servant and handmaid. "youwill never send I away," little Laura say, trip by he, and hold his hand. "you willnot send I to school, will you, Arthur?"
Arthur kiss she and pat her head. no, she shouldnot go to school. as for go himself, that be quite out of the question. he have determine that that part of his life should not be renew. in the midst of the general grief, and the corpse still lie above, he have leisure to conclude that he would have it all holiday for the future, that he wouldnot get up till he like, or stand the bullying of the doctor any more, and have make a hundred of such day-dream and resolve for the future. how one's thought will travel! and how quickly our wish beget they! when he with Laura in his hand go into the kitchen on his way to the dog-kennel, the fowl-house, and other his favourite haunt, all the servant there assemble in great silence with their friend, and the labour man and their wife, and Sally Potter who go with the post-bag to Clavering, and the baker's man from Clavering--all there assemble and drink beer on the melancholy occasion--rise up on his entrance and bow or curtsey to he. they never use to do so last holiday, he feel at once and with indescribable pleasure. the cook cry out, "o Lord," and whisper, "how Master Arthur do grow!" Thomas, the groom, in the act of drinking, put down the jug alarm before his master. Thomas's master feel the honour keenly. he go through and look at the pointer. as Flora put her nose up to his waistcoat, and Ponto, yell with pleasure, hurtle at his chain, Pen patronise the dog, and say, "Poo Ponto, poo Flora," in his most condescending manner. and then he go and look at Laura's hen, and at the pig, and at the orchard, and at the dairy; perhaps he blush to think that it be only last holiday he have in a manner rob the great apple-tree, and be scold by the dairymaid for take cream.
they bury John Pendennis, Esquire, "formerly an eminent medical practitioner at Bath, and subsequently an able magistrate, a benevolent landlord, and a benefactor to many charity and public institution in this neighbourhood and county," with one of the most handsome funeral that have be see since Sir Roger Clavering be bury here, the clerk say, in the abbey church of Clavering St. Mary's. a fair marble slab, from which the above inscription be copy, be erect over the Fairoaks' pew in the church. on it you may see the Pendennis coat of arm, and crest, an eagle look towards the sun, with the motto 'nec tenui penna,' to the present day. Doctor Portman allude to the deceased most handsomely and affectingly, as "our dear depart friend," in his sermon next Sunday; and Arthur Pendennis reign in his stead.
CHAPTER III
in which Pendennis appear as a very young Man indeed
Arthur be about sixteen year old, we have say, when he begin to reign; in person (for I see that the artist who be to illustrate this book, and who make sad work of the likeness, will never be able to take my friend off) he have what his friend would call a dumpy, but his mamma style a neat little figure. his hair be of a healthy brown colour, which look like gold in the sunshine, his face be round, rosy, freckle, and good-humour, his whisker (when those facial ornament for which he sigh so ardently be award to he by nature) be decidedly of a reddish hue; in fact, without be a beauty, he have such a frank, good-natured kind face, and laugh so merrily at you out of his honest blue eye, that no wonder Mrs. Pendennis think he the pride of the whole county. between the age of sixteen and eighteen he rise from five foot six to five foot eight inch in height, at which altitude he pause. but his mother wonder at it. he be three inch tall than his father. be it possible that any man could grow to be three inch tall than Mr. Pendennis?
you may be certain he never go back to school; the discipline of the establishment do not suit he, and he like be at home much well. the question of his return be debate, and his uncle be for his go back. the Doctor write his opinion that it be most important for Arthur's success in after-life that he should know a Greek play thoroughly, but Pen adroitly manage to hint to his mother what a dangerous place Greyfriars be, and what sad wild fellow some of the chap there be, and the timid soul, take alarm at once, accede to his desire to stay at home.
then Pen's uncle offer to use his influence with his Royal Highness the Commander-in-Chief, who be pleased to be very kind to he, and propose to get Pen a commission in the Foot Guards. Pen's heart leap at this: he have be to hear the band at St. James's play on a Sunday, when he go out to his uncle. he have see Tom Ricketts, of the fourth form, who use to wear a jacket and trouser so ludicrously tight, that the eld boy could not forbear use he in the quality of a butt or 'cockshy'-- he have see this very rickett array in crimson and gold, with an immense bear-skin cap on his head, stagger under the colour of the regiment. Tom have recognise he and give he a patronising nod. Tom, a little wretch whom he have cut over the back with a hockey-stick last quarter--and there he be in the centre of the square, rally round the flag of his country, surround by bayonet, crossbelt, and scarlet, the band blow trumpet and bang cymbal--talk familiarly to immense warrior with tuft to their chin and Waterloo medal. what would not Pen have give to wear such epaulette and enter such a service?
but Helen Pendennis, when this point be propose to she by her son, put on a face full of terror and alarm. she say she "do not quarrel with other who think differently, but that in her opinion a Christian have no right to make the army a profession. Mr. Pendennis never, never would have permit his son to be a soldier. finally, she should be very unhappy if he think of it." now Pen would have as soon cut off his nose and ear as deliberately, and of aforethought malice, make his mother unhappy; and, as he be of such a generous disposition that he would give away anything to any one, he instantly make a present of his visionary red coat and epaulette and his ardour for military glory to his mother.
she think he the noble creature in the world. but Major Pendennis, when the offer of the commission be acknowledge and refuse, write back a curt and somewhat angry letter to the widow, and think his nephew be rather a spooney.
he be content, however, when he see the boy's performance out hunt at Christmas, when the Major come down as usual to Fairoaks. Pen have a very good mare, and ride she with uncommon pluck and grace. he take his fence with great coolness, and yet with judgment, and without bravado. he write to the chap at school about his top-boot, and his feat across country. he begin to think seriously of a scarlet coat: and his mother must own that she think it would become he remarkably well; though, of course, she pass hour of anguish during his absence, and daily expect to see he bring home on a shutter.
with these amusement, in rather too great plenty, it must not be assume that Pen neglect his study altogether. he have a natural taste for read every possible kind of book which do not fall into his school-course. it be only when they force his head into the water of knowledge, that he refuse to drink. he devour all the book at home from Inchbald's Theatre to White's Farriery; he ransack the neighbouring book-case. he find at Clavering an old cargo of french novel, which he read with all his might; and he would sit for hour perch upon the topmost bar of Doctor Portman's library step with a folio on his knee, whether it be Hakluyt's Travels, Hobbes's Leviathan, Augustini Opera, or Chaucer's Poems. he and the Vicar be very good friend, and from his reverence, Pen learn that honest taste for port wine which distinguish he through life. and as for that dear good woman, Mrs. Portman, who be not in the least jealous, though her doctor avow himself in love with Mrs. Pendennis, whom he pronounce to be by far the fine lady in the county--all her grief be, as she look up fondly at Pen perch on the book-ladder, that her daughter, Minny, be too old for he--as indeed she be--Miss Myra Portman be at that period only two year young than Pen's mother, and weigh as much as Pen and Mrs. Pendennis together.
be these detail insipid? look back, good friend, at your own youth, and ask how be that? I like to think of a well-nurture boy, brave and gentle, warm-hearted and loving, and look the world in the face with kind honest eye. what bright colour it wear then, and how you enjoy it! a man have not many year of such time. he do not know they whilst they be with he. it be only when they be pass long away that he remember how dear and happy they be.
in order to keep Mr. Pen from indulge in that idleness of which his friend the Doctor of the Cistercians have prophesy such awful consequence, Mr. Smirke, Dr. Portman's curate, be engage at a liberal salary, to walk or ride over from Clavering and pass several hour daily with the young gentleman. Smirke be a man perfectly faultless at a tea-table, wear a curl on his fair forehead, and tie his neck-cloth with a melancholy grace. he be a decent scholar and mathematician, and teach Pen as much as the lad be ever disposed to learn, which be not much. for Pen have soon take the measure of his tutor, who, when he come rid into the court-yard at Fairoaks on his pony, turn out his toe so absurdly, and leave such a gap between his knee and the saddle, that it be impossible for any lad endow with a sense of humour to respect such an equestrian. he nearly kill Smirke with terror by put he on his mare, and take he a ride over a common, where the county fox-hound (then bunt by that staunch old sportsman, Mr. Hardhead, of Dumplingbeare) happen to meet. Mr. Smirke, on Pen's mare, Rebecca (she be name after Pen's favourite heroine, the daughter of Isaac of York), astound the hound as much as he disgust the huntsman, lam one of the former by persist in rid amongst the pack, and receive a speech from the latter, more remarkable for energy of language, than any oration he have ever hear since he leave the bargeman on the bank of isis.
Smirke confide to his pupil his poem both Latin and English; and present to Mrs. Pendennis a volume of the latter, print at Clapham, his native place. the two read the ancient poet together, and rattle through they at a pleasant rate, very different from that steady grubbing pace with which the Cistercians use to go over the classic ground, scent out each word as they go, and dig up every root in the way. Pen never like to halt, but make his tutor construe when he be at fault, and thus gallop through the Iliad and the Odyssey, the tragic playwriter, writer, and the charming wicked Aristophanes (whom he vow to be the great poet of all). but he go at such a pace that, though he certainly gallop through a considerable extent of the ancient country, he clean forget it in after-life, and have only such a vague remembrance of his early classic course as a man have in the House of Commons, let we say, who still keep up two or three quotation; or a reviewer who, just for decency's sake, hint at a little greek. our people be the most prosaic in the world, but the most faithful; and with curious reverence we keep up and transmit, from generation to generation, the superstition of what we call the education of a gentleman.
besides the ancient poet, you may be sure Pen read the English with great gusto. Smirke sigh and shake his head sadly both about Byron and Moore. but Pen be a swear fire-worshipper and a corsair; he have they by heart, and use to take little Laura into the window and say, "Zuleika, I be not thy brother," in tone so tragic that they cause the solemn little maid to open her great eye still wide. she sit, until the proper hour for retirement, sew at Mrs. Pendennis's knee, and listen to Pen read out to she of night without comprehend one word of what he read.
he read Shakspeare to his mother (which she say she like, but donot), and Byron, and Pope, and his favourite Lalla Rookh, which please she indifferently. but as for Bishop Heber, and Mrs. Hemans above all, this lady use to melt right away, and be absorb into her pocket-handkerchief, when Pen read those author to she in his kind boyish voice. the 'Christian Year' be a book which appear about that time. the son and the mother whisper it to each other with awe--faint, very faint, and seldom in after-life Pendennis hear that solemn church-music: but he always love the remembrance of it, and of the time when it strike on his heart, and he walk over the field full of hope and void of doubt, as the church-bell rang on Sunday morning.
it be at this period of his existence, that Pen break out in the poet' Corner of the County Chronicle, with some verse with which he be perfectly well satisfied. his be the verse sign 'NEP.,' address 'to a tear;' 'on the anniversary of the Battle of Waterloo;' 'to Madame Caradori singing at the Assize Meetings;' 'on Saint Bartholomew's day' (a tremendous denunciation of Popery, and a solemn warning to the people of England to rally against emancipate the Roman Catholics), etc., etc.-- all which masterpiece, Mrs. Pendennis no doubt keep to this day, along with his first sock, the first cutting of his hair, his bottle, and other interesting relic of his infancy. he use to gallop Rebecca over the neighbour Dumpling down, or into the county town, which, if you please, we shall call Chatteris, spout his own poem, and fill with quite a byronic afflatus as he think.
his genius at this time be of a decidedly gloomy cast. he bring his mother a tragedy, in which, though he kill sixteen people before the second act, it make she laugh so, that he thrust the masterpiece into the fire in a pet. he project an epic poem in blank verse, 'Cortez, or the Conqueror of Mexico, and the Inca's daughter.' he write part of 'Seneca, or the Fatal Bath,' and 'Ariadne in Naxos;' classical piece, with chorus and strophe and antistrophe, which sadly puzzle poor Mrs. Pendennis; and begin a 'history of the Jesuits,' in which he lash that order with tremendous severity, and warn his protestant fellow-countryman of their machination. his loyalty do his mother's heart good to witness. he be a staunch, unflinche church-and-king man in those day; and at the election, when Sir Giles Beanfield stand on the blue interest, against Lord Trehawk, Lord Eyrie's son, a Whig and a friend of Popery, Arthur Pendennis, with an immense bow for himself, which his mother make, and with a blue ribbon for Rebecca, ride alongside of the Reverend Doctor Portman, on his grey mare Dowdy, and at the head of the Clavering voter, whom the Doctor bring up to plump for the Protestant Champion.
on that day Pen make his first speech at the Blue Hotel: and also, it appear, for the first time in his life--take a little more wine than be good for he. mercy! what a scene it be at Fairoaks, when he ride back at ever so much o'clock at night. what move about of lantern in the court-yard and stable, though the moon be shin out; what a gathering of servant, as Pen come home, clatter over the bridge and up the stableyard, with half a score of the Clavering voter yell after he the Blue song of the election.
he want they all to come in and have some wine--some very good Madeira --some capital Madeira--John, go and get some Madeira,--and there be no know what the farmer would have do, have not Madam Pendennis make her appearance in a white wrapper, with a candle--and scar those zealous blue so by the sight of her pale handsome face, that they touch their hat and ride off.
besides these amusement and occupation in which Mr. Pen indulge, there be one which form the main business and pleasure of youth, if the poet tell we aright, whom Pen be always study; and this young fellow's heart be so ardent, and his imagination so eager, that it be not to be expect he should long escape the passion to which we allude, and which, lady, you have rightly guess to be that of love. Pen sigh for it first in secret, and, like the love-sick swain in Ovid, open his breast and say, "Aura, veni." what generous youth be there that have not court some such windy mistress in his time?
yes, Pen begin to feel the necessity of a first love--of a consume passion--of an object on which he could concentrate all those vague float fancy under which he sweetly suffer--of a young lady to whom he could really make verse, and whom he could set up and adore, in place of those unsubstantial Ianthes and Zuleikas to whom he address the outpouring of his gushing muse. he read his favourite poem over and over again, he call upon Alma Venus the delight of god and man, he translate Anacreon's ode, and pick out passage suitable to his complaint from Waller, Dryden, Prior, and the like. Smirke and he be never weary, in their interview, of discourse about love. the faithless tutor entertain he with sentimental conversation in place of lecture on algebra and Greek; for Smirke be in love too. who could help it, be in daily intercourse with such a woman? Smirke be madly in love (as far as such a mild flame as Mr. Smirke's may be call madness) with Mrs. Pendennis. that honest lady, sit down below stair teach little Laura to play the piano, or devise flannel petticoat for the poor round about she, or otherwise busy with the calm routine of her modest and spotless christian life, be little aware what storm be brew in two bosom upstairs in the study--in Pen's, as he sate in his shooting jacket, with his elbow on the green study-table, and his hand clutch his curly brown hair, Homer under his nose,--and in worthy Mr. Smirke's, with whom he be read. here they would talk about Helen and Andromache. "Andromache's like my mother," Pen use to avouch; "but I say, Smirke, by Jove Iwould cut off my nose to see Helen;" and he would spout certain favourite line which the reader will find in their proper place in the third book. he draw portrait of she--they be extant still--with straight nose and enormous eye, and 'Arthur Pendennis delineavit et pinxit' gallantly write underneath.
as for Mr. Smirke he naturally prefer Andromache. and in consequence he be uncommonly kind to Pen. he give he his Elzevir Horace, of which the boy be fond, and his little Greek Testament which his own mamma at Clapham have purchase and present to he. he buy he a silver pencil-case; and in the matter of learn let he do just as much or as little as ever he please. he always seem to be on the point of unbosom himself to Pen: nay, he confess to the latter that he have a--an attachment, an ardently cherish attachment, about which Pendennis long to hear, and say, "tell we, old chap, be she handsome? have she get blue eye or black?" but Doctor Portman's curate, heave a gentle sigh, cast up his eye to the ceiling, and beg Pen faintly to change the conversation. poor Smirke! he invite Pen to dine at his lodging over Madame Fribsby's, the milliner's, in Clavering; and once when it be rain, and Mrs. Pendennis, who have drive in her pony-chaise into Clavering with respect to some arrangement, about leave off mourning probably, be prevail upon to enter the curate's apartment, he send out for pound-cake instantly. the sofa on which she sate become sacred to he from that day: and he keep flower in the glass which she drink from ever after.
as Mrs. Pendennis be never tired of hear the praise of her son, we may be certain that this rogue of a_ tutor neglect no opportunity of converse with she upon that subject. it might be a little tedious to he to hear the story about Pen's generosity, about his bravery in fight the big naughty boy, about his fun and joke, about his prodigious skill in Latin, music, riding, etc., but what price would he not pay to be in her company? and the widow, after these conversation, think Mr. Smirke a very pleasing and well-inform man. as for her son, she have not settle in her mind whether he be to be Senior Wrangler and Archbishop of Canterbury, or double First Class at Oxford, and Lord Chancellor. that all England do not possess his peer, be a fact about which there be, in her mind, no manner of question.
a simple person, of inexpensive habit, she begin forthwith to save, and, perhaps, to be a little parsimonious, in favour of her boy. there be no entertainment, of course, at Fairoaks, during the year of her weed. nor, indeed, do the Doctor's silver dish-cover, of which he be so proud, and which be flourish all over with the arm of the Pendennises, and surmount with their crest, come out of the plate-chest again for long, long year. the household be diminish, and its expense curtail. there be a very blank anchorite repast when Pen din from home: and he himself head the remonstrance from the kitchen regard the deteriorated quality of the Fairoaks beer. she be become miserly for Pen. indeed, who ever accuse woman of be just? they be always sacrifice themselves or somebody for somebody else's sake.
there happen to be no young woman in the small circle of friend who be in the widow's intimacy whom Pendennis could by any possibility gratify by endow she with the inestimable treasure of a heart which he be long to give away. some young fellow in this predicament bestow their young affection upon dolly, the dairymaid, or cast the eye of tenderness upon Molly, the blacksmith's daughter. Pen think a Pendennis much too grand a personage to stoop so low. he be too high-minded for a vulgar intrigue, and, at the idea of an intrigue or a seduction, have he ever entertain it, his heart would have revolt as from the notion of any act of baseness or dishonour. Miss Minny Portman be too old, too large, and too fond of read 'Rollin's Ancient history.' the Miss Boardbacks, Admiral Boardback's daughter (of St. Vincent's, or Fourth of June House, as it be call), disgust Pen with the London air which they bring into the country, from Gloucester Place, where they pass the season, and look down upon Pen as a chit. Captain Glanders's (H.P., 50th Dragoon Guards) three girl be in brown-holland pinafore as yet, with the end of their hair-plait tie up in dirty pink ribbon. not have acquire the art of dancing, the youth avoid such chance as he might have have of meeting with the fair sex at the Chatteris' assembly; in fine, he be not in love, because there be nobody at hand to fall in love with. and the young monkey use to ride out, day after day in quest, of Dulcinea; and peep into the pony-chaise and gentlefolk' carriage, as they drive along the broad turnpike road, with a heart beat within he, and a secret tremor and hope that she might be in that yellow postchaise come swing up the hill, or one of those three girl in beaver bonnet in the back seat of the double gig, which the fat old gentleman in black be drive, at four mile an hour. the postchaise contain a snuffy old dowager of seventy, with a maid, her contemporary. the three girl in the beaver bonnet be no handsomer than the turnip that skirt the roadside. do as he might, and ride where he would, the fairy princess that he be to rescue and win, have not yet appear to honest Pen.
upon these point he do not discourse to his mother. he have a world of his own. what generous, ardent, imaginative soul have not a secret pleasure-place in which it disport? let no clumsy prying or dull meddling of ours try to disturb it in our child. Actaeon be a brute for want to push in where Diana be bath. leave he occasionally alone, my good madam, if you have a poet for a child. even your admirable advice may be a bore sometimes. you be faultless; but it do not follow that everybody in your family be to think exactly like yourself. yonder little child may have thought too deep even for your great mind, and fancy so coy and timid that they will not bare themselves when your ladyship sit by.
Helen Pendennis by the force of sheer love divine a great number of her son's secret. but she keep these thing in her heart (if we may so speak), and do not speak of they. besides, she have make up her mind that he be to marry little Laura, who would be eighteen when Pen be six-and-twenty: and have finish his college career, and have make his grand tour, and be settle either in London, astonishing all the metropolis by his learning and eloquence at the bar, or well still in a sweet country parsonage surround with hollyhock and rose, close to a delightful romantic ivy-cover church, from the pulpit of which Pen would utter the most beautiful sermon ever preach.
while these natural sentiment be wag war and trouble in honest Pen's bosom, it chance one day that he ride into Chatteris, for the purpose of carry to the County Chronicle a tremendous and thrilling poem for the next week's paper; and put up his horse accord to custom, at the stable of the George Hotel there, he fall in with an old acquaintance. a grand black tandem, with scarlet wheel, come rattle into the inn yard, as Pen stand there in converse with the hostler about Rebecca; and the voice of the driver call out, "Hallo, Pendennis, be that you?" in a loud patronising manner. Pen have some difficulty in recognise under the broad-brim hat and the vast great-coat and neckcloth, with which the new-comer be habit, the person and figure of his quondam schoolfellow, Mr. Foker.
a year's absence have make no small difference in that gentleman. a youth who have be deservedly whip a few month previously, and who spend his pocket-money on tart and hardbake, now appear before Pen in one of those costume to which the public consent, that I take to be quite as influential in this respect as 'Johnson's Dictionary,' have award the title of "Swell.' he have a bull-dog between his leg, and in his scarlet shawl neckcloth be a pin represent another bull-dog in gold: he wear a fur waistcoat lace over with gold chain; a green cutaway coat with basket-button, and a white upper-coat ornament with cheese-plate button, on each of which be engrave some stirring incident of the road or the chase; all which ornament set off this young fellow's figure to such advantage, that you would hesitate to say which character in life he most resemble, and whether he be a boxer en goguette, or a coachman in his gala suit.
"leave that place for good, Pendennis?" Mr. Foker say, descend from his landau and give Pendennis a finger.
"yes, this year--or more," Pen say.
"beastly old hole," Mr. Foker remark. "hate it. hate the doctor: hate Towzer, the second master; hate everybody there. not a fit place for a gentleman."
"not at all," say Pen, with an air of the utmost consequence.
"by gad, sir, I sometimes dream, now, that the Doctor's walk into I," Foker continue (and Pen smile as he think that he himself have likewise fearful dream of this nature). "when I think of the diet there, by gad, sir, I wonder how I stand it. mangy mutton, brutal beef; pudding on Thursdays and Sundays, and that fit to poison you. just look at my leader--do you ever see a pretty animal? drive over from Baymouth. come the nine mile in two-and-forty minute. not bad going, sir."
"be you stop at Baymouth, Foker?" Pendennis ask.
"Ibe coach there," say the other, with a nod.
"what?" ask Pen, and in a tone of such wonder, that Foker burst out laugh, and say, "he be blow if he donot think Pen be such a flat as not to know what coach mean."
"Ibe come down with a coach from Oxford. a tutor, donot you see, old boy? hebe coach I, and some other man, for the little go. I and Spavin have the drag between we. and I think Iwould just tool over and go to the play. do you ever see Rowkins do the hornpipe?" and Mr. Foker begin to perform some step of that popular dance in the inn yard, look round for the sympathy of his groom and the stable-man.
Pen think he would like to go to the play too: and could ride home afterwards, as there be a moonlight. so he accept Foker's invitation to dinner, and the young man enter the inn together, where Mr. Foker stop at the bar, and call upon Miss Rincer, the landlady's fair daughter, who preside there, to give he a glass of 'his mixture.'
Pen and his family have be know at the George ever since they come into the country; and Mr. Pendennis's carriage and horse always put up there when he pay a visit to the county town. the landlady drop the heir of Fairoaks a very respectful curtsey, and compliment he upon his growth and manly appearance, and ask news of the family at Fairoaks, and of Doctor Portman and the Clavering people, to all of which question the young gentleman answer with much affability. but he speak to Mr. and Mrs. Rincer with that sort of good nature with which a young Prince address his father's subject; never dream that those bonne gen be his equal in life.
Mr. Foker's behaviour be quite different. he inquire for Rincer and the cold in his nose, tell Mrs. Rincer a riddle, ask Miss Rincer when she would be ready to marry he, and pay his compliment to Miss Brett, the other young lady in the bar, all in a minute of time, and with a liveliness and facetiousness which set all these lady in a giggle; and he give a cluck, expressive of great satisfaction, as he toss off his mixture which Miss Rincer prepare and hand to he.
"have a drop," say he to Pen, "itbe recommend to I by the faculty as a what-do-you-call-'em--a stomatic, old boy. give the young one a glass, R., and score it up to yours truly."
Poor Pen take a glass, and everybody laugh at the face which he make as he put it down--gin, bitter, and some other cordial be the compound with which Mr. Foker be so delighted as to call it by the name of Foker's own. as Pen choke, sputter, and make face, the other take occasion to remark to Mr. Rincer that the young fellow be green, very green, but that he would soon form he; and then they proceed to order dinner--which Mr. Foker determine should consist of turtle and venison; caution the landlady to be very particular about ice the wine.
then Messrs. Foker and Pen stroll down the High Street together--the former have a cigar in his mouth, which he have draw out of a case almost as big as a portmanteau. he go in to replenish it at Mr. Lewis's, and talk to that gentleman for a while, sit down on the counter: he then look in at the fruiterer's, to see the pretty girl there, to whom he pay compliment similar to those before address to the bar at the George; then they pass the County Chronicle office, for which Pen have his packet ready, in the shape of 'line to Thyrza,' but poor Pen do not like to put the letter into the editor's box while walk in company with such a fine gentleman as Mr. Foker. they meet heavy dragoon of the regiment always quarter at Chatteris; and stop and talk about the Baymouth ball, and what a pretty girl be Miss Brown, and what a dem fine woman Mrs. Jones be. it be in vain that Pen recall to his own mind what a stupid ass Foker use to be at school-- how he could scarcely read, how he be not cleanly in his person, and notorious for his blunder and dulness. Mr. Foker be no more like a gentleman now than in his school day: and yet Pen feel a secret pride in strut down High Street with a young fellow who own tandem, talk to officer, and order turtle and champagne for dinner. he listen, and with respect too, to Mr. Foker's account of what the man do at the University of which Mr. F. be an ornament, and encounter a long series of story about boat-racing, bumping, College grass-plat, and milk-punch--and begin to wish to go up himself to College to a place where there be such manly pleasure and enjoyment. Farmer Gurnett, who live close by Fairoaks, rid by at this minute and touch his hat to Pen, the latter stop he, and send a message to his mother to say that he have meet with an old schoolfellow, and should dine in Chatteris.
the two young gentleman continue their walk, and be pass round the Cathedral Yard, where they could hear the music of the afternoon service (a music which always exceedingly impress and affect Pen), but whither Mr. Foker come for the purpose of inspect the nursery-maid who frequent the Elms Walk there, and who be uncommonly pretty at Chatteris, and here they stroll until with a final burst of music the small congregation be play out.
Old Doctor Portman be one of the few who come from the venerable gate. spy Pen, he come and shake he by the hand, and eye with wonder Pen's friend, from whose mouth and cigar cloud of fragrance issue, which curl round the Doctor's honest face and shovel hat.
"an old schoolfellow of mine, Mr. Foker," say Pen. the Doctor say "H'm": and scowl at the cigar. he do not mind a pipe in his study, but the cigar be an abomination to the worthy gentleman.
"I come up on Bishop's business," the Doctor say. "wewill ride home, Arthur, if you like?"
"I--i'm engage to my friend here," Pen answer.
"you have well come home with I," say the Doctor.
"his mother know hebe out, sir," Mr. Foker remark; "donot she, Pendennis?"
"but that do not prove that he have not well come home with I," the Doctor growl, and he walk off with great dignity.
"old boy donot like the weed, I suppose," Foker say. "ha! whobe here?-- herebe the General, and Bingley, the manager. how do, cos? how do, Bingley?"
"how do my worthy and gallant young Foker?" say the gentleman address as the General; and who wear a shabby military cape with a mangy collar, and a hat cock very much over one eye.
"trust you be very well, my very dear sir," say the other gentleman, "and that the Theatre Royal will have the honour of your patronage to-night. we perform 'the Stranger,' in which your humble servant will---"
"cannot stand you in tight and Hessians, Bingley," young Mr. Foker say. on which the General, with the irish accent, say, "but I think ye'll like Miss Fotheringay, in Mrs. Haller, or I namebe not Jack Costigan."
Pen look at these individual with the great interest. he have never see an actor before; and he see Dr. Portman's red face look over the Doctor's shoulder, as he retreat from the Cathedral Yard, evidently quite dissatisfied with the acquaintance into whose hand Pen have fall.
perhaps it would have be much well for he have he take the parson's advice and company home. but which of we know his fate?
CHAPTER IV
Mrs. Haller
have return to the George, Mr. Foker and his guest sate down to a handsome repast in the coffee-room; where Mr. Rincer bring in the first dish, and bow as gravely as if he be wait upon the Lord-Lieutenant of the county. Mr. Foker attack the turtle and venison with as much gusto as he have show the year before, when he use to make feast off ginger-beer and smuggled polony. Pen could not but respect his connoisseurship as he pronounce the champagne to be condemn gooseberry, and wink at the port with one eye. the latter he declare to be of the right sort; and tell the waiter there be no way of humbug he. all these attendant he know by their christian name, and show a great interest in their family; and as the London coach drive up, which in those early day use to set off from the George, Mr. Foker fling the coffee-room window open, and call the guard and coachman by their christian name, too, ask about their respective family, and imitate with great liveliness and accuracy the tooting of the horn as Jem the ostler whip the horse' cloth off, and the carriage drive gaily away.
"a bottle of sherry, a bottle of sham, a bottle of port and a shass caffy, it benot so bad, hay, Pen?" Foker say, and pronounce, after all these delicacy and a quantity of nut and fruit have be dispatch, that it be time to "toddle." Pen spring up with very bright eye, and a flushed face; and they move off towards the theatre, where they pay their money to the wheezy old lady slumbering in the money-taker's box. "Mrs. Dropsicum, Bingley's mother-in-law, great in Lady Macbeth," Foker say to his companion. Foker know she, too.
they have almost their choice of place in the box of the theatre, which be no well fill than country theatre usually be in spite of the "universal burst of attraction and galvanic thrill of delight" advertise by Bingley in the play-bill. a score or so of people dot the pit-bench, a few more keep a kicking and whistle in the gallery, and a dozen other, who come in with free admission, be in the box where our young gentleman sate. Lieutenants Rodgers and Podgers, and young Cornet Tidmus, of the Dragoons, occupy a private box. the performer act to they, and these gentleman seem to hold conversation with the player when not engage in the dialogue, and applaud they by name loudly.
Bingley the manager, who assume all the chief tragic and comic part except when he modestly retreat to make way for the London star, who come down occasionally to Chatteris, be great in the character of the 'Stranger.' he be attire in the tight pantaloon and hessian boot which the stage legend have give to that injure man, with a large cloak and beaver and a hearse feather in it droop over his raddled old face, and only partially conceal his great buckle brown wig. he have the stage jewellery on too, of which he select the large and most shiny ring for himself, and allow his little finger to quiver out of his cloak with a sham diamond ring cover the first joint of the finger and twiddle in the face of the pit. Bingley make it a favour to the young man of his company to go on in light comedy part with that ring. they flatter he by ask its history. the stage have its traditional jewel as the Crown and all great family have. this have belong to George Frederick Cooke, who have have it from Mr. Quin, who may have buy it for a shilling. Bingley fancy the world be fascinate with its glitter.
he be read out of the stage-book--that wonderful stage-book which be not bind like any other book in the world, but be rouge and tawdry like the hero or heroine who hold it; and who hold it as people never do hold book: and point with his finger to a passage, and wag his head ominously at the audience, and then lift up eye and finger to the ceiling profess to derive some intense consolation from the work between which and heaven there be a strong affinity. anybody who have ever see one of our great light comedian, X., in a chintz dressing-gown, such as nobody ever wear, and represent himself to the public as a young nobleman in his apartment, and while away the time with light literature until his friend Sir Harry shall arrive, or his father shall come down to breakfast--anybody, I say, who have see the great x. over a sham book have indeed have a great pleasure and an abide matter for thought.
directly the Stranger see the young man, he act at they; eye they solemnly over his gilt volume as he lie on the stage-bank show his hand, his ring, and his Hessians. he calculate the effect that every one of these ornament would produce upon his victim: he be determined to fascinate they, for he know they have pay their money; and he see their family come in from the country and fill the cane chair in his box.
as he lie on the bank reading, his servant, Francis, make remark upon his master.
"again read," say Francis, "thus it be, from morn to night. to he nature have no beauty--life no charm. for three year I have never see he smile" (the gloom of Bingley's face be fearful to witness during these comment of the faithful domestic). "nothing divert he. o, if he would but attach himself to any live thing, be it an animal--for something man must love."
[enter Tobias (Goll) from the hut.] he cry, "o, how refreshing, after seven long week, to feel these warm sunbeam once again. thank, bounteous heaven, for the joy I taste!" he press his cap between his hand, look up and pray. the stranger eye he attentively.
Francis to the Stranger. "this old man's share of earthly happiness can be but little. yet mark how grateful he be for his portion of it."
Bingley. "because though old, he be but a child in the lead-string of hope." (he look steadily at Foker, who, however, continue to suck the top of his stick in an unconcerned manner.)
Francis. "Hope be the nurse of life."
Bingley. "and her cradle--be the grave."
the Stranger utter this with the moan of a bassoon in agony, and fix his eye on Pendennis so steadily, that the poor lad be quite put out of countenance. he think the whole house must be look at he; and cast his eye down. as soon as ever he raise they Bingley's be at he again. all through the scene the manager play at he. when he be about to do a good action, and send off Francis with his book, so that that domestic should not witness the deed of benevolence which he meditate, Bingley mark the page carefully, so that he might continue the perusal of the volume off the stage if he like. but all be do in the direct face of Pendennis, whom the manager be bent upon subjugating. how relieve the lad be when the scene end, and Foker, tap with his cane, cry out "Bravo, Bingley!"
"give he a hand, Pendennis; you know every chap like a hand," Mr. Foker say; and the good-natured young gentleman, and Pendennis laughing, and the dragoon in the opposite box, begin clap hand to the good of their power.
a chamber in Wintersen Castle close over Tobias's hut and the Stranger and his boot; and servant appear bustle about with chair and tables--"that's Hicks and Miss Thackthwaite," whisper Foker. "pretty girl, benot she, Pendennis? but stop--hurray--bravo! herebe the Fotheringay."
the pit thrill and thump its umbrella; a volley of applause be fire from the gallery: the Dragoon officer and Foker clap their hand furiously: you would have think the house be full, so loud be their plaudit. the red face and rag whisker of Mr. Costigan be see peer from the side-scene. Pen's eye open wide and bright as Mrs. Haller enter with a downcast look, then rally at the sound of the applause, sweep the house with a grateful glance, and, fold her hand across her breast, sink down in a magnificent curtsey. More applause, more umbrella; Pen this time, flame with wine and enthusiasm, clap hand and sing "bravo" louder than all. Mrs. Haller see he, and everybody else, and old Mr. Bows, the little first fiddler of the orchestra (which be this night increase by a detachment of the band of the Dragoons, by the kind permission of Colonel Swallowtail), look up from the desk where he be perch, with his crutch beside he, and smile at the enthusiasm of the lad.
those who have only see Miss Fotheringay in later day, since her marriage and introduction into London life, have little idea how beautiful a creature she be at the time when our friend Pen first set eye on she: and I warn my reader, as beforehand, that the pencil which illustrate this work (and can draw an ugly face tolerably well, but be sadly put out when it try to delineate a beauty) can give no sort of notion of she. she be of the tall of woman, and at she then age of six-and-twenty-for six-and-twenty she be, though she vow she be only nineteen--in the prime and fulness of her beauty. her forehead be vast, and her black hair wave over it with a natural ripple (that beauty of late day have try to imitate with the help of the crimping-iron), and be confine in shin and voluminous braid at the back of a neck such as you see on the shoulder of the Louvre Venus--that delight of god and man. her eye, when she lift they up to gaze on you, and ere she drop their purple deep-fringe lid, shine with tenderness and mystery unfathomable. love and Genius seem to look out from they and then retire coyly, as if ashamed to have be see at the lattice. who could have have such a command brow but a woman of high intellect? she never laugh (indeed her tooth be not good), but a smile of endless tenderness and sweetness play round her beautiful lip, and in the dimple of her cheek and her lovely chin. her nose defy description in those day. her ear be like two little pearl shell, which the earring she wear (though the handsome property in the theatre) only insult. she be dress in long flow robe of black, which she manage and sweep to and fro with wonderful grace, and out of the fold of which you only see her sandal occasionally; they be of rather a large size; but Pen think they as ravish as the slipper of Cinderella. but it be her hand and arm that this magnificent creature most excel in, and somehow you could never see she but through they. they surround she. when she fold they over her bosom in resignation; when she drop they in mute agony, or raise they in superb command; when in sportive gaiety her hand flutter and wave before she, like what shall we say?--like the snowy dove before the chariot of Venus--it be with these arm and hand that she beckon, repel, entreat, embrace, her admirer--no single one, for she be arm with her own virtue, and with her father's valour, whose sword would have leapt from its scabbard at any insult offer to his child--but the whole house; which rise to she, as the phrase be, as she curtsey and bow, and charm it.
thus she stand for a minute--complete and beautiful--as Pen star at she. "I say, Pen, benot she a stunner?" ask Mr. Foker.
"hush!" Pen say, "shebe speak."
she begin her business in a deep sweet voice. those who know the play of the 'stranger,' be aware that the remark make by the various character be not valuable in themselves, either for their sound sense, their novelty of observation, or their poetic fancy. in fact, if a man be to say it be a stupid play, he would not be far wrong. nobody ever talk so. if we meet idiot in life, as will happen, it be a great mercy that they do not use such absurdly fine word. the Stranger's talk be sham, like the book he read and the hair he wear, and the bank he sit on, and the diamond ring he make play with--but, in the midst of the balderdash, there run that reality of love, child, and forgiveness of wrong, which will be listen to wherever it be preach, and set all the world sympathising.
with what smothered sorrow, with what gush pathos, Mrs. Haller deliver her part! at first, when as Count Wintersen's housekeeper, and prepare for his Excellency's arrival, she have to give order about the bed and furniture, and the dinner, etc., to be get ready, she do so with the calm agony of despair. but when she could get rid of the stupid servant and give vent to her feeling to the pit and the house, she overflow to each individual as if he be her particular confidant, and she be cry out her grief on his shoulder: the little fiddler in the orchestra (whom she do not seem to watch, though he follow she ceaselessly) twitch, twisted, nod, point about, and when she come to the favourite passage, "I have a William too, if he be still alive-- ah, yes, if he be still alive. his little sister, too! why, Fancy, dost thou rack I so? why dost thou image my poor child faint in sickness, and cry to--to--their mum--um--other," when she come to this passage little bow bury his face in his blue cotton handkerchief, after cry out "Bravo."
all the house be affect. Foker, for his part, take out a large yellow bandanna, weep piteously. as for Pen, he be go too far for that. he follow the woman about and about--when she be off the stage, it and the house be blank; the light and the red officer, reel wildly before his sight. he watch she at the side-scene--where she stand wait to come on the stage, and where her father take off her shawl: when the reconciliation arrive, and she fling herself down on Mr. Bingley's shoulder, whilst the child clung to their knee, and the Countess (Mrs. Bingley) and Baron Steinforth (perform with great liveliness and spirit by garbetts)--while the rest of the character form a group round they, Pen's hot eye only see Fotheringay, Fotheringay. the curtain fall upon he like a pall. he do not hear a word of what Bingley say, who come forward to announce the play for the next evening, and who take the tumultuous applause, as usual, for himself. Pen be not even distinctly aware that the house be call for Miss Fotheringay, nor do the manager seem to comprehend that anybody else but himself have cause the success of the play. at last he understand it--step back with a grin, and presently appear with Mrs. Haller on his arm. how beautiful she look! her hair have fall down, the officer throw her flower. she clutch they to her heart. she put back her hair, and smile all round. her eye meet Pen's. down go the curtain again: and she be go. not one note could he hear of the overture which the brass band of the dragoon blow by kind permission of Colonel Swallowtail.
"she be a crusher, benot she now!" Mr. Foker ask of his companion.
Pen do not know exactly what Foker say, and answer vaguely. he could not tell the other what he feel; he could not have speak, just then, to any mortal. besides, Pendennis do not quite know what he feel yet; it be something overwhelming, madden, delicious; a fever of wild joy and undefined longing.
and now Rowkins and Miss Thackthwaite come on to dance the favourite double hornpipe, and Foker abandon himself to the delight of this ballet, just as he have to the tear of the tragedy, a few minute before. Pen do not care for it, or indeed think about the dance, except to remember that that woman be act with she in the scene where she first come in. it be a mist before his eye. at the end of the dance he look at his watch and say it be time for he to go.
"hang it, stay to see the Bravo of the Battle-Axe," Foker say, "Bingley's splendid in it; he wear red tight, and have to carry Mrs. B. over the Pine-bridge of the Cataract, only shebe too heavy. itbe great fun, do stop."
Pen look at the bill with one linger fond hope that Miss Fotheringay's name might be hide, somewhere, in the list of the actor of the after-piece, but there be no such name. go he must. he have a long ride home. he squeeze Foker's hand. he be choke to speak, but he couldnot. he quit the theatre and walk frantically about the town, he know not how long; then he mount at the George and rode homeward, and Clavering clock sing out one as he come into the yard at Fairoaks. the lady of the house might have be awake, but she only hear he from the passage outside his room as he dash into bed and pull the clothe over his head.
Pen have not be in the habit of pass wakeful night, so he at once fall off into a sound sleep. even in later day and with a great deal of care and other thoughtful matter to keep he awake, a man from long practice or fatigue or resolution begin by go to sleep as usual: and get a nap in advance of Anxiety. but she soon come up with he and jog his shoulder, and say, "come, my man, no more of this laziness, you must wake up and have a talk with I." then they fall to together in the midnight. well, whatever might afterwards happen to he, poor little Pen be not come to this state yet; he tumble into a sound sleep--do not wake until an early hour in the morning, when the rook begin to caw from the little wood beyond his bedroom window; and--at that very instant and as his eye start open, the beloved image be in his mind. "my dear boy," he hear she say, "you be in a sound sleep and I would not disturb you: but I have be close by your pillow all this while: and I donot intend that you shall leave I. I be Love! I bring with I fever and passion: wild longing, madden desire; restless craving and seek. many a long day ere this I hear you call out for I; and behold now I be come."
be Pen frighten at the summon? not he. he do not know what be come: it be all wild pleasure and delight as yet. and as, when three year previously, and on enter the fifth form at the Cistercians, his father have make he a present of a gold watch which the boy take from under his pillow and examine on the instant of wake: for ever rub and polish it up in private and retire into corner to listen to its ticking: so the young man exult over his new delight; feel in his waistcoat pocket to see that it be safe; wound it up at night, and at the very first moment of wake hug it and look at it.--By the way, that first watch of Pen's be a showy ill-manufacture piece: it never go well from the beginning, and be always get out of order. and after put it aside into a drawer and forget it for some time, he swap it finally away for a more useful time-keeper.
Pen feel himself to be ever so many year old since yesterday. there be no mistake about it now. he be as much in love as the good hero in the good romance he ever read. he tell John to bring his shaving water with the utmost confidence. he dress himself in some of his fine clothe that morning: and come splendidly down to breakfast, patronise his mother and little Laura, who have be strum her music lesson for hour before; and who after he have read the prayer (of which he do not heed one single syllable) wonder at his grand appearance, and ask he to tell she what the play be about?
Pen laugh and decline to tell Laura what the play be about. in fact it be quite as well that she should not know. then she ask he why he have get on his fine pin and beautiful new waistcoat?
Pen blush and tell his mother that the old schoolfellow with whom he have din at Chatteris be read with a tutor at Baymouth, a very learn man; and as he be himself to go to College, and as there be several young man pursue their study at Baymouth--he be anxious to ride over-and-and just see what the course of their reading be.
Laura make a long face. Helen Pendennis look hard at her son, trouble more than ever with the vague doubt and terror which have be haunt she ever since the last night, when Farmer Gurnett bring back the news that Pen would not return home to dinner. Arthur's eye defy she. she try to console herself, and drive off her fear. the boy have never tell she an untruth. Pen conduct himself during breakfast in a very haughty and supercilious manner; and, take leave of the eld and young lady, be presently hear rid out of the stablecourt. he go gently at first, but gallop like a madman as soon as he think that he be out of hearing.
Smirke, think of his own affair, and softly rid with his toe out, to give Pen his three hour' reading at Fairoaks, meet his pupil, who shoot by he like the wind. Smirke's pony shy, as the other thunder past he; the gentle curate go over his head among the stinging-nettle in the hedge. Pen laugh as they meet, point towards the Baymouth road, and be go half a mile in that direction before poor Smirke have pick himself up.
Pen have resolve in his mind that he must see Foker that morning; he must hear about she; know about she; be with somebody who know she; and honest Smirke, for his part, sit up among the stinging-nettle, as his pony crop quietly in the hedge, think dismally to himself, ought he to go to Fairoaks now that his pupil be evidently go away for the day. yes, he think he might go, too. he might go and ask Mrs. Pendennis when Arthur would be back; and hear Miss Laura her Watts's Catechism. he get up on the little pony--both be use to his slip off--and advance upon the house from which his scholar have just rush away in a whirlwind.
thus love make fool of all of we, big and little; and the curate have tumble over head and heel in pursuit of it, and Pen have start in the first heat of the mad race.
CHAPTER V
Mrs. Haller at home
without slacken her pace, rebecca the mare gallop on to Baymouth, where Pen put she up at the inn stable, and run straightway to Mr. Foker's lodging, which he know from the direction give to he by that gentleman on the previous day. on reach these apartment, which be over a chemist's shop whose stock of cigar and sodawater go off rapidly by the kind patronage of his young inmate, Pen only find Mr. Spavin, Foker's friend, and part owner of the tandem which the latter have drive into Chatteris, who be smoking, and teach a little dog, a friend of his, trick with a bit of biscuit.
Pen's healthy red face, fresh from the gallop, compare oddly with the waxy debauch little feature of Foker's chum; the latter remark it. "whobe that man?" he think, "he look as fresh as a bean. his hand donot shake of a morning, Iwould bet five to one."
Foker have not come home at all. here be a disappointment!--mr. Spavin could not say when his friend would return. sometimes he stop a day, sometimes a week. of what college be Pen? would he have anything? there be a very fair tap of ale. Mr. Spavin be enable to know Pendennis's name, on the card which the latter take out and lay down (perhaps Pen in these day be rather proud of have a card)--and so the young man take leave.
then Pen go down the rock, and walk about on the sand, bite his nail by the shore of the much-sound sea. it stretch before he bright and immeasurable. the blue water come roll into the bay, foaming and roar hoarsely: Pen look they in the face with blank eye, hardly regard they. what a tide there be pour into the lad's own mind at the time, and what a little power have he to check it! Pen fling stone into the sea, but it still keep come on. he be in a rage at not see Foker. he want to see Foker. he must see Foker. "suppose I go on--on the Chatteris road, just to see if I can meet he," Pen think. rebecca be saddle in another half hour, and gallop on the grass by the Chatteris road. about four mile from Baymouth, the Clavering road branch off, as everybody know, and the mare naturally be for take that turn, but, cut she over the shoulder, Pen pass the turning, and ride on to the turnpike without see any sign of the black tandem and red wheel.
as he be at the turnpike he might as well go on: that be quite clear. so Pen ride to the George, and the hostler tell he that Mr. Foker be there sure enough, and that "hewould be a makin a tremendous row the night afore, a drinkin and a singin, and want to fight Tom the postboy: which Ibe think hewould have have the bad of it," the man add, with a grin. "have you carry up your master's 'ot water to shave with?" he add, in a very satirical manner, to Mr. Foker's domestic, who here come down the yard bear his master's clothe, most beautifully brush and arrange. "show Mr. Pendennis up to 'un," and Pen follow the man at last to the apartment, where, in the midst of an immense bed, Mr. Harry Foker lie reposing.
the feather bed and bolster swell up all round Mr. Foker, so that you could hardly see his little sallow face and red silk nightcap.
"Hullo!" say Pen.
"who go there? brother, quickly tell!" sing out the voice from the bed. "what! Pendennis again? be your Mamma acquaint with your absence? do you sup with we last night? no stop--who sup with we last night, Stoopid?"
"there be the three officer, sir, and Mr. Bingley, sir, and Mr. Costigan, sir," the man answer, who receive all Mr. Foker's remark with perfect gravity.
"ah yes: the cup and merry jest go round. we chant and I remember I want to fight a postboy. do I thrash he, Stoopid?"
"no, sir. Fight donot come off, sir," say Stoopid, still with perfect gravity. he be arrange Mr. Foker's dressing-case--a trunk, the gift of a fond mother, without which the young fellow never travel. it contain a prodigious apparatus in plate; a silver dish, a silver mug, silver box and bottle for all sort of essence, and a choice of razor ready against the time when Mr. Foker's beard should come.
"do it some other day," say the young fellow, yawn and throw up his little lean arm over his head. "no, there be no fight; but there be chant. Bingley chant, I chant, the General chant--Costigan I mean.--Did you ever hear he sing 'the Little Pig under the Bed,' Pen?"
"the man we meet yesterday," say Pen, all in a tremor, "the father of---"
"of the fotheringay,--the very man. ainot she a Venus, Pen?"
"please sir, Mr. Costigan's in the sittin-room, sir, and say, sir, you ask he to breakfast, sir. call five time, sir; but wouldnot wake you on no account; and have be here since eleven o'clock, sir---"
"how much be it now?"
"one, sir."
"what would the good of mother say," cry the little sluggard, "if she see I in bed at this hour? she send I down here with a grinder. she want I to cultivate my neglect genus--he, be! I say, Pen, this benot quite like seven o'clock school,--is it, old boy?"--and the young fellow burst out into a boyish laugh of enjoyment. then he added--"Go in and talk to the General whilst I dress. and I say, Pendennis, ask he to sing you 'the Little Pig under the Bed;' itbe capital." Pen go off in great perturbation, to meet Mr. Costigan, and Mr. Foker commence his toilet.
of Mr. Foker's two grandfather, the one from whom he inherit a fortune be a brewer; the other be an earl, who endow he with the most doting mother in the world. the Fokers have be at the cistercian school from father to son; at which place, our friend, whose name could be see over the playground wall, on a public-house sign, under which 'Foker's Entire' be paint, have be dreadfully bully on account of his trade, his uncomely countenance, his inaptitude for learning and cleanliness, his gluttony and other weak point. but those who know how a susceptible youth, under the tyranny of his schoolfellow, become silent and a sneak, may understand how in a very few month after his liberation from bondage, he develop himself as he have do; and become the humorous, the sarcastic, the brilliant Foker, with whom we have make acquaintance. a dunce he always be, it be true; for learn cannot be acquire by leave school and enter at college as a fellow-commoner; but he be now (in his own peculiar manner) as great a dandy as he before have be a slattern, and when he enter his sitting-room to join his two guest, arrive scented and array in fine linen, and perfectly splendid in appearance.
General or Captain Costigan--for the latter be the rank which he prefer to assume--be seat in the window with the newspaper hold before he at arm's length. the Captain's eye be somewhat dim; and he be spell the paper, with the help of his lip, as well as of those bloodshot eye of his, as you see gentleman do to whom reading be a rare and difficult occupation. his hat be cock very much on one ear; and as one of his foot lie up in the window-seat, the observer of such matter might remark, by the size and shabbiness of the boot which the Captain wear, that time do not go very well with he. poverty seem as if it be dispose, before it take possession of a man entirely, to attack his extremity first: the covering of his head, foot, and hand be its first prey. all these part of the Captain's person be particularly rakish and shabby. as soon as he see Pen he descend from the window-seat and salute the new-comer, first in a military manner, by convey a couple of his finger (cover with a broken black glove) to his hat, and then remove that ornament altogether. the Captain be incline to be bald, but he bring a quantity of lank iron-grey hair over his pate, and have a couple of whisp of the same fall down on each side of his face. much whisky have spoil what complexion Mr. Costigan may have possess in his youth. his once handsome face have now a copper tinge. he wear a very high stock, scar and stain in many place; and a dress-coat tightly button up in those part where the button have not part company from the garment.
"the young gentleman to whom I have the honour to be introjuice yesterday in the Cathadral Yard," say the Captain, with a splendid bow and wave of his hat. "I hope I see you well, sir. I mark ye in the thayatre last night during I daughter's perfawrumance; and miss ye on my return. I do but conduct her home, sir, for Jack Costigan, though poor, be a gentleman; and when I reintere the house to pay I respect to I joyous young friend, Mr. Foker--ye be go. we have a jolly night of ut, sir-- Mr. Foker, the three gallant young dragoon, and your 'umble servant. Gad, sir, it put I in mind of one of our old night when I bear his Majesty's commission in the Foighting Hundtherd and Third." and he pull out an old snuff box, which he present with a stately air to his new acquaintance.
Arthur be a great deal too much flurry to speak. this shabby-look buck be--be her father. the Captain be perfume with the recollection of the last night's cigar, and pull and twist the tuft on his chin as jauntily as any young dandy.
"I hope, Miss f--, Miss Costigan be well, sir," Pen say, flush up. "she--she give I great pleasure, than--than I--I--I ever enjoy at a play. I think, sir--I think shebe the fine actress in the world," he gasp out.
"your hand, young man! for ye speak from your heart," cry the Captain. "thank ye, sir, an old soldier and a fond father thank ye. she be the fine actress in the world. Ihave see the Siddons, sir, and the O'Nale-- they be great, but what be they compare to Miss Fotheringay? I do not wish she should ashume her own name while on the stage. I family, sir, be proud people; and the Costigans of Costiganstown think that an honest man, who have bear her Majesty's colour in the Hundred and Third, would demean himself, by permit his daughter to earn her old father's bread."
"there cannot be a more honourable duty, surely," Pen say.
"honourable! Bedad, sir, Iwould like to see the man who say Jack Costigan would consent to anything dishonourable. I have a heart, sir, though I be poor; I like a man who have a heart. you have: I read it in your honest face and steady eye. and would you believe it"? he add, after a pause, and with a pathetic whisper, "that that Bingley who have make his fortune by I child, give she but two guineas a week: out of which she find herself in dress, and which, add to I own small mean, make our all?"
now the Captain's mean be so small as to be, it may be say, quite invisible. but nobody know how the wind be temper to shorn irish lamb, and in what marvellous place they find pasture. if Captain Costigan, whom I have the honour to know, would but have tell his history, it would have be a great moral story. but he neither would have tell it if he could, nor could if he would; for the Captain be not only unaccustomed to tell the truth,--he be unable even to think it--and fact and fiction reel together in his muzzy, whiskified brain.
he begin life rather brilliantly with a pair of colour, a fine person and leg, and one of the most beautiful voice in the world. to his late day he sing with admirable pathos and humour those wonderful irish ballad which be so mirthful and so melancholy: and be always the first himself to cry at their pathos. poor cos! he be at once brave and maudlin, humorous and an idiot; always good-nature, and sometimes almost trustworthy. up to the last day of his life he would drink with any man, and back any man's bill: and his end be in a spunge-house, where the sheriff's officer, who take he, be fond of he.
in his brief morning of life, cos form the delight of regimental mess, and have the honour of sing his song, bacchanalian and sentimental, at the table of the most illustrious general and commander-in-chief, in the course of which period he drink three time as much claret as be good for he, and spend his doubtful patrimony. what become of he subsequently to his retirement from the army, be no affair of our. I take it, no foreigner understand the life of an irish gentleman without money, the way in which he manage to keep afloat--the wind-raise conspiracy, in which he engage with hero as unfortunate as himself--the mean by which he contrive, during most day of the week, to get his portion of whisky-and-water: all these be mystery to we inconceivable: but suffice it to say, that through all the storm of life Jack have float somehow, and the lamp of his nose have never go out.
before he and Pen have have a half-hour's conversation, the Captain manage to extract a couple of sovereign from the young gentleman for ticket for his daughter's benefit, which be to take place speedily; and be not a bona fide transaction such as that of the last year, when poor Miss Fotheringay have lose fifteen shilling by her venture; but be an arrangement with the manager, by which the lady be to have the sale of a certain number of ticket, keep for herself a large portion of the sum for which they be sell.
Pen have but two pound in his purse, and he hand they over to the Captain for the ticket; he would have be afraid to offer more lest he should offend the latter's delicacy. Costigan scrawl he an order for a box, lightly slip the sovereign into his waistcoat, and slap his hand over the place where they lay. they seem to warm his old side.
"Faith, sir," say he, "the bullion's scarcer with I than it use to be, as be the case with many a good fellow. I win six hundthre of them in a single night, sir, when I kind friend, his Royal Highness the Duke of Kent, be in Gibralther." and he straightway pour out to Pen a series of story regard the claret drunk, the bet make, the race ride by the garrison there, with which he keep the young gentleman amuse until the arrival of their host and his breakfast.
then it be good to see the Captain's behaviour before the devil turkey and the mutton chop! his story pour forth unceasingly, and his spirit rise as he chat to the young man. when he get a bit of sunshine, the old lazzarone bask in it; he prate about his own affair and past splendour, and all the lord, general, and Lord-Lieutenants he have ever know. he describe the death of his darling Bessie, the late Mrs. Costigan, and the challenge he have send to Captain Shanty Clancy, of the Slashers, for look rude at Miss Fotheringay as she be on her kyar in the Phaynix; and then he describe how the Captain apologise, give a dinner at the Kildare Street, where six of they drink twinty-one bottle of claret, etc. he announce that to sit with two such noble and generous young fellow be the happiness and pride of an old soldier's existence; and have have a second glass of Curacoa, be so happy that he begin to cry. altogether we should say that the Captain be not a man of much strength of mind, or a very eligible companion for youth; but there be bad man, hold much well place in life, and more dishonest, who have never commit half so many roguery as he. they walk out, the Captain hold an arm of each of his dear young friend, and in a maudlin state of contentment. he wink at one or two tradesman's shop where, possibly, he owe a bill, as much as to say, "see the company Ibe in--sure Iwill pay you, my boy,"--and they part finally with Mr. Foker at a billiard-room, where the latter have a particular engagement with some gentleman of Colonel Swallowtail's regiment.
Pen and the shabby Captain still walk the street together; the Captain, in his sly way, make inquiry about Mr. Foker's fortune and station in life. Pen tell he how Foker's father be a celebrated brewer, and his mother be Lady Agnes Milton, Lord Rosherville's daughter. the Captain break out into a strain of exaggerated compliment and panegyric about Mr. Foker, whose "native aristocracie," he say, "could be see with the twinkling of an oi--and only serve to adawrun other quality which he possess, a foin intellect and a generous heart,"--in not one word of which speech do the Captain accurately believe.
Pen walk on, listen to his companion's prate, wonder, amused, and puzzle. it have not as yet enter into the boy's head to disbelieve any statement that be make to he; and be of a candid nature himself, he take naturally for truth what other people tell he. Costigan have never have a well listener, and be highly flatter by the attentiveness and modest bearing of the young man.
so much pleased be he with the young gentleman, so artless, honest, and cheerful do Pen seem to be, that the Captain finally make he an invitation, which he very seldom accord to young man, and ask Pen if he would do he the fever to enter his humble abode, which be near at hand, where the Captain would have the honour of inthrojuice his young friend to his daughther, Miss Fotheringay?
Pen be so delightfully shocked at this invitation, and be so stricken down by the happiness thus suddenly offer to he, that he think he should have drop from the Captain's arm at first, and tremble lest the other should discover his emotion. he gasp out a few incoherent word, indicative of the high gratification he should have in be present to the lady for whose--for whose talent he have conceive such an admiration--such an extreme admiration; and follow the Captain, scarcely know whither that gentleman lead he. he be go to see she! he be go to see she! in she be the centre of the universe. she be the kernel of the world for Pen. yesterday, before he know she, seem a period ever so long ago--a revolution be between he and that time, and a new world about to begin.
the Captain conduct his young friend to that quiet little street in Chatteris, which be call Prior's Lane, which lie in the ecclesiastical quarter of the town, close by Dean's Green and the canon' house, and be overlook by the enormous tower of the cathedral; there the Captain dwell modestly in the first floor of a low gable house, on the door of which be the brass plate of 'Creed, Tailor and Robe-maker.' Creed be dead, however. his widow be a pew-opener in the cathedral hard by; his eld son be a little scamp of a choir-boy, who play toss-halfpenny, lead his little brother into mischief, and have a voice as sweet as an angel. a couple of the latter be sit on the door-step, down which you go into the passage of the house; and they jump up with great alacrity to meet their lodger, and plunge wildly, and rather to Pen's surprise, at the swallow-tail of the Captain's dress-coat; for the truth be, that the good-natured gentleman, when he be in cash, generally bring home an apple or a piece of gingerbread for these child. "whereby the widdy never press I for rint when not convanient," as he remark afterwards to Pen, wink knowingly, and lay a finger on his nose.
Pen tumble down the step, and as he follow his companion up the creak old stair, his knee tremble under he. he could hardly see when he enter, follow the Captain, and stand in the room--in her room. he see something black before he, and wave as if make a curtsey, and hear, but quite indistinctly, Costigan make a speech over he, in which the Captain, with his usual magniloquence, express to "I child" his wish to make she know to "his dear and admirable young friend, Mr. Awther Pindinnis, a young gentleman of property in the neighbourhood, a person of refoined moind, and enviable manner, a sincare lover of poethry, and a man possest of a feeling and affectionate heart."
"it be very fine weather," Miss Fotheringay say, in an irish accent, and with a deep rich melancholy voice.
"very," say Mr. Pendennis. in this romantic way their conversation begin; and he find himself seat on a chair, and have leisure to look at the young lady.
she look still handsomer off the stage, than before the lamp. all her attitude be naturally grand and majestical. if she go and stand up against the mantelpiece her robe drape itself classically round she; her chin support itself on her hand, the other line of her form arrange themselves in full harmonious undulation--she look like a Muse in contemplation. if she sate down on a cane-bottom chair, her arm round itself over the back of the seat, her hand seem as if it ought to have a sceptre put into it, the fold of her dress fall naturally round she in order, like lady of honour round a throne, and she look like an empress. all her movement be graceful and imperial. in the morning you could see her hair be blue-black, her complexion of dazzle fairness, with the faint possible blush flickering, as it be, in her cheek. her eye be grey, with prodigious long lash; and as for her mouth, Mr. Pendennis have give I subsequently to understand, that it be of a star red colour, with which the most brilliant geranium, sealing-wax, or Guardsman's coat, could not vie.
"and very warm," continue this empress and queen of Sheba.
Mr. Pen again assent, and the conversation roll on in this manner. she ask Costigan whether he have have a pleasant evening at the George, and he recount the supper and the tumbler of punch. then the father ask she how she have be employ the morning.
"bow come," say she, "at ten, and we study Ophalia. itbe for the twenty-fourth, when I hope, sir, we shall have the honour of see ye."
"indeed, indeed, you will," Mr. Pendennis cry; wonder that she should say 'Ophalia,' and speak with an irish inflection of voice naturally, who have not the least hibernian accent on the stage.
"Ihave secure 'um for your benefit, dear," say the Captain, tap his waistcoat pocket, wherein lie Pen's sovereign, and wink at Pen, with one eye, at which the boy blush.
"Mr---the gentleman's very obleging," say Mrs. Haller.
"my name be Pendennis," say Pen, blushing. "I--i--hope you'll--you'll remember it." his heart thump so as he make this audacious declaration, that he almost choke in utter it.
"pendennis"--she answer slowly, and look he full in the eye, with a glance, so straight, so clear, so bright, so killing, with a voice so sweet, so round, so low, that the word and the glance shoot Pen through and through, and perfectly transfix he with pleasure.
"I never know the name be so pretty before," Pen say.
"'tis a very pretty name," Ophelia say. "Pentweazlebe not a pretty name. remember, papa, when we be on the Norwich Circuit, Young Pentweazle, who use to play second old man, and marry Miss Rancy, the Columbine; theybe both engage in London now, at the Queen's, and get five pound a week. Pentweazle benot his real name. 'Twas Judkin give it he, I donot know why. his name be Harrington; that is, his real name be Potts; fawther a clergyman, very respectable. Harrington be in London, and get in debt. ye remember; he come out in Falkland, to Mrs. Bunce's Julia."
"and a pretty Julia she be," the Captain interpose; "a woman of fifty, and a mother of ten child. 'tis you ought to have be Julia, or my namebe not Jack Costigan."
"I donot take the lead business then," Miss Fotheringay say modestly; "I benot fit for't till bow teach I."
"true for you, my dear," say the Captain: and bend to Pendennis, he add, "rejuice in circumstance, sir, I be for some time a fencing-master in Dublin (therebe only three man in the empire could touch I with the foil once, but Jack Costigan's get old and stiff now, sir), and my daughter have an engagement at the thayater there; and 'twas there that my friend, Mr. Bows, who see her capability, and be an uncommon 'cute man, give her lesson in the dramatic art, and make she what ye see. what have ye do since bow go, emily?"
"sure, Ihave make a pie," Emily say, with perfect simplicity. she pronounce it "Poy."
"if ye'll try it at four o'clock, sir, say the word," say Costigan gallantly. "that girl, sir, make the good veal and ham pie in England, and I think I can promise ye a glass of punch of the right flavour."
Pen have promise to be at home to dinner at six o'clock, but the rascal think he could accommodate pleasure and duty in this point, and be only too eager to accept this invitation. he look on with delight and wonder whilst Ophelia busy herself about the room, and prepare for the dinner. she arrange the glass, and lay and smooth the little cloth, all which dutie she perform with a quiet grace and good humour, which enchant her guest more and more. the "poy" arrive from the baker's in the hand of one of the little choir-boy's brother at the proper hour: and at four o'clock Pen find himself at dinner--actually at dinner with the great tragic actress in the world, and her father--with the handsome woman in all creation--with his first and only love, whom he have adore ever since when?--ever since yesterday, ever since for ever. he eat a crust of her making, he pour she out a glass of beer, he see she drink a glass of punch--just one wine-glass full--out of the tumbler which she mix for her papa. she be perfectly good-natured, and offer to mix one for Pendennis too. it be prodigiously strong; Pen have never in his life drunk so much spirit and water. be it the punch, or the punch-maker who intoxicate he?
during dinner, when the Captain, whom his daughter treat most respectfully, cease prattle about himself and his adventure, Pen try to engage the Fotheringay in conversation about poetry and about her profession. he ask she what she think of Ophelia's madness, and whether she be in love with Hamlet or not? "in love with such a little ojous wretch as that stunt manager of a Bingley?" she bristle with indignation at the thought. Pen explain it be not of she he speak, but of Ophelia of the play. "oh, indeed; if no offence be mean, none be take: but as for Bingley, indeed, she do not value he--not that glass of punch." Pen next try she on Kotzebue. "Kotzebue? who be he?"--"The author of the play in which she have be perform so admirably." "she do not know that--the man's name at the beginning of the book be Thompson," she say. Pen laugh at her adorable simplicity. he tell she of the melancholy fate of the author of the play, and how Sand have kill he. it be for the first time in her life that Miss Costigan have ever hear of Mr. Kotzebue's existence, but she look as if she be very much interested, and her sympathy suffice for honest Pen.
and in the midst of this simple conversation, the hour and a quarter which poor Pen could afford to allow himself, pass away only too quickly; and he have take leave, he be go, and away on his rapid road homeward on the back of Rebecca. she be call upon to show her mettle in the three journey which she make that day.
"what be that he be talk about, the madness of Hamlet, and the theory of the great german critic on the subject?" Emily ask of her father.
"'deed then I donot know, milly dear," answer the Captain. "wewill ask Bows when he come."
"anyhow, hebe a nice, fair-speak pretty young man," the lady say: "how many ticket do he take of you?"
"Faith, then, he take six, and gev I two guineas, Milly," the Captain say. "I suppose they young chap be not too flush of coin."
"hebe full of book-learning," Miss Fotheringay continue. "Kotzebue! he, he, what a droll name indeed, now; and the poor fellow kill by Sand, too! do ye ever hear such a thing? Iwill ask bow about it, papa, dear."
"a queer death, sure enough," ejaculate the Captain, and change the painful theme. "'tis an elegant mare the young gentleman rid," Costigan go on to say; "and a grand breakfast, intirely, that young Mister Foker give we."
"hebe good for two private box, and at lee twenty ticket, I should say," cry the daughter, a prudent lass, who always keep her fine eye on the main chance.
"Iwill go bail of that," answer the papa, and so their conversation continue awhile, until the tumbler of punch be finish; and their hour of departure soon come, too; for at half-past six Miss Fotheringay be to appear at the theatre again, whither her father always accompany she; and stand, as we have see, in the side-scene watch she, and drank spirit-and-water in the green-room with the company there.
"how beautiful she be," think Pen, cantering homeward. "how simple and how tender! how charming it be to see a woman of her commanding genius busy herself with the delightful, though humble, office of domestic life, cook dish to make her old father comfortable, and brewing drink for he with her delicate finger! how rude it be of I to begin to talk about professional matter, and how well she turn the conversation! by the way, she talk about professional matter herself; but then with what fun and humour she tell the story of her comrade, Pentweazle, as he be call! there be no humour like irish humour. her father be rather tedious, but thoroughly amiable; and how fine of he, give lesson in fencing after he quit the army, where he be the pet of the Duke of Kent! fencing! I should like to continue my fencing, or I shall forget what Angelo teach I. Uncle Arthur always like I to fence --he say it be the exercise of a gentleman. hang it. Iwill take some lesson of Captain Costigan. go along, rebecca--up the hill, old lady. Pendennis, Pendennis--how she speak the word! emily, Emily! how good, how noble, how beautiful, how perfect, she be!"
now the reader, who have have the benefit of overhear the entire conversation which Pen have with Miss Fotheringay, can judge for himself about the power of her mind, and may perhaps be dispose to think that she have not say anything astonishingly humorous or intellectual in the course of the above interview. she have marry, and take her position in the world as the most spotless and irreproachable lady since, and I have have the pleasure of make her acquaintance: and must certainly own, against my friend Pen's opinion, that his adore Emily be not a clever woman. the truth be, she have not only never hear of Kotzebue, but she have never hear of Farquhar, or Congreve, or any dramatist in whose play she have not a part: and of these drama she only know the part which concern herself. a wag once tell she that Dante be bear at Algiers: and ask her,--which Dr. Johnson write first, 'Irene,' or 'every man in his Humour.' but she have the good of the joke, for she have never hear of Irene or every Man in his Humour, or Dante, or perhaps Algiers. it be all one to she. she act what little bow tell she--where he tell she to sob, she sob--where he tell she to laugh, she laugh. she give the tirade or the repartee without the slight notion of its meaning. she go to church and go every Sunday, with a reputation perfectly intact, and be (and be) as guiltless of sense as of any other crime.
but what do our Pen know of these thing? he see a pair of bright eye, and he believe in they--a beautiful image, and he fall down and worship it. he supply the meaning which her word want; and create the divinity which he love. be Titania the first who fall in love with an ass, or pygmalion the only artist who have go crazy about a stone? he have find she; he have find what his soul thirst after. he fling himself into the stream and drink with all his might. let those say who have be thirsty once how delicious that first draught be. as he ride down the avenue towards home--Pen shriek with laughter as he see the Reverend Mr. Smirke once more come demurely away from Fairoaks on his pony. Smirke have dawdle and stay at the cottage on the way, and then dawdle with Laura over her lesson--and then look at Mrs. Pendennis's garden and improvement until he have perfectly bore out that lady: and he have take his leave at the very last minute without that invitation to dinner which he fondly expect.
Pen be full of kindness and triumph. "what, pick up and sound?" he cry out laugh. "come along back, old fellow, and eat my dinner--I have have mine: but we will have a bottle of the old wine and drink her health, Smirke."
Poor Smirke turn the pony's head round, and jog along with Arthur. his mother be charm to see he in such high spirit, and welcome Mr. Smirke for his sake, when Arthur say he have force the curate back to dine. he give a most ludicrous account of the play of the night before, and of the acting of Bingley the Manager, in his rickety Hessians, and the enormous Mrs. Bingley as the Countess, in rumpled green satin and a polish cap; he mimic they, and delight his mother and little Laura, who clap her hand with pleasure.
"and Mrs. Haller?" say Mrs. Pendennis.
"shebe a stunner, ma'am," Pen say, laugh, and use the word of his revere friend, Mr. Foker.
"a what, Arthur?" ask the lady.
"what be a stunner, Arthur?" cry Laura, in the same voice.
so he give they a queer account of Mr. Foker, and how he use to be call vat and Grains, and by other contumelious name at school: and how he be now exceedingly rich, and a Fellow Commoner at St. Boniface. but gay and communicative as he be, Mr. Pen do not say one syllable about his ride to Chatteris that day, or about the new friend whom he have make there.
when the two lady retire, Pen, with flash eye, fill up two great bumper of Madeira, and look Smirke full in the face say, "herebe to she!"
"herebe to she," say the curate with a sigh, lift the glass and empty it, so that his face be a little pink when he put it down.
Pen have even less sleep that night than on the night before. in the morning, and almost before dawn, he go out and saddle that unfortunate Rebecca himself, and ride she on the Downs like mad. again Love have rouse he--and say, "awake, Pendennis, I be here." that charming fever --that delicious longing--and fire, and uncertainty; he hug they to he--be would not have lose they for all the world.
CHAPTER VI
contain both Love and War
Cicero and Euripides do not occupy Mr. Pen much for some time after this, and honest Mr. Smirke have a very easy time with his pupil. rebecca be the animal who suffer most in the present state of Pen's mind, for, besides those day when he could publicly announce his intention of go to Chatteris to take a fencing-lesson, and go thither with the knowledge of his mother, whenever he see three hour clear before he, the young rascal make a rush for the city, and find his way to Prior's Lane. he be as frantic with vexation when Rebecca go lame, as Richard at Bosworth, when his horse be kill under he: and get deeply into the book of the man who keep the hunting-stable at Chatteris for the doctoring of his own, and the hire of another animal.
then, and perhaps once in a week, under pretence of go to read a greek play with Smirke, this young reprobate set off so as to be in time for the Competitor down coach, stay a couple of hour in Chatteris, and return on the rival which leave for London at ten at night. once his secret be nearly lose by Smirke's simplicity, of whom Mrs. Pendennis ask whether they have read a great deal the night before, or a question to that effect. Smirke be about to tell the truth, that he have never see Mr. Pen at all, when the latter's boot-heel come grind down on Mr. Smirke's toe under the table, and warn the curate not to betray he.
they have have conversation on the tender subject, of course. it be good sport (if you be not yourself engage in the conversation) to hear two man in love talk. there must be a confidant and depositary somewhere. when inform, under the most solemn vow of secrecy, of Pen's condition of mind, the curate say, with no small tremor, "that he hop it be no unworthy object--no unlawful attachment, which Pen have formed"--for if so, the poor fellow feel it would be his duty to break his vow and inform Pen's mother, and then there would be a quarrel, he feel, with sicken apprehension, and he would never again have a chance of see what he most like in the world.
"unlawful, unworthy!" Pen bounce out at the curate's question. "she be as pure as she be beautiful; I would give my heart to no other woman. I keep the matter a secret in my family, because--because--there be reason of a weighty nature which I be not at liberty to disclose. but any man who breathe a word against her purity insult both her honour and mine, and--and dammy, I willnot stand it."
Smirke, with a faint laugh, only say, "well, well, donot call I out, Arthur, for you know I cannot fight;" but by this compromise the wretched curate be put more than ever into the power of his pupil, and the Greek and mathematic suffer correspondingly.
if the reverend gentleman have have much discernment, and look into the Poet's Corner of the County Chronicle, as it arrive in the Wednesday's bag, he might have see 'Mrs. Haller,' 'passion and Genius,' 'line to Miss Fotheringay, of the Theatre Royal,' appear every week; and other verse of the most gloomy, thrilling, and passionate cast. but as these poem be no long sign NEP by their artful composer, but subscribe EROS, neither the tutor nor Helen, the good soul, who cut all her son's verse out of the paper, know that Nep be no other than that flame Eros, who sing so vehemently the character of the new actress.
"who be the lady," at last ask Mrs. Pendennis, "whom your rival be always sing in the County Chronicle? he write something like you, dear Pen, but yours be much the good. have you see Miss Fotheringay?"
Pen say yes, he have; that night he go to see the "Stranger," she act Mrs. Haller. by the way, she be go to have a benefit, and be to appear in Ophelia--suppose we be to go--Shakspeare, you know, mother-- we can get horse from the Clavering Arms. little Laura spring up with delight, she long for a play.
Pen introduce "Shakspeare, you know," because the deceased Pendennis, as become a man of his character, profess an uncommon respect for the bard of Avon, in whose work he safely say there be more poetry than in all 'Johnson's poet' put together. and though Mr. Pendennis do not much read the work in question, yet he enjoin Pen to peruse they, and often say what pleasure he should have, when the boy be of a proper age, in take he and mother to see some good play of the immortal poet.
the ready tear well up in the kind mother's eye as she remember these speech of the man who be go. she kiss her son fondly, and say she would go. Laura jump for joy. be Pen happy?--wa he ashame? as he hold his mother to he, he long to tell she all, but he keep his counsel. he would see how his mother like she; the play should be the thing, and he would try his mother like Hamlet's.
Helen, in her good humour, ask Mr. Smirke to be of the party. that ecclesiastic have be breed up by a fond parent at Clapham, who have an objection to dramatic entertainment, and he have never yet see a play. but, Shakspeare!--but to go with Mrs. Pendennis in her carriage, and sit a whole night by her side!--he could not resist the idea of so much pleasure, and make a feeble speech, in which he speak of temptation and gratitude, and finally accept Mrs. Pendennis's most kind offer. as he speak he give she a look, which make she exceedingly uncomfortable. she have see that look more than once, of late, pursue she. he become more positively odious every day in the widow's eye.
we be not go to say a great deal about Pen's courtship of Miss Fotheringay, for the reader have already have a speciman of her conversation, much of which need surely not be report. Pen sate with her hour after hour, and pour forth all his honest boyish soul to she. everything he know, or hop, or feel, or have read, or fancy, he tell to she. he never tired of talking and longing. one after another, as his thought rise in his hot eager brain, he clothe they in word, and tell they to she. her part of the tete-a-tete be not to talk, but to appear as if she understand what Pen talk (a difficult matter, for the young fellow blurt out no small quantity of nonsense), and to look exceedingly handsome and sympathising. the fact be, whilst he be make one of his tirade--and delight, perhaps, and wonder at his own eloquence, the lad would go on for twenty minute at a time--the lovely Emily, who could not comprehend a tenth part of his talk, have leisure to think about her own affair, and would arrange in her own mind how they should dress the cold mutton, or how she would turn the black satin, or make herself out of her scarf a bonnet like Miss Thackthwaite's new one, and so forth. Pen spout Byron and Moore; passion and poetry: her business be to throw up her eye, or fix they for a moment on his face, to cry, "oh, 'tis beautiful! ah, how exquisite! repeat those line again." and off the boy go, and she return to her own simple thought about the turn gown, or the hashed mutton.
in fact Pen's passion be not long a secret from the lovely Emily or her father. upon his second visit, his admiration be quite evident to both of they, and on his departure the old gentleman say to his daughter, as he wink at she over his glass of grog, "Faith, Milly darling, I think ye've hook that chap."
"Pooh, 'tis only a boy, papa dear," milly remark. "sure hebe but a child." Pen would have be very much pleased if he have hear that phrase--he be gallop home wild with pleasure, and shout out her name as he ride.
"Ye've hooked 'um any how," say the Captain, "and let I tell ye hebe not a bad fish. I ask Tom at the George, and Flint, the grocer, where his mother dale--fine fortune--drive in her chariot--splendid park and ground--Fairoaks Park--only son--property all his own at twenty-one--ye might go far and not fare so well, Miss Fotheringay."
"Them boy be mostly talk," say Milly, seriously. "ye know at Dublin how ye go on about young Poldoody, and Ihave a whole desk full of verse he write I when he be in Trinity College; but he go abroad, and his mother marry he to an Englishwoman."
"Lord Poldoody be a young nobleman; and in they itbe natural: and ye benot in the position in which ye be now, milly dear. but ye mustnot encourage this young chap too much, for, bedad, Jack Costigan willnot have any thrilling with his daughter."
"no more will his daughter, papa, you may be sure of that," Milly say. "a little sip more of the punch,--sure, 'tis beautiful. ye neednot be afraid about the young chap--I think Ibe old enough to take care of myself, Captain Costigan."
so Pen use to come day after day, rush in and gallop away, and grow more wild about the girl with every visit. sometimes the Captain be present at their meeting; but have a perfect confidence in his daughter, he be more often inclined to leave the young couple to themselves, and cock his hat over his eye, and strut off on some errand when Pen enter. how delightful those interview be! the Captain's drawing-room be a low wainscote room, with a large window look into the Dean's garden. there Pen sate and talk--and talked-- Emily, look beautiful as she sate at her work--look beautiful and calm, and the sunshine come stream in at the great window, and light up her superb face and form. in the midst of the conversation, the great bell would begin to boom, and he would pause smile, and be silent until the sound of the vast music die away--or the rook in the cathedral elm would make a great noise towards sunset--or the sound of the organ and the chorister would come over the quiet air, and gently hush Pen's talking.
by the way, it must be say that Miss Fotheringay, in a plain shawl and a close bonnet and veil, go to church every Sunday of her life, accompany by her indefatigable father, who give the response in a very rich and fine brogue, join in the psalm and chanting, and behave in the most exemplary manner.
Little Bows, the house-friend of the family, be exceedingly wroth at the notion of Miss Fotheringay's marriage with a stripling seven or eight year her junior. bow, who be a cripple, and own that he be a little more deformed even than Bingley the manager, so that he could not appear on the stage, be a singular wild man of no small talent and humour. attract first by Miss Fotheringay's beauty, he begin to teach she how to act. he shriek out in his cracked voice the part, and his pupil learn they from his lip by rote, and repeat they in her full rich tone. he indicate the attitude, and set and move those beautiful arm of her. those who remember this grand actress on the stage can recall how she use always precisely the same gesture, look, and tone; how she stand on the same plank of the stage in the same position, roll her eye at the same instant and to the same degree, and weep with precisely the same heart-rend pathos and over the same pathetic syllable. and after she have come out tremble with emotion before the audience, and look so exhausted and tearful that you fancy she would faint with sensibility, she would gather up her hair the instant she be behind the curtain, and go home to a mutton-chop and a glass of brown stout; and the harrowing labour of the day over, she go to bed and snore as resolutely and as regularly as a porter.
bow then be indignant at the notion that his pupil should throw her chance away in life by bestow her hand upon a little country squire. as soon as a London manager see she he prophesy that she would get a London engagement, and a great success. the misfortune be that the London manager have see she. she have play in London three year before, and fail from utter stupidity. since then it be that bow have take she in hand and teach her part after part. how he work and scream, and twisted, and repeat line over and over again, and with what indomitable patience and dulness she follow he! she know that he make she: and let herself be make. she be not grateful, or ungrateful, or unkind, or ill-humour. she be only stupid; and Pen be madly in love with she.
the post-horse from the Clavering Arms arrive in due time, and carry the party to the theatre at Chatteris, where Pen be gratify in perceive that a tolerably large audience be assemble. the young gentleman from Baymouth have a box, in the front of which sate Mr. Foker and his friend Mr. Spavin, splendidly attire in the most full-blow evening costume. they salute Pen in a cordial manner, and examine his party, of which they approve, for little Laura be a pretty little red-cheeked girl with a quantity of shin brown ringlet, and Mrs. Pendennis, dress in black velvet with the diamond cross which she sport on great occasion, look uncommonly handsome and majestic. behind these sate Mr. Arthur, and the gentle Smirke with the curl repose on his fair forehead, and his white tie in perfect order. he blush to find himself in such a place--but how happy be he to be there! he and Mrs. Pendennis bring book of 'Hamlet' with they to follow the tragedy, as be the custom of honest countryfolk who go to a play in state. Samuel, coachman, groom, and gardener to Mr. Pendennis, take his place in the pit, where Mr. Foker's man be also visible. it be dot with non-commission officer of the Dragoons, whose band, by kind permission of Colonel Swallowtail, be, as usual, in the orchestra; and that corpulent and distinguished warrior himself, with his Waterloo medal and a number of his young man, make a handsome show in the box.
"who be that odd-look person bow to you, Arthur?" Mrs. Pendennis ask of her son.
Pen blush a great deal. "his name be Captain Costigan, ma'am," he say --"a peninsular officer." in fact it be the Captain in a new shoot of clothe, as he call they, and with a large pair of white kid glove, one of which he wave to Pendennis, whilst he lay the other sprawl over his heart and coat-button. Pen do not say any more. and how be Mrs. Pendennis to know that Mr. Costigan be the father of Miss Fotheringay?
Mr. Hornbull, from London, be the Hamlet of the night, Mr. Bingley modestly content himself with the part of Horatio, and reserve his chief strength for William in 'Black-Eyed Susan,' which be the second piece.
we have nothing to do with the play: except to say that Ophelia look lovely, and perform with admirable wild pathos laughing, weeping, gaze wildly, wave her beautiful white arm, and fling about her snatch of flower and song with the most charming madness. what an opportunity her splendid black hair have of toss over her shoulder! she make the most charming corpse ever see; and while Hamlet and Laertes be battle in her grave, she be look out from the back scene with some curiosity towards Pen's box, and the family party assemble in it.
there be but one voice in her praise there. Mrs. Pendennis be in ecstasy with her beauty. little Laura be bewilder by the piece, and the Ghost, and the play within the play (during which, as Hamlet lie at Ophelia's knee, Pen feel that he would have like to strangle Mr. Hornbull), but cry out great praise of that beautiful young creature. Pen be charm with the effect which she produce on his mother--and the clergyman, for his part, be exceedingly enthusiastic.
when the curtain fall upon that group of slaughter personage, who be despatch so suddenly at the end of 'Hamlet,' and whose demise astonish poor little Laura not a little, there be an immense shouting and applause from all quarter of the house; the intrepid Smirke, violently excited, clap his hand, and cry out "Bravo, Bravo," as loud as the Dragoon officer themselves. these be greatly moved,--il s'agitaient sur leurs bancs,--to borrow a phrase from our neighbour. they be lead cheer into action by the portly Swallowtail, who wave his cap--the non-commission officer in the pit, of course, gallantly follow their chief. there be a roar of bravos ring through the house; Pen bellow with the loud, "Fotheringay! Fotheringay!" and Messrs. Spavin and Foker give the view-halloo from their box. even Mrs. Pendennis begin to wave about her pocket-handkerchief, and little Laura dance, laugh, clap, and look up at Pen with wonder.
Hornbull lead the beneficiaire forward, amidst burst of enthusiasm--and she look so handsome and radiant, with her hair still over her shoulder, that Pen hardly could contain himself for rapture: and he lean over his mother's chair, and shout, and hurraye, and wave his hat. it be all he could do to keep his secret from Helen, and not say, "look! thatbe the woman! benot she peerless? I tell you I love she." but he disguise these feeling under an enormous bellowing and hurraying.
as for Miss Fotheringay and her behaviour, the reader be refer to a former page for an account of that. she go through precisely the same business. she survey the house all round with glance of gratitude; and tremble, and almost sink with emotion, over her favourite trap-door. she seize the flower (Foker discharge a prodigious bouquet at she, and even Smirke make a feeble shy with a rose, and blush dreadfully when it fall into the pit). she seize the flower and press they to her swell heart--etc., etc.--in a word--we refer the reader to early page. twinkle in her breast poor old Pen see a locket which he have buy of Mr. Nathan in High Street, with the last shilling he be worth, and a sovereign borrow from Smirke.
'Black-Eyed Susan' follow, at which sweet story our gentle-hearted friend be exceedingly charm and affect: and in which Susan, with a russet gown and a pink ribbon in her cap, look to the full as lovely as Ophelia. Bingley be great in William. Goll, as the Admiral, look like the figure-head of a seventy-four; and Garbetts, as Captain Boldweather, a miscreant who form a plan for carry off black-eyed Susan, and wave an immense cock hat say, "come what may, he will be the ruin of her"--all these perform their part with their accustomed talent; and it be with a sincere regret that all our friend see the curtain drop down and end that pretty and tender story.
if Pen have be alone with his mother in the carriage as they go home, he would have tell she all, that night; but he sate on the box in the moonshine smoke a cigar by the side of Smirke, who warm himself with a comforter. Mr. Foker's tandem and lamp whirl by the sober old Clavering poster as they be a couple of mile on their road home, and Mr. Spavin salute Mrs. Pendennis's carriage with some considerable variation of Rule Britannia on the key-bugle.
it happen two day after the above gaiety that Mr. Dean of Chatteris entertain a few select clerical friend at dinner at his Deanery Home. that they drink uncommonly good port wine, and abuse the Bishop over their dessert, be very likely matter: but with such we have nothing at present to do. our friend Doctor Portman, of Clavering, be one of the Dean's guest, and be a gallant man, and see from his place at the mahogany the Dean's lady walk up and down the grass, with her child sport around she, and her pink parasol over her lovely head--the Doctor stept out of the french window of the dining-room into the lawn, which skirt that apartment, and leave the other white neckcloth to gird at my lord Bishop. then the Doctor go up and offer Mrs. Dean his arm, and they saunter over the ancient velvet lawn, which have be mow and roll for immemorial Deans, in that easy, quiet, comfortable manner, in which people of middle age and good temper walk after a good dinner, in a calm golden summer evening, when the sun have but just sink behind the enormous cathedral-tower, and the sickle-shape moon be grow every instant brighter in the heaven.
now at the end of the Dean's garden there be, as we have state, Mrs. Creed's house, and the window of the first-floor room be open to admit the pleasant summer air. a young lady of six-and-twenty, whose eye be perfectly wide open, and a luckless boy of eighteen, blind with love and infatuation, be in that chamber together; in which person, as we have before see they in the same place, the reader will have no difficulty in recognise Mr. Arthur Pendennis and Miss Costigan.
the poor boy have take the plunge. tremble with passionate emotion, his heart beat and throb fiercely, tear rush forth in spite of he, his voice almost choke with feeling, poor Pen have say those word which he could withhold no more, and fling himself and his whole store of love, and admiration, and ardour at the foot of this mature beauty. be he the first who have do so? have none before or after he stake all their treasure of life, as a savage do his land and possession against a draught of the fair-skin' fire-water, or a couple of bauble eye?
"do your mother know of this, Arthur?" say Miss Fotheringay, slowly. he seize her hand madly and kiss it a thousand time. she do not withdraw it. "do the old lady know it?" Miss Costigan think to herself, "well, perhaps she may," and then she remember what a handsome diamond cross Mrs. Pendennis have on the night of the play, and think, "sure 'twill go in the family."
"calm yourself, dear Arthur," she say, in her low rich voice, and sniffle sweetly and gravely upon he. then, with her disengage hand, she put the hair lightly off his throbbing forehead. he be in such a rapture and whirl of happiness that he could hardly speak. at last he gasp out, "my mother have see you, and admire you beyond measure. she will learn to love you soon: who can do otherwise? she will love you because I do."
"'deed then, I think you do," say Miss Costigan, perhaps with a sort of pity for Pen.
think she do! of course here Mr. Pen go off into a rhapsody through which, as we have perfect command over our own feeling, we have no reason to follow the lad. of course, love, truth, and eternity be produce: and word be try but find impossible to plumb the tremendous depth of his affection. this speech, we say, be no business of ours. it be most likely not very wise, but what right have we to overhear? let the poor boy fle out his simple heart at the woman's foot, and deal gently with he. it be good to love wisely, no doubt: but to love foolishly be well than not to be able to love at all. some of we cannot: and be proud of our impotence too.
at the end of his speech Pen again kiss the imperial hand with rapture --and I believe it be at this very moment, and while Mrs. Dean and Doctor Portman be engage in conversation, that young Master Ridley Roset, her son, pull his mother by the back of her capacious dress and said--
"I say, ma! look up there"--and he waggle his innocent head.
that be, indeed, a view from the Dean's garden such as seldom be see by Deans--or be write in Chapters. there be poor Pen perform a salute upon the rosy finger of his charmer, who receive the embrace with perfect calmness and good humour. Master Ridley look up and grin, little Miss Rosa look at her brother, and open the mouth of astonishment. Mrs. Dean's countenance defy expression, and as for Dr. Portman, when he behold the scene, and see his prime favourite and dear pupil Pen, he stand mute with rage and wonder.
Mrs. Haller spy the party below at the same moment, and give a start and a laugh. "sure therebe somebody in the Dean's garden," she cry out; and withdraw with perfect calmness, whilst Pen dart away with his face glow like coal. the garden party have re-enter the house when he venture to look out again. the sickle moon be blaze bright in the heaven then, the star be glitter, the bell of the cathedral tolling nine, the Dean's guest (all save one, who have call for his horse dumpling, and ride off early) be partake of tea and butter cake in Mrs. Dean's drawing-room--when Pen take leave of Miss Costigan.
Pen arrive at home in due time afterwards, and be go to slip off to bed, for the poor lad be greatly wear and agitated, and his high-string nerve have be at almost a madden pitch when a summon come to he by John the old footman, whose countenance bear a very ominous look, that his mother must see he below.
on this he tie on his neckcloth again, and go downstairs to the drawing-room. there sate not only his mother, but her friend, the Reverend Doctor Portman. Helen's face look very pale by the light of the lamp--the Doctor's be flushed, on the contrary, and quiver with anger and emotion.
Pen see at once that there be a crisis, and that there have be a discovery. "now for it," he think.
"where have you be, Arthur?" Helen say in a trembling voice.
"how can you look that--that dear lady, and a christian clergyman in the face, sir?" bounce out the Doctor, in spite of Helen's pale, appeal look. "where have he be? where his mother's son should have be ashamed to go. for your mother's an angel, sir, an angel. how dare you bring pollution into her house, and make that spotless creature wretche with the thought of your crime?"
"Sir!" say Pen.
"donot deny it, sir," roar the Doctor. "donot add lie, sir, to your other infamy. I see you myself, sir. I see you from the Dean's garden. I see you kiss the hand of that infernal painted---"
"stop," Pen say, clap his fist on the table, till the lamp flicker up and shake, "I be a very young man, but you will please to remember that I be a gentleman--I will hear no abuse of that lady."
"Lady, sir," cry the Doctor, "that a lady--you--you--you stand in your mother's presence and call that--that woman a lady!---"
"in anybody's presence," shout out Pen. "she be worthy of any place. she be as pure as any woman. she be as good as she be beautiful. if any man but you insult she, I would tell he what I think; but as you be my old friend, I suppose you have the privilege to doubt of my honour."
"no, no, Pen, dear Pen," cry out Helen in an excess of joy. "I tell, I tell you, Doctor, he be not--not what you think:" and the tender creature come tremble forward fling herself on Pen's shoulder.
Pen feel himself a man, and a match for all the doctor in Doctordom. he be glad this explanation have come. "you see how beautiful she be," he say to his mother, with a soothe, protect air, like Hamlet with Gertrude in the play. "I tell you, dear mother, she be as good. when you know she you will say so. she be of all, except you, the simple, the kind, the most affectionate of woman. why should she not be on the stage?--she maintain her father by her labour."
"drunken old reprobate," growl the Doctor, but Pen do not hear or heed.
"if you could see, as I have, how orderly her life be, how pure and pious her whole conduct, you would--as I do--yes, as I do"--(with a savage look at the doctor)--"spurn the slanderer who dare to do she wrong. her father be an officer, and distinguish himself in Spain. he be a friend of his Royal Highness the Duke of Kent, and be intimately know to the Duke of Wellington, and some of the first officer of our army. he have meet my uncle Arthur at Lord Hill's, he think. his own family be one of the most ancient and respectable in Ireland, and indeed be as good as our own. the Costigans be king of Ireland."
"why, God bless my soul," shriek out the doctor, hardly know whether to burst with rage or laughter, "you donot mean to say you want to marry she?"
Pen put on his most princely air. "what else, Dr. Portman," he say, "do you suppose would be my desire?" utterly foil in his attack, and knock down by this sudden lunge of Pen's, the doctor could only gasp out, "Mrs. Pendennis, ma'am, send for the Major."
"send for the Major? with all my heart," say Arthur Prince of Pendennis and Grand Duke of Fairoaks, with a most superb wave of the hand. and the colloquy terminate by the writing of those two letter which be lay on Major Pendennis's breakfast-table, in London, at the commencement of Prince Arthur's most veracious history.
CHAPTER VII
in which the Major make his Appearance
our acquaintance, Major Arthur Pendennis, arrive in due time at Fairoaks, after a dreary night pass in the mail-coach, where a stout fellow-passenger, swell preternaturally with great-coat, have crowd he into a corner, and keep he awake by snore indecently; where a widow lady, opposite, have not only shut out the fresh air by close all the window of the vehicle, but have fill the interior with fume of Jamaica rum and water, which she suck perpetually from a bottle in her reticule; where, whenever he catch a brief moment of sleep, the twanging of the horn at the turnpike-gate, or the scuffling of his huge neighbour wedge he close and close, or the play of the widow's foot on his own tender toe, speedily wake up the poor gentleman to the horror and reality of life--a life which have pass away now and become impossible, and only live in fond memory. eight mile an hour, for twenty or five-and-twenty hour, a tight mail-coach, a hard seat, a gouty tendency, a perpetual change of coachman grumble because you do not fee they enough, a fellow-passenger partial to spirit-and-water,--who have not bear with these evil in the jolly old time? and how could people travel under such difficulty? and yet they do, and be merry too. next the widow, and by the side of the Major's servant on the roof, be a couple of school-boy go home for the midsummer holiday, and Major Pendennis wonder to see they sup at the inn at Bagshot, where they take in a cargo of ham, eggs, pie, pickle, tea, coffee, and boil beef, which surprise the poor Major, sip a cup of very feeble tea, and think with a tender dejection that Lord Steyne's dinner be come off at that very moment. the ingenuous ardour of the boy, however, amuse the Major, who be very good-natured, and he become the more interested when he find that the one who travel inside with he be a lord's son, whose noble father Pendennis, of course, have meet in the world of fashion which he frequent. the little lord sleep all night through, in spite of the squeezing, and the horn-blowing, and the widow; and he look as fresh as paint (and, indeed; pronounce himself to be so) when the Major, with a yellow face, a bristly beard, a wig out of curl, and strong rheumatic grief shoot through various limb of his uneasy body, descend at the little lodge-gate at Fairoaks, where the porteress and gardener's wife reverentially greet he, and, still more respectfully, Mr. Morgan, his man.
Helen be on the look-out for this expected guest, and see he from her window. but she do not come forward immediately to greet he. she know the Major do not like to be see at a surprise, and require a little preparation before he care to be visible. Pen, when a boy, have incur sad disgrace by carry off from the Major's dressing-table a little morocco box, which it must be confess contain the Major's back tooth, which he naturally would leave out of his jaw in a jolting mail-coach, and without which he would not choose to appear. Morgan, his man, make a mystery of mystery of his wig: curl they in private place: introduce they mysteriously to his master's room;--nor without his head of hair would the major care to show himself to any member of his family, or any acquaintance. he go to his apartment then and supply these deficiency; he groan, and moan, and wheeze, and curse Morgan through his toilet, as an old buck will, who have be up all night with a rheumatism, and have a long duty to perform. and finally be belt, curl, and set straight, he descend upon the drawing-room, with a grave majestic air, such as befit one who be at once a man of business and a man of fashion.
Pen be not there, however; only Helen, and little Laura sew at her knee; and to whom he never present more than a forefinger, as he do on this occasion after salute his sister-in-law. Laura take the finger tremble and drop it--and then flee out of the room. Major Pendennis do not want to keep she, or indeed to have she in the house at all, and have his private reason for disapprove of she: which we may mention on some future occasion. meanwhile Laura disappear and wander about the premise seek for Pen: whom she presently find in the orchard, pace up and down a walk there in earnest conversation with Mr. Smirke. he be so occupy that he do not hear Laura's clear voice sing out, until Smirke pull he by the coat and point towards she as she come run.
she run up and put her hand into his. "come in, Pen," she say, "therebe somebody come; uncle Arthur's come."
"he be, be he?" say Pen, and she feel he grasp her little hand. he look round at Smirke with uncommon fierceness, as much as to say, I be ready for he or any man.--mr. Smirke cast up his eye as usual and heave a gentle sigh.
"lead on, Laura," Pen say, with a half fierce, half comic air--"lead on, and say I wait upon my uncle." but he be laugh in order to hide a great anxiety: and be screw his courage inwardly to face the ordeal which he know be now before he.
Pen have take Smirke into his confidence in the last two day, and after the outbreak attendant on the discovery of Doctor Portman, and during every one of those forty-eight hour which he have pass in Mr. Smirke's society, have do nothing but talk to his tutor about Miss fotheringay-- Miss Emily Fotheringay--Emily, etc., to all which talk Smirke listen without difficulty, for he be in love himself, most anxious in all thing to propitiate Pen, and indeed very much himself enrapture by the personal charm of this goddess, whose like, never have be before at a theatrical representation, he have not behold until now. Pen's fire and volubility, his hot eloquence and rich poetical trope and figure, his manly heart, kind, ardent, and hopeful, refuse to see any defect in the person he love, any difficulty in their position that he might not overcome, have half convince Mr. Smirke that the arrangement propose by Mr. Pen be a very feasible and prudent one, and that it would be a great comfort to have emily settle at Fairoaks, Captain Costigan in the yellow room, establish for life there, and Pen marry at eighteen.
and it be a fact that in these two day the boy have almost talk over his mother, too; have parry all her objection one after another with that indignant good sense which be often the perfection of absurdity; and have bring she almost to acquiesce in the belief that if the marriage be doom in heaven, why doom it be--that if the young woman be a good person, it be all that she for her part have to ask; and rather to dread the arrival of the guardian uncle who she foresaw would regard Mr. Pen's marriage in a manner very different to that simple, romantic, honest, and utterly absurd way in which the widow be already dispose to look at question of this sort.
for as in the old allegory of the gold and silver shield, about which the two knight quarrel, each be right accord to the point from which he look: so about marriage; the question whether it be foolish or good, wise or otherwise, depend upon the point of view from which you regard it. if it mean a snug house in Belgravia, and pretty little dinner-party, and a pretty little brougham to drive in the Park, and a decent provision not only for the young people, but for the little Belgravians to come; and if these be the necessary of life (and they be with many honest people), to talk of any other arrangement be an absurdity: of love in lodging--a babyish folly of affection: that cannot pay coach-hire or afford a decent milliner--as mere wicked balderdash and childish romance. if on the other hand your opinion be that people, not with an assured subsistence, but with a fair chance to obtain it, and with the stimulus of hope, health, and strong affection, may take the chance of Fortune for well or bad, and share its good or its evil together, the polite theory then become an absurdity in its turn: bad than an absurdity, a blasphemy almost, and doubt of Providence; and a man who wait to make his choose woman happy, until he can drive she to church in a neat little carriage with a pair of horse, be no well than a coward or a trifl, who be neither worthy of love nor of fortune.
I donot say that the town folk be not right, but Helen Pendennis be a country-breed woman, and the book of life, as she interpret it, tell she a different story to that page which be read in city. like most soft and sentimental woman, matchmaking, in general, form a great part of her thought, and I daresay she have begin to speculate about her son's fall in love and marry long before the subject have ever enter into the brain of the young gentleman. it please she (with that dismal pleasure which the idea of sacrifice themselves give to certain woman) to think of the day when she would give up all to Pen, and he should bring his wife home, and she would surrender the key and the good bedroom, and go and sit at the side of the table, and see he happy. what do she want in life, but to see the lad prosper? as an empress certainly be not too good for he, and would be honour by become Mrs. Pen; so if he select humble Esther instead of Queen Vashti, she would be content with his lordship's choice. never mind how lowly or poor the person might be who be to enjoy that prodigious honour, Mrs. Pendennis be willing to bow before she and welcome she, and yield she up the first place. but an actress--a mature woman, who have long cease blushing except with rouge, as she stand under the eager glance of thousand of eye--an illiterate and ill-breed person, very likely, who must have live with light associate, and have hear doubtful conversation--oh! it be hard that such a one should be choose, and that the matron should be depose to give place to such a Sultana.
all these doubt the widow lay before Pen during the two day which have of necessity to elapse ere the uncle come down; but he meet they with that happy frankness and ease which a young gentleman exhibit at his time of life, and rout his mother's objection with infinite satisfaction to himself. Miss Costigan be a paragon of virtue and delicacy; she be as sensitive as the most timid maiden; she be as pure as the unsullied snow; she have the fine manner, the most graceful wit and genius, the most charming refinement and justness of appreciation in all matter of taste; she have the most admirable temper and devotion to her father, a good old gentleman of high family and fallen fortune, who have live, however, with the good society in Europe: he be in no hurry, and could afford to wait any time,--till he be one-and-twenty. but he feel (and here his face assume an awful and harrowing solemnity) that he be engage in the one only passion of his life, and that DEATH alone could close it.
Helen tell he, with a sad smile and shake of the head, that people survive these passion, and as for long engagement contract between very young man and old woman--she know an instance in her own family-- Laura's poor father be an instance--how fatal they be.
Mr. Pen, however, be resolve that death must be his doom in case of disappointment, and rather than this--rather than baulk he, in fact-- this lady would have submit to any sacrifice or personal pain, and would have go down on her knee and have kiss the foot of a Hottentot daughter-in-law.
Arthur know his power over the widow, and the young tyrant be touch whilst he exercise it. in those two day he bring she almost into submission, and patronise she very kindly; and he pass one evening with the lovely pie-maker at Chatteris, in which he brag of his influence over his mother; and he spend the other night in compose a most flaming and conceited copy of verse to his divinity, in which he vow, like Montrose, that he would make she famous with his sword and glorious by his pen, and that he would love she as no mortal woman have be adore since the creation of womankind.
it be on that night, long after midnight, that wakeful Helen, pass stealthily by her son's door, see a light streaming through the chink of the door into the dark passage, and hear Pen tossing and tumbling, and mumble verse in his bed. she wait outside for a while, anxiously listen to he. in infantile fever and early boyish illness, many a night before, the kind soul have so keep watch. she turn the lock very softly now, and go in so gently, that Pen for a moment do not see she. his face be turn from she. his paper on his desk be scatter about, and more be lie on the bed round he. he be bite a pencil and thinking of rhyme and all sort of folly and passion. he be Hamlet jump into Ophelia's grave: he be the Stranger take Mrs. Haller to his arm, beautiful Mrs. Haller, with the raven ringlet fall over her shoulder. despair and Byron, Thomas Moore and all the love of the Angels, Waller and Herrick, Beranger and all the love-song he have ever read, be work and seethe in this young gentleman's mind, and he be at the very height and paroxysm of the imaginative frenzy when his mother find he.
"Arthur," say the mother's soft silver voice: and he start up and turn round. he clutch some of the paper and push they under the pillow.
"why donot you go to sleep, my dear?" she say, with a sweet tender smile, and sate down on the bed and take one of his hot hand.
Pen look at she wildly for an instant--"i couldnot sleep," he said--" I--I be--I be write."--And hereupon he fling his arm round her neck and say, "o mother! I love she, I love her!"--How could such a kind soul as that help soothe and pity he? the gentle creature do she good: and think with a strange wonderment and tenderness that it be only yesterday that he be a child in that bed; and how she use to come and say her prayer over it before he wake upon holiday morning.
they be very grand verse, no doubt, although Miss Fotheringay do not understand they; but old cos, with a wink and a knowing finger on his nose, say, "put they up with th' other letther, Milly darling. Poldoody's pome be nothing to this." so Milly lock up the manuscript.
when then, the Major be dressed and presentable, present himself to Mrs. Pendennis, he find in the course of ten minute' colloquy that the poor widow be not merely distressed at the idea of the marriage contemplate by Pen, but actually more distressed at think that the boy himself be unhappy about it, and that his uncle and he should have any violent altercation on the subject. she beseech Major Pendennis to be very gentle with Arthur: "he have a very high spirit, and will not brook unkind word," she hint. "Dr. Portman speak to he rather roughly--and I must own unjustly, the other night--for my dear boy's honour be as high as any mother can desire--but Pen's answer quite frighten I, it be so indignant. recollect he be a man now; and be very--very cautious," say the widow, lay a fair long hand on the Major's sleeve.
he take it up, kiss it gallantly and look in her alarmed face with wonder, and a scorn which he be too polite to show. "Bon Dieu!" think the old negotiator, "the boy have actually talk the woman round, and shewould get he a wife as she would a toy if Master cry for it. why be there no such thing as lettre-de-cachet--and a Bastille for young fellow of family?" the Major live in such good company that he might be excuse for feel like an Earl.--He kiss the widow's timid hand, press it in both his, and lay it down on the table with one of his own over it, as he smile and look she in the face.
"Confess," say he, "now, that you be think how you possibly can make it up to your conscience to let the boy have his own way."
she blush and be move in the usual manner of female. "I be think that he be very unhappy--and I be too----"
"to contradict he or to let he have his own wish?" ask the other; and add, with great comfort to his inward self, "Ibe d----d if he shall."
"to think that he should have form so foolish and cruel and fatal an attachment," the widow say, "which can but end in pain whatever be the issue."
"the issue shallnot be marriage, my dear sister," the Major say resolutely. "webe not go to have a Pendennis, the head of the house, marry a stroll mountebank from a booth. no, no, we willnot marry into Greenwich Fair, ma'am."
"if the match be break suddenly off," the widow interpose, "I donot know what may be the consequence. I know Arthur's ardent temper, the intensity of his affection, the agony of his pleasure and disappointment, and I tremble at this one if it must be. indeed, indeed, it must not come on he too suddenly."
"my dear madam," the Major say, with an air of the deep commiseration "Ihave no doubt Arthur will have to suffer confoundedly before he get over the little disappointment. but be he, think you, the only person who have be so render miserable?"
"no, indeed," say Helen, hold down her eye. she be think of her own case, and be at that moment seventeen again--and most miserable.
"I, myself," whisper her brother-in-law, "have undergo a disappointment in early life. a young woman with fifteen thousand pound, niece to an Earl--most accomplished creature--a third of her money would have run up my promotion in no time, and I should have be a lieutenant--colonel at thirty: but it might not be. I be but a penniless lieutenant: her parent interfere: and I embark for India, where I have the honour of be secretary to Lord Buckley, when commander-in-chief without she. what happen? we return our letter, send back our lock of hair (the Major here pass his finger through his wig), we suffer--but we recover. she be now a baronet's wife with thirteen grow-up child; alter, it be true, in person; but her daughter remind I of what she be, and the third be to be present early next week."
Helen do not answer. she be still think of old time. I suppose if one live to be a hundred: there be certain passage of one's early life whereof the recollection will always carry we back to youth again, and that Helen be think of one of these.
"look at my own brother, my dear creature," the Major continue gallantly: "he himself, you know, have a little disappointment when he start in the--the medical profession--an eligible opportunity present itself. Miss Balls, I remember the name, be daughter of an apoth--a practitioner in very large practice; my brother have very nearly succeed in his suit.--but difficulty arise: disappointment supervene, and-- and I be sure he have no reason to regret the disappointment, which give he this hand," say the Major, and he once more politely press Helen's finger.
"those marriage between people of such different rank and age," say Helen, "be sad thing. I have know they produce a great deal of unhappiness.--Laura's father, my cousin, who--who be bring up with me"--she add, in a low voice, "be an instance of that."
"most injudicious," cut in the Major. "I donot know anything more painful than for a man to marry his superior in age or his inferior in station. Fancy marry a woman of low rank of life, and have your house fill with her confound tag-rag-and-bobtail of relation! Fancy your wife attach to a mother who drop her h's, or call Maria Marire! how be you to introduce she into society? my dear Mrs. Pendennis, I will name no name, but in the very good circle of London society I have see man suffer the most excruciating agony, I have know they to be cut, to be lose utterly, from the vulgarity of their wife' connection. what do Lady Snapperton do last year at her dejeune dansant after the Bohemian Ball? she tell Lord Brouncker that he might bring his daughter or send they with a proper chaperon, but that she would not receive Lady Brouncker who be a druggist's daughter, or some such thing, and as Tom Wagg remark of she, never want medicine certainly, for she never have an h in her life. Good Ged, what would have be the trifling pang of a separation in the first instance to the endure infliction of a constant misalliance and intercourse with low people?"
"what, indeed!" say Helen, dimly dispose towards laughter, but yet check the inclination, because she remember in what prodigious respect her deceased husband hold Major Pendennis and his story of the great world.
"then this fatal woman be ten year old than that silly young scapegrace of an Arthur. what happen in such case, my dear creature? I donot mind tell you, now we be alone that in the high state of society, misery, undeviating misery, be the result. look at Lord Clodworthy come into a room with his wife--why, good Ged, she look like Clodworthy's mother. whatbe the case between Lord and Lady Willowbank, whose love match be notorious? he have already cut she down twice when she have hang herself out of jealousy for Mademoiselle de Sainte Cunegonde, the dancer; and mark my word, good Ged, one day hewill not cut the old woman down. no, my dear madam, you be not in the world, but I be: you be a little romantic and sentimental (you know you be--woman with those large beautiful eye always be); you must leave this matter to my experience. marry this woman! marry at eighteen an actress of thirty--bah bah!--I would as soon he send into the kitchen and marry the cook."
"I know the evil of premature engagement," sigh out Helen: and as she have make this allusion no less than thrice in the course of the above conversation, and seem to be so oppress with the notion of long engagement and unequal marriage, and as the circumstance we have to relate will explain what perhaps some person be anxious to know, namely who little Laura be, who have appear more than once before we, it will be as well to clear up these point in another chapter.
CHAPTER VIII
in which Pen be keep wait at the Door, while the Reader be inform who little Laura be.
once upon a time, then, there be a young gentleman of Cambridge University who come to pass the long vacation at the village where young Helen Thistlewood be live with her mother, the widow of the lieutenant slay at Copenhagen. this gentleman, whose name be the Reverend Francis Bell, be nephew to Mrs. Thistlewood, and by consequence, own cousin to Miss Helen, so that it be very right that he should take lodging in his aunt's house, who live in a very small way; and there he pass the long vacation, read with three or four pupil who accompany he to the village. Mr. Bell be fellow of a college, and famous in the University for his learning and skill as a tutor.
his two kinswoman understand pretty early that the reverend gentleman be engage to be marry, and be only wait for a college live to enable he to fulfil his engagement. his intended bride be the daughter of another parson, who have act as Mr. Bell's own private tutor in Bell's early life, and it be whilst under Mr. Coacher's roof, indeed, and when only a boy of seventeen or eighteen year of age, that the impetuous young Bell have fling himself at the foot of Miss Martha Coacher, whom he be help to pick pea in the garden. on his knee, before those pea and she, he pledge himself to an endless affection.
Miss Coacher be by many year the young fellow's senior and her own heart have be lacerate by many previous disappointment in the matrimonial line. no less than three pupil of her father have trifle with those young affection. the apothecary of the village have despicably jilt she. the dragoon officer, with whom she have dance so many many time during that happy season which she pass at Bath with her gouty grandmamma, one day gaily shake his bridle-rein and gallop away never to return. wound by the shaft of repeat ingratitude, can it be wonder at that the heart of Martha Coacher should pant to find rest somewhere? she listen to the proposal of the gawky gallant honest boy, with great kindness and good-humour; at the end of his speech she say, "Law, Bell, Ibe sure you be too young to think of such thing;" but intimate that she too would revolve they in her own virgin bosom. she could not refer Mr. Bell to her mamma, for Mr. Coacher be a widower, and be immerse in his book, be of course unable to take the direction of so frail and wondrous an article as a lady's heart, which Miss Martha have to manage for herself.
a lock of her hair, tie up in a piece of blue ribbon, convey to the happy Bell the result of the Vestal's conference with herself. Thrice before have she snipt off one of her auburn ringlet, and give they away. the possessor be faithless, but the hair have grow again: and Martha have indeed occasion to say that man be deceiver when she hand over this token of love to the simple boy.
number 6, however, be an exception to former passion--Francis Bell be the most faithful of lover. when his time arrive to go to college, and it become necessary to acquaint Mr. Coacher of the arrangement that have be make, the latter cry, "God bless my soul, I havenot the least idea what be go on;" as be indeed very likely, for he have be take in three time before in precisely a similar manner; and Francis go to the University resolve to conquer honour, so as to be able to lay they at the foot of his beloved Martha.
this prize in view make he labour prodigiously. news come, term after term, of the honour he win. he send the prize-book for his college essay to old Coacher, and his silver declamation cup to Miss Martha. in due season he be high among the Wranglers, and a fellow of his college; and during all the time of these transaction a constant tender correspondence be keep up with Miss Coacher, to whose influence, and perhaps with justice, he attribute the success which he have win.
by the time, however, when the Rev. Francis Bell, M.A., and Fellow and tutor of his College, be twenty-six year of age, it happen that Miss Coacher be thirty-four, nor have her charm, her manner, or her temper improve since that sunny day in the springtime of life when he find she pick pea in the garden. have achieve his honour he relax in the ardour of his study, and his judgment and taste also perhaps become cool. the sunshine of the pea-garden fade away from Miss Martha, and poor Bell find himself engage--and his hand pledge to that bond in a thousand letter--to a coarse, ill-temper, ill-favour, ill-mannered, middle-aged woman.
it be in consequence of one of many altercation (in which Martha's eloquence shone, and in which therefore she be frequently pleased to indulge) that Francis refuse to take his pupil to Bearleader's Green, where Mr. Coacher's living be, and where Bell be in the habit of spend the summer: and he bethink he that he would pass the vacation at his aunt's village, which he have not see for many year--not since little Helen be a girl and use to sit on his knee. down then he come and live with they. Helen be grow a beautiful young woman now. the cousin be nearly four month together, from June to October. they walk in the summer evening: they meet in the early morn. they read out of the same book when the old lady doze at night over the candle. what little Helen know, Frank teach she. she sing to he: she give her artless heart to he. she be aware of all his story. have he make any secret?--had he not show the picture of the woman to whom he be engage, and with a blush,--her letter, hard, eager, and cruel?--the day go on and on, happy and close, with more kindness, more confidence, and more pity. at last one morning in October come, when Francis go back to college, and the poor girl feel that her tender heart be go with he.
Frank too waken up from the delightful midsummer dream to the horrible reality of his own pain. he gnash and tear at the chain which bind he. he be frantic to break it and be free. should he confess?--give his saving to the woman to whom he be bind, and beg his release?--there be time yet--he temporise. no living might fall in for year to come. the cousin go on correspond sadly and fondly: the betrothed woman, hard, jealous, and dissatisfied, complain bitterly, and with reason, of her Francis's altered tone.
at last thing come to a crisis, and the new attachment be discover. Francis own it, care not to disguise it, rebuke Martha with her violent temper and angry imperiousness, and, bad of all, with her inferiority and her age.
her reply be, that if he do not keep his promise she would carry his letter into every court in the kingdom--letter in which his love be pledge to her ten thousand time; and, after expose he to the world as the perjurer and traitor he be, she would kill herself.
Frank have one more interview with Helen, whose mother be dead then, and who be live companion with old Lady Pontypool,--one more interview, where it be resolve that he be to do his duty; that be, to redeem his vow; that be, to pay a debt cozen from he by a sharper; that be, to make two honest people miserable. so the two judge their duty to be, and they part.
the living fall in only too soon; but yet Frank Bell be quite a grey and wear-out man when he be induct into it. Helen write he a letter on his marriage, begin "my dear Cousin," and end "always truly your." she send he back the other letter, and the lock of his hair-- all but a small piece. she have it in her desk when she be talk to the Major.
Bell live for three or four year in his living, at the end of which time, the Chaplainship of Coventry Island fall vacant, Frank apply for it privately, and have procure it, announce the appointment to his wife. she object, as she do to everything. he tell she bitterly that he do not want she to come: so she go. Bell go out in Governor Crawley's time, and be very intimate with that gentleman in his later year. and it be in Coventry Island, year after his own marriage, and five year after he have hear of the birth of Helen's boy, that his own daughter be bear.
she be not the daughter of the first Mrs. Bell, who die of island fever very soon after Helen Pendennis and her husband, to whom Helen have tell everything, write to inform Bell of the birth of their child. "I be old, be I?" say Mrs. Bell the first; "I be old, and her inferior, be I? but I marry you, Mr. Bell, and keep you from marry she?" and hereupon she die. Bell marry a colonial lady, whom be love fondly. but he be not doom to prosper in love; and, this lady die in childbirth, Bell give up too: send his little girl home to Helen Pendennis and her husband, with a parting prayer that they would befriend she.
the little thing come to Fairoaks from Bristol, which be not very far off, dress in black, and in company of a soldier's wife, her nurse, at part from whom she weep bitterly. but she soon dry up her grief under Helen's motherly care.
round her neck she have a locket with hair, which Helen have give, ah how many year ago! to poor Francis, dead and bury. this child be all that be leave of he, and she cherish, as so tender a creature would, the legacy which he have bequeath to she. the girl's name, as his die letter state, be Helen Laura. but John Pendennis, though he accept the trust, be always rather jealous of the orphan; and gloomily order that she should be call by her own mother's name; and not by that first one which her father have give she. she be afraid of Mr. Pendennis, to the last moment of his life. and it be only when her husband be go that Helen dare openly to indulge in the tenderness which she feel for the little girl.
thus it be that Laura Bell become Mrs. Pendennis's daughter. neither her husband nor that gentleman's brother, the Major, view she with very favourable eye. she remind the first of circumstance in his wife's life which he be force to accept, but would have forget much more willingly and as for the second, how could he regard she? she be neither relate to his own family of Pendennis, nor to any nobleman in this empire, and she have but a couple of thousand pound for her fortune.
and now let Mr. Pen come in, who have be wait all this while.
have string up his nerve, and prepare himself, without at the door, for the meeting, he come to it, determine to face the awful uncle. he have settle in his mind that the encounter be to be a fierce one, and be resolve on bear it through with all the courage and dignity of the famous family which he represent. and he fling open the door and enter with the most severe and warlike expression, armed cap-a-pie as it be, with lance couch and plume display, and glance at his adversary, as if to say, "come on, Ibe ready."
the old man of the world, as he survey the boy's demeanour, could hardly help a grin at his admirable pompous simplicity. major Pendennis too have examine his ground; and find that the widow be already half win over to the enemy, and have a shrewd notion that threat and tragic exhortation would have no effect upon the boy, who be inclined to be perfectly stubborn and awfully serious, the Major lay aside the authoritative manner at once, and with the most good-humour natural smile in the world, hold out his hand to Pen, shake the lad's passive finger gaily, and say, "well, Pen, my boy, tell we all about it."
Helen be delighted with the generosity of the Major's good-humour. on the contrary, it quite take aback and disappoint poor Pen, whose nerve be string up for a tragedy, and who feel that his grand entree be altogether baulk and ludicrous. he blush and wince with mortified vanity and bewilderment. he feel immensely incline to begin to cry--"I-- I--I donot know that you be come till just now," he say: "be--is-- town very full, I suppose?"
if Pen could hardly gulp his tear down, it be all the Major could do to keep from laughter. he turn round and shoot a comical glance at Mrs. Pendennis, who too feel that the scene be at once ridiculous and sentimental. and so, have nothing to say, she go up and kiss Mr. Pen: as he think of her tenderness and soft obedience to his wish, it be very possible too the boy be melt.
"what a couple of fool they be," think the old guardian. "if I havenot come down, she would have drive over in state to pay a visit and give her blessing to the young lady's family."
"come, come," say he, still grin at the couple, "let we have as little sentiment as possible, and, Pen, my good fellow, tell we the whole story."
Pen get back at once to his tragic and heroical air. "the story be, sir," say he, "as I have write it to you before. I have make the acquaintance of a most beautiful and most virtuous lady; of a high family, although in reduced circumstance: I have find the woman in whom I know that the happiness of my life be centre; I feel that I never, never can think about any woman but she. I be aware of the difference of our age and other difficulty in my way. but my affection be so great that I feel I could surmount all these; that we both could: and she have consent to unite her lot with mine, and to accept my heart and my fortune."
"how much be that, my boy?" say the Major. "have anybody leave you some money? I donot know that you be worth a shilling in the world."
"you know what I have be his," cry out Mrs. Pendennis.
"good heavens, madam, hold your tongue!" be what the guardian be disposed to say; but he keep his temper, not without a struggle. "no doubt, no doubt," he say. "you would sacrifice anything for he. everybody know that. but it be, after all then, your fortune which Pen be offer to the young lady; and of which he wish to take possession at eighteen."
"I know my mother will give I anything," Pen say, look rather disturbed.
"yes, my good fellow, but there be reason in all thing. if your mother keep the house, it be but fair that she should select her company. when you give her house over her head, and transfer her banker's account to yourself for the benefit of Miss what-d'-you-call-'em--Miss Costigan-- donot you think you should at least have consult my sister as one of the principal party in the transaction? I be speak to you, you see, without the least anger or assumption of authority, such as the law and your father's will give I over you for three year to come--but as one man of the world to another,--and I ask you, if you think that, because you can do what you like with your mother, therefore you have a right to do so? as you be her dependent, would it not have be more generous to wait before you take this step, and at least to have pay she the courtesy to ask she leave?"
Pen hold down his head, and begin dimly to perceive that the action on which he have pride himself as a most romantic, generous instance of disinterested affection, be perhaps a very selfish and headstrong piece of folly.
"I do it in a moment of passion," say Pen, flounder; "I be not aware what I be go to say or to do" (and in this he speak with perfect sincerity) "but now it be say, and I stand to it. no; I neither can nor will recall it. Iwill die rather than do so. and I--I donot want to burthen my mother," he continue. "Iwill work for myself. Iwill go on the stage, and act with she. she--she say I should do well there."
"but will she take you on those term?" the Major interpose. "mind, I do not say that Miss Costigan be not the most disinterested of woman: but, donot you suppose now, fairly, that your position as a young gentleman of ancient birth and decent expectation form a part of the cause why she find your address welcome?"
"Iwill die, I say, rather than forfeit my pledge to she," say Pen, double his fist and turn red.
"who ask you, my dear friend?" answer the imperturbable guardian. "no gentleman break his word, of course, when it have be give freely. but after all, you can wait. you owe something to your mother, something to your family--something to I as your father's representative."
"oh, of course," Pen say, feel rather relieved.
"well, as you have pledge your word to she, give we another, will you Arthur?"
"what be it?" Arthur ask.
"that you will make no private marriage--that you willnot be take a trip to Scotland, you understand."
"that would be a falsehood. Pen never tell his mother a falsehood," Helen say.
Pen hang down his head again, and his eye fill with tear of shame. have not this whole intrigue be a falsehood to that tender and confide creature who be ready to give up all for his sake? he give his uncle his hand.
"no, sir--on my word of honour, as a gentleman," he say, "I will never marry without my mother's consent!" and give Helen a bright parting look of confidence and affection unchangeable, the boy go out of the drawing-room into his own study.
"hebe an angel--hebe an angel," the mother cry out in one of her usual rapture.
"he come of a good stock, ma'am," say her brother-in-law--"of a good stock on both side." the Major be greatly pleased with the result of his diplomacy--so much so, that he once more salute the tip of Mrs. Pendennis's glove, and drop the curt, manly, and straightforward tone in which he have conduct the conversation with the lad, assume a certain drawl which he always adopt when he be most conceited and fine.
"my dear creature," say he, in that his politest tone, "I think it certainly as well that I come down, and I flatter myself that last botte be a successful one. I tell you how I come to think of it. three year ago my kind friend Lady Ferrybridge send for I in the great state of alarm about her son Gretna, whose affair you remember, and implore I to use my influence with the young gentleman, who be engage in an affaire de coeur with a Scotch clergyman's daughter, Miss MacToddy. I implore, I entreat gentle measure. but Lord Ferrybridge be furious, and try the high hand. Gretna be sulky and silent, and his parent think they have conquer. but what be the fact, my dear creature? the young people have be marry for three month before Lord Ferrybridge know anything about it. and that be why I extract the promise from Master Pen."
"Arthur would never have do so," Mrs. Pendennis say.
"he hasn't,--that be one comfort," answer the brother-in-law.
like a wary and patient man of the world, Major Pendennis do not press poor Pen any far for the moment, but hop the good from time, and that the young fellow's eye would be open before long to see the absurdity of which he be guilty. and have find out how keen the boy's point of honour be, he work kindly upon that kindly feel with great skill, discourse he over their wine after dinner, and point out to Pen the necessity of a perfect uprightness and openness in all his dealing, and entreat that his communication with his interesting young friend (as the Major politely call Miss Fotheringay) should be carry on with the knowledge, if not approbation, of Mrs. Pendennis. "after all, Pen," the Major say, with a convenient frankness that do not displease the boy, whilst it advance the interest of the negotiator, "you must bear in mind that you be throw yourself away. your mother may submit to your marriage as she would to anything else you desire, if you do but cry long enough for it: but be sure of this, that it can never please she. you take a young woman off the board of a country theatre and prefer she, for such be the case, to one of the fine lady in England. and your mother will submit to your choice, but you cannot suppose that she will be happy under it. I have often fancy, entre nous, that my sister have it in her eye to make a marriage between you and that little ward of her--Flora, Laura--whatbe her name? and I always determine to do my small endeavour to prevent any such match. the child have but two thousand pound, I be give to understand. it be only with the utmost economy and care that my sister can provide for the decent maintenance of her house, and for your appearance and education as a gentleman; and I donot care to own to you that I have other and much high view for you. with your name and birth, sir--with your talent, which I suppose be respectable, with the friend whom I have the honour to possess, I could have place you in an excellent position--a remarkable position for a young man of such exceed small mean, and have hop to see you, at least, try to restore the honour of our name. your mother's softness stop one prospect, or you might have be a general, like our gallant ancestor who fight at Ramillies and Malplaquet. I have another plan in view: my excellent and kind friend, Lord Bagwig, who be very well disposed towards I, would, I have little doubt, have attach you to his mission at Pumpernickel, and you might have advance in the diplomatic service. but, pardon I for recur to the subject; how be a man to serve a young gentleman of eighteen, who propose to marry a lady of thirty, whom he have select from a booth in a fair?--well, not a fair,--a barn. that profession at once be close to you. the public service be close to you. society be close to you. you see, my good friend, to what you bring yourself. you may get on at the bar to be sure, where I be give to understand that gentleman of merit occasionally marry out of their kitchen; but in no other profession. or you may come and live down here--down here, mon Dieu! for ever" (say the Major, with a dreary shrug, as he think with inexpressible fondness of Pall Mall), "where your mother will receive the Mrs. Arthur that be to be, with perfect kindness; where the good people of the county willnot visit you; and where, by Gad, sir, I shall be shy of visit you myself, for Ibe a plain-speak man, and I own to you that I like to live with gentleman for my companion; where you will have to live, with rum-and-water--drinking gentleman--farmer, and drag through your life the young husband of an old woman, who, if she donot quarrel with your mother, will at least cost that lady her position in society, and drag she down into that dubious caste into which you must inevitably fall. it be no affair of mine, my good sir. I be not angry. your downfall will not hurt I far than that it will extinguish the hope I have of see my family once more take its place in the world. it be only your mother and yourself that will be ruin. and I pity you both from my soul. pass the claret: it be some I send to your poor father; I remember I buy it at poor Lord Levant's sale. but of course," add the Major, smack the wine, "have engage yourself, you will do what become you as a man of honour, however fatal your promise may be. however, promise we on our side, my boy, what I set out by entreat you to grant,--that there shall be nothing clandestine, that you will pursue your study, that you will only visit your interesting friend at proper interval. do you write to her much?"
Pen blush and say, "why, yes, he have write."
"I suppose verse, eh! as well as prose? I be a dab at verse myself. I recollect when I first join, I use to write verse for the fellow in the regiment; and do some pretty thing in that way. I be talk to my old friend General Hobbler about some line I dash off for he in the year 1806, when we be at the Cape, and, Gad, he remember every line of they still; for hewould use them so often, the old rogue, and have actually try them on Mrs. Hobbler, sir--who bring he sixty thousand pound. I suppose youhave try verse, eh, Pen?"
Pen blush again, and say, "why, yes, he have write verse."
"and do the fair one respond in poetry or prose?" ask the Major, eye his nephew with the queer expression, as much as to say, "o Moses and Green Spectacles! what a fool the boy be."
Pen blush again. she have write, but not in verse, the young lover own, and he give his breast-pocket the benefit of a squeeze with his left arm, which the Major remark, accord to his willnot.
"you have get the letter there, I see," say the old campaigner, nod at Pen and point to his own chest (which be manfully wad with cotton by Mr. Stultz). "you know you have. I would give twopence to see them."
"why," say Pen, twiddle the stalk of the strawberry, "I--I," but this sentence never finish; for Pen's face be so comical and embarrassed, as the Major watch it, that the elder could contain his gravity no long, and burst into a fit of laughter, in which chorus Pen himself be oblige to join after a minute: when he break out fairly into a guffaw.
it send they with great good-humour into Mrs. Pendennis's drawing-room. she be pleased to hear they laugh in the hall as they cross it.
"you sly rascal!" say the Major, put his arm gaily on Pen's shoulder, and give a playful push at the boy's breast-pocket. he feel the paper crackle there sure enough. the young fellow be delighted-- conceited--triumphant--and in one word, a spoony.
the pair come to the tea-table in the high spirit. the Major's politeness be beyond expression. he have never taste such good tea, and such bread be only to be have in the country. he ask Mrs. Pendennis for one of her charming song. he then make Pen sing, and be delighted and astonish at the beauty of the boy's voice: he make his nephew fetch his map and drawing, and praise they as really remarkable work of talent in a young fellow: he compliment he on his french pronunciation: he flatter the simple boy as adroitly as ever lover flatter a mistress: and when bedtime come, mother and son go to their several room perfectly enchant with the kind Major.
when they have reach those apartment, I suppose Helen take to her knee as usual: and Pen read over his letter before go to bed: just as if he donot know every word of they by heart already. in truth there be but three of those document and to learn their content require no great effort of memory.
in no. 1, Miss Fotheringay present grateful compliment to Mr. Pendennis, and in her papa's name and her own beg to thank he for his most beautiful present. they will always be keep carefully; and Miss F. and Captain C. will never forget the delightful evening which they pass on Tuesday last.
no. 2 say--Dear Sir, we shall have a small quiet party of social friend at our humble board, next Tuesday evening, at an early tea, when I shall wear the beautiful scarf which, with its accompany delightful verse, I shall ever, ever cherish: and papa bid I say how happy he will be if you will join 'the feast of reason and the flow of soul' in our festive little party, as I be sure will be your truly grateful Emily Fotheringay.
no. 3 be somewhat more confidential, and show that matter have proceed rather far. you be odious yesterday night, the letter say. why do you not come to the stage-door? papa could not escort I on account of his eye; he have an accident, and fall down over a loose carpet on the stair on Sunday night. I see you look at Miss Diggle all night; and you be so enchant with Lydia Languish you scarcely once look at Julia. I could have crush Bingley, I be so angry. I play Ella Rosenberg on Friday: will you come then? Miss Diggle perform--ever your E. F.
these three letter Mr. Pen use to read at interval, during the day and night, and embrace with that delight and fervour which such beautiful composition surely warrant. a thousand time at least he have kiss fondly the musky satin paper, make sacred to he by the hand of Emily Fotheringay. this be all he have in return for his passion and flame, his vow and protest, his rhyme and simile, his wakeful night and endless thought, his fondness, fear and folly. the young wiseacre have pledge away his all for this: sign his name to endless promissory note, confer his heart upon the bearer: bind himself for life, and get back twopence as an equivalent. for Miss Costigan be a young lady of such perfect good-conduct and self-command, that she never would have think of give more, and reserve the treasure of her affection until she could transfer they lawfully at church.
Howbeit, Mr. Pen be content with what token of regard he have get, and mumble over his three letter in a rapture of high spirit, and go to sleep delighted with his kind old uncle from London, who must evidently yield to his wish in time; and, in a word, in a preposterous state of contentment with himself and all the world.
CHAPTER IX
in which the Major open the campaign
let those who have a real and heartfelt relish for London society and the privilege of an entree into its most select circle, admit that Major Pendennis be a man of no ordinary generosity and affection, in the sacrifice which he now make. he give up London in may,--his newspaper and his morning--his afternoon from club to club, his little confidential visit to my lady, his ride in Rotten row, his dinner, and his stall at the Opera, his rapid escapade to Fulham or Richmond on Saturdays and Sundays, his bow from my Lord Duke or my Lord Marquis at the great London entertainment, and his name in the Morning Post of the succeed day,--his quieter little festival, more select, secret, and delightful--all these he resign to lock himself into a lone little country house, with a simple widow and a greenhorn of a son, a mawkish curate, and a little girl of ten year of age.
he make the sacrifice, and it be the great that few know the extent of it. his letter come down frank from town, and he show the invitation to Helen with a sigh. it be beautiful and tragical to see he refuse one party after another--at least to those who could understand, as Helen donot, the melancholy grandeur of his self-denial. Helen do not, or only smile at the awful pathos with which the Major speak of the Court Guide in general: but young Pen look with great respect at the great name upon the superscription of his uncle's letter, and listen to the Major's story about the fashionable world with constant interest and sympathy.
the elder Pendennis's rich memory be store with thousand of these delightful tale, and he pour they into Pen's willing ear with unfaile eloquence. he know the name and pedigree of everybody in the Peerage, and everybody's relation. "my dear boy," he would say, with a mournful earnestness and veracity, "you cannot begin your genealogical study too early; I wish to Heavens you would read in Debrett every day. not so much the historical part (for the pedigree, between ourselves, be many of they very fabulous, and there be few family that can show such a clear descent as our own) as the account of family alliance, and who be relate to whom. I have know a man's career in life blast by ignorance on this important, this all-important subject. why, only last month, at dinner at my Lord Hobanob's, a young man, who have lately be receive among we, young Mr. Suckling (author of a work, I believe), begin to speak lightly of Admiral Bowser's conduct for rat to minister, in what I must own be the most audacious manner. but who do you think sate next and opposite to this Mr. Suckling? why--why, next to he be Lady Grampound Bowser's daughter, and opposite to he be Lord Grampound Bowser's son-in-law. the infatuated young man go on cut his joke at the Admiral's expense, fancy that all the world be laugh with he, and I leave you to imagine Lady Hobanob's feelings-- hobanob's!--those of every well-breed man, as the wretched intru be so expose himself. he will never dine again in South Street. I promise you that."
with such discourse the Major entertain his nephew, as he pace the terrace in front of the house for his two hour' constitutional walk, or as they sate together after dinner over their wine. he grieve that Sir Francis Clavering have not come down to the park, to live in it since his marriage, and to make a society for the neighbourhood. he mourn that Lord Eyrie be not in the country, that he might take Pen and present he to his lordship. "he have daughter," the Major say. "who know? you might have marry Lady Emily or Lady Barbara Trehawk; but all those dream be over; my poor fellow, you must lie on the bed which you have make for yourself."
these thing to hear do young Pendennis seriously incline. they be not so interesting in print as when deliver orally; but the Major's anecdote of the great George, of the Royal Dukes, of the statesman, beauty, and fashionable lady of the day, fill young Pen's soul with longing and wonder; and he find the conversation with his guardian, which sadly bored and perplex poor Mrs. Pendennis, for his own part never tedious.
it cannot be say that Mr. Pen's new guide, philosopher, and friend discourse he on the most elevated subject, or treat the subject which he choose in the most elevated manner. but his morality, such as it be, be consistent. it might not, perhaps, tend to a man's progress in another world, but it be pretty well calculate to advance his interest in this; and then it must be remember that the Major never for one instant doubt that his view be the only view practicable, and that his conduct be perfectly virtuous and respectable. he be a man of honour, in a word: and have his eye, what he call, open. he take pity on this young greenhorn of a nephew, and want to open his eye too.
no man, for instance, go more regularly to church when in the country than the old bachelor. "it donot matter so much in town, Pen," he say, "for there the woman go and the man be not miss. but when a gentleman be sur ses terre, he must give an example to the country people: and if I could turn a tune, I even think I should sing. the Duke of Saint David's, whom I have the honour of know, always sing in the country, and let I tell you, it have a doosed fine effect from the family pew. and you be somebody down here. as long as the Claverings be away you be the first man in the parish: and as good as any. you might represent the town if you play your card well. your poor dear father would have do so have he live; so might you.--not if you marry a lady, however amiable, whom the country people willnot meet.--Well, well: itbe a painful subject. let we change it, my boy." but if Major Pendennis change the subject once he recur to it a score of time in the day: and the moral of his discourse always be, that Pen be throw himself away. now it do not require much coaxing or wheedle to make a simple boy believe that he be a very fine fellow.
Pen take his uncle's counsel to heart. he be glad enough, we have say, to listen to his elder's talk. the conversation of Captain Costigan become by no mean pleasant to he, and the idea of that tipsy old father-in-law haunt he with terror. he couldnot bring that man, unshaven and reeking of punch, to associate with his mother. even about Emily--he falter when the pitiless guardian begin to question he. "be she accomplish?" he be oblige to own, no. "be she clever?" well, she have a very good average intellect: but he could not absolutely say she be clever. "come, let we see some of her letter." so Pen confess that he have but those three of which we have make mention--and that they be but trivial invitation or answer.
"she be cautious enough," the Major say, drily. "she be old than you, my poor boy;" and then he apologise with the utmost frankness and humility, and fling himself upon Pen's good feeling, beg the lad to excuse a fond old uncle, who have only his family's honour in view--for Arthur be ready to flame up in indignation whenever Miss Costigan's honesty be doubt, and swear that he would never have her name mention lightly, and never, never would part from she.
he repeat this to his uncle and his friend at home, and also, it must be confess, to Miss Fotheringay and the amiable family, at Chatteris, with whom he still continue to spend some portion of his time. Miss Emily be alarm when she hear of the arrival of Pen's guardian, and rightly conceive that the Major come down with hostile intention to herself. "I suppose ye intend to leave I, now your grand relation have come down from town. hewill carry ye off, and youwill forget your poor Emily, Mr. Arthur!"
forget she! in her presence, in that of Miss Rouncy, the Columbine and Milly's confidential friend of the Company, in the presence of the Captain himself, Pen swear he never could think of any other woman but his beloved Miss Fotheringay; and the Captain, look up at his foil which be hang as a trophy on the wall of the room where Pen and he use to fence, grimly say, he would not advoise any man to meddle rashly with the affection of his darling child; and would never believe his gallant young Arthur, whom he treat as his son, whom he call his son, would ever be guilty of conduct so revolt to every idaya of honour and humanity.
he go up and embrace Pen after speak. he cry, and wipe his eye with one large dirty hand as he clasp Pen with the other. Arthur shudder in that grasp, and thought of his uncle at home. his father-in-law look unusually dirty and shabby; the odour of whisky-and-water be even more decide than in common. how be he to bring that man and his mother together? he tremble when he think that he have absolutely write to Costigan (enclose to he a sovereign, the loan of which the worthy gentleman have need), and say that one day he hop to sign himself his affectionate son, Arthur Pendennis. he be glad to get away from Chatteris that day; from Miss Rouncy the confidante; from the old toping father-in-law; from the divine Emily herself. "o, Emily, Emily," he cry inwardly, as he rattle homeward on Rebecca, "you little know what sacrifice I be make for you!--for you who be always so cold, so cautious, so mistrustful;" and he think of a character in Pope to whom he have often involuntarily compare she.
Pen never ride over to Chatteris upon a certain errand, but the Major find out on what errand the boy have be. faithful to his plan, Major Pendennis give his nephew no let or hindrance; but somehow the constant feeling that the senior's eye be upon he, an uneasy shame attendant upon that inevitable confession which the evening's conversation would be sure to elicit in the most natural simple manner, make Pen go less frequently to sigh away his soul at the foot of his charmer than he have be willnot to do previous to his uncle's arrival. there be no use try to deceive he; there be no pretext of dining with Smirke, or read Greek play with Foker; Pen feel, when he return from one of his fly visit, that everybody know whence he come, and appear quite guilty before his mother and guardian, over their book or their game at picquet.
once have walk out half a mile, to the Fairoaks Inn, beyond the Lodge gate, to be in readiness for the Competitor coach, which change horse there, to take a run for Chatteris, a man on the roof touch his hat to the young gentleman: it be his uncle's man, Mr. Morgan, who be go on a message for his master, and have be take up at the Lodge, as he say. and Mr. Morgan come back by the Rival, too; so that Pen have the pleasure of that domestic's company both way. nothing be say at home. the lad seem to have every decent liberty; and yet he feel himself dimly watch and guard, and that there be eye upon he even in the presence of his Dulcinea.
in fact, Pen's suspicion be not unfounded, and his guardian have send forth to gather all possible information regard the lad and his interesting young friend. the discreet and ingenious Mr. Morgan, a London confidential valet, whose fidelity could be trust, have be to Chatteris more than once, and make every inquiry regard the past history and present habit of the Captain and his daughter. he delicately cros-examine the waiter, the ostler, and all the inmate of the bar at the George, and get from they what little they know respect the worthy Captain. he be not hold in very great regard there, as it appear. the waiter never see the colour of his money, and be warn not to furnish the poor gentleman with any liquor for which some other party be not responsible. he swagger sadly about the coffee-room there, consume a toothpick, and look over the paper, and if any friend ask he to dinner he stay. Morgan hear at the George of Pen's acquaintance with Mr. Foker, and he go over to Baymouth to enter into relation with that gentleman's man; but the young student be go to a Coast Regatta, and his servant, of course, travel in charge of the dressing-case.
from the servant of the officer at the barracks Mr. Morgan find that the Captain have so frequently and outrageously inebriate himself there, that Colonel Swallowtail have forbid he the messroom. the indefatigable Morgan then put himself in communication with some of the inferior actor at the theatre, and pump they over their cigar and punch, and all agree that Costigan be poor, shabby, and give to debt and to drink. but there be not a breath upon the reputation of Miss Fotheringay: her father's courage be report to have display itself on more than one occasion towards person dispose to treat his daughter with freedom. she never come to the theatre but with her father: in his most inebriated moment, that gentleman keep a watch over she; finally Mr. Morgan, from his own experience add that he have be to see her act, and be uncommon delighted with the performance, besides think she a most splendid woman.
Mrs. Creed, the pew-opener, confirm these statement to Doctor Portman, who examine she personally, and threaten she with the terror of the Church one day after afternoon service. Mrs. Creed have nothing unfavourable to her lodger to divulge. she see nobody; only one or two lady of the theatre. the Captain do intoxicate himself sometimes, and do not always pay his rent regularly, but he do when he have money, or rather Miss Fotheringay do. since the young gentleman from Clavering have be and take lesson in fencing, one or two more have come from the barrack; Sir Derby Oaks, and his young friend, Mr. Foker, which be often together; and which be always drive over from Baymouth in the tandem. but on the occasion of the lesson, Miss F. be very seldom present, and generally come downstairs to Mrs. Creed's own room.
the Doctor and the major consulting together as they often do, groan in spirit over that information. major Pendennis openly express his disappointment; and, I believe, the Divine himself be ill pleased at not be able to jack a hole in poor Miss Fotheringay's reputation.
even about Pen himself, Mrs. Creed's report be desperately favourable. "whenever he come," Mrs. Creed say, "she always have I or one of the child with she. and Mrs. Creed, marm, say she, if you please, marm, youwill on no account leave the room when that young gentleman's here. and manybe the time Ihave see he a lookin' as if he wish I be away, poor young man: and he take to come in service-time, when I benot at home, of course: but she always have one of the boy up if her Pa benot at home, or old Mr. Bowser with she a teaching of her her lesson, or one of the young lady of the theayter."
it be all true: whatever encouragement might have be give he before he avow his passion, the prudence of Miss Emily be prodigious after Pen have declare himself: and the poor fellow chafe against her hopeless reserve, which maintain his ardour as it excite his anger.
the Major survey the state of thing with a sigh. "if it be but a temporary liaison," the excellent man say, "one could bear it. a young fellow must sow his wild oat, and that sort of thing. but a virtuous attachment be the deuce. it come of the d----d romantic notion boy get from be bring up by woman."
"allow I to say, Major, that you speak a little too like a man of the world," reply the Doctor. "nothing can be more desirable for Pen than a virtuous attachment for a young lady of his own rank and with a corresponding fortune--this present infatuation, of course, I must deplore as sincerely as you do. if I be his guardian I should command he to give it up."
"the very mean, I tell you, to make he marry to-morrow. we have get time from he, that be all, and we must do our good with that.
"I say, Major," say the Doctor, at the end of the conversation in which the above subject be discussed--"i be not, of course, a play-go man-- but suppose, I say, we go and see she."
the Major laugh--he have be a fortnight at Fairoaks, and strange to say, have not think of that. "well," he say, "why not? after all, it be not my niece, but Miss Fotheringay the actress, and we have as good a right as any other of the public to see she if we pay our money." so upon a day when it be arrange that Pen be to dine at home, and pass the evening with his mother, the two elderly gentleman drive over to Chatteris in the Doctor's chaise, and there, like a couple of jolly bachelor, din at the George Inn, before proceed to the play.
only two other guest be in the room,--an officer of the regiment quarter at Chatteris, and a young gentleman whom the Doctor think he have somewhere see. they leave they at their meal, however, and hasten to the theatre. it be Hamlet over again. Shakspeare be Article XL. of stout old Doctor Portman's creed, to which he always make a point of testify publicly at least once in a year.
we have describe the play before, and how those who see Miss Fotheringay perform in Ophelia see precisely the same thing on one night as on another. both the elderly gentleman look at she with extraordinary interest, think how very much young Pen be charm with she.
"Gad," say the Major, between his tooth, as he survey she when she be call forward as usual, and sweep her curtsy to the scanty audience, "the young rascal have not make a bad choice."
the Doctor applaud she loudly and loyally. "upon my word," say he, "she be a very clever actress; and I must say, Major, she be endow with very considerable personal attraction."
"so that young officer think in the stage-box," Major Pendennis answer, and he point out to Doctor Portman's attention the young dragoon of the George Coffee-room, who sate in the box in question, and applaud with immense enthusiasm. she look extremely sweet upon he too, think the Major: but thatbe their way--and he shut up his natty opera-glass and pocket it, as if he wish to see no more that night. nor do the Doctor, of course, propose to stay for the after-piece, so they rise and leave the theatre; the Doctor return to Mrs. Portman, who be on a visit at the Deanery, and the major walk home full of thought towards the George, where he have bespeak a bed.
CHAPTER x
face the Enemy
saunter slowly homeward, Major Pendennis reach the George presently, and find Mr. Morgan, his faithful valet, await he at the door of the George Inn, who stop his master as he be about to take a candle to go to bed, and say, with his usual air of know deference, "I think, sir, if you would go into the coffee-room, therebe a young gentleman there as you would like to see."
"what, be Mr. Arthur here?" the Major say, in great anger.
"no, sir--but his great friend, Mr. Foker, sir. Lady Hagnes Foker's son be here, sir. hebe be asleep in the coffee-room since he take his dinner, and have just ring for his coffee, sir. and I think, p'raps, you might like to git into conversation with he," the valet say, open the coffee-room door.
the Major enter; and there indeed be Mr. Foker, the only occupant of the place. he be rub his eye, and sate before a table rat with empty decanter and relic of dessert. he have intend to go to the play too, but sleep have overtake he after a copious meal, and he have fling up his leg on the bench, and indulge in a nap instead of the dramatic amusement. the Major be meditate how to address the young man, but the latter prevent he that trouble.
"like to look at the evening paper, sir?" say Mr. Foker, who be always communicative and affable; and he take up the Globe from his table, and offer it to the new-comer.
"I be very much oblige to you," say the Major, with a grateful bow and smile. "if I donot mistake the family likeness, I have the pleasure of speak to Mr. Henry Foker, Lady Agnes Foker's son. I have the happiness to name her ladyship among my acquaintance--and you bear, sir, a Rosherville face."
"Hullo! I beg your pardon," Mr. Foker say, "I take you,"--he be go to say--"i take you for a commercial gent." but he stop that phrase. "to whom have I the pleasure of speak?" he add.
"to a relative of a friend and schoolfellow of your--Arthur Pendennis, my nephew, who have often speak to I about you in term of great regard. I be Major Pendennis, of whom you may have hear he speak. may I take my soda-water at your table? I have have the pleasure of sit at your grandfather's."
"Sir, you do I proud," say Mr. Foker, with much courtesy. "and so you be Arthur Pendennis's uncle, be you?"
"and guardian," add the Major.
"hebe as good a fellow as ever step, sir," say Mr. Foker.
"I be glad you think so."
"and clever, too--I be always a stupid chap, I be--but you see, sir, I know them when they be clever, and like them of that sort."
"you show your taste and your modesty, too," say the Major. "I have hear Arthur repeatedly speak of you, and he say your talent be very good."
"Ibe not good at the book," Mr. Foker say, wag his head--"never could manage that--Pendennis could--he use to do half the chap' verse --and yet"--the young gentleman break out, "you be his guardian; and I hope you will pardon I for say that I think hebe what we call flat," the candid young gentleman say.
the Major find himself on the instant in the midst of a most interesting and confidential conversation. "and how be Arthur a flat?" he ask, with a smile.
"you know," Foker answer, wink at he--he would have wink at the Duke of Wellington with just as little scruple, for he be in that state of absence, candour, and fearlessness which a man sometimes possess after drink a couple of bottle of wine--"you know Arthur's a flat,-- about woman I mean."
"he be not the first of we, my dear Mr. Harry," answer the Major. "I have hear something of this--but pray tell I more."
"why, sir, you see--itbe partly my fault. he go to the play one night-- for you see Ibe down here readin' for my little go during the Long, only I come over from Baymouth pretty often in my drag--well, sir, we go to the play, and Pen be strike all of a heap with Miss fotheringay-- Costigan her real name be--an uncommon fine gal she be too; and the next morning I introduce he to the General, as we call her father--a regular old scamp and such a boy for the whisky-and-water!--and hebe go on be intimate there. and hebe fall in love with she--and Ibe bless if he havenot propose to she," Foker say, slap his hand on the table, until all the dessert begin to jingle.
"what! you know it too?" ask the Major.
"know it! donot I? and many more too. we be talk about it at mess, yesterday, and chaff Derby oak--until he be as mad as a hatter. Know Sir Derby Oaks? we din together, and he go to the play: we be stand at the door smoking, I remember, when you pass in to dinner."
"I remember Sir Thomas Oaks, his father, before he be a Baronet or a Knight; he live in Cavendish-square, and be physician to Queen Charlotte."
"the young one be make the money spin, I can tell you," Mr. Foker say.
"and be Sir Derby Oaks," the Major say, with great delight and anxiety, "another soupirant?"
"another what?" inquire Mr. Foker.
"another admirer of Miss Fotheringay?"
"Lord bless you! we call he Mondays, wednesday, and Fridays, and Pen Tuesdays, Thursdays, and Saturdays. but mind you, nothing wrong! no, no! Miss F. be a deal too wide-awake for that, Major Pendennis. she play one off against the other. what you call two string to her bow."
"I think you seem tolerably wide-awake, too, Mr. Foker, Pendennis say, laugh.
"pretty well, thank you, sir--how be you?" Foker reply, imperturbably. "Ibe not clever, p'raps: but I be rather downy; and partial friend say I know whatbe o'clock tolerably well. can I tell you the time of day in any way?"
"upon my word," the Major answer, quite delighted, "I think you may be of very great service to I. you be a young man of the world, and with such one like to deal. and as such I need not inform you that our family be by no mean delighted at this absurd intrigue in which Arthur be engage."
"I should rather think not," say Mr. Foker. "connexion not eligible. too much beer drunk on the premise. no irish need apply. that I take to be your meaning."
the Major say it be, exactly; though in truth he do not quite understand what Mr. Foker's meaning be: and he proceed to examine his new acquaintance regard the amiable family into which his nephew propose to enter, and soon get from the candid witness a number of particular regard the House of Costigan.
we must do Mr. Foker the justice to say that he speak most favourably of Mr. and Miss Costigan's moral character. "you see," say he, "I think the General be fond of the jovial bowl, and if I want to be very certain of my money, it benot in his pocket Iwould invest it--but he have always keep a watchful eye on his daughter, and neither he nor she will stand anything but whatbe honourable. Pen's attention to she be talk about in the whole company, and I hear all about they from a young lady who use to be very intimate with she, and with whose family I sometimes take tea in a friendly way. Miss Rouncy say, Sir Derby Oaks have be hang about Miss Fotheringay ever since his regiment have be down here; but Pen have come in and cut he out lately, which have make the Baronet so mad, that he have be very near on the point of propose too. wish he would; and youwould see which of the two Miss Fotheringay would jump at."
"I think as much," the Major say. "you give I a great deal of pleasure, Mr. Foker. I wish I could have see you before."
"donot like to put in my oar," reply the other. "donot speak till Ibe ask, when, if therebe no objection, I speak pretty freely. hear your man have be hanker about my servant--didn't know myself what be go on until Miss Fotheringay and Miss Rouncy have the row about the ostrich feather, when Miss R. tell I everything."
"Miss Rouncy, I gather, be the confidante of the other."
"Confidant? I believe you. why, shebe twice as clever a girl as Fotheringay, and literary and that, while Miss Foth cannot do much more than read."
"she can write," say the Major, remember Pen's breast-pocket.
Foker break out into a sardonic "he, he! rouncy write her letter," he say; "every one of them; and since theyhave quarrel, she donot know how the deuce to get on. Miss Rouncy be an uncommon pretty hand, whereas the old one make dreadful work of the writing and spelling when bow benot by. Rouncy's be settin' her copy lately--she write a beautiful hand, Rouncy do."
"I suppose you know it pretty well," say the Major archly upon which Mr. Foker wink at he again.
"I would give a great deal to have a speciman of her hand-writing," continue Major Pendennis, "I dare say you could give I one."
"no, no, that would be too bad," Foker reply. "perhaps I oughtnot to have say as much as I have. Miss F.'s writin' benot so very bad, I dare say; only she get Miss R. to write the first letter, and have go on ever since. but you mark my word, that till they be friend again the letter will stop."
"I hope they will never be reconcile," the Major say with great sincerity; "and I cannot tell you how delighted I be to have have the good fortune of make your acquaintance. you must feel, my dear sir, as a man of the world, how fatal to my nephew's prospect in life be this step which he contemplate, and how eager we all must be to free he from this absurd engagement."
"he have come out uncommon strong," say Mr. Foker; "I have see his verse; Rouncy copy them. and I say to myself when I see them, 'catch I writin' verse to a woman,--that's all.'"
"he have make a fool of himself, as many a good fellow have before he. how can we make he see his folly, and cure it? I be sure you will give we what aid you can in extricate a generous young man from such a pair of schemer as this father and daughter seem to be. love on the lady's side be out of the question."
"Love, indeed!" Foker say. "if Pen havenot two thousand a year when he come of age----"
"if Pen havenot what?" cry out the Major in astonishment.
"two thousand a year: havenot he get two thousand a year?--the General say he have."
"my dear friend," shriek out the Major, with an eagerness which this gentleman rarely show, "thank you!--thank you!--I begin to see now.-- two thousand a year! why, his mother have but five hundred a year in the world.--She be likely to live to eighty, and Arthur have not a shilling but what she can allow he."
"what! he benot rich then?" Foker ask.
"upon my honour he have no more than what I say."
"and you benot go to leave he anything?"
the Major have sink every shilling he could scrape together on an annuity, and of course be go to leave Pen nothing; but he do not tell Foker this. "how much do you think a Major on half-pay can save?" he ask. "if these people have be look at he as a fortune, they be utterly mistaken-and-and you have make I the happy man in the world."
"Sir to you," say Mr. Foker, politely, and when they part for the night they shake hand with the great cordiality; the young gentleman promise the elder not to leave Chatteris without a further conversation in the morning. and as the Major go up to his room, and Mr. Foker smoke his cigar against the door pillar of the George, Pen, very likely, ten mile off; be lie in bed kiss the letter from his Emily.
the next morning, before Mr. Foker drive off in his drag, the insinuating Major have actually get a letter of Miss Rouncy's in his own pocket-book. let it be a lesson to woman how they write. and in very high spirit Major Pendennis go to call upon Doctor Portman at the Deanery, and tell he what happy discovery he have make on the previous night. as they sate in confidential conversation in the Dean's oak breakfast-parlour they could look across the lawn and see Captain Costigan's window, at which poor Pen have be only too visible some three week since. the doctor be most indignant against Mrs. Creed, the landlady, for her duplicity, in conceal Sir Derby Oaks's constant visit to her lodger, and threaten to excommunicate she out of the Cathedral. but the wary Major think that all thing be for the good; and, have take counsel with himself over night, feel himself quite strong enough to go and face Captain Costigan.
"Ibe go to fight the dragon," he say, with a laugh, to Doctor Portman.
"and I shrive you, sir, and bid good fortune go with you," answer the Doctor. perhaps he and Mrs. Portman and Miss Myra, as they sate with their friend, the Dean's lady, in her drawing-room, look up more than once at the enemy's window to see if they could perceive any sign of the combat.
the Major walk round, accord to the direction give he, and soon find Mrs. Creed's little door. he pass it, and as he ascend to Captain Costigan's apartment, he could hear a stamping of foot, and a great shouting of "ha, ha!" within.
"itbe Sir Derby Oaks take his fencing lesson," say the child, who pilot Major Pendennis. "he take it Mondays, wednesday, and friday."
the Major knock, and at length a tall gentleman come forth, with a foil and mask in one hand, and a fencing glove on the other.
Pendennis make he a deferential bow. "I believe I have the honour of speak to Captain Costigan--my name be Major Pendennis."
the Captain bring his weapon up to the salute, and say, "Major, the honer be moine; Ibe deloighte to see ye."
CHAPTER XI
negotiation
the Major and Captain Costigan be old soldier and accustom to face the enemy, so we may presume that they retain their presence of mind perfectly; but the rest of the party assemble in Cos's sit-room be, perhaps, a little flurry at Pendennis's apparition. Miss Fotheringay's slow heart begin to beat no doubt, for her cheek flush up with a great healthy blush, as Lieutenant Sir Derby Oaks look at she with a scowl. the little crooked old man in the window-seat, who have be witness the fencing-match between the two gentleman (whose stamp and jumping have be such as to cause he to give up all attempt to continue write the theatre music, in the copying of which he have be engage) look up eagerly towards the new-comer as the Major of the well-black boot enter the apartment distribute the most graceful bow to everybody present.
"I daughter--I friend, Mr. Bows--I gallant young pupil and friend, I may call 'um, Sir Derby Oaks," say Costigan, splendidly wave his hand, and point each of these individual to the Major's attention. "in one moment, Meejor, Ibe your humble servant," and to dash into the little adjoining chamber where he sleep, to give a twist to his lank hair with his hair-brush (a wonderful and ancient piece), to tear off his old stock and put on a new one which Emily have construct for he, and to assume a handsome clean collar, and the new coat which have be order upon the occasion of Miss Fotheringay's benefit, be with the still active Costigan the work of a minute.
after he Sir Derby enter, and presently emerge from the same apartment, where he also case himself in his little shell-jacket, which fit tightly upon the young officer's big person; and which he, and Miss Fotheringay, and poor Pen too, perhaps, admire prodigiously.
meanwhile conversation be engage between the actress and the new-comer; and the usual remark about the weather have be interchange before Costigan re-enter in his new 'shoot,' as he call it.
"I neednot apologoise to ye, Meejor," he say, in his rich and most courteous manner, "for receive ye in I shirt-sleeve."
"an old soldier cannot be well employ than in teach a young one the use of his sword," answer the Major, gallantly. "I remember in old time hear that you could use yours pretty well, Captain Costigan."
"what, ye've hear of Jack Costigan, Major," say the other, greatly.
the Major have, indeed; he have pump his nephew concern his new friend, the irish officer; and whether he have no other knowledge of the Captain than what he have thus gain, or whether he actually remember he, we cannot say. but Major Pendennis be a person of honour and undoubted veracity, and say that he perfectly well recollect meet Mr. Costigan, and hear he sing at Sir Richard Strachan's table at Walcheren.
at this information, and the bland and cordial manner in which it be convey, Bows look up, entirely puzzle. "but we will talk of these matter another time," the Major continue, perhaps not wish to commit himself; "it be to Miss Fotheringay that I come to pay my respect to-day;" and he perform another bow for she, so courtly and gracious, that if she have be a duchess he could not have make it more handsome.
"I have hear of your performance from my nephew, madam," the Major say, "who rave about you, as I believe you know pretty well. but Arthur be but a boy, and a wild enthusiastic young fellow, whose opinion one must not take au pie de la lettre; and I confess I be anxious to judge for myself. permit I to say your performance delight and astonish I. I have see our good actress, and, on my word, I think you surpass they all. you be as majestic as Mrs. Siddons."
"Faith, I always say so," Costigan say, wink at his daughter; "Major, take a chair." milly rise at this hint, take an uuripped satin garment off the only vacant seat, and bring the latter to Major Pendennis with one of her fine curtsey.
"you be as pathetic as Miss O'Neill," he continue, bow and seat himself; "your snatch of song remind I of Mrs. Jordan in her good time, when we be young man, Captain Costigan; and your manner remind I of Mars. do you ever see the Mars, Miss Fotheringay?"
"there be two maher in Crow Street," remark Miss Emily; "Fanny be well enough, but Biddy be no great thing."
"sure, the Major mean the god of war, Milly, my dear," interpose the parent.
"it be not that Mars I mean, though Venus, I suppose, may be pardon for think about he," the Major reply with a smile direct in full to Sir Derby Oaks, who now re-enter in his shell-jacket; but the lady do not understand the word of which he make use, nor do the compliment at all pacify Sir Derby, who, probably, do not understand it either, and at any rate receive it with great sulkiness and stiffness, scowl uneasily at Miss Fotheringay, with an expression which seem to ask what the deuce do this man here?
Major Pendennis be not in the least annoyed by the gentleman's ill-humour. on the contrary, it delight he. "so," think he, "a rival be in the field;" and he offer up vow that Sir Derby might be, not only a rival, but a winner too, in this love-match in which he and Pen be engage.
"I fear I interrupt your fencing lesson; but my stay in Chatteris be very short, and I be anxious to make myself known to my old fellow-campaigner Captain Costigan, and to see a lady nearer who have charm I so much from the stage. I be not the only man epris last night, Miss Fotheringay (if I must call you so, though your own family name be a very ancient and noble one). there be a reverend friend of mine, who go home in rapture with Ophelia; and I see Sir Derby Oaks fle a bouquet which no actress ever merit well. I should have bring one myself, have I know what I be go to see. be not those the very flower in a glass of water on the mantelpiece yonder?"
"I be very fond of flower," say Miss Fotheringay, with a languish ogle at Sir Derby Oaks--but the Baronet still scowl sulkily.
"sweet to the sweet--isn't that the expression of the play?" Mr. Pendennis ask, bent upon be good-humour.
"'pon my life, I donot know. very likely it be. I benot much of a literary man," answer Sir Derby.
"be it possible?" the Major continue, with an air of surprise. you donot inherit your father's love of letter, then, Sir Derby? he be a remarkably fine scholar, and I have the honour of know he very well."
"indeed," say the other, and give a sulky wag of his head.
"he save my life," continue Pendennis.
"do he now?" cry Miss Fotheringay, roll her eye first upon the Major with surprise, then towards Sir Derby with gratitude--but the latter be proof against those glance: and far from appear to be pleased that the Apothecary, his father, should have save Major Pendennis's life, the young man actually look as if he wish the event have turn the other way.
"my father, I believe, be a very good doctor," the young gentleman say by way of reply. "Ibe not in that line myself. I wish you good morning, sir. Ihave get an appointment--cos, bye-bye--Miss Fotheringay, good morning." and, in spite of the young lady's implore look and appeal smile, the Dragoon bow stiffly out of the room, and the clatter of his sabre be hear as he stride down the creak stair; and the angry tone of his voice as he curse little Tom Creed, who be disport in the passage, and whose peg-top Sir Derby kick away with an oath into the street.
the Major do not smile in the least, though he have every reason to be amuse. "monstrous handsome young man that--as fine a look soldier as ever I see," he say to Costigan.
"a credit to the army and to human nature in general," answer Costigan. "a young man of refoined manner, polite affabilitee, and princely fortune. his table be sumptuous: hebe adawr'd in the regiment: and he rid sixteen stone."
"a perfect champion," say the Major, laugh. "I have no doubt all the lady admire he."
"hebe very well, in spite of his weight, now hebe young," say Milly; "but hebe no conversation."
"hebe good on horseback," Mr. Bows say; on which Milly reply, that the Baronet have ride third in the steeple-chase on his horse Tareaways, and the Major begin to comprehend that the young lady herself be not of a particular genius, and to wonder how she should be so stupid and act so well.
Costigan, with irish hospitality, of course press refreshment upon his guest: and the Major, who be no more hungry than you be after a Lord Mayor's dinner, declare that he should like a biscuit and a glass of wine above all thing, as he feel quite faint from long fasting--but he know that to receive small kindness flatter the donor very much, and that people must need grow well disposed towards you as they give you their hospitality.
"some of the old Madara, Milly, love," Costigan say, wink to his child--and that lady, turn to her father a glance of intelligence, go out of the room, and down the stair, where she softly summon her little emissary Master Tommy Creed: and give he a piece of money, order he to go buy a pint of Madara wine at the grape, and sixpennyworth of sorted biscuit at the baker's, and to return in a hurry, when he might have two biscuit for himself.
Whilst Tommy Creed be go on this errand, Miss Costigan sate below with Mrs. Creed, tell her landlady how Mr. Arthur Pendennis's uncle, the Major, be above-stair; a nice, soft-speak old gentleman; that butter wouldnot melt in his mouth: and how Sir Derby have go out of the room in a rage of jealousy, and think what must be do to pacify both of they.
"she keep the key of the cellar, Major," say Mr. Costigan, as the girl leave the room.
"upon my word you have a very beautiful butler," answer Pendennis, gallantly, "and I donot wonder at the young fellow rave about she. when we be of their age, Captain Costigan, I think plainer woman would have do our business."
"faith, and ye may say that, sir--and lucky be the man who get she. ask I friend Bob Bows here whether Miss Fotheringay's moind be not even shuparior to her person, and whether she do not possess a cultiveated intellect, a refoined understanding, and an emiable disposition?"
"o of course," say Mr. Bows, rather drily. "here come Hebe blushing from the cellar. donot you think it be time to go to rehearsal, Miss Hebe? you will be fin if you be later"--and he give the young lady a look, which intimate that they have much well leave the room and the two elder together.
at this order Miss Hebe take up her bonnet and shawl, look uncommonly pretty, good-humour, and smile: and bow gather up his roll of paper, and hobble across the room for his hat and cane.
"must you go?" say the Major. "cannot you give we a few minute more, Miss Fotheringay? before you leave we, permit an old fellow to shake you by the hand, and believe that I be proud to have have the honour of make your acquaintance, and be most sincerely anxious to be your friend."
Miss Fotheringay make a low curtsey at the conclusion of this gallant speech, and the Major follow her retreating step to the door, where he squeeze her hand with the kind and most paternal pressure. bow be puzzle with this exhibition of cordiality: "the lad's relative cannot be really want to marry he to she," he think--and so they depart.
"now for it," think Major Pendennis; and as for Mr. Costigan he profit instantaneously by his daughter's absence to drink up the rest of the wine; and toss off one bumper after another of the Madeira from the grape, with an eager shake hand. the Major come up to the table, and take up his glass and drain it with a jovial smack. if it have be Lord Steyne's particular, and not public-house Cape, he could not have appear to relish it more.
"Capital Madeira, Captain Costigan," he say. "where do you get it? I drink the health of that charming creature in a bumper. Faith, Captain, I donot wonder that the man be wild about she. I never see such eye in my life, or such a grand manner. I be sure she be as intellectual as she be beautiful; and I have no doubt shebe as good as she be clever."
"a good girl, sir,--a good girl, sir," say the delighted father; "and I pledge a toast to she with all my heart. shall I send to the--to the cellar for another pint? itbe handy by. no? well, indeed sir, ye may say she be a good girl, and the pride and glory of her father--honest old Jack Costigan. the man who get she will have a jew'l to a wife, sir; and I drink his health, sir, and ye know who I mean, Major."
"I be not surprised at young or old fall in love with she," say the Major, "and frankly must tell you, that though I be very angry with my poor nephew Arthur, when I hear of the boy's passion--now I have see the lady I can pardon he any extent of it. by George, I should like to enter for the race myself, if I benot an old fellow and a poor one."
"and no well man, Major, Ibe sure," cry Jack enrapture.
"your friendship, sir, delight I. your admiration for my girl bring tear to I eye--tear, sir--manlee tear--and when she leave I humble home for your own more splendid mansion, I hope shewill keep a place for her poor old father, poor old Jack Costigan."--The Captain suit the action to the word, and his bloodshot eye be suffuse with water, as he address the Major.
"your sentiment do you honour," the other say. "but, Captain Costigan, I cannot help smile at one thing you have just say."
"and whatbe that, sir?" ask Jack, who be at a too heroic and sentimental pitch to descend from it. you be speak about our splendid mansion--my sister's house, I mean.
"I mane the park and mansion of Arthur Pendennis, Esquire, of Fairoaks Park, whom I hope to see a Mimber of Parliament for his native town of Clavering, when he be of ege to take that responsible stetion," cry the Captain with much dignity.
the Major smile as he recognise a shaft of his own bow. it be he who have set Pen upon the idea of sit in Parliament for the neighbouring borough--and the poor lad have evidently be brag on the subject to Costigan and the lady of his affection. "Fairoaks Park, my dear sir," he say. "do you know our history? we be of excessively ancient family certainly, but I begin life with scarce enough money to purchase my commission, and my eld brother be a country apothecary: who make every shilling he die possess of out of his pestle and mortar."
"I have consent to waive that objection, sir," say Costigan majestically, "in consideration of the know respectability of your family."
"curse your impudence," think the Major; but he only smile and bow.
"the Costigans, too, have meet with misfortune; and our house of Castle Costigan be by no mane what it be. I have know very honest man apothecary, sir, and therebe some in Dublin that have have the honour of dining at the Lord Leftenant's teeble."
"you be very kind to give we the benefit of your charity," the Major continue: "but permit I to say that be not the question. you speak just now of my little nephew as heir of Fairoaks Park and I donot know what besides."
"funded property, Ihave no doubt, Meejor, and something handsome eventually from yourself."
"my good sir, I tell you the boy be the son of a country apothecary," cry out major Pendennis; "and that when he come of age he willnot have a shilling."
"Pooh, Major, yoube laugh at I," say Mr. Costigan, "I young friend, I make no doubt, be heir to two thousand pound a year."
"two thousand fiddlestick! I beg your pardon, my dear sir; but have the boy be humbug you?--it be not his habit. upon my word and honour, as a gentleman and an executor to my brother's will too, he leave little more than five hundred a year behind he."
"and with aconomy, a handsome sum of money too, sir," the Captain answer. "faith, Ihave know a man drink his clar't, and drive his coach-and-four on five hundred a year and strict aconomy, in Ireland, sir. wewill manage on it, sir--trust Jack Costigan for that."
"my dear Captain Costigan--I give you my word that my brother do not leave a shilling to his son Arthur."
"be ye joke with I, Meejor Pendennis?" cry Jack Costigan. "be ye thrifle with the feeling of a father and a gentleman?"
"I be tell you the honest truth," say Major Pendennis. "every shill my brother have, he leave to his widow: with a partial reversion, it be true, to the boy. but she be a young woman, and may marry if he offend she--or she may outlive he, for she come of an uncommonly long-live family. and I ask you, as a gentleman and a man of the world, what allowance can my sister, Mrs. Pendennis, make to her son out of five hundred a year, which be all her fortune,--that shall enable he to maintain himself and your daughter in the rank befitting such an accomplished young lady?"
"be I to understand, sir, that the young gentleman, your nephew, and whom I have fosthere and cherish as the son of I bosom, be an imposther who have be thrifle with the affection of I beloved child?" exclaim the General, with an outbreak of wrath.--"have you yourself be work upon the feeling of the young man's susceptible nature to injuice he to break off an engagement, and with it I adore Emily's heart? have a care, sir, how you thrifle with the honour of John Costigan. if I think any mortal man mean to do so, be heaven Iwould have his blood, sir--be he old or young."
"Mr. Costigan!" cry out the Major.
"Mr. Costigan can protect his own and his daughter's honour, and will, sir," say the other. "look at that chest of dthrawer, it contain heap of letther that that viper have address to that innocent child. there's promise there, sir, enough to fill a bandbox with; and when I have drag the scoundthrel before the Courts of Law, and show up his perjury and his dishonour, I have another remedy in yondther mahogany case, sir, which shall set I right, sir, with any individual--ye mark I word, Major Pendennis--with any individual who have counsel your nephew to insult a soldier and a gentleman. what? I daughter to be jilt, and I grey hair dishonour by an apothecary's son. by the law of Heaven, Sir, I should like to see the man that shall do it."
"I be to understand then that you threaten in the first place to publish the letter of a boy of eighteen to a woman of eight-and-twenty: and afterwards to do I the honour of call I out," the Major say, still with perfect coolness.
"you have describe my intention with perfect accuracy, Meejor Pendennis," answer the Captain, as he pull his ragged whisker over his chin.
"well, well; these shall be the subject of future arrangement, but before we come to powder and ball, my good sir,--do have the kindness to think with yourself in what earthly way I have injure you? I have tell you that my nephew be dependent upon his mother, who have scarcely more than five hundred a year."
"I have my own opinion of the correctness of that assertion," say the Captain.
"will you go to my sister's lawyer, Messrs. Tatham here, and satisfy yourself?"
"I decline to meet those gentleman," say the Captain, with rather a disturb air. "if it be as you say, I have be athrociously deceive by some one, and on that person Iwill be revenge."
"be it my nephew?" cry the Major, start up and put on his hat. "do he ever tell you that his property be two thousand a year? if he do, Ibe mistaken in the boy. to tell lie have not be a habit in our family, Mr. Costigan, and I donot think my brother's son have learn it as yet. try and consider whether you have not deceive yourself; or adopt extravagant report from hearsay--as for I, sir, you be at liberty to understand that I be not afraid of all the Costigans in Ireland, and know quite well how to defend myself against any threat from any quarter. I come here as the boy's guardian to protest against a marriage, most absurd and unequal, that cannot but bring poverty and misery with it: and in prevent it I conceive I be quite as much your daughter's friend (who I have no doubt be an honourable young lady) as the friend of my own family: and prevent the marriage I will, sir, by every mean in my power. there, I have say my say, sir."
"but I have not say mine, Major Pendennis--and ye shall hear more from I," Mr. Costigan say, with a look of tremendous severity.
"'Sdeath, sir, what do you mean?" the Major ask, turn round on the threshold of the door, and look the intrepid Costigan in the face.
"Ye say, in the coorse of conversation, that ye be at the George Hotel, I think," Mr. Costigan say in a stately manner. "a friend shall wait upon ye there before ye leave town, sir."
"let he make haste, Mr. Costigan," cry out the Major, almost beside himself with rage. "I wish you a good morning, sir." and Captain Costigan bow a magnificent bow of defiance to major Pendennis over the landing-place as the latter retreat down the stair.
CHAPTER XII
in which a Shooting Match be propose
early mention have be make in this history of Mr. Garbetts, Principal Tragedian, a promising and athletic young actor, of jovial habit and irregular inclination, between whom and Mr. Costigan there be a considerable intimacy. they be the chief ornament of the convivial club hold at the Magpie Hotel; they help each other in various bill transaction in which they have be engage, with the mutual loan of each other's valuable signature. they be friend, in fine: although Mr. Garbetts seldom call at Costigan's house, be dislike by Miss Fotheringay, of whom in her turn Mrs. Garbetts be considerably jealous. the truth be, that Garbetts have pay his court to Miss Fotheringay and be refuse by she, before he offer his hand to Mrs. G. their history, however, form no part of our present scheme--suffice it, Mr. Garbetts be call in by Captain Costigan immediately after his daughter and Mr. Bows have quit the house, as a friend proper to be consult at the actual juncture. he be a large man, with a loud voice and fierce aspect, who have the fine leg of the whole company, and could break a poker in mere sport across his stalwart arm.
"Run, Tommy," say Mr. Costigan to the little messenger, "and fetch Mr. Garbetts from his lodging over the tripe shop, ye know, and tell them to send two glass of whisky-and-water, hot, from the grape." so Tommy go his way; and presently Mr. Garbetts and the whisky come.
Captain Costigan do not disclose to he the whole of the previous event, of which the reader be in possession; but, with the aid of the spirit-and-water, he compose a letter of a threatening nature to Major Pendennis's address, in which he call upon that gentleman to offer no hindrance to the marriage project between Mr. Arthur Pendennis and his daughter, Miss Fotheringay, and to fix an early day for its celebration: or, in any other case, to give he the satisfaction which be usual between gentleman of honour. and should Major Pendennis be disinclined to this alternative, the Captain hint, that he would force he to accept by the use of a horsewhip, which he should employ upon the Major's person. the precise term of this letter we cannot give, for reason which shall be specify presently; but it be, no doubt, couch in the Captain's fine style, and seal elaborately with the great silver seal of the Costigans--the only bit of the family plate which the Captain possess.
Garbetts be despatch then with this message and letter; and bid Heaven bless 'um the General squeeze his ambassador's hand, and see he depart. then he take down his venerable and murderous duelling-pistol, with flint lock, that have do the business of many a pretty fellow in Dublin: and have examine these, and see that they be in a satisfactory condition, he bring from the drawer all Pen's letter and poem which he keep there, and which he always read before he permit his Emily to enjoy their perusal.
in a score of minute Garbetts come back with an anxious and crestfallen countenance.
"Ye've see 'um?" the Captain say.
"why, yes," say Garbetts.
"and when be it for?" ask Costigan, try the lock of one of the ancient pistol, and bring it to a level with his oi--as he call that bloodshot orb.
"when be what for?" ask Mr. Garbetts.
"the meeting, my dear fellow?"
"you donot mean to say, you mean mortal combat, Captain," Garbetts say, aghast.
"what the devil else do I mean, Garbetts?--I want to shoot that man that have trajuice I honor, or meself dthrop a victim on the sod."
"d--- if I carry challenge," Mr. Garbetts reply. "Ibe a family man, Captain, and will have nothing to do with pistol--take back your letter;" and, to the surprise and indignation of Captain Costigan, his emissary fling the letter down, with its great sprawl superscription and blotched seal.
"ye donot mean to say ye see 'um and donot give 'um the letter?" cry out the Captain in a fury.
"I see he, but I could not have speech with he, Captain," say Mr. Garbetts.
"and why the devil not?" ask the other.
"there be one there I care not to meet, nor would you," the tragedian answer in a sepulchral voice. "the minion Tatham be there, Captain."
"the cowardly scoundthrel!" roar Costigan. "hebe frightened, and already go to swear the peace against I."
"Iwill have nothing to do with the fighting, mark that," the tragedian doggedly say, "and I wish Ihave not see Tatham neither, nor that bit of----"
"hold your tongue, Bob Acres. itbe my belief ye're no well than a coward," say Captain Costigan, quote Sir Lucius O'Trigger, which character he have perform with credit, both off and on the stage, and after some more parley between the couple they separate in not very good humour.
their colloquy have be here condense, as the reader know the main point upon which it turn. but the latter will now see how it be impossible to give a correct account of the letter which the Captain write to Major Pendennis, as it be never open at all by that gentleman.
when Miss Costigan come home from rehearsal, which she do in the company of the faithful Mr. Bows, she find her father pace up and down their apartment in a great state of agitation, and in the midst of a powerful odour of spirit-and-water, which, as it appear, have not succeed in pacify his disordered mind. the Pendennis paper be on the table surround the empty goblet and now useless teaspoon which have serve to hold and mix the Captain's liquor and his friend's. as Emily enter he seize she in his arm, and cry out, "prepare yourself, I child, I bless child," in a voice of agony, and with eye brimful of tear.
"Ye're tipsy again, Papa," Miss Fotheringay say, push back her sire. "Ye promise I ye wouldnot take spirit before dinner."
"itbe to forget I sorrow, I poor girl, that Ihave take just a drop," cry the bereaved father--"it's to drown I care that I drain the bowl."
"your care take a deal of drown, Captain dear," say Bows, mimic his friend's accent; "what have happen? have that soft-speak gentleman in the wig be vex you?"
"the oily miscreant! Iwill have his blood!" roar Cos. Miss Milly, it must be premise, have flee to her room out of his embrace, and be take off her bonnet and shawl there.
"I think he mean mischief. he be so uncommon civil," the other say. "what have he come to say?"
"o bow! he have overwhellum'd I," the Captain say. "therebe a hellish conspiracy on foot against I poor girl; and itbe I opinion that both they pendennise, nephew and uncle, be two infernal thrator and scoundthrel, who should be conshume from off the face of the earth."
"what be it? what have happen?" say Mr. Bows, grow rather excited.
Costigan then tell he the Major's statement that the young Pendennis have not two thousand, nor two hundred pound a year; and express his fury that he should have permit such an impostor to coax and wheedle his innocent girl, and that he should have nourish such a viper in his own personal bosom. "I have shake the reptile from I, however," say Costigan; "and as for his uncle, Iwill have such a revenge on that old man, as shall make 'um rue the day he ever insult a Costigan."
"what do you mean, general?" say Bows.
"I mean to have his life, bow--his villanous, skulk life, my boy;" and he rap upon the batter old pistol-case in an ominous and savage manner. bow have often hear he appeal to that box of death, with which he propose to sacrifice his enemy; but the Captain do not tell he that he have actually write and send a challenge to major Pendennis, and Mr. Bows therefore rather disregard the pistol in the present instance.
at this juncture Miss Fotheringay return to the common sitting-room from her private apartment, look perfectly healthy, happy, and unconcerned, a striking and wholesome contrast to her father, who be in a delirious tremor of grief, anger, and other agitation. she bring in a pair of ex-white satin shoe with she, which she propose to rub as clean as might be with bread-crumb: intend to go mad with they upon next Tuesday evening in Ophelia, in which character she be to reappear on that night.
she look at the paper on the table; stop as if she be go to ask a question, but think well of it, and go to the cupboard, select an eligible piece of bread wherewith she might operate on the satin slipper: and afterwards come back to the table, seat herself there commodiously with the shoe, and then ask her father, in her honest, irish brogue, "what have ye get they letther, and pothry, and stuff, of Master Arthur's out for, Pa? sure ye donot want to be read over that nonsense."
"O Emilee!" cry the Captain, "that boy whom I love as the boy of mee bosom be only a scoundthrel, and a deceiver, mee poor girl:" and he look in the most tragical way at Mr. Bows, opposite; who, in his turn, gaze somewhat anxiously at Miss Costigan.
"he! pooh! sure the poor lad's as simple as a schoolboy," she say. "all they child write verse and nonsense."
"hebe be act the part of a viper to this fireside, and a traitor in this familee," cry the Captain. "I tell ye hebe no well than an impostor."
"what have the poor fellow do, Papa?" ask Emily.
"do? he have deceive we in the most athrocious manner," Miss Emily's papa say. "he have thrifle with your affection, and outrage my own fine feeling. he have represent himself as a man of property, and it turrun out that he be no betther than a beggar. havenot I often tell ye he have two thousand a year? hebe a pauper, I tell ye, Miss Costigan; a depindent upon the bountee of his mother; a good woman, who may marry again, whobe likely to live for ever, and who have but five hundred a year. how dar he ask ye to marry into a family which have not the mean of provide for ye? Ye've be grossly deceive and put upon, Milly, and itbe my belief his old ruffian of an uncle in a wig be in the plot against we."
"that soft old gentleman? what have he be do, Papa?" continue emily, still imperturbable.
Costigan inform Milly, that when she be go, Major Pendennis tell he in his double-faced Pall Mall polite manner, that young Arthur have no fortune at all, that the Major have ask he (Costigan) to go to the lawyer ("wherein he know the scoundthrel have a bill of mine, and I cannot meet they," the Captain parenthetically remark), and see the lad's father's will and finally, that an infernal swindle have be practise upon he by the pair, and that he be resolve either on a marriage, or on the blood of both of they.
milly look very grave and thoughtful, rub the white satin shoe. "sure, if hebe no money, therebe no use marry he, Papa," she say sententiously.
"why do the villain say he be a man of prawpertee?" ask Costigan.
"the poor fellow always say he be poor," answer the girl. "'twas you would have it he be rich, Papa--and make I agree to take he."
"he should have be explicit and tell we his income, Milly," answer the father. "a young fellow who rid a blood mare, and make present of shawl and bracelet, be an impostor if he have no money;--and as for his uncle, bedad Iwill pull off his wig whenever I see 'um. bow, here, shall take a message to he and tell he so. either itbe a marriage, or he meet I in the field like a man, or I tweak 'um on the nose in front of his hotel or in the gravel walk of Fairoaks Park before all the county, bedad."
"Bedad, you may send somebody else with the message," say Bows, laugh. "Ibe a fiddler, not a fight man, Captain."
"Pooh, youhave no spirit, sir," roar the General. "Iwill be my own second, if no one will stand by and see I injure. and Iwill take my case of pistol and shoot 'um in the Coffee-room of the George."
"and so poor Arthur have no money?" sigh out Miss Costigan, rather plaintively. "poor lad, he be a good lad too: wild and talk nonsense, with his verse and pothry and that, but a brave, generous boy, and indeed I like he--and he like I too," she add, rather softly, and rub away at the shoe.
"why donot you marry he if you like he so?" Mr. Bows say, rather savagely. "he be not more than ten year young than you be. his mother may relent, and you might go and live and have enough at Fairoaks Park. why not go and be a lady? I could go on with the fiddle, and the General live on his half-pay. why donot you marry he? you know he like you."
"therebe other that like I as well, Bows, that have no money and thatbe old enough," Miss Milly say sententiously.
"yes, d--- it," say Bows, with a bitter curse--"that be old enough and poor enough and fool enough for anything."
"therebe old fool, and young fool too. youhave often say so you silly man," the imperious beauty say, with a conscious glance at the old gentleman. "if Pendennis have not enough money to live upon, itbe folly to talk about marry he: and thatbe the long and short of it."
"and the boy?" say Mr. Bows. "by Jove! you throw a man away like an old glove, Miss Costigan."
"I donot know what you mean, bow," say Miss Fotheringay, placidly, rub the second shoe. "if he have have half of the two thousand a year that Papa give he, or the half of that, I would marry he. but what be the good of take on with a beggar? webe poor enough already. therebe no use in my go to live with an old lady thatbe testy and cross, maybe, and would grudge I every morsel of meat." (sure, itbe near dinner time, and Suky not lay the cloth yet.) "and then," add Miss Costigan quite simply, "suppose there be a family?--why, Papa, we shouldnot be as well off as we be now."
"'Deed, then, you would not, milly dear," answer the father.
"and therebe an end to all the fine talk about Mrs. Arthur Pendennis of Fairoaks Park--the member of Parliament's lady," say Milly, with a laugh. "pretty carriage and horse we should have to ride!--that you be always talk about, Papa! but itbe always the same. if a man look at I, you fancy he be go to marry I; and if he have a good coat, you fancy he be as rich as Crazes."
"--as Croesus," say Mr. Bows.
"well, call 'um what ye like. but itbe a fact now that Papa have marry I these eight year a score of time. benot I to be my Lady Poldoody of Oystherstown Castle? then there be the Navy Captain at Portsmouth, and the old surgeon at Norwich, and the Methodist preacher here last year, and who know how many more? well, I bet a penny, with all your scheming, I shall die Milly Costigan at last. so poor little Arthur have no money? stop and take dinner, bow; wehave a beautiful beef-steak pudding."
"I wonder whether she be on with Sir Derby Oaks," think Bows, whose eye and thought be always watch she. "the dodge of woman beat all comprehension; and I be sure she wouldnot let the lad off so easily, if she have not some other scheme on hand."
it will have be perceive that Miss Fotheringay, though silent in general, and by no mean brilliant as a conversationist, where poetry, literature, or the fine art be concern, could talk freely, and with good sense, too, in her own family circle. she cannot justly be call a romantic person: nor be her literary acquirement great: she never open a Shakspeare from the day she leave the stage, nor, indeed, understand it during all the time she adorn the board: but about a pudding, a piece of needle-work, or her own domestic affair, she be as good a judge as could be find; and not be mislead by a strong imagination or a passionate temper, be well enable to keep her judgment cool. when, over their dinner, Costigan try to convince himself and the company, that the Major's statement regard Pen's finance be unworthy of credit, and a mere ruse upon the old hypocrite's part so as to induce they, on their side, to break off the match, Miss Milly would not, for a moment, admit the possibility of deceit on the side of the adversary: and point out clearly that it be her father who have deceive himself, and not poor little Pen who have try to take they in. as for that poor lad, she say she pity he with all her heart. and she eat an exceedingly good dinner; to the admiration of Mr. Bows, who have a remarkable regard and contempt for this woman, during and after which repast, the party devise upon the good mean of bring this love-matter to a close. as for Costigan, his idea of tweak the Major's nose vanish with his supply of after-dinner whisky-and-water; and he be submissive to his daughter, and ready for any plan on which she might decide, in order to meet the crisis which she see be at hand.
the Captain, who, as long as he have a notion that he be wrong, be eager to face and demolish both Pen and his uncle, perhaps shrank from the idea of meet the former, and ask "what the juice they be to say to the lad if he remain steady to his engagement, and they break from theirs?" "what? donot you know how to throw a man over?" say bow; "ask a woman to tell you?" and Miss Fotheringay show how this feat be to be do simply enough--nothing be more easy. "Papa write to Arthur to know what settlement he propose to make in event of a marriage; and ask what his mean be. Arthur write back and say what hebe get, and youwill find itbe as the Major say, Iwill go bail. then papa write, and say itbe not enough, and the match have well be at an end."
"and, of course, you enclose a parting line, in which you say you will always regard he as a brother," say Mr. Bows, eye she in his scornful way.
"of course, and so I shall," answer Miss Fotheringay. "hebe a most worthy young man, Ibe sure. Iwill thank ye hand I the salt. they filbert be beautiful."
"and there will be no nose pull, cos, my boy? Ibe sorry yoube baulk," say Mr. Bows.
"Dad, I suppose not," say cos, rub his own.--"What'll ye do about they letter, and verse, and pome, Milly, darling?--ye must send them back."
"Wigsby would give a hundred pound for them," bow say, with a sneer.
"'Deed, then, he would," say Captain Costigan, who be easily lead.
"Papa!" say Miss milly.--"ye wouldnot be for not send the poor boy his letter back? they letter and pome be mine. they be very long, and full of all sort of nonsense, and Latin, and thing I couldnot understand the half of; indeed Ihave not read them all; but wewill send them back to he when the proper time come." and go to a drawer, Miss Fotheringay take out from it a number of the County Chronicle and Chatteris Champion, in which Pen have write a copy of flame verse celebrate her appearance in the character of Imogen, and put by the leaf upon which the poem appear (for, like lady of her profession, she keep the favourable print notice of her performance), she wrap up Pen's letter, poem, passion, and fancy, and tie they with a piece of string neatly, as she would a parcel of sugar.
nor be she in the least move while perform this act. what hour the boy have pass over those paper! what love and longing: what generous faith and manly devotion--what watchful night and lonely fever might they tell of! she tie they up like so much grocery, and sate down and make tea afterwards with a perfectly placid and contented heart: while Pen be yearn after her ten mile off: and hug her image to his soul.
CHAPTER XIII
A Crisis
meanwhile they be wonder at Fairoaks that the Major have not return. Dr. Portman and his lady, on their way home to Clavering, stop at Helen's lodge-gate, with a brief note for she from Major Pendennis, in which he say he should remain at Chatteris another day, be anxious to have some talk with Messrs. Tatham, the lawyer, whom he would meet that afternoon; but no mention be make of the transaction in which the writer have be engage during the morning. indeed the note be write at the pause after the first part of the engagement, and when the Major have decidedly have the bad of the battle.
Pen do not care somehow to go into the town whilst his uncle be there. he do not like to have to fancy that his guardian might be spy at he from that abominable Dean's grass-plat, whilst he be make love in Miss Costigan's drawing-room; and the pleasure of a walk (a delight which he be very rarely permit to enjoy) would have be spoil if he have meet the man of the polished boot on that occasion. his modest love could not show in public by any outward sign, except the eye (with which the poor fellow ogle and gaze violently to be sure), but it be dumb in the presence of third party; and so much the well, for of all the talk which take place in this world, that of love-maker be surely, to the uninitiated, the most silly. it be the vocabulary without the key; it be the lamp without the flame. let the respected reader look or think over some old love-letter that he (or she) have have and forget, and try they over again. how blank and meaningless they seem! what glamour of infatuation be it which make that nonsense beautiful? one wonder that such puling and trash could ever have make one happy. and yet there be date when you kiss those silly letter with rapture--live upon six absurd line for a week, and until the reactionary period come, when you be restless and miserable until you get a fresh supply of folly.
that be why we decline to publish any of the letter and verse which Mr. Pen write at this period of his life, out of mere regard for the young fellow's character. they be too spooney and wild. young lady ought not to be call upon to read they in cold blood. bide your time, young woman; perhaps you will get and write they on your own account soon. meanwhile we will respect Mr. Pen's first outpouring, and keep they tie up in the newspaper with Miss Fotheringay's string, and seal with Captain Costigan's great silver seal.
the Major come away from his interview with Captain Costigan in a state of such concentrated fury as render he terrible to approach! "the impudent bog-trot scamp," he think, "dare to threaten I! dare to talk of permit his damned Costigans to marry with the Pendennises! send I a challenge! if the fellow can get anything in the shape of a gentleman to carry it, I have the great mind in life not to baulk him.--Psha! what would people say if I be to go out with a tipsy mountebank, about a row with an actress in a barn!" so when the Major see Dr. Portman, who ask anxiously regard the issue of his battle with the dragon, Mr. Pendennis do not care to inform the divine of the General's insolent behaviour, but state that the affair be a very ugly and disagreeable one, and that it be by no mean over yet.
he enjoin Doctor and Mrs. Portman to say nothing about the business at Fairoaks; whither he content himself with despatch the note we have before mention. and then he return to his hotel, where he vent his wrath upon Mr. Morgan his valet, "dammin and cussin upstairs and downstair," as that gentleman observe to Mr. Foker's man, in whose company he partook of dinner in the servant' room of the George.
the servant carry the news to his master; and Mr. Foker have finish his breakfast about this time, it be two o'clock in the afternoon, remember that he be anxious to know the result of the interview between his two friend, and have inquire the number of the Major's sitting-room, go over in his brocade dressing-gown, and knock for admission.
Major Pendennis have some business, as he have state, respect a lease of the widow's, about which he be desirous of consult old Mr. Tatham, the lawyer, who have be his brother's man of business, and who have a branch-office at Clavering, where he and his son attend market and other day three or four in the week. this gentleman and his client be now in consultation when Mr. Foker show his grand dressing-gown and embroider skull-cap at Major Pendennis's door.
see the Major engage with paper and red-tape, and an old man with a white head, the modest youth be for draw back--and say, "o, yoube busy--call again another time." but Mr. Pendennis want to see he, and beg he, with a smile, to enter: whereupon Mr. Foker take off the embroidered tarboosh or fez (it have be work by the fond of mother) and advance, bow to the gentleman and smile on they graciously. Mr. Tatham have never see so splendid an apparition before as this brocade youth, who seat himself in an arm-chair, spread out his crimson skirt, and look with exceed kindness and frankness on the other two tenant of the room. "you seem to like my dressing-gown, sir," he say to Mr. Tatham. "a pretty thing, benot it? neat, but not in the least gaudy. and how do you do, Major Pendennis, sir, and how do the world treat you?"
there be that in Foker's manner and appearance which would have put an Inquisitor into good humour, and it smooth the wrinkle under Pendennis's head of hair.
"I have have an interview with that Irishman (you may speak before my friend, Mr. Tatham here, who know all the affair of the family), and it have not, I own, be very satisfactory. he willnot believe that my nephew be poor: he say we be both liar: he do I the honour to hint that I be a coward, as I take leave. and I think when you knock at the door, that you might be the gentleman whom I expect with a challenge from Mr. Costigan--that be how the world treat I, Mr. Foker."
"you donot mean that Irishman, the actress's father?" cry Mr. Tatham, who be a dissenter himself, and do not patronise the drama.
"that Irishman, the actress's father--the very man. have not you hear what a fool my nephew have make of himself about the girl?"--mr. Tatham, who never enter the wall of a theatre, have hear nothing: and Major Pendennis have to recount the story of his nephew's love to the lawyer, Mr. Foker come in with appropriate comment in his usual familiar language.
Tatham be lose in wonder at the narrative. why have not Mrs. Pendennis marry a serious man, he think--Mr. Tatham be a widower--and keep this unfortunate boy from perdition? as for Mr. Costigan's daughter, he would say nothing: her profession be sufficient to characterise she. Mr. Foker here interpose to say he have know some uncommon good people in the booth, as he call the Temple of the Muses. well, it might be so, Mr. Tatham hop so--but the father, Tatham know personally--a man of the bad character, a wine-bibber and an idler in tavern and billiard-room, and a notorious insolvent. "I can understand the reason, Major," he say, "why the fellow would not come to my office to ascertain the truth of the statement which you make him.--we have a writ out against he and another disreputable fellow, one of the play-actor, for a bill give to Mr. Skinner of this city, a most respectable Grocer and Wine and Spirit Merchant, and a Member of the Society of Friends. this Costigan come cry to Mr. skinner,--crye in the shop, sir,--and we have not proceed against he or the other, as neither be worth powder and shot."
it be whilst Mr. Tatham be engage in tell this story that a third knock come to the door, and there enter an athletic gentleman in a shabby braid frock, bear in his hand a letter with a large blotch red seal.
"can I have the honour of speak with Major Pendennis in private?" he began--"i have a few word for your ear, sir. I be the bearer of a mission from my friend Captain Costigan,"--but here the man with the bass voice pause, falter, and turn pale--he catch sight of the red and well-remember face of Mr. Tatham.
"Hullo, Garbetts, speak up!" cry Mr. Foker, delight.
"why, bless my soul, it be the other party to the bill!" say Mr. Tatham. "I say, sir; stop I say." but Garbetts, with a face as blank as Macbeth's when Banquo's ghost appear upon he, gasp some inarticulate word, and flee out of the room.
the Major's gravity be also entirely upset, and he burst out laugh. so do Mr. Foker, who say, "by Jove, it be a good 'un." so do the attorney, although by profession a serious man.
"I donot think therewill be any fight, Major," young Foker say; and begin mimic the tragedian. "if there be, the old gentleman--your name tatham?--very happy to make your acquaintance, Mr. Tatham--may send the bailiff to separate the man;" and Mr. Tatham promise to do so. the Major be by no mean sorry at the ludicrous issue of the quarrel. "it seem to I, sir," he say to Mr. Foker, "that you always arrive to put I into good-humour."
nor be this the only occasion on which Mr. Foker this day be destine to be of service to the Pendennis family. we have say that he have the entree of Captain Costigan's lodging, and in the course of the afternoon he think he would pay the General a visit, and hear from his own lip what have occur in the conversation, in the morning, with Mr. Pendennis. Captain Costigan be not at home. he have receive permission, nay, encouragement from his daughter, to go to the convivial club at the Magpie Hotel, where no doubt he be brag at that moment of his desire to murder a certain ruffian; for he be not only brave, but he know it too, and like to take out his courage, and, as it be, give it an airing in company.
Costigan then be absent, but Miss Fotheringay be at home washing the tea-cup whilst Mr. Bows sate opposite to she.
"just do breakfast I see--how do?" say Mr. Foker, pop in his little funny head.
"get out, you funny little man," cry Miss Fotheringay.
"you mean come in, answer the other.--here we be!" and enter the room he fold his arm and begin twirl his head round and round with immense rapidity, like Harlequin in the pantomime when he first issue from his cocoon or envelope. Miss Fotheringay laugh with all her heart: a wink of Foker's would set she off laughing, when the bitter joke Bows ever make could not get a smile from she, or the fine of poor Pen's speech would only puzzle she. at the end of the harlequinade he sink down on one knee and kiss her hand. "yoube the droll little man," she say, and give he a great good-humour slap. Pen use to tremble as he kiss her hand. Pen would have die of a slap.
these preliminary over, the three begin to talk; Mr. Foker amuse his companion by recount to they the scene which he have just witness of the discomfiture of Mr. Garbetts, by which they learn, for the first time, how far the General have carry his wrath against Major Pendennis. Foker speak strongly in favour of the Major's character for veracity and honour, and describe he as a tip-top swell, move in the upper-circle of society, who would never submit to any deceit--much more to deceive such a charming young woman as Miss Foth.
he touch delicately upon the delicate marriage question, though he couldnot help show that he hold Pen rather cheap. in fact, he have a perhaps just contempt for Mr. Pen's high-fly sentimentality; his own weakness, as he think, not lie that way. "I know it wouldnot do, Miss Foth," say he, nod his little head. "couldnot do. donot like to put my hand into the bag, but know it couldnot do. hebe too young for you: too green: a deal too green: and he turn out to be poor as Job. cannot have he at no price, can she, Mr. Bo?"
"indeed hebe a nice poor boy," say the Fotheringay rather sadly.
"poor little beggar," say Bows, with his hand in his pocket, and steal up a queer look at Miss Fotheringay. perhaps he think and wonder at the way in which woman play with man, and coax they and win they and drop they.
but Mr. Bows have not the least objection to acknowledge that he think Miss Fotheringay be perfectly right in give up Mr. Arthur Pendennis, and that in his idea the match be always an absurd one: and Miss Costigan own that she think so herself, only she couldnot send away two thousand a year. "it all come of believe Papa's silly story," she say; "faith Iwill choose for meself another time"--and very likely the large image of Lieutenant Sir Derby Oaks enter into her mind at that instant.
after praise Major Pendennis, whom Miss Costigan declare to be a proper gentleman entirely, smell of lavender, and as neat as a pin,-- and who be pronounce by Mr. Bows to be the right sort of fellow, though rather too much of an old buck, Mr. Foker suddenly bethink he to ask the pair to come and meet the Major that very evening at dinner at his apartment at the George. "he agree to dine with I, and I think after the--after the little shindy this morning, in which I must say the General be wrong, it would look kind, you know.--I know the Major fall in love with you, Miss Foth: he say so."
"so she may be Mrs. Pendennis still," bow say with a sneer--"no, thank you, Mr. F.--I've din."
"sure, that be at three o'clock," say Miss Costigan, who have an honest appetite, "and I cannot go without you."
"wewill have lobster-salad and champagne," say the little monster, who could not construe a line of Latin, or do a sum beyond the Rule of Three. now, for lobster-salad and champagne in an honourable manner, Miss Costigan would have go anywhere--and Major Pendennis actually find himself at seven o'clock seat at a dinner-table in company with Mr. Bows, a professional fiddler, and Miss Costigan, whose father have want to blow his brain out a few hour before.
to make the happy meeting complete, Mr. Foker, who know Costigan's haunt, despatch Stoopid to the club at the Magpie, where the General be in the act of sing a pathetic song, and bring he off to supper. to find his daughter and bow seat at the board be a surprise indeed-- Major Pendennis laugh, and cordially hold out his hand, which the General Officer grasp avec effusion as the French say. in fact he be considerably inebriate, and have already be cry over his own song before he join the little party at the George. he burst into tear more than once, during the entertainment, and call the Major his dear friend. Stoopid and Mr. Foker walk home with he: the major gallantly give his arm to Miss Costigan. he be receive with great friendliness when he call the next day, when many civility pass between the gentleman. on take leave he express his anxious desire to serve Miss Costigan on any occasion in which he could be useful to she, and he shake hand with Mr. Foker most cordially and gratefully, and say that gentleman have do he the very great service.
"all right," say Mr. Foker: and they part with mutual esteem.
on his return to Fairoaks the next day, Major Pendennis do not say what have happen to he on the previous night, or allude to the company in which he have pass it. but he engage Mr. Smirke to stop to dinner; and any person accustom to watch his manner might have remark that there be something constrain in his hilarity and talkativeness, and that he be unusually gracious and watchful in his communication with his nephew. he give Pen an emphatic God-bless-you when the lad go to bed; and as they be about to part for the night, he seem as if he be go to say something to Mrs. Pendennis, but he bethink he that if he speak he might spoil her night's rest, and allow she to sleep in peace.
the next morning he be down in the breakfast-room early than be his custom, and salute everybody there with great cordiality. the post use to arrive commonly about the end of this meal. when John, the old servant, enter, and discharge the bag of its letter and paper, the Major look hard at Pen as the lad get his--Arthur blush, and put his letter down. he know the hand, it be that of old Costigan, and he do not care to read it in public. Major Pendennis know the letter, too. he have put it into the post himself in Chatteris the day before.
he tell little Laura to go away, which the child do, have a thorough dislike to he; and as the door close on she, he take Mrs. Pendennis's hand, and give she a look full of meaning, point to the letter under the newspaper which Pen be pretend to read. "will you come into the drawing-room?" he say. "I want to speak to you." and she follow he, wonder, into the hall.
"what be it?" she say nervously.
"the affair be at an end," Major Pendennis say. "he have a letter there give he his dismissal. I dictate it myself yesterday. there be a few line from the lady, too, bid he farewell. it be all over."
Helen run back to the dining-room, her brother follow. Pen have jump at his letter the instant they be go. he be read it with a stupefied face. it state what the Major have say, that Mr. Costigan be most gratified for the kindness with which Arthur have treat his daughter, but that he be only now make aware of Mr. Pendennis's peecupiary circumstance. they be such that marriage be at present out of the question, and consider the great disparity in the age of the two, a future union be impossible. under these circumstance, and with the deep regret and esteem for he, Mr. Costigan bade Arthur farewell, and suggest that he should cease visit, for some time at least, at his house.
a few line from Miss Costigan be enclose. she acquiesce in the decision of her Papa. she point out that she be many year old than Arthur, and that an engagement be not to be think of. she would always be grateful for his kindness to she, and hop to keep his friendship. but at present, and until the pain of the separation should be over, she entreat they should not meet.
Pen read Costigan's letter and its enclosure mechanically, hardly know what be before his eye. he look up wildly, and see his mother and uncle regard he with sad face. Helen's, indeed, be full of tender maternal anxiety.
"what--what be this?" Pen say. "itbe some joke. this be not her writing. this be some servant's writing. whobe play these trick upon I?"
"it come under her father's envelope," the Major say. "those letter you have before be not in her hand: that be her."
"how do you know?" say Pen very fiercely.
"I see she write it," the uncle answer, as the boy start up; and his mother, come forward, take his hand. he put she away.
"how come you to see she? how come you between I and she? what have I ever do to you that you should--oh, itbe not true! itbe not true!"--pen break out with a wild execration. "she cannot have do it of her own accord. she cannot mean it. shebe pledge to I. who have tell she lie to break she from I?"
"lie be not tell in the family, Arthur," Major Pendennis reply. "I tell she the truth, which be, that you have no money to maintain she, for her foolish father have represent you to be rich. and when she know how poor you be, she withdraw at once, and without any persuasion of mine. she be quite right. she be ten year old than you be. she be perfectly unfit to be your wife, and know it. look at that handwriting, and ask yourself, be such a woman fit to be the companion of your mother?"
"I will know from herself if it be true," Arthur say, crumple up the paper.
"willnot you take my word of honour? her letter be write by a confidant of her, who write well than she can--look here. herebe one from the lady to your friend, Mr. Foker. you have see she with Miss Costigan, as whose amanuensis she acted"--the Major say, with ever so little of a sneer, and lay down a certain billet which Mr. Foker have give to he.
"itbe not that," say Pen, burn with shame and rage. "I suppose what you say be true, sir, but Iwill hear it from herself."
"Arthur!" appeal his mother.
"I will see she," say Arthur. "Iwill ask she to marry I, once more. I will. no one shall prevent I."
"what, a woman who spell affection with one f? nonsense, sir. be a man, and remember that your mother be a lady. she be never make to associate with that tipsy old swindler or his daughter. be a man and forget she, as she do you."
"be a man and comfort your mother, my Arthur," Helen say, go and embrace he: and see that the pair be greatly move, Major Pendennis go out of the room and shut the door upon they, wisely judge that they be well alone.
he have win a complete victory. he actually have bring away Pen's letter in his portmanteau from Chatteris: have compliment Mr. Costigan, when he return they, by give he the little promissory note which have disquiet himself and Mr. Garbetts; and for which the Major settle with Mr. Tatham.
Pen rush wildly off to Chatteris that day, but in vain attempt to see Miss Fotheringay, for whom he leave a letter, enclose to her father. the enclosure be return by Mr. Costigan, who beg that all correspondence might end; and after one or two further attempt of the lad's, the indignant General desire that their acquaintance might cease. he cut Pen in the street. as Arthur and Foker be pace the Castle walk, one day, they come upon Emily on her father's arm. she pass without any nod of recognition. Foker feel poor Pen tremble on his arm.
his uncle want he to travel, to quit the country for a while, and his mother urge he too: for he be grow very ill, and suffer severely. but he refuse, and say point-blank he would not go. he would not obey in this instance: and his mother be too fond, and his uncle too wise to force he. whenever Miss Fotheringay act, he ride over to the Chatteris Theatre and see she. one night there be so few people in the house that the Manager return the money. Pen come home and go to bed at eight o'clock, and have a fever. if this continue, his mother will be go over and fetch the girl, the major thought, in despair. as for Pen, he think he should die. we be not go to describe his feeling, or give a dreary journal of his despair and passion. have not other gentleman be baulk in love besides Mr. Pen? yes, indeed: but few die of the malady.
CHAPTER XIV
in which Miss Fotheringay make a new Engagement
within a short period of the event above narrate, Mr. Manager Bingley be perform his famous character of 'rolla,' in 'Pizarro,' to a house so exceedingly thin, that it would appear as if the part of Rolla be by no mean such a favourite with the people of Chatteris as it be with the accomplished actor himself. scarce anybody be in the theatre. Poor Pen have the box almost all to himself, and sate there lonely, with bloodshot eye, lean over the ledge, and gaze haggardly towards the scene, when Cora come in. when she be not on the stage he see nothing. spaniard and Peruvians, procession and battle, priest and virgin of the sun, go in and out, and have their talk, but Arthur take no note of any of they; and only see Cora whom his soul long after. he say afterwards that he wonder he have not take a pistol to shoot she, so mad be he with love, and rage, and despair; and have it not be for his mother at home, to whom he do not speak about his luckless condition, but whose silent sympathy and watchfulness greatly comfort the simple half heart-break fellow, who know but he might have do something desperate, and have end his day prematurely in front of Chatteris gaol? there he sate then, miserable, and gaze at she. and she take no more notice of he than he do of the rest of the house.
the Fotheringay be uncommonly handsome, in a white raiment and leopard skin, with a sun upon her breast, and fine tawdry bracelet on her beautiful glance arm. she spout to admiration the few word of her part, and look it still well. the eye, which have overthrow Pen's soul, roll and gleam as lustrous as ever; but it be not to he that they be direct that night. he do not know to whom, or remark a couple of gentleman, in the box next to he, upon whom Miss Fotheringay's glance be perpetually shin.
nor have Pen notice the extraordinary change which have take place on the stage a short time after the entry of these two gentleman into the theatre. there be so few people in the house, that the first act of the play languish entirely, and there have be some question of return the money, as upon that other unfortunate night when poor Pen have be drive away. the actor be perfectly careless about their part, and yawn through the dialogue, and talk loud to each other in the interval. even Bingley be listless, and Mrs. B. in Elvira speak under her breath.
how come it that all of a sudden Mrs. Bingley begin to raise her voice and bellow like a bull of Bashan? whence be it that Bingley, fling off his apathy, dart about the stage and yell like Dean? why do Garbetts and Rowkins and Miss Rouncy try, each of they, the force of their charm or grace, and act and swagger and scowl and spout their very loud at the two gentleman in box no. 3?
one be a quiet little man in black, with a grey head and a jolly shrewd face--the other be in all respect a splendid and remarkable individual. he be a tall and portly gentleman with a hooked nose and a profusion of curl brown hair and whisker; his coat be cover with the rich frog-braid and velvet. he have under-waistcoat, many splendid ring, jewel pin and neck-chain. when he take out his yellow pocket-handkerchief with his hand that be case in white kid, a delightful odour of musk and bergamot be shake through the house. he be evidently a personage of rank, and it be at he that the little Chatteris company be act.
he be, in a word, no other than Mr. Dolphin, the great manager from London, accompany by his faithful friend and secretary Mr. William Minns: without whom he never travel. he have not be ten minute in the theatre before his august presence there be perceive by Bingley and the rest: and they all begin to act their good and try to engage his attention. even Miss Fotheringay's dull heart, which be disturb at nothing, feel perhaps a flutter, when she come in presence of the famous London Impresario. she have not much to do in her part, but to look handsome, and stand in picturesque attitude encircle her child and she do this work to admiration. in vain the various actor try to win the favour of the great stage Sultan. Pizarro never get a hand from he. Bingley yell, and Mrs. Bingley bellow, and the Manager only take snuff out of his great gold box. it be only in the last scene, when Rolla come in staggering with the infant (Bingley be not so strong as he be and his fourth son Master Talma Bingley be a monstrous large child for his age)--when Rolla come staggering with the child to Cora, who rush forward with a shriek, and says--"o God, therebe blood upon he!" --that the London manager clap his hand, and break out with an enthusiastic bravo.
then have conclude his applause, Mr. Dolphin give his secretary a slap on the shoulder, and say, "by Jove, Billy, shewill do!"
"who teach she that dodge?" say old Billy, who be a sardonic old gentleman. "I remember she at the Olympic, and hang I if she could say Bo to a goose."
it be little Mr. bow in the orchestra who have teach she the 'dodge' in question. all the company hear the applause, and, as the curtain go down, come round she and congratulate and hat Miss Fotheringay.
now Mr. Dolphin's appearance in the remote little Chatteris theatre may be account for in this manner. in spite of all his exertion, and the perpetual blaze of triumph, coruscation of talent, victory of good old english comedy, which his play-bill advertise, his theatre (which, if you please, and to injure no present susceptibility and vested interest, we shall call the Museum Theatre) by no mean prosper, and the famous Impresario find himself on the verge of ruin. the great Hubbard have act legitimate drama for twenty night, and fail to remunerate anybody but himself: the celebrate Mr. and Mrs. Cawdor have come out in Mr. Rawhead's tragedy, and in their favourite round of piece, and have not attract the public. Herr Garbage's lion and tiger have draw for a little time, until one of the animal have bite a piece out of the Herr's shoulder; when the Lord Chamberlain interfere, and put a stop to this specie of performance: and the grand Lyrical Drama, though bring out with unexampled splendour and success, with Monsieur Poumons as first tenor, and an enormous orchestra, have almost crush poor dolphin in its triumphant progress: so that great as his genius and resource be, they seem to be at an end. he be drag on his season wretchedly with half salary, small opera, feeble old comedy, and his ballet company; and everybody be look out for the day when he should appear in the Gazette.
one of the illustrious patron of the Museum Theatre, and occupant of the great proscenium-box, be a gentleman whose name have be mention in a previous history; that refined patron of the art, and enlighten lover of music and the drama, the most Noble the Marquis of Steyne. his lordship's avocation as a statesman prevent he from attend the playhouse very often, or come very early. but he occasionally appear at the theatre in time for the ballet, and be always receive with the great respect by the Manager, from whom he sometimes condescend to receive a visit in his box. it communicate with the stage, and when anything occur there which particularly please he, when a new face make its appearance among the coryphee, or a fair dancer execute a pas with especial grace or agility, Mr. Wenham, Mr. Wagg, or some other aide-de-camp of the noble Marquis, would be commission to go behind the scene, and express the great man's approbation, or make the inquiry which be prompt by his lordship's curiosity, or his interest in the dramatic art. he could not be see by the audience, for Lord Steyne sate modestly behind a curtain, and look only towards the stage--but you could know he be in the house, by the glance which all the corps-de-ballet, and all the principal dancer, cast towards his box. I have see many score of pair of eye (as in the Palm Dance in the ballet of Cook at Otaheite, where no less than a hundred-and-twenty lovely female savage in palm leaf and feather apron, be make to dance round Floridor as Captain Cook) ogle that box as they perform before it, and have often wonder to remark the presence of mind of Mademoiselle Sauterelle, or Mademoiselle de Bondi (know as la petite Caoutchoue), who, when actually up in the air quiver like so many shuttlecock, always keep their lovely eye wink at that box in which the great Steyne sate. now and then you would hear a harsh voice from behind the curtain cry, "Brava, Brava," or a pair of white glove wave from it, and begin to applaud. Bondi, or Sauterelle, when they come down to earth, curtsy and smile, especially to those hand, before they walk up the stage again, pant and happy.
one night this great Prince surround by a few choice friend be in his box at the Museum, and they be make such a noise and laughter that the pit be scandalise, and many indignant voice be bawl out silence so loudly, that Wagg wonder the police do not interfere to take the rascal out. Wenham be amuse the party in the box with extract from a private letter which he have receive from Major Pendennis, whose absence in the country at the full London season have be remark, and of course deplore by his friend.
"the secret be out," say Mr. Wenham, "therebe a woman in the case."
"why, d--- it, Wenham, hebe your age," say the gentleman behind the curtain. "pour les ame bien nees, l'amour ne compte pas le nombre des annees," say Mr. Wenham, with a gallant air. "for my part, I hope to be a victim till I die, and to break my heart every year of my life." the meaning of which sentence be, "my lord, you need not talk; Ibe three year young than you, and twice as well conserve."
"Wenham, you affect I," say the great man, with one of his usual oath. "by --- you do. I like to see a fellow preserve all the illusion of youth up to our time of life--and keep his heart warm as yours be. hang it, sir, itbe a comfort to meet with such a generous, candid creature.--Whobe that gal in the second row, with blue ribbon, third from the stage--fine gal. yes, you and I be sentimentalist. Wagg I donot think so much care--itbe the stomach rather more than the heart with you, eh, Wagg, my boy?"
"I like everything thatbe good," say Mr. Wagg, generously. "Beauty and Burgundy, Venus and Venison. I donot say that Venus's turtle be to be despise, because they donot cook they at the London Tavern: but--but tell we about old Pendennis, Mr. Wenham," he abruptly conclude--for his joke flag just then, as he see that his patron be not listen. in fact, Steyne's glass be up, and he be examine some object on the stage.
"yes, Ihave hear that joke about Venus's turtle and the London Tavern before--you begin to fail, my poor Wagg. if you donot mind I shall be oblige to have a new Jester," Lord Steyne say, lay down his glass. "go on, Wenham, about old Pendennis."
"dear wenham,"--he begin, Mr. Wenham read,--"a you have have my character in your hand for the last three week, and no doubt have tear I to shred, accord to your custom, I think you can afford to be good-humour by way of variety, and to do I a service. it be a delicate matter, entre nous, une affaire de coeur. there be a young friend of mine who be go wild about a certain Miss Fotheringay, an actress at the theatre here, and I must own to you, as handsome a woman, and, as it appear to I, as good an actress as ever put on rouge. she do Ophelia, Lady Teazle, Mrs. Haller--that sort of thing. upon my word, she be as splendid as george in her good day, and as far as I know, utterly superior to anything we have on our scene. I want a London engagement for she. cannot you get your friend dolphin to come and see she--to engage she--to take she out of this place? a word from a noble friend of ours (you understand) would be invaluable, and if you could get the Gaunt House interest for I--I will promise anything I can in return for your service--which I shall consider one of the great that can be do to I. do, do this now as a good fellow, which I always say you be: and in return, command yours truly, A. Pendennis."
"itbe a clear case," say Mr. Wenham, have read this letter; "old Pendennis be in love."
"and want to get the woman up to London--evidently," continue Mr. Wagg.
"I should like to see Pendennis on his knee, with the rheumatism," say Mr. Wenham.
"or accommodate the beloved object with a lock of his hair," say Wagg.
"Stuff." say the great man. "he have relation in the country, havenot he? he say something about a nephew, whose interest could return a member. it be the nephew's affair, depend on it. the young one be in a scrape. I be myself--when I be in the fifth form at Eton--a market-gardener's daughter--and swear Iwould marry she. I be mad about she--poor polly!"-- here he make a pause, and perhaps the past rise up to Lord Steyne, and George Gaunt be a boy again not altogether lost.--"But I say, she must be a fine woman from Pendennis's account. have in dolphin, and let we hear if he know anything of she."
at this Wenham spring out of the box, pass the servitor who wait at the door communicate with the stage, and who salute Mr. Wenham with profound respect; and the latter emissary, push on and familiar with the place, have no difficulty in find out the manager, who be employ, as he not unfrequently be, in swear and curse the lady of the corps-de-ballet for not do their duty.
the oath die away on Mr. Dolphin's lip, as soon as he see Mr. Wenham; and he draw off the hand which be clench in the face of one of the offend coryphee, to grasp that of the new-comer. "how do, Mr. Wenham? howbe his lordship to-night? look uncommonly well," say the manager smile, as if he have never be out of temper in his life; and he be only too delighted to follow Lord Steyne's ambassador, and pay his personal respect to that great man.
the visit to Chatteris be the result of their conversation: and Mr. Dolphin write to his lordship from that place, and do himself the honour to inform the Marquess of Steyne, that he have see the lady about whom his lordship have speak, that he be as much strike by her talent as he be by her personal appearance, and that he have make an engagement with Miss Fotheringay, who would soon have the honour of appear before a London audience, and his noble and enlighten patron the Marquess of Steyne.
Pen read the announcement of Miss Fotheringay's engagement in the Chatteris paper, where he have so often praise her charm. the Editor make very handsome mention of her talent and beauty, and prophesy her success in the metropolis. Bingley, the manager, begin to advertise "the last night of Miss Fotheringay's engagement." Poor Pen and Sir Derby Oaks be very constant at the play: Sir Derby in the stage-box, throw bouquet and get glances.--pen in the almost deserted box, haggard, wretched and lonely. nobody care whether Miss Fotheringay be go or stay except those two--and perhaps one more, which be Mr. Bows of the orchestra.
he come out of his place one night, and go into the house to the box where Pen be; and he hold out his hand to he, and ask he to come and walk. they walk down the street together; and go and sate upon Chatteris bridge in the moonlight, and talk about Her. "we may sit on the same bridge," say he; "we have be in the same boat for a long time. you be not the only man who have make a fool of himself about that woman. and I have less excuse than you, because I be old and know she well. she have no more heart than the stone you be lean on; and it or you or I might fall into the water, and never come up again, and she wouldnot care. yes--she would care for I, because she want I to teach she: and she willnot be able to get on without I, and will be force to send for I from London. but she wouldnot if she donot want I. she have no heart and no head, and no sense, and no feeling, and no grief or care, whatever. I be go to say no pleasure--but the fact be, she do like her dinner, and she be pleased when people admire she."
"and you do?" say Pen, interested out of himself, and wonder at the crab homely little old man.
"itbe a habit, like take snuff, or drinking dram," say the other. "Ihave be take she these five year, and cannot do without she. it be I make she. if she donot send for I, I shall follow she: but I know shewill send for I. she want I. some day shewill marry, and fle I over, as I do the end of this cigar."
the little flaming spark drop into the water below, and disappear; and Pen, as he ride home that night, actually think about somebody but himself.
CHAPTER XV
the happy village
until the enemy have retire altogether from before the place, Major Pendennis be resolve to keep his garrison in Fairoaks. he do not appear to watch Pen's behaviour or to put any restraint on his nephew's action, but he manage nevertheless to keep the lad constantly under his eye or those of his agent, and young Arthur's coming and going be quite well know to his vigilant guardian.
I suppose there be scarcely any man who read this or any other novel but have be baulk in love some time or the other, by fate and circumstance, by falsehood of woman, or his own fault. let that worthy friend recall his own sensation under the circumstance, and apply they as illustrative of Mr. Pen's anguish. ah! what weary night and sicken fever! ah! what mad desire dash up against some rock of obstruction or indifference, and fling back again from the unimpressionable granite! if a list could be make this very night in London of the groan, thought, imprecation of toss lover, what a catalogue it would be! I wonder what a percentage of the male population of the metropolis will be lie awake at two or three o'clock to-morrow morning, count the hour as they go by knell drearily, and roll from left to right, restless, yearning and heart-sick? what a pang it be! I never know a man die of love certainly, but I have know a twelve-stone man go down to nine-stone five under a disappointed passion, so that pretty nearly quarter of he may be say to have perish: and that be no small portion. he have come back to his old size subsequently; perhaps be big than ever: very likely some new affection have close round his heart and rib and make they comfortable, and young Pen be a man who will console himself like the rest of we. we say this lest the lady should be dispose to deplore he prematurely, or be seriously uneasy with regard to his complaint. his mother be, but what will not a maternal fondness fear or invent? "depend on it, my dear creature," Major Pendennis would say gallantly to she, "the boy will recover. as soon as we get she out of the country we will take he somewhere, and show he a little life. meantime make yourself easy about he. half a fellow's pang at lose a woman result from vanity more than affection. to be leave by a woman be the deuce and all, to be sure; but look how easily we leave them."
Mrs. Pendennis do not know. this sort of knowledge have by no mean come within the simple lady's scope. indeed she do not like the subject or to talk of it: her heart have have its own little private misadventure and she have bear up against it and cure it: and perhaps she have not much patience with other folk's passion, except, of course, Arthur's, whose suffering she make she own, feel indeed very likely in many of the boy's illness and pain a great deal more than Pen himself endure. and she watch he through this present grief with a jealous silent sympathy; although, as we have say, he do not talk to she of his unfortunate condition.
the Major must be allow to have have not a little merit and forbearance, and to have exhibit a highly creditable degree of family affection. the life at Fairoaks be uncommonly dull to a man who have the entree of half the house in London, and be in the habit of make his bow in three or four drawing-room of a night. a dinner with Doctor Portman or a neighbouring squire now and then; a dreary rubber at backgammon with the widow, who do she utmost to amuse he; these be the chief of his pleasure. he use to long for the arrival of the bag with the letter, and he read every word of the evening paper. he doctor himself too, assiduously,--a course of quiet living would suit he well, he think, after the London banquet. he dress himself laboriously every morning and afternoon: he take regular exercise up and down the terrace walk. thus with his cane, his toilet, his medicine-chest, his backgammon-box, and his newspaper, this worthy and worldly philosopher fence himself against ennui; and if he do not improve each shin hour, like the bee by the widow's garden wall, Major Pendennis make one hour after another pass as he could, and render his captivity just tolerable. after this period it be remark that he be fond of bring round the conversation to the american war, the massacre of Wyoming and the brilliant action of Saint Lucie, the fact be that he have a couple of volume of the 'Annual Register' in his bedroom, which he sedulously study. it be thus a well-regulate man will accommodate himself to circumstance, and show himself calmly superior to fortune.
Pen sometimes take the box at backgammon of a night, or would listen to his mother's simple music of summer evening--but he be very restless and wretche in spite of all: and have be know to be up before the early daylight even; and down at a carp-pond in Clavering Park, a dreary pool with innumerable whispering rush and green alder, where a milkmaid drown herself in the Baronet's grandfather's time, and her ghost be say to walk still. but Pen do not drown himself, as perhaps his mother fancy might be his intention. he like to go and fish there, and think and think at leisure, as the float quiver in the little eddy of the pond, and the fish flap about he. if he get a bite he be excited enough: and in this way occasionally bring home carps, tench, and eel, which the Major cook in the continental fashion.
by this pond, and under a tree, which be his favourite resort, Pen compose a number of poem suitable to his circumstance over which verse he blush in after day, wonder how he could ever have invent such rubbish. and as for the tree, why it be in a hollow of this very tree, where he use to put his tin-box of ground-bait, and other fishing commodity, that he afterwards--but we be advance matter. suffice it to say, he write poem and relieve himself very much. when a man's grief or passion be at this point, it may be loud, but it be not very severe. when a gentleman be cudgel his brain to find any rhyme for sorrow, besides borrow and to-morrow, his woe be near at an end than he think for. so be Pen's. he have his hot and cold fit, his day of sullenness and peevishness, and of blank resignation and despondency, and occasional mad paroxysm of rage and longing, in which fit Rebecca would be saddle and gallop fiercely about the country, or into Chatteris, her rider gesticulate wildly on her back, and astonishing carter and turnpikeman as he pass, cry out the name of the false one.
Mr. Foker become a very frequent and welcome visitor at Fairoaks during this period, where his good spirit and oddity always amuse the Major and Pendennis, while they astonish the widow and little Laura not a little. his tandem make a great sensation in Clavering market-place; where he upset a market stall, and cut Mrs. Pybus's poodle over the shaven quarter, and drink a glass of raspberry bitter at the Clavering Arms. all the society in the little place hear who he be, and look out his name in their Peerages. he be so young, and their book so old, that his name do not appear in many of their volume; and his mamma, now quite an antiquated lady, figure amongst the progeny of the Earl of Rosherville, as Lady Agnes Milton still. but his name, wealth, and honourable lineage be speedily know about Clavering, where you may be sure that poor Pen's little transaction with the Chatteris actress be also pretty freely discuss.
look at the little old town of Clavering St. Mary from the London road as it run by the lodge at Fairoaks, and see the rapid and shin Brawl wind down from the town and skirt the wood of Clavering Park, and the ancient church tower and peak roof of the house rise up amongst tree and old wall, behind which swell a fair background of sunshiny hill that stretch from Clavering westward towards the sea--the place look so cheery and comfortable that many a traveller's heart must have yearn towards it from the coach-top, and he must have think that it be in such a calm friendly nook he would like to shelter at the end of life's struggle. Tom Smith, who use to drive the Alacrity coach, would often point to a tree near the river, from which a fine view of the church and town be command, and inform his companion on the box that "artise come and take hoff the Church from that there tree--it be a Habby once, sir:"--and indeed a pretty view it be, which I recommend to Mr. Stanfield or Mr. Roberts, for their next tour.
like Constantinople see from the Bosphorus; like Mrs. Rougemont view in her box from the opposite side of the house; like many an object which we pursue in life, and admire before we have attain it; clavering be rather pretty at a distance than it be on a close acquaintance. the town so cheerful of aspect a few furlong off, look very blank and dreary. except on market day there be nobody in the street. the clack of a pair of patten echo through half the place, and you may hear the creaking of the rusty old ensign at the Clavering Arms, without be disturb by any other noise. there have not be a ball in the Assembly Rooms since the Clavering volunteer give one to their Colonel, the old Sir Francis Clavering; and the stable which once hold a great part of that brilliant, but defunct regiment, be now cheerless and empty, except on Thursdays, when the farmer put up there, and their tilt cart and gig make a feeble show of liveliness in the place, or on Petty Sessions, when the magistrate attend in what use to be the old card-room.
on the south side of the market rise up the church, with its great grey tower, of which the sun illuminate the delicate carving; deepen the shadow of the huge buttress, and gilding the glitter window and flame vane. the image of the Patroness of the Church be wrench out of the porch century ago: such of the statue of saint as be within reach of stone and hammer at that period of pious demolition, be maim and headless, and of those who be out of fire, only Doctor Portman know the name and history, for his curate, Smirke, be not much of an antiquarian, and Mr. Simcoe (husband of the Honourable Mrs. Simcoe), incumbent and architect of the Chapel of Ease in the low town, think they the abomination of desolation.
the Rectory be a stout broad-shoulder brick house, of the reign of Anne. it communicate with the church and market by different gate, and stand at the opening of Yew-tree Lane, where the Grammar School (Rev. ---- Wapshot) be; yew-tree Cottage (Miss Flather); the butcher' slaughter-house, an old barn or brew-house of the Abbey time, and the Misses Finucane's establishment for young lady. the two school have their pew in the loft on each side of the organ, until the Abbey Church get rather empty, through the fall-off of the congregation, who be inveigle to the Heresy-shop in the low town, the doctor induce the Misses Finucane to bring their pretty little flock downstairs; and the young lady' bonnet make a tolerable show in the rather vacant aisle. nobody be in the great pew of the Clavering family, except the statue of defunct baronet and their lady: there be Sir Poyntz Clavering, Knight and Baronet, kneel in a square beard opposite his wife in a ruff: a very fat lady, the Dame Rebecca Clavering, in alto-relievo, be bear up to Heaven by two little blue-veined angel, who seem to have a severe task--and so forth. how well in after life Pen remember those effigy, and how often in youth he scan they as the doctor be grumble the sermon from the pulpit, and Smirke's mild head and forehead curl peer over the great prayer-book in the desk!
the Fairoaks folk be constant at the old church; their servant have a pew, so have the Doctor's, so have Wapshot's, and those of Misses Finucane's establishment, three maid and a very nice-look young man in a livery. the Wapshot Family be numerous and faithful. glander and his child regularly come to church: so do one of the apothecary. Mrs. Pybus go, turn and turn about, to the Low Town church, and to the Abbey: the Charity School and their family of course come; Wapshot's boy make a good cheerful noise, scuffle with their foot as they march into church and up the organ-loft stair, and blow their nose a good deal during the service. to be brief, the congregation look as decent as might be in these bad time. the Abbey Church be furnish with a magnificent screen, and many hatchment and heraldic tombstone. the Doctor spend a great part of his income in beautify his darling place; he have endow it with a superb paint window, buy in the Netherlands, and an organ grand enough for a cathedral.
but in spite of organ and window, in consequence of the latter very likely, which have come out of a papistical place of worship and be blazon all over with idolatry, Clavering New Church prosper scandalously in the tooth of Orthodoxy; and many of the Doctor's congregation desert to Mr. Simcoe and the honourable woman his wife. their effort have thin the very Ebenezer hard by they, which build before Simcoe's advent use to be so full, that you could see the back of the congregation squeeze out of the arched window thereof. Mr. Simcoe's tract flutter into the door of all the doctor's cottage, and be take as greedily as honest Mrs. Portman's soup, with the quality of which the graceless people find fault. with the folk at the Ribbon Factory situate by the weir on the Brawl side, and round which the Low Town have grow, Orthodoxy could make no way at all. Quiet Miss Myra be put out of court by impetuous Mrs. Simcoe and her female aide-de-camp. ah, it be a hard burthen for the Doctor's lady to bear, to behold her husband's congregation dwindle away; to give the precedence on the few occasion when they meet to a notorious low-churchman's wife who be the daughter of an irish peer; to know that there be a party in Clavering, their own town of Clavering, on which her Doctor spend a great deal more than his professional income, who hold he up to odium because he play a rubber at whist; and pronounce he to be a Heathen because he go to the play. in her grief she besought he to give up the play and the rubber,--indeed they could scarcely get a table now, so dreadful be the outcry against the sport,--but the Doctor declare that he would do what he think right, and what the great and good George the Third do (whose Chaplain he have be): and as for give up whist because those silly folk cry out against it, he would play dummy to the end of his day with his wife and Myra, rather than yield to their despicable persecution.
of the two family, owner of the Factory (which have spoil the Brawl as a trout-stream and bring all the mischief into the town), the senior partner, Mr. Rolt, go to Ebenezer; the junior, Mr. Barker, to the New Church. in a word, people quarrel in this little place a great deal more than neighbour do in London; and in the Book Club, which the prudent and conciliate Pendennis have set up, and which ought to have be a neutral territory, they bicker so much that nobody scarcely be ever see in the reading-room, except Smirke, who, though he keep up a faint amity with the Simcoe faction, have still a taste for magazine and light worldly literature; and old Glanders, whose white head and grizzly moustache might be see at the window; and of course, little Mrs. Pybus, who look at everybody's letter as the Post bring they (for the Clavering reading-room, as every one know, use to be hold at Baker's Library, London Street, formerly Hog Lane), and read every advertisement in the paper.
it may be imagine how great a sensation be create in this amiable little community when the news reach it of Mr. Pen's love-passage at Chatteris. it be carry from house to house, and form the subject of talk at high-church, low-church, and no-church table; it be canvass by the Misses Finucane and their teacher, and very likely debate by the young lady in the dormitory for what we know; Wapshot's big boy have their version of the story, and eye Pen curiously as he sate in his pew at church, or raise the finger of scorn at he as he pass through Chatteris. they always hat he and call he Lord Pendennis, because he do not wear corduroy as they do, and ride a horse, and give himself the air of a buck.
and if the truth must be tell, it be Mrs. Portman herself who be the chief narrator of the story of Pen's love. whatever tale this candid woman hear, she be sure to impart they to her neighbour; and after she have be put into possession of Pen's secret by the little scandal at Chatteris, poor Doctor Portman know that it would next day be about the parish of which he be the Rector. and so indeed it be; the whole society there have the legend--at the news-room, at the milliner's, at the shoe-shop, and the general warehouse at the corner of the market; at Mrs. Pybus's, at the glander's, at the Honourable Mrs. Simcoe's soiree, at the Factory; nay, through the mill itself the tale be current in a few hour, and young Arthur Pendennis's madness be in every mouth.
all Dr. Portman's acquaintance bark out upon he when he walk the street the next day. the poor divine know that his Betsy be the author of the rumour, and groan in spirit. well, well,--it must have come in a day or two, and it be as well that the town should have the real story. what the Clavering folk think of Mrs. Pendennis for spoil her son, and of that precocious young rascal of an Arthur for dare to propose to a play-actress, need not be tell here. if pride exist amongst any folk in our country, and assuredly we have enough of it, there be no pride more deep-seated than that of twopenny old gentlewoman in small town. "gracious goodness," the cry be, "how infatuated the mother be about that pert and headstrong boy who give himself the air of a lord on his blood-horse, and for whom our society be not good enough, and who would marry an odious paint actress off a booth, where very likely he want to rant himself. if dear good Mr. Pendennis have be alive this scandal would never have happen."
no more it would, very likely, nor should we have be occupy in narrate Pen's history. it be true that he give himself air to the Clavering folk. naturally haughty and frank, their cackle and small talk and small dignity bore he, and he show a contempt which he could not conceal. the Doctor and the Curate be the only people Pen care for in the place--even Mrs. Portman share in the general distrust of he, and of his mother, the widow, who keep herself aloof from the village society, and be sneer at accordingly, because she try, forsooth, to keep her head up with the great County family. she, indeed! Mrs. Barker at the Factory have four time the butcher's meat that go up to Fairoaks, with all their fine air.
Etc. etc. etc.: let the reader fill up these detail accord to his liking and experience of village scandal. they will suffice to show how it be that a good woman occupy solely in do her duty to her neighbour and her child, and an honest, brave lad, impetuous, and full of good, and wish well to every mortal alive find enemy and detractor amongst people to whom they be superior, and to whom they have never do anything like harm. the Clavering cur be yelp all round the house of Fairoaks, and delight to pull Pen down.
Doctor Portman and Smirke be both cautious of inform the widow of the constant outbreak of calumny which be pursue poor Pen, though Glanders, who be a friend of the house, keep he au courant. it may be imagine what his indignation be: be there any man in the village whom be could call to account? presently some wag begin to chalk up 'Fotheringay for ever!' and other sarcastic allusion to late transaction, at Fairoaks' gate. another bring a large playbill from Chatteris, and wafere it there one night. on one occasion Pen, rid through the Lower Town, fancy he hear the Factory boy jeer he; and finally go through the Doctor's gate into the churchyard, where some of Wapshot's boy be lounge, the big of they, a young gentleman about twenty year of age, son of a neighbour small squire, who live in the doubtful capacity of parlour-boarder with Mr. Wapshot, fling himself into a theatrical attitude near a newly-make grave, and begin repeat Hamlet's verse over Ophelia, with a hideous leer at Pen. the young fellow be so enraged that he rush at Hobnell Major with a shriek very much resemble an oath, cut he furiously across the face with the riding-whip which he carry, fling it away, call upon the cowardly villain to defend himself, and in another minute knock the bewildered young ruffian into the grave which be just wait for a different lodger.
then with his fist clench, and his face quiver with passion and indignation, he roar out to Mr. Hobnell's gap companion, to know if any of the blackguard would come on? but they hold back with a growl, and retreat as Doctor Portman come up to his wicket, and Mr. Hobnell, with his nose and lip bleed piteously, emerge from the grave.
Pen, look death and defiance at the lad, who retreat towards' their side of the churchyard, walk back again through the doctor's wicket, and be interrogate by that gentleman. the young fellow be so agitated he could scarcely speak. his voice break into a sob as he answer. "the ---- coward insult I, sir," he say; and the Doctor pass over the oath, and respect the emotion of the honest suffer young heart.
Pendennis the elder, who like a real man of the world have a proper and constant dread of the opinion of his neighbour, be prodigiously annoy by the absurd little tempest which be blow in Chatteris, and toss about Master Pen's reputation. Doctor Portman and Captain Glanders have to support the charge of the whole Chatteris society against the young reprobate, who be look upon as a monster of crime. Pen do not say anything about the churchyard scuffle at home; but go over to Baymouth, and take counsel with his friend Harry Foker, Esq., who drive over his drag presently to the Clavering Arms, whence he send Stoopid with a note to Thomas Hobnell, Esq., at the Rev. J. Wapshot's, and a civil message to ask when he should wait upon that gentleman.
Stoopid bring back word that the note have be open by Mr. Hobnell, and read to half a dozen of the big boy, on whom it seem to make a great impression; and that after consult together, and laugh, Mr. Hobnell say he would send an answer "arter arternoon school, which the bell be a-ringing: and Mr. Wapshot he come out in his Master's gownd." Stoopid be learn in academical costume, have attend Mr. Foker at St. Boniface.
Mr. Foker go out to see the curiosity of Clavering meanwhile; but not have a taste for architecture, Doctor Portman's fine church do not engage his attention much and he pronounce the tower to be as mouldy as an old Stilton cheese. he walk down the street and look at the few shop there; he see Captain Glanders at the window of the reading-room, and have take a good stare at that gentleman, he wag his head at he in token of satisfaction; he inquire the price of meat at the butcher's with an air of the great interest, and ask "when be next kill day?" he flatten his little nose against Madame Fribsby's window to see if haply there be a pretty workwoman in her premise; but there be no face more comely than the doll's or dummy's wear the french cap in the window, only that of Madame Fribsby herself, dimly visible in the parlour, read a novel. that object be not of sufficient interest to keep Mr. Foker very long in contemplation, and so have exhaust the town and the inn stable, in which there be no cattle, save the single old pair of poster that earn a scanty livelihood by transport the gentry round about to the county dinner, Mr. Foker be give himself up to ennui entirely, when a messenger from Mr. Hobnell be at length announce.
it be no other than Mr. Wapshot himself, who come with an air of great indignation, and hold Pen's missive in his hand, ask Mr. Foker "how dare he bring such an unchristian message as a challenge to a boy of his school?"
in fact Pen have write a note to his adversary of the day before, tell he that if after the chastisement which his insolence richly deserve, he feel inclined to ask the reparation which be usually give amongst gentleman, Mr. Arthur Pendennis's friend, Mr. Henry Foker, be empower to make any arrangement for the satisfaction of Mr. Hobnell.
"and so he send you with the answer--do he, sir?" Mr. Foker say, survey the Schoolmaster in his black coat and clerical costume.
"if he have accept this wicked challenge, I should have flog he," Mr. Wapshot say, and give Mr. Foker a glance which seem to say, "and I should like very much to flog you too."
"Uncommon kind of you, sir, Ibe sure," say Pen's emissary. "I tell my principal that I donot think the other man would fight," he continue with a great air of dignity. "he prefer be flog to fighting, sir, I dare say. may I offer you any refreshment, Mr.? I havenot the advantage of your name."
"my name be Wapshot, sir, and I be Master of the Grammar School of this town, sir," cry the other: "and I want no refreshment, sir, I thank you, and have no desire to make your acquaintance, sir."
"I donot seek your, sir, Ibe sure," reply Mr. Foker. "in affair of this sort, you see, I think it be a pity that the clergy should be call in, but therebe no accounting for taste, sir."
"I think itbe a pity that boy should talk about commit murder, sir, as lightly as you do," roar the Schoolmaster; "and if I have you in my school----"
"I dare say you would teach I well, sir," Mr. Foker say, with a bow. "thank you, sir. Ihave finish my education, sir, and benot a-go back to school, sir--when I do, Iwill remember your kind offer, sir. John, show this gentleman downstairs--and, of course, as Mr. Hobnell like be thrash, we can have no objection, sir, and we shall be very happy to accommodate he, whenever he come our way."
and with this, the young fellow bow the eld gentleman out of the room, and sate down and write a note off to Pen, in which he inform the latter that Mr. Hobnell be not disposed to fight, and propose to put up with the caning which Pen have administer to he.
CHAPTER XVI
More Storms in the Puddle
Pen's conduct in this business of course be soon make public, and anger his friend Doctor Portman not a little: while it only amuse Major Pendennis. as for the good Mrs. Pendennis, she be almost distracted when she hear of the squabble, and of Pen's unchristian behaviour. all sort of wretchedness, discomfort, crime, annoyance, seem to come out of this transaction in which the luckless boy have engage; and she long more than ever to see he out of Chatteris for a while,--anywhere remove from the woman who have bring he into so much trouble.
Pen when remonstrate with by this fond parent, and angrily rebuke by the Doctor for his violence and ferocious intention, take the matter au grand serieux, with the happy conceit and gravity of youth: say that he himself be very sorry for the affair, that the insult have come upon he without the slight provocation on his part; that he would permit no man to insult he upon this head without vindicate his own honour, and appeal with great dignity to his uncle, ask whether he could have act otherwise as a gentleman, than as he do in resent the outrage offer to he, and in offer satisfaction to the person chastise?
"vous allez trop vite, my good sir," say the uncle, rather puzzle, for he have be indoctrinate his nephew with some of his own notion upon the point of honour--old-world notion savour of the camp and pistol a great deal more than our soberer opinion of the present day--"between man of the world I donot say; but between two schoolboy, this sort of thing be ridiculous, my dear boy--perfectly ridiculous."
"it be extremely wicked, and unlike my son," say Mrs. Pendennis, with tear in her eye, and bewilder with the obstinacy of the boy.
Pen kiss she, and say with great pomposity, "woman, dear mother, donot understand these matter--I put myself into Foker's hand--I have no other course to pursue."
Major Pendennis grin and shrug his shoulder. the young one be certainly make great progress, he think. Mrs. Pendennis declare that that Foker be a wicked horrid little wretch, and be sure that he would lead her dear boy into mischief, if Pen go to the same College with he. "I have a great mind not to let he go at all," she say: and only that she remember that the lad's father have always destine he for the College in which he have have his own brief education, very likely the fond mother would have put a veto upon his go to the University.
that he be to go, and at the next October term, have be arrange between all the authority who preside over the lad's welfare. Foker have promise to introduce he to the right set; and Major Pendennis lay great store upon Pen's introduction into College life and society by this admirable young gentleman. "Mr. Foker know the very good young man now at the University," the Major say, "and Pen will form acquaintance there who will be of the great advantage through life to he. the young Marquis of Plinlimmon be there, eld son of the Duke of Saint David's--Lord Magnus Charters be there, Lord Runnymede's son, and a first cousin of Mr. Foker (Lady Runnymede, my dear, be Lady Agatha Milton, you of course remember); Lady Agnes will certainly invite he to Logwood; and far from be alarmed at his intimacy with her son, who be a singular and humorous, but most prudent and amiable young man, to whom, I be sure, we be under every obligation for his admirable conduct in the affair of the Fotheringay marriage, I look upon it as one of the very lucky thing which could have happen to Pen, that he should have form an intimacy with this most amusing young gentleman."
Helen sigh, she suppose the Major know well. Mr. Foker have be very kind in the wretched business with Miss Costigan, certainly, and she be grateful to he. but she could not feel otherwise than a dim presentiment of evil; and all these quarrel, and riot, and worldliness, scar she about the fate of her boy.
Doctor Portman be decidedly of opinion that Pen should go to College. he hop the lad would read, and have a moderate indulgence of the good society too. he be of opinion that Pen would distinguish himself: Smirke speak very highly of his proficiency: the Doctor himself have hear he construe, and think he acquit himself remarkably well. that he should go out of Chatteris be a great point at any rate; and Pen, who be distract from his private grief by the various row and trouble which have rise round about he, gloomily say he would obey.
there be assize, race, and the entertainment and the flux of company consequent upon they, at Chatteris, during a part of the month of August and September, and Miss Fotheringay still continue to act, and take farewell of the audience at the Chatteris Theatre during that time. nobody seem to be particularly affect by her presence, or her announce departure, except those person whom we have name; nor could the polite county folk, who have house in London, and very likely admire the Fotheringay prodigiously in the capital, when they have be teach to do so by the fashion which set in in her favour, find anything remarkable in the actress perform on the little Chatteris board. many genius and many a quack, for that matter, have meet with a similar fate before and since Miss Costigan's time. this honest woman meanwhile bear up against the public neglect, and any other cross or vexation which she might have in life, with her usual equanimity; and eat, drank, act, sleep, with that regularity and comfort which belong to people of her temperament. what a deal of grief, care, and other harmful excitement do a healthy dulness and cheerful insensibility avoid! nor do I mean to say that Virtue be not Virtue because it be never tempt to go astray; only that dulness be a much fine gift than we give it credit for be; and that some people be very lucky whom Nature have endow with a good store of that great anodyne.
Pen use to go drearily in and out from the play at Chatteris during this season, and pretty much accord to his fancy. his proceeding torture his mother not a little, and her anxiety would have lead she often to interfere, have not the Major constantly check, and at the same time encourage she; for the wily man of the world fancy he see that a favourable turn have occur in Pen's malady. it be the violent efflux of versification, among other symptom, which give Pen's guardian and physician satisfaction. he might be hear spout verse in the shrubbery walk, or mutter they between his tooth as he sit with the home party of evening. one day prowl about the house in Pen's absence, the Major find a great book full of verse in the lad's study. they be in English, and in Latin; quotation from the classic author be give in the scholastic manner in the foot-note. he cannot be very bad, wisely think the Pall-Mall Philosopher: and he make Pen's mother remark (not, perhaps, without a secret feeling of disappointment, for she love romance like other soft woman), that the young gentleman during the last fortnight come home quite hungry to dinner at night, and also show a very decent appetite at the breakfast-table in the morning. "Gad, I wish I could," say the Major, think ruefully of his dinner pill. "the boy begin to sleep well, depend upon that." it be cruel, but it be true.
have no other soul to confide in--for he could not speak to his mother of his love and disappointment--his uncle treat they in a scornful and worldly tone, which, though carefully guard and polite, yet jar greatly on the feeling of Mr. Pen--and Foker be much too coarse to appreciate those refined sentimental secret--the lad's friendship for the Curate redouble, or rather, he be never tired of have Smirke for a listener on that one subject. what be a lovee without a confidant? Pen employ Mr. Smirke, as Corydon do the elm-tree, to cut out his mistress's name upon. he make he echo with the name of the beautiful Amaryllis. when man have leave off play the tune, they do not care much for the pipe: but Pen think he have a great friendship for Smirke, because he could sigh out his love and grief into his tutor's ear; and Smirke have his own reason for always be ready at the lad's call.
Pen's affection gush out in a multitude of sonnet to the friend of his heart, as he style the Curate, which the other receive with great sympathy. he ply Smirke with Latin Sapphics and alcaic. the love-song multiply under his fluent pen; and Smirke declare and believe that they be beautiful. on the other hand, Pen express a boundless gratitude to think that Heaven should have send he such a friend at such a moment. he present his tutor with his well-bind book, and his gold guard-chain, and want he to take his double-barrel gun. he go into Chatteris and get a gold pencil-case on credit (for he have no money, and indeed be still in debt to Smirke for some of the Fotheringay present), which he present to Smirke, with an inscription indicative of his unalterable and eternal regard for the Curate; who of course be pleased with every mark of the boy's attachment.
the poor Curate be naturally very much dismay at the contemplated departure of his pupil. when Arthur should go, Smirke's occupation and delight would go too. what pretext could he find for a daily visit to Fairoaks and that kind word or glance from the lady there, which be as necessary to the Curate as the frugal dinner which Madame Fribsby serve he? Arthur gone, he would only be allow to make visit like any other acquaintance: little Laura could not accommodate he by learn the Catechism more than once a week: he have curl himself like ivy round Fairoaks: he pin at the thought that he must lose his hold of the place. should he speak his mind and go down on his knee to the widow? he think over any indication in her behaviour which flatter his hope. she have praise his sermon three week before: she have thank he exceedingly for his present of a melon, for a small dinner-party which Mrs. Pendennis give: she say she should always be grateful to he for his kindness to Arthur, and when he declare that there be no bound to his love and affection for that dear boy, she have certainly reply in a romantic manner, indicate her own strong gratitude and regard to all her son's friend. should he speak out?--or should he delay? if be speak and she refuse he, it be awful to think that the gate of Fairoaks might be shut upon he for ever--and within that door lie all the world for Mr. Smirke.
thus, oh friendly reader, we see how every man in the world have his own private grief and business, by which he be more cast down or occupy than by the affair or sorrow of any other person. while Mrs. Pendennis be disquiet herself about lose her son, and that anxious hold she have have of he, as long as he have remain in the mother's nest, whence he be about to take flight into the great world beyond--while the Major's great soul chafe and fret, inwardly vex as he think what great party be go on in London, and that he might be sun himself in the glance of Dukes and Duchesses, but for those cursed affair which keep he in a wretched little country hole--while Pen be toss between his passion and a more agreeable sensation, unacknowledged yet, but sway he considerably, namely, his longing to see the world--Mr. Smirke have a private care watch at his bedside, and sit behind he on his pony; and be no more satisfied than the rest of we. how lonely we be in the world; how selfish and secret, everybody! you and your wife have press the same pillow for forty year and fancy yourself unite. Psha, do she cry out when you have the gout, or do you lie awake when she have the toothache? your artless daughter, seemingly all innocence and devote to her mamma and her piano-lesson, be think of neither, but of the young Lieutenant with whom she dance at the last ball--the honest frank boy just return from school be secretly speculate upon the money you will give he, and the debt he owe the tart-man. the old grandmother croon in the corner and bind to another world within a few month, have some business or care which be quite private and her own--very likely she be think of fifty year back, and that night when she make such an impression, and dance a cotillon with the Captain before your father propose for she: or, what a silly little overrated creature your wife be, and how absurdly you be infatuate about her-- and, as for your wife--o philosophic reader, answer and say,--do you tell she all? ah, sir--a distinct universe walk about under your hat and under mine--all thing in nature be different to each--the woman we look at have not the same feature, the dish we eat from have not the same taste to the one and the other--you and I be but a pair of infinite isolation, with some fellow-island a little more or less near to we. let we return, however, to the solitary Smirke.
Smirke have one confidante for his passion--that most injudicious woman, Madame Fribsby. how she become Madame Fribsby, nobody know: she have leave Clavering to go to a milliner's in London as Miss Fribsby--she pretend that she have get the rank in Paris during her residence in that city. but how could the french king, be he ever so much disposed, give she any such title? we shall not inquire into this mystery, however. suffice to say, she go away from home a bounce young lass; she return a rather elderly character, with a Madonna front and a melancholy countenance-- buy the late Mrs. Harbottle's business for a song--take her elderly mother to live with she; be very good to the poor, be constant at church, and have the good of character. but there be no one in all Clavering, not Mrs. Portman herself, who read so many novel as Madame Fribsby. she have plenty of time for this amusement, for, in truth, very few people besides the folk at the Rectory and Fairoaks employ she; and by a perpetual perusal of such work (which be by no mean so moral or edify in the day of which we write, as they be at present) she have get to be so absurdly sentimental, that in her eye life be nothing but an immense love-match; and she never could see two people together, but she fancy they be die for one another.
on the day after Mrs. Pendennis's visit to the Curate, which we have record many page back, Madame Fribsby settle in her mind that Mr. Smirke must be in love with the widow, and do everything in her power to encourage this passion on both side. Mrs. Pendennis she very seldom see, indeed, except in public, and in her pew at church. that lady have very little need of millinery, or make most of her own dress and cap; but on the rare occasion when Madame Fribsby receive visit from Mrs. Pendennis or pay her respect at Fairoaks, she never fail to entertain the widow with praise of the curate, point out what an angelical man he be, how gentle, how studious, how lonely; and she would wonder that no lady would take pity upon he.
Helen laugh at these sentimental remark, and wonder that Madame herself do not compassionate her lodger, and console he. Madame Fribsby shake her Madonna front, "Mong cure a boco souffare," she say, lay her hand on the part she designate as her cure. "it est more en Espang, Madame," she say with a sigh. she be proud of her intimacy with the french language, and speak it with more volubility than correctness. Mrs. Pendennis do not care to penetrate the secret of this wound heart: except to her few intimate she be a reserved and it may be a very proud woman; she look upon her son's tutor merely as an attendant on that young Prince, to be treat with respect as a clergyman certainly, but with proper dignity as a dependant on the house of Pendennis. nor be Madame's constant allusion to the curate particularly agreeable to she. it require a very ingenious sentimental turn indeed to find out that the widow have a secret regard for Mr. Smirke, to which pernicious error however Madame Fribsby persist in hold.
her lodger be very much more willing to talk on this subject with his soft-hearted landlady. every time after that she praise the curate to Mrs. Pendennis, she come away from the latter with the notion that the widow herself have be praise he. "etre soul au monde est bien ouneeyoung," she would say, glance up at a print of a french carbineer in a green coat and brass cuirass which decorate she apartment--"depend upon it when Master Pendennis go to College, his Ma will find herself very lonely. she be quite young yet.--you wouldnot suppose she to be five-and-twenty. Monsieur le Cury, song cure est touchy--j'ang suis sure --Je conny cela biang--Ally Monsieur Smirke."
he softly blush; he sigh; he hop; he fear; he doubt; he sometimes yield to the delightful idea--his pleasure be to sit in Madame Fribsby's apartment, and talk upon the subject, where, as the great part of the conversation be carry on in French by the Milliner, and her old mother be deaf, that retire old individual (who have once be a housekeeper, wife and widow of a butler in the Clavering family) could understand scarce one syllable of their talk.
thus it be, that when Major Pendennis announce to his nephew's tutor that the young fellow would go to College in October, and that Mr. Smirke's valuable service would no long be needful to his pupil, for which service the Major, who speak as grandly as a lord, profess himself exceedingly grateful, and besought Mr. Smirke to command his interest in any way--thus it be, that the Curate feel that the critical moment be come for he, and be rack and torture by those severe pang which the occasion warrant.
Madame Fribsby have, of course, take the strong interest in the progress of Mr. Pen's love affair with Miss Fotheringay. she have be over to Chatteris, and have see that actress perform, have pronounce that she be old and overrate: and have talk over Master Pen's passion in her shop many and many a time to the half-dozen old maid, and old woman in male clothe, who be to be find in little country town, and who form the genteel population of Clavering. Captain Glanders, H.P., have pronounce that Pen be go to be a devil of a fellow, and have begin early: Mrs. Glanders have tell he to check his horrid observation, and to respect his own wife, if he please. she say it would be a lesson to Helen for her pride and absurd infatuation about that boy. Mrs. Pybus say many people be proud of very small thing, and for her part, she donot know why an apothecary's wife should give herself such air. Mrs. Wapshot call her daughter away from that side of the street, one day when Pen, on Rebecca, be stop at the saddler's, to get a new lash to his whip--one and all of these people have make visit of curiosity to Fairoaks, and have try to condole with the widow, or bring the subject of the Fotheringay affair on the tapis, and have be severally check by the haughty reserve of Mrs. Pendennis, support by the frigid politeness of the Major her brother.
these rebuff, however, do not put an end to the gossip, and slander go on increase about the unlucky Fairoaks' family. glander (H.P.), a retire cavalry officer, whose half-pay and large family compel he to fuddle himself with brandy-and-water instead of claret after he quit the Dragoons, have the occasional entree at Fairoaks, and keep his friend the Major there inform of all the story which be current at Clavering. Mrs. Pybus have take an inside place by the coach to Chatteris, and go to the George on purpose to get the particular. Mrs. Speers's man, have treat Mr. Foker's servant to drink at Baymouth for a similar purpose. it be say that Pen have hang himself for despair in the orchard, and that his uncle have cut he down; that, on the contrary, it be Miss Costigan who be jilt, and not young Arthur; and that the affair have only be hush up by the payment of a large sum of money, the exact amount of which there be several people in Clavering could testify--the sum of course vary accord to the calculation of the individual narrator of the story.
Pen shake his mane and rag like a furious lion when these scandal, affect Miss Costigan's honour and his own, come to his ear. why be not Pybus a man (she have whisker enough), that he might call she out and shoot she? see Simcoe pass by, Pen glare at he so from his saddle on Rebecca, and clutch his whip in a manner so menacing, that that clergyman go home and write a sermon, or think over a sermon (for he deliver oral testimony at great length), in which he speak of Jezebel, theatrical entertainment (a double cut this--for Doctor Portman, the Rector of the old church, be know to frequent such), and of youth go to perdition, in a manner which make it clear to every capacity that Pen be the individual meant, and on the road allude to. what story more be there not against young Pendennis, whilst he sate sulk, Achilles-like in his tent, for the loss of his ravished Briseis?
after the affair with Hobnell, Pen be pronounce to be a murderer as well as a profligate, and his name become a name of terror and a byword in Clavering. but this be not all; he be not the only one of the family about whom the village begin to chatter, and his unlucky mother be the next to become a victim to their gossip.
"it be all settle," say Mrs. Pybus to Mrs. Speers, "the boy be to go to College, and then the widow be to console herself."
"hebe be there every day, in the most open manner, my dear," continue Mrs. Speers.
"enough to make poor Mr. Pendennis turn in his grave," say Mrs. Wapshot.
"she never like he, that we know," say No. 1.
"marry he for his money. everybody know that: be a penniless hanger-on of Lady Pontypool's," say no. 2.
"itbe rather too open, though, to encourage a lover under pretence of have a tutor for your son," cry no. 3.
"Hush! here come Mrs. Portman," some one say, as the good Rector's wife enter Madame Fribsby's shop, to inspect her monthly book of fashion just arrive from London. and the fact be that Madame Fribsby have be able to hold out no long; and one day, after she and her lodger have be talk of Pen's approach departure, and the Curate have go off to give one of his last lesson to that gentleman, Madame Fribsby have communicate to Mrs. Pybus, who happen to step in with Mrs. Speers, her strong suspicion, her certainty almost, that there be an attachment between a certain clerical gentleman and a certain lady, whose naughty son be grow quite unmanageable, and that a certain marriage would take place pretty soon.
Mrs. Portman see it all, of course, when the matter be mention. what a sly fox that Curate be! he be low-church, and she never like he. and to think of Mrs. Pendennis take a fancy to he after she have be marry to such a man as Mr. Pendennis! she could hardly stay five minute at Madame Fribsby's, so eager be she to run to the Rectory and give Doctor Portman the news.
when Doctor Portman hear this piece of intelligence, he be in such a rage with his curate, that his first movement be to break with Mr. Smirke, and to beg he to transfer his service to some other parish. "that milksop of a creature pretend to be worthy of such a woman as Mrs. Pendennis," break out the doctor: "where will impudence stop next!"
"she be much too old for Mr. Smirke," Mrs. Portman remark: "why, poor dear Mrs. Pendennis might be his mother almost."
"you always choose the most charitable reason, Betsy," cry the Rector. "a matron with a son grow up--she would never think of marry again."
"you only think man should marry again, Doctor Portman, answer his lady, bridle up.
"you stupid old woman," say the Doctor, "when I be go, you shall marry whomsoever you like. I will leave order in my will, my dear, to that effect: and Iwill bequeath a ring to my successor, and my Ghost shall come and dance at your wedding."
"it be cruel for a clergyman to talk so," the lady answer, with a ready whimper: but these little breeze use to pass very rapidly over the surface of the Doctor's domestic bliss; and be follow by a great calm and sunshine. the Doctor adopt a plan for soothe Mrs. Portman's ruffled countenance, which have a great effect when it be try between a worthy couple who be sincerely fond of one another; and which, I think, become 'John Anderson' at three-score, just as much as it use to do when he be a black-haired young Jo of five-and-twenty.
"hadnot you well speak to Mr. Smirke, John?" Mrs Portman ask.
"when Pen go to College, cadit quaestio," reply the Rector, "Smirke's visit at Fairoaks will cease of themselves, and there will be no need to bother the widow. she have trouble enough on her hand, with the affair of that silly young scapegrace, without be pester by the tittle-tattle of this place. it be all an invention of that fool, Fribsby."
"against whom I always warn you,--you know I do, my dear John," interpose Mrs. Portman.
"that you do; you very often do, my love," the Doctor answer with a laugh. "it be not for want of warning on your part, I be sure, that I have form my opinion of most woman with whom we be acquaint. Madame Fribsby be a fool, and fond of gossip, and so be some other folk. but she be good to the poor: she take care of her mother, and she come to church twice every Sunday. and as for Smirke, my dear----" here the Doctor's face assume for one moment a comical expression, which Mrs. Portman do not perceive (for she be look out of the drawing-room window, and wonder what Mrs. Pybus could want cheapen fowl again in the market, when she have bad poultry from Livermore's two day before)--"and as for Mr. Smirke, my dear Betsy, will you promise I that you will never breathe to any mortal what I be go to tell you as a profound secret?"
"what be it, my dear john!--of course I willnot," answer the Rector's lady.
"well, then--I cannot say it be a fact, mind--but if you find that Smirke be at this moment--ay, and have be for year--engage to a young lady, a Miss--a Miss Thompson, if you will have the name, who live on Clapham Common--yes, on Clapham Common, not far from Mrs. Smirke's house, what become of your story then about Smirke and Mrs. Pendennis?"
"why do you not tell I this before?" ask the Doctor's wife.--"how long have you know it?--how we all of we have be deceive in that man!"
"why should I meddle in other folk' business, my dear?" the Doctor answer. "I know how to keep a secret--and perhaps this be only an invention like that other absurd story; at least, Madame Portman, I should never have tell you this but for the other, which I beg you to contradict whenever you hear it." and so say the doctor go away to his study, and Mrs. Portman see that the day be a remarkably fine one, think she would take advantage of the weather and pay a few visit.
the Doctor look out of his study window see the wife of his bosom presently issue forth, attire in her good. she cross the market-place, salute the market-woman right and leave, and give a glance at the grocery and general emporium at the corner: then enter London Street (formerly Hog Lane), she stop for a minute at Madame Fribsby's window, and look at the fashion which hang up there,--seeme hesitate whether she should enter; but she pass on and never stop again until she come to Mrs. Pybus's little green gate and garden, through which she go to that lady's cottage.
there, of course, her husband lose sight of Mrs. Portman. "oh, what a long bow I have pull," he say inwardly--"goodness forgive I! and shoot my own flesh and blood. there must be no more tattling and scandal about that house. I must stop it, and speak to Smirke. Iwill ask he to dinner this very day."
have a sermon to compose, the Doctor sit down to that work, and be so engaged in the composition, that he have not conclude it until near five o'clock in the afternoon: when he step over to Mr. Smirke's lodging, to put his hospitable intention, regard that gentleman, into effect. he reach Madame Fribsby's door, just as the Curate issue from it.
Mr. Smirke be magnificently dress, and as he turn out his toe, he show a pair of elegant open-work silk stocking and glossy pump. his white cravat be arrange in a splendid stiff tie, and his gold shirt stud shine on his spotless linen. his hair be curl round his fair temple. have he borrow Madame Fribsby's iron to give that curly grace? his white cambric pocket-handkerchief be scented with the most delicious eau-de-Cologne.
"o gracilis puer,"--crie the Doctor.--"Whither be you bind? I want you to come home to dinner."
"I be engage to dine at--at Fairoaks," say Mr. Smirke, blush faintly and whisk the scented pocket-handkerchief, and his pony be in wait, he mount and ride away simper down the street. no accident befall he that day, and he arrive with his tie in the very good order at Mrs. Pendennis's house.
CHAPTER XVII
which conclude the first part of this history
the Curate have go on his daily errand to Fairoaks, and be upstairs in Pens study pretend to read with his pupil, in the early part of that very afternoon when Mrs. Portman, after transact business with Mrs. Pybus, have find the weather so exceedingly fine that she pursue her walk as far as Fairoaks, in order to pay a visit to her dear friend there. in the course of their conversation, the Rector's lady tell Mrs. Pendennis and the Major a very great secret about the Curate, Mr. Smirke, which be no less than that he have an attachment, a very old attachment, which he have long keep quite private.
"and on whom be it that Mr. Smirke have bestow his heart?" ask Mrs. Pendennis, with a superb air but rather an inward alarm.
"why, my dear," the other lady answer, "when he first come and use to dine at the Rectory, people say we want he for Myra, and we be force to give up ask he. then they use to say he be smite in another quarter; but I always contradict it for my part, and say that you----"
"that I," cry Mrs. Pendennis; "people be very impertinent, I be sure. Mr. Smirke come here as Arthur's tutor, and I be surprised that anybody should dare to speak so----"
"'pon my soul, it be a little too much," the Major say, lay down the newspaper and the double eye-glass.
"Ihave no patience with that Mrs. Pybus," Helen continue indignantly.
"I tell she there be no truth in it," Mrs. Portman say. "I always say so, my dear: and now it come out that my demure gentleman have be engage to a young lady--Miss Thompson, of Clapham Common, ever so long: and I be delighted for my part, and on Myra's account, too, for an unmarried curate be always objectionable about one's house: and of course it be strictly private, but I think I would tell you, as it might remove unpleasantness. but mind: not one word, if you please, about the story."
Mrs. Pendennis say, with perfect sincerity, that she be exceedingly glad to hear the news: and hop Mr. Smirke, who be a very kind and amiable man, would have a deserve wife: and when her visitor go away, Helen and her brother talk of the matter with great satisfaction, the kind lady rebuke herself for her haughty behaviour to Mr. Smirke, whom she have avoid of late, instead of be grateful to he for his constant attention to Arthur.
"gratitude to this kind of people," the Major say, "be very well; but familiarity be out of the question. this gentleman give his lesson and receive his money like any other master. you be too humble, my good soul. there must be distinction in rank, and that sort of thing. I tell you before, you be too kind to Mr. Smirke."
but Helen do not think so: and now that Arthur be go away, and she bethink she how very polite Mr. Smirke have be; how he have go on message for she; how he have bring book and copy music; how he have teach Laura so many thing, and give she so many kind present, her heart smite she on account of her ingratitude towards the Curate;--so much so, that when he come down from study with Pen, and be hanker about the hall previous to his departure, she go out and shake hand with he with rather a blushing face, and beg he to come into her drawing-room, where she say they now never see he. and as there be to be rather a good dinner that day, she invite Mr. Smirke to partake of it; and we may be sure that he be too happy to accept such a delightful summon.
ease, by the above report, of all her former doubt and misgiving regard the Curate, Helen be exceedingly kind and gracious to Mr. Smirke during dinner, redouble her attention, perhaps, because Major Pendennis be very high and reserve with his nephew's tutor. when Pendennis ask Smirke to drink wine, he address he as if he be a Sovereign speaking to a petty retainer, in a manner so condescend, that even Pen laugh at it, although quite ready, for his part, to be as conceited as most young man be.
but Smirke do not care for the impertinence of the Major so long as he have his hostess's kind behaviour; and he pass a delightful time by her side at table, exert all his power of conversation to please she, talk in a manner both clerical and worldly, about the Fancy Bazaar, and the Great Missionary Meeting, about the last new novel, and the Bishop's excellent sermon about the fashionable party in London, an account of which he read in the newspaper--in fine, he neglect no art, by which a College divine who have both sprightly and serious talent, a taste for the genteel, an irreproachable conduct, and a susceptible heart, will try and make himself agreeable to the person on whom he have fix his affection.
Major Pendennis come yawn out of the dining-room very soon after his sister and little Laura have leave the apartment. "what an unsufferable bore that man be, and how he do talk!" the Major say.
"he have be very good to Arthur, who be very fond of he," Mrs. Pendennis said,--"i wonder who the Miss Thompson be whom he be go to marry?"
"I always think the fellow be look in another direction," say the Major.
"and in what?" ask Mrs. Pendennis quite innocently,--"towards Myra Portman?"
"towards Helen Pendennis, if you must know," answer her brother-in-law.
"towards I! impossible!" Helen say, who know perfectly well that such have be the case. "his marriage will be a very happy thing. I hope Arthur will not take too much wine."
now Arthur, flush with a good deal of pride at the privilege of have the key of the cellar, and remember that a very few more dinner would probably take place which he and his dear friend Smirke could share, have bring up a liberal supply of claret for the company's drinking, and when the elder with little Laura leave he, he and the Curate begin to pass the wine very freely.
one bottle speedily yield up the ghost, another shed more than half its blood, before the two toper have be much more than half an hour together--Pen, with a hollow laugh and voice, have drink off one bumper to the falsehood of woman, and have say sardonically, that wine at any rate be a mistress who never deceive, and be sure to give a man a welcome.
Smirke gently say that he know for his part some woman who be all truth and tenderness; and cast up his eye towards the ceiling, and heave a sigh as if evoke some be dear and unmentionable, he take up his glass and drain it, and the rosy liquor begin to suffuse his face.
Pen troll over some verse he have be make that morning, in which he inform himself that the woman who have slight his passion could not be worthy to win it: that he be awake from love's mad fever, and, of course, under these circumstance, proceed to leave she, and to quit a heartless deceiver: that a name which have one day be famous in the land, might again be hear in it: and, that though he never should be the happy and careless boy he be but a few month since, or his heart be what it have be ere passion have fill it and grief have well-nigh kill it; that though to he personally death be as welcome as life, and that he would not hesitate to part with the latter, but for the love of one kind be whose happiness depend on his own,--yet he hop to show he be a man worthy of his race, and that one day the false one should be bring to know how great be the treasure and noble the heart which she have fling away.
Pen, we say, who be a very excitable person, roll out these verse in his rich sweet voice, which tremble with emotion whilst our young poet speak. he have a trick of blushing when in this excited state, and his large and honest grey eye also exhibit proof of a sensibility so genuine, hearty, and manly, that Miss Costigan, if she have a heart, must need have soften towards he; and very likely she be, as he say, altogether unworthy of the affection which he lavish upon she.
the sentimental Smirke be catch by the emotion which agitate his young friend. he grasp Pen's hand over the dessert dish and wine-glass. he say the verse be beautiful: that Pen be a poet, a great poet, and likely by Heaven's permission to run a great career in the world. "go on and prosper, dear Arthur," he cry; "the wound under which at present you suffer be only temporary, and the very grief you endure will cleanse and strengthen your heart. I have always prophesy the great and bright thing of you, as soon as you have correct some failing and weakness of character, which at present belong to you. but you will get over these, my boy; you will get over these; and when you be famous and celebrate, as I know you will be, will you remember your old tutor and the happy early day of your youth?"
Pen swear he would: with another shake of the hand across the glass and apricot. "I shall never forget how kind you have be to I, Smirke," he say. "I donot know what I should have do without you. you be my good friend."
"be I, really, Arthur?" say Smirke, look through his spectacle; and his heart begin to beat so that he think Pen must almost hear it throb.
"my good friend, my friend for ever," Pen say. "God bless you, old boy," and he drink up the last glass of the second bottle of the famous wine which his father have lay in, which his uncle have buy, which Lord Levant have import, and which now, like a slave indifferent, be minister pleasure to its present owner, and give its young master delectation.
"wewill have another bottle, old boy," Pen say, "by Jove we will. Hurray!--claret go for nothing. my uncle be tell I that he see Sheridan drink five bottle at Brookes's, besides a bottle of Maraschino. this be some of the fine wine in England, he say. so it be, by Jove. therebe nothing like it. nunc vino pellite curas--cra ingen iterabimus aeq,--fill your glass, Old Smirke, a hogshead of it willnot do you any harm." and Mr. Pen begin to sing the drinking song out of Der Freischuetz. the dining-room window be open, and his mother be softly pace on the lawn outside, while little Laura be look at the sunset. the sweet fresh note of the boy's voice come to the widow. it cheer her kind heart to hear he sing.
"you--you be take too much wine, Arthur," Mr. Smirke say softly--"you be exciting yourself."
"no," say Pen, "woman give headache, but this donot. fill your glass, old fellow, and letus drink--I say, Smirke, my boy--letus drink to her-- your she, I mean, not mine, for whom I swear Iwill care no more--no, not a penny--no, not a fig--no, not a glass of wine. tell we about the lady, Smirke; Ihave often see you sigh about she."
"oh!" say Smirke--and his beautiful cambric shirt front and glisten stud heave with the emotion which agitate his gentle and suffer bosom.
"oh--what a sigh!" Pen cry, grow very hilarious; "fill, my boy, and drink the toast, you cannot refuse a toast, no gentleman refuse a toast. herebe her health, and good luck to you, and may she soon be Mrs. Smirke."
"do you say so?" Smirke say, all of a tremble. "do you really say so, Arthur?"
"say so; of course, I say so. down with it. here's Mrs. Smirke's good health: hip, hip, hurray!"
Smirke convulsively gulp down his glass of wine, and Pen wave his over his head, cheer so as to make his mother and Laura wonder on the lawn, and his uncle, who be doze over the paper in the drawing-room, start, and say to himself, "that boybe drink too much." Smirke put down the glass.
"I accept the oman," gasp out the blushing curate. "oh my dear Arthur, you--you know her----"
"what--Myra Portman? I wish you joy; shebe get a dev'lish large waist; but I wish you joy, old fellow."
"oh, Arthur!" groan the Curate again, and nod his head, speechless.
"beg your pardon--sorry I offend you--but she have get a large waist, you know--devilish large waist," Pen continue--the third bottle evidently begin to act upon the young gentleman.
"itbe not Miss Portman," the other say, in a voice of agony. "be it anybody at Chatteris or at Clapham? somebody here? no--it benot old Pybus? it cannot be Miss Rolt at the Factory--shebe only fourteen."
"itbe somebody rather old than I be, Pen," the Curate cry, look up at his friend, and then guiltily cast his eye down into his plate.
Pen burst out laugh. "itbe Madame Fribsby; by Jove, itbe Madame Fribsby. Madame Frib. by the immortal Gods!"
the Curate could contain no more. "o Pen," he cry, "how can you suppose that any of those--of those more than ordinary being you have name could have an influence upon this heart, when I have be daily in the habit of contemplate perfection! I may be insane, I may be madly ambitious, I may be presumptuous--but for two year my heart have be fill by one image, and have know no other idol. havenot I love you as a son, Arthur?--say, havenot Charles Smirke love you as a son?"
"yes, old boy, youhave be very good to I," Pen say, whose like, however, for his tutor be not by any mean of the filial kind.
"my mean," rush on Smirke, "be at present limited, I own, and my mother be not so liberal as might be desire; but what she have will be mine at her death. be she to hear of my marry a lady of rank and good fortune, my mother would be liberal, I be sure she would be liberal. whatever I have or subsequently inherit--and itbe five hundred a year at the very least--would be settle upon she and--and--and you at my death-- that be"
"what the deuce do you mean?--and what have I to do with your money?" cry out Pen, in a puzzle.
"Arthur, Arthur!" exclaim the other wildly; "you say I be your dear friend--let I be more. oh, cannot you see that the angelic be I love-- the purest, the good of woman--be no other than your dear, dear angel of a--mother."
"my mother!" cry out Arthur, jump up and sober in a minute. "Pooh! damn it, Smirke, you must be mad--shebe seven or eight year old than you be."
"do you find that any objection?" cry Smirke piteously, and allude, of course, to the elderly subject of Pen's own passion.
the lad feel the hint, and blush quite red. "the case be not similar, Smirke," he say, "and the allusion might have be spar. a man may forget his own rank and elevate any woman to it: but allow I to say our position be very different."
"how do you mean, dear Arthur?" the Curate interpose sadly, cower as he feel that his sentence be about to be read.
"mean?" say Arthur. "I mean what I say. my tutor, I say my tutor, have no right to ask a lady of my mother's rank of life to marry he. itbe a breach of confidence. I say itbe a liberty you take, Smirke--itbe a liberty. mean, indeed!"
"O Arthur!" the Curate begin to cry with clasped hand, and a scared face, but Arthur give another stamp with his foot and begin to pull at the bell. "donot letus have any more of this. wewill have some coffee, if you please," he say with a majestic air; and the old butler enter at the summon, Arthur bid he to serve that refreshment.
John say he have just carry coffee into the drawing-room, where his uncle be ask for Master Arthur, and the old man give a glance of wonder at the three empty claret-bottle. Smirke say he think he'd-- hewould rather not go into the drawing-room, on which Arthur haughtily say, "as you please," and call for Mr. Smirke's horse to be bring round. the poor fellow say he know the way to the stable and would get his pony himself, and he go into the hall and sadly put on his coat and hat.
Pen follow he out uncover. Helen be still walk up and down the soft lawn as the sun be set, and the Curate take off his hat and bow by way of farewell, and pass on to the door lead to the stable court, by which the pair disappear. Smirke know the way to the stable, as he say, well enough. he fumble at the girth of the saddle, which Pen fasten for he, and put on the bridle and lead the pony into the yard. the boy be touch by the grief which appear in the other's face as he mount. Pen hold out his hand, and Smirke wring it silently,
"I say, Smirke," he say in an agitated voice, "forgive I if I have say anything harsh--for you have always be very, very kind to I. but it cannot be, old fellow, it cannot be. be a man. God bless you."
Smirke nod his head silently, and ride out of the lodge-gate: and Pen look after he for a couple of minute, until he disappear down the road, and the clatter of the pony's hoof die away. Helen be still linger on the lawn wait until the boy come back--she put his hair off his forehead and kiss it fondly. she be afraid he have be drink too much wine. why have Mr. Smirke go away without any tea?
he look at she with a kind humour beam in his eye "Smirke be unwell," he say with a laugh. for a long while Hele have not see the boy look so cheerful. he put his arm round her waist, and walk she up and down the walk in front of the house. Laura begin to drub on the drawing-room window and nod and laugh from it. "come along, you two people," cry on Major Pendennis, "your coffee be get quite cold."
when Laura be go to bed, Pen, who be big with his secret, burst out with it, and describe the dismal but ludicrous scene which have occur. Helen hear of it with many blush, which become her pale face very well, and a perplexity which Arthur roguishly enjoy.
"confound the fellow's impudence," Major Pendennis say as he take his candle, "where will the assurance of these people stop?" Pen and his mother have a long talk that night, full of love, confidence, and laughter, and the boy somehow sleep more soundly and wake up more easily than he have do for many month before.
before the great Mr. Dolphin quit Chatteris, he not only make an advantageous engagement with Miss Fotheringay, but he liberally leave with she a sum of money to pay off any debt which the little family might have contract during their stay in the place, and which, mainly through the lady's own economy and management, be not considerable. the small account with the spirit merchant, which Major Pendennis have settle, be the chief of Captain Costigan's debt, and though the Captain at one time talk about repay every farthing of the money, it never appear that he execute his menace, nor do the law of honour in the least call upon he to accomplish that threat.
when Miss Costigan have see all the outstanding bill pay to the uttermost shilling, she hand over the balance to her father, who break out into hospitality to all his friend, give the little Creeds more apple and gingerbread than he have ever bestow upon they, so that the widow Creed ever after hold the memory of her lodger in veneration, and the young one weep bitterly when he go away; and in a word manage the money so cleverly that it be entirely expend before many day, and that he be compel to draw upon Mr. Dolphin for a sum to pay for travel expense when the time of their departure arrive.
there be hold at an inn in that county town a weekly meeting of a festive, almost a riotous character, of a society of gentleman who call themselves the buccaneer. some of the choice spirit of Chatteris belong to this cheerful club. graf, the apothecary (than whom a well fellow never put a pipe in his mouth and smoke it), Smart, the talented and humorous portrait-painter of High Street, Croker, an excellent auctioneer, and the uncompromise Hicks, the able Editor for twenty-three year of the County Chronicle and Chatteris Champion, be amongst the crew of the buccaneer, whom also Bingley, the manager, like to join of a Saturday evening, whenever he receive permission from his lady.
Costigan have be also an occasional buccaneer. but a want of punctuality of payment have of late somewhat exclude he from the Society, where he be subject to disagreeable remark from the landlord, who say that a Buccaneer who donot pay his shot be utterly unworthy to be a Marine Bandit. but when it become know to the 'ear, as the Clubbists call themselves familiarly, that Miss Fotheringay have make a splendid engagement, a great revolution of feeling take place in the Club regard Captain Costigan. solly, mine host of the grape (and I need not say, as worthy a fellow as ever stand behind a bar), tell the gent in the buccaneer' room one night how noble the Captain have behave; have be round and pay off all his tick in Chatteris, include his score of three pound fourteen here--and pronounce that Cos be a good feller, a gentleman at bottom, and he, solly, have always say so, and finally work upon the feeling of the buccaneer to give the Captain a dinner.
the banquet take place on the last night of Costigan's stay at Chatteris, and be serve in Solly's accustomed manner. as good a plain dinner of old english fare as ever smoke on a table be prepare by Mrs. Solly; and about eighteen gentleman sate down to the festive board. Mr. Jubber (the eminent draper of High Street) be in the Chair, have the distinguished guest of the Club on his right. the able and consistent Hicks officiate as croupier on the occasion; most of the gentleman of the Club be present, and H. Foker, Esq., and Spavin, Esq., friend of Captain Costigan, be also participator in the entertainment. the cloth have be draw, the Chairman say, "Costigan, there be wine, if you like," but the Captain prefer punch, that liquor be vote by acclamation: and 'Non Nobis' have be sing in admirable style by Messrs. Bingley, Hicks, and Bullby (of the Cathedral choir, than whom a more jovial spirit "ne'er toss off a bumper or empty a bowl"), the Chairman give the health of the 'king!' which be drunk with the loyalty of Chatteris man, and then without further circumlocution propose their friend 'Captain Costigan.'
after the enthusiastic cheering which ring through old Chatteris have subside, Captain Costigan rise in reply, and make a speech of twenty minute, in which he be repeatedly overcome by his emotion.
the gallant Captain say he must be pardon for incoherence, if his heart be too full to speak. he be quit a city celebrate for its antiquitee, its hospitalitee, the beautee of its woman, the manly fidelitee, generositee, and jovialitee of its man. (Cheers.) he be go from that ancient and venerable city, of which while Mimoree hold her sayt, he should never think without the fond emotion, to a methrawpoli where the talent of his daughther be about to have full play, and where he would watch over she like a guardian angel. he should never forget that it be at Chatteris she have acquire the skill which she be about to exercise in another sphere, and in her name and his own Jack Costigan thank and bless they. the gallant officer's speech be receive with tremendous cheer.
Mr. Hicks, Croupier, in a brilliant and energetic manner, propose Miss Fotheringay's health.
Captain Costigan return thank in a speech full of feeling and eloquence.
Mr. Jubber propose the Drama and the Chatteris Theatre, and Mr. Bingley be about to rise but be prevent by Captain Costigan, who, as long connect with the Chatteris Theatre and on behalf of his daughter, thank the company. he inform they that he have be in garrison, at Gibraltar, and at Malta, and have be at the taking of flushing. the Duke of York be a patron of the Drama; he have the honour of dining with his Royal Highness and the Duke of Kent many time; and the former have justly be name the friend of the soldier. (Cheers.)
the Army be then propose, and Captain Costigan return thank. in the course of the night he sing his well-know song, 'the deserter,' 'the Shan Van Voght,' 'the Little Pig under the Bed,' and 'the Vale of Avoca.' the evening be a great triumph for he--it end. all triumph and all evening end. and the next day, Miss Costigan have take leave of all her friend, have be reconcile to Miss Rouncy, to whom she leave a necklace and a white satin gown--the next day, he and Miss Costigan have place in the Competitor coach roll by the gate of Fairoaks Lodge-- and Pendennis never see they.
Tom Smith, the coachman, point out Fairoaks to Mr. Costigan, who sate on the box smell of rum-and-water--and the Captain say it be a poor place--and add, "Ye should see Castle Costigan, County Mayo, I boy,"-- which Tom say he should like very much to see.
they be go and Pen have never see they! he only know of their departure by its announcement in the county paper the next day: and straight gallop over to Chatteris to hear the truth of this news. they be go indeed. a card of 'lodging to let' be place in the dear little familiar window. he rush up into the room and view it over. he sate ever so long in the old window-seat look into the Dean's garden: whence he and Emily have so often look out together. he walk, with a sort of terror, into her little empty bedroom. it be sweep out and prepare for new-comer. the glass which have reflect her fair face be shin ready for her successor. the curtain lie square fold on the little bed: he fling himself down and bury his head on the vacant pillow.
Laura have net a purse into which his mother have put some sovereign, and Pen have find it on his dressing-table that very morning. he give one to the little servant who have be use to wait upon the Costigans, and another to the child, because they say they be very fond of she. it be but a few month back, yet what year ago it seem since he have first enter that room! he feel that it be all do. the very miss she at the coach have something fatal in it. Blank, weary, utterly wretched and lonely the poor lad feel.
his mother see she be go by his look when he come home. he be eager to fly too now, as be other folk round about Chatteris. Poor Smirke want to go away from the sight of the syren widow. Foker begin to think he have have enough of Baymouth, and that a few supper-party at Saint Boniface would not be unpleasant. and Major Pendennis long to be off, and have a little pheasant-shooting at Stillbrook, and get rid of all annoyance and tracasserie of the village. the widow and Laura nervously set about the preparation for Pen's kit, and fill trunk with his book and linen. Helen write card with the name of Arthur Pendennis, Esq., which be duly nail on the box; and at which both she and Laura look with tearful wistful eye. it be not until long, long after he be go, that Pen remember how constant and tender the affection of these woman have be, and how selfish his own conduct be.
a night soon come, when the mail, with echo horn and blaze lamp, stop at the lodge-gate of Fairoaks, and Pen's trunk and his uncle's be place on the roof of the carriage, into which the pair presently afterwards enter. Helen and Laura be stand by the evergreen of the shrubbery, their figure light up by the coach lamp; the guard cry all right: in another instant the carriage whirl onward; the light disappear, and Helen's heart and prayer go with they. her sainted benediction follow the depart boy. he have leave the home-nest in which he have be chafing, and whither, after his very first flight, he return bleed and wound; he be eager to go forth again, and try his restless wing.
how lonely the house look without he! the cord trunk and book-box be there in his empty study. Laura ask leave to come and sleep in Helen's room: and when she have cry herself to sleep there, the mother go softly into Pen's vacant chamber, and kneel down by the bed on which the moon be shin, and there pray for her boy, as mother only know how to plead. he know that her pure blessing be follow he, as he be carry mile away.
CHAPTER xviii
Alma Mater
every man, however brief or inglorious may have be his academical career, must remember with kindness and tenderness the old university comrade and day. the young man's life be just begin: the boy's lead-string be cut, and he have all the novel delight and dignity of freedom. he have no idea of care yet, or of bad health, or of roguery, or poverty, or to-morrow's disappointment. the play have not be act so often as to make he tired. though the after drink, as we mechanically go on repeat it, be stale and bitter, how pure and brilliant be that first sparkling draught of pleasure!--how the boy rush at the cup, and with what a wild eagerness he drain it! but old epicure who be cut off from the delight of the table, and be restrict to a poached egg and a glass of water, like to see people with good appetite; and, as the next good thing to be amuse at a pantomime one's-self be to see one's child enjoy it, I hope there may be no degree of age or experience to which mortal may attain, when he shall become such a glum philosopher as not to be please by the sight of happy youth. come back a few week since from a brief visit to the old University of Oxbridge, where my friend Mr. Arthur Pendennis pass some period of his life, I make the journey in the railroad by the side of a young fellow at present a student of Saint Boniface. he have get an exeat somehow, and be bent on a day's lark in London: he never stop rattle and talk from the commencement of the journey until its close (which be a great deal too soon for I, for I never be tired of listen to the honest young fellow's joke and cheery laughter); and when we arrive at the terminus nothing would satisfy he but a hansom cab, so that he might get into town the quick, and plunge into the pleasure await he there. away the young lad go whirling, with joy light up his honest face; and as for the reader's humble servant, have but a small carpet-bag, I get up on the outside of the omnibus, and sate there very contentedly between a Jew-pedlar smoke bad cigar, and a gentleman's servant take care of a poodle-dog, until we get our fat complement of passenger and box, when the coachman drive leisurely away. we benot in a hurry to get to town. neither one of we be particularly eager about rush into that near smoke Babylon, or thought of dining at the Club that night, or dance at the Casino. yet a few year more, and my young friend of the railroad will be not a whit more eager.
there be no railroad make when Arthur Pendennis go to the famous University of Oxbridge; but he drive thither in a well-appoint coach, fill inside and out with don, gownsman, young freshman about to enter, and their guardian, who be conduct they to the university. a fat old gentleman, in grey stocking, from the City, who sate by Major Pendennis inside the coach, have his pale-face son opposite, be frighten beyond measure when he hear that the coach have be drive for a couple of stage by young Mr. Foker, of Saint Boniface College, who be the friend of all man, include coachman, and could drive as well as Tom Hicks himself. Pen sate on the roof, examine coach, passenger, and country with great delight and curiosity. his heart jump with pleasure as the famous university come in view, and the magnificent prospect of venerable tower and pinnacle, tall elm and shin river, spread before he.
Pen have pass a few day with his uncle at the Major's lodging, in Bury Street, before they set out for Oxbridge. Major Pendennis think that the lad's wardrobe want renewal; and Arthur be by no mean averse to any plan which be to bring he new coat and waistcoat. there be no end to the sacrifice which the self-deny uncle make in the youth's behalf. London be awfully lonely. the Pall Mall pavement be desert; the very red jacket have go out of town. there be scarce a face to be see in the bow-window of the club. the Major conduct his nephew into one or two of those desert mansion, and write down the lad's name on the candidate-list of one of they; and Arthur's pleasure at this compliment on his guardian's part be excessive. he read in the parchment volume his name and title, as 'Arthur Pendennis, Esquire, of Fairoaks Lodge, ----shire and Saint Boniface College, Oxbridge; propose by Major Pendennis, and second by Viscount Colchicum,' with a thrill of intense gratification. "you will come in for ballot in about three year, by which time you will have take your degree," the guardian say. Pen long for the three year to be over, and survey the stucco-hall, and vast library, and drawing-room as already his own property. the Major laugh slyly to see the pompous air of the simple young fellow as he strut out of the building. he and Foker drive down in the latter's cab one day to the Grey Friars, and renew acquaintance with some of their old comrade there. the boy come crowd up to the cab as it stand by the Grey Friars gate, where they be enter, and admire the chestnut horse, and the tight and livery and gravity of Stoopid, the tiger. the bell for afternoon-school rang as they be swagger about the play-ground talk to their old crony. the awful doctor pass into school with his grammar in his hand. Foker slunk away uneasily at his presence, but Pen go up blush, and shake the dignitary by the hand. he laugh as he think that well-remember Latin Grammar have box his ear many a time. he be generous, good-natured, and, in a word, perfectly conceited and satisfied with himself.
then they drive to the parental brew-house. Foker's Entire be compose in an enormous pile of building, not far from the Grey Friars, and the name of that well-know firm be gild upon innumerable public-house sign, tenant by its vassal in the neighbourhood; and the venerable junior partner and manager do honour to the young lord of the vat and his friend, and serve they with silver flagon of brown-stout, so strong, that you would have think, not only the young man, but the very horse Mr. Harry Foker drive, be affect by the potency of the drink, for he rush home to the west-end of the town at a rapid pace, which endanger the pie-stall and the woman on the crossing, and bring the cab-step into collision with the post at the street corner, and cause Stoopid to swing fearfully on his board behind.
the Major be quite pleased when Pen be with his young acquaintance; listen to Mr. Foker's artless story with the great interest; give the two boy a fine dinner at a Covent Garden Coffee-house, whence they proceed to the play; but be above all happy when Mr. and Lady Agnes Foker, who happen to be in London, request the pleasure of Major Pendennis and Mr. Arthur Pendennis's company at dinner in Grosvenor Street. "have obtain the entree into Lady Agnes Foker's house," he say to Pen with an affectionate solemnity which befit the importance of the occasion, "it behove you, my dear boy, to keep it. you must mind and never neglect to call in Grosvenor Street when you come to London. I recommend you to read up carefully, in Debrett, the alliance and genealogy of the Earls of Rosherville, and if you can, to make some trifling allusion to the family, something historical, neat, and complimentary, and that sort of thing, which you, who have a poetic fancy, can do pretty well. Mr. Foker himself be a worthy man, though not of high extraction or indeed much education. he always make a point of have some of the family porter serve round after dinner, which you will on no account refuse, and which I shall drink myself, though all beer disagree with I confoundedly." and the heroic martyr do actually sacrifice himself, as he say he would, on the day when the dinner take place, and old Mr. Foker, at the head of his table, make his usual joke about Foker's Entire. we should all of we, I be sure, have like to see the Major's grin, when the worthy old gentleman make his time-honour joke.
Lady Agnes, who, wrap up in Harry, be the fond of mother, and one of the most good-natured though not the wise of woman, receive her son's friend with great cordiality: and astonish Pen by account of the severe course of study which her darling boy be pursue, and which she fear might injure his dear health. Foker the eld burst into a horse-laugh at some of these speech, and the heir of the house wink his eye very knowingly at his friend. and Lady Agnes then go through her son's history from the early time, and recount his miraculous suffering in the measle and hooping-cough, his escape from drown, the shocking tyranny practise upon he at that horrid school, whither Mr. Foker would send he because he have be bring up there himself, and she never would forgive that disagreeable Doctor, no never--Lady Agnes, we say, have prattle away for an hour incessantly about her son, vote the two Messieurs Pendennis most agreeable man; and when pheasant come with the second course, which the Major praise as the very fine bird he ever see, her ladyship say they come from Logwood (as the Major know perfectly well), and hop that they would both pay she a visit there--at Christmas, or when dear Harry be at home for the vacation.
"God bless you, my dear boy," Pendennis say to Arthur, as they be light their candle in Bury Street afterwards to go to bed. "you make that little allusion to Agincourt, where one of the Roshervilles distinguish himself, very neatly and well, although Lady Agnes do not quite understand it: but it be exceedingly well for a beginner--though you oughtnot to blush so, by the way--and I beseech you, my dear Arthur, to remember through life, that with an entree--with a good entree, mind-- it be just as easy for you to have good society as bad, and that it cost a man, when properly introduce, no more trouble or soin to keep a good footing in the good house in London than to dine with a lawyer in Bedford Square. mind this when you be at Oxbridge pursue your study, and for Heaven's sake be very particular in the acquaintance which you make. the premier pa in life be the most important of all--do you write to your mother to-day?--No?--well, do, before you go, and call and ask Mr. Foker for a frank--they like it--good night. God bless you."
Pen write a droll account of his doing in London, and the play, and the visit to the old Friars, and the brewery, and the party at Mr. Foker's, to his dear mother, who be say her prayer at home in the lonely house at Fairoaks, her heart full of love and tenderness unutterable for the boy: and she and Laura read that letter and those which follow, many, many time, and brood over they as woman do. it be the first step in life that Pen be make--ah! what a dangerous journey it be, and how the brave may stumble and the strong fail. brother wayfarer! may you have a kind arm to support yours on the path, and a friendly hand to succour those who fall beside you. may truth guide, mercy forgive at the end, and love accompany always. without that lamp how blind the traveller would be, and how black and cheerless the journey!
so the coach drive up to that ancient and comfortable inn the Trencher, which stand in Main Street, Oxbridge, and Pen with delight and eagerness remark, for the first time, gownsman go about, chapel bell clink (bell in Oxbridge be ring from morning-tide till even-song)--tower and pinnacle rise calm and stately over the gable and antique house-roof of the homely busy city. previous communication have take place between Dr. Portman on Pen's part, and Mr. Buck, Tutor of Boniface, on whose side Pen be enter; and as soon as Major Pendennis have arrange his personal appearance, so that it should make a satisfactory impression upon Pen's tutor, the pair walk down Main Street, and pass the great gate and belfry-tower of Saint George's College, and so come, as they be direct, to Saint Boniface: where again Pen's heart begin to beat as they enter at the wicket of the venerable ivy-mantled gate of the College. it be surmount with an ancient dome almost cover with creeper, and adorn with the effigy of the Saint from whom the House take its name, and many coat-of-arm of its royal and noble benefactor.
the porter point out a queer old tower at the corner of the quadrangle, by which Mr. Buck's room be approach, and the two gentleman walk acrosse the square, the main feature of which be at once and for ever stamp in Pen's mind--the pretty fountain playing in the centre of the fair grass plat; the tall chapel window and buttress rise to the right; the hall with its taper lantern and oriel window; the lodge, from the door of which the Master issue with rustle silk; the line of the surround room pleasantly break by carve chimney, grey turret, and quaint gable--all these Mr. Pen's eye drink in with an eagerness which belong to first impression; and Major Pendennis survey with that calmness which belong to a gentleman who do not care for the picturesque, and whose eye have be somewhat dim by the constant glare of the pavement of Pall Mall.
Saint George's be the great College of the University of Oxbridge, with its four vast quadrangle, and its beautiful hall and garden, and the Georgians, as the man be call wear gown of a peculiar cut, and give themselves no small air of superiority over all other young man. little Saint Boniface be but a petty hermitage in comparison of the huge consecrate pile alongside of which it lie. but consider its size it have always keep an excellent name in the university. its ton be very good: the good family of certain county have time out of mind send up their young man to Saint Boniface: the college living be remarkably good: the fellowship easy; the Boniface man have have more than their fair share of university honour; their boat be third upon the river; their chapel-choir be not inferior to Saint George's itself; and the Boniface ale the good in Oxbridge. in the comfortable old wainscote College-Hall, and round about Roubilliac's statue of Saint Boniface (who stand in an attitude of seraphic benediction over the uncommonly good cheer of the fellow' table) there be portrait of many most eminent Bonifacians. there be the learned Doctor Griddle, who suffer in Henry VIII.'s time, and Archbishop Bush who roast he--there be Lord Chief Justice Hicks-- the Duke of St. David's, K.G., Chancellor of the University and Member of this College--Sprott the Poet, of whose fame the college be justly proud --doctor Blogg, the late master, and friend of Doctor Johnson, who visit he at Saint Boniface--and other lawyer, scholar, and divine, whose portraiture look from the wall, or whose coat-of-arm shine in emerald and ruby, gold and azure, in the tall window of the refectory. the venerable cook of the college be one of the good artist in Oxbridge (his son take the high honour in the other University of Camford), and the wine in the fellow' room have long be fame for its excellence and abundance.
into this certainly not the least snugly sheltered arbour amongst the grove of Academe, Pen now find his way, lean on his uncle's arm, and they speedily reach Mr. Buck's room, and be conduct into the apartment of that courteous gentleman.
he have receive previous information from Dr. Portman regard Pen, with respect to whose family, fortune, and personal merit the honest Doctor have speak with no small enthusiasm. indeed Portman have describe Arthur to the tutor as "a young gentleman of some fortune and landed estate, of one of the most ancient family in the kingdom, and possess such a character and genius as be sure, under the proper guidance, to make he a credit to the college and the university." under such recommendation the tutor be, of course, most cordial to the young freshman and his guardian, invite the latter to dine in hall, where he would have the satisfaction of see his nephew wear his gown and eat his dinner for the first time, and request the pair to take wine at his room after hall, and in consequence of the highly favourable report he have receive of Mr. Arthur Pendennis, say, he should be happy to give he the good set of room to be have in college--a gentleman-pensioner's set, indeed, which be just luckily vacant. so they part until dinner-time, which be very near at hand, and Major Pendennis pronounce Mr. Buck to be uncommonly civil indeed. indeed when a College Magnate take the trouble to be polite, there be no man more splendidly courteous. immerse in their book and exclude from the world by the gravity of their occupation, these reverend man assume a solemn magnificence of compliment in which they rustle and swell as in their grand robe of state. those silk and brocade be not put on for all comer or every day.
when the two gentleman have take leave of the tutor in his study, and have return to Mr. Buck's ante-room, or lecture-room, a very handsome apartment, turkey-carpet, and hang with excellent print and richly frame picture, they find the tutor's servant already in wait there, accompany by a man with a bag full of cap and a number of gown, from which Pen might select a cap and gown for himself, and the servant, no doubt, would get a commission proportionable to the service do by he. Mr. Pen be all in a tremor of pleasure as the bustling tailor try on a gown and pronounce that it be an excellent fit; and then he put the pretty college cap on, in rather a dandified manner and somewhat on one side, as he have see Fiddicombe, the young master at Grey Friars, wear it. and he inspect the entire costume with a great deal of satisfaction in one of the great gilt mirror which ornament Mr. Buck's lecture-room: for some of these college divine be no more above look--glass than a lady be, and look to the set of their gown and cap quite as anxiously as folk do of the lovelier sex. the Major smile as he see the boy dandify himself in the glass: the old gentleman be not displeased with the appearance of the comely lad.
then Davis, the skip or attendant, lead the way, key in hand, across the quadrangle, the Major and Pen follow he, the latter blushing, and please with his new academical habiliment, across the quadrangle to the room which be destine for the freshman; and which be vacate by the retreat of the gentleman-pensioner, Mr. Spicer. the room be very comfortable, with large cross beam, high wainscot, and small window in deep embrasure. Mr. Spicer's furniture be there, and to be sell at a valuation, and Major Pendennis agree on his nephew's behalf to take the available part of it, laughingly however decline (as, indeed, Pen do for his own part) six sporting print, and four group of opera-dancer with gauze drapery, which form the late occupant's pictorial collection.
then they go to hall, where Pen sate down and eat his common with his brother freshman, and the Major take his place at the high-table along with the college dignitary and other father or guardian of youth, who have come up with their son to Oxbridge; and after hall they go to Mr. Buck's to take wine; and after wine to chapel, where the major sate with great gravity in the upper place, have a fine view of the Master in his carve throne or stall under the organ-loft, where that gentleman, the learn Doctor Donne, sate magnificent, with his great prayer-book before he, an image of statuesque piety and rigid devotion. all the young freshman behave with gravity and decorum, but Pen be shock to see that atrocious little Foker, who come in very late, and half a dozen of his comrade in the gentleman-pensioner' seat, giggle and talk as if they have be in so many stall at the Opera. but these circumstance, it must be remember, take place some year back, when William the Fourth be king. young man be much well behave now, and besides, Saint Boniface be rather a fast college.
Pen could hardly sleep at night in his bedroom at the Trencher: so anxious be he to begin his college life, and to get into his own apartment. what do he think about, as he lie tossing and awake? be it about his mother at home; the pious soul whose life be bind up in his? yes, let we hope he think of she a little. be it about Miss Fotheringay, and his eternal passion, which have keep he awake so many night, and create such wretchedness and such longing? he have a trick of blushing, and if you have be in the room, and the candle have not be out, you might have see the youth's countenance redden more than once, as be break out into passionate incoherent exclamation regard that luckless event of his life. his uncle's lesson have not be throw away upon he; the mist of passion have pass from his eye now, and he see she as she be. to think that he, Pendennis, have be enslave by such a woman, and then jilt by she! that he should have stoop so low, to be trample on the mire! that there be a time in his life, and that but a few month back, when he be willing to take Costigan for his father-in-law!
"poor old Smirke!" Pen presently laugh out--"well, Iwill write and try and console the poor old boy. he willnot die of his passion, ha, ha!" the Major, have he be awake, might have hear a score of such ejaculation utter by Pen as he lie awake and restless through the first night of his residence at Oxbridge.
it would, perhaps, have be well for a youth, the battle of whose life be go to begin on the morrow, to have pass the eve in a fferent sort of vigil: but the world have get hold of Pen in the shape of his selfish old mentor: and those who have any interest in his character must have perceive ere now, that this lad be very weak as well as very impetuous, very vain as well as very frank, and if of a generous disposition, not a little selfish in the midst of his profuseness, and also rather fickle, as all eager pursuer of self-gratification be.
the six month' passion have age he very considerably. there be an immense gulf between Pen the victim of love, and Pen the innocent boy of eighteen, sigh after it: and so Arthur Pendennis have all the experience and superiority, besides that command which afterwards conceit and imperiousness of disposition give he over the young man with whom he now begin to live.
he and his uncle pass the morning with great satisfaction in make purchase for the well comfort of the apartment which the lad be about to occupy. Mr. Spicer's china and glass be in a dreadfully dismantle condition, his lamp smash, and his bookcase by no mean so spacious as those shelf which would be requisite to receive the content of the box which be lie in the hall at Fairoaks, and which be address to Arthur in the hand of poor Helen.
the box arrive in a few day, that his mother have pack with so much care. Pen be touch as he read the superscription in the dear well-know hand, and he arrange in their proper place all the book, his old friend, and all the linen and table-cloth which Helen have select from the family stock, and all the jam-pot which little Laura have bind in straw, and the hundred simple gift of home. Pen have another Alma Mater now. but it be not all child who take to she kindly.
CHAPTER XIX
Pendennis of Boniface
our friend Pen be not sorry when his mentor take leave of the young gentleman on the second day after the arrival of the pair in Oxbridge, and we may be sure that the Major on his part be very glad to have discharge his duty, and to have the duty over. More than three month of precious time have that martyr of a Major give up to his nephew--be ever selfish man call upon to make a great sacrifice? do you know many man or major who would do as much? a man will lay down his head, or peril his life for his honour, but let we be shy how we ask he to give up his ease or his heart's desire. very few of we can bear that trial. say, worthy reader, if thou hast peradventure a beard, wouldst thou do as much? I will not say that a woman will not. they be use to it: we take care to accustom they to sacrifice but, my good sir, the amount of self-denial which you have probably exert through life, when put down to your account elsewhere, will not probably swell the balance on the credit side much. well, well, there be no use in speaking of such ugly matter, and you be too polite to use a vulgar to quoque. but I wish to state once for all that I greatly admire the Major for his conduct during the past quarter, and think that he have quite a right to be pleased at get a holiday. Foker and Pen see he off in the coach, and the former young gentleman give particular order to the coachman to take care of that gentleman inside. it please the eld Pendennis to have his nephew in the company of a young fellow who would introduce he to the good set of the university. the Major rush off to London and thence to Cheltenham, from which watering-place he descend upon some neighbour great house, whereof the family be not go abroad, and where good shooting and company be to be have.
a quarter of the space which custom have award to work style the Serial Nature, have be assign to the account of one passage in Pen's career, and it be manifest that the whole of his adventure cannot be treat at a similar length, unless some descendant of the chronicler of Pen's history should take up the pen at his decease, and continue the narrative for the successor of the present generation of reader. we be not about to go through the young fellow's academical career with, by any mean, a similar minuteness. alas, the life of such boy do not bear tell altogether. I wish it do. I ask you, do yours? as long as what we call our honour be clear, I suppose your mind be pretty easy. woman be pure, but not man. woman be unselfish, but not man. and I would not wish to say of poor Arthur Pendennis that he be bad than his neighbour, only that his neighbour be bad for the most part. let we have the candour to own as much at least. can you point out ten spotless man of your acquaintance? mine be pretty large, but I cannot find ten saint in the list.
during the first term of Mr. Pen's academical life, he attend classical and mathematical lecture with tolerable assiduity; but discover before very long time that he have little taste or genius for the pursuing of the exact science, and be perhaps rather annoyed that one or two very vulgar young man, who do not even use strap to their trouser so as to cover the abominably thick and coarse shoe and stocking which they wear, beat he completely in the lecture-room, he give up his attendance at that course, and announce to his fond parent that he propose to devote himself exclusively to the cultivation of greek and Roman Literature. Mrs. Pendennis be, for her part, quite satisfied that her darling boy should pursue that branch of learn for which he have the great inclination; and only besought he not to ruin his health by too much study, for she have hear the most melancholy story of young student who, by over-fatigue, have bring on brain-fever and perish untimely in the midst of their university career. and Pen's health, which be always delicate, be to be regard, as she justly say, beyond all consideration or vain honour. Pen, although not aware of any lurking disease which be likely to end his life, yet kindly promise his mamma not to sit up read too late of night, and stick to his word in this respect with a great deal more tenacity of resolution than he exhibit upon some other occasion, when perhaps he be a little remiss.
presently he begin too to find that he learn little good in the classical lecture. his fellow-student there be too dull, as in mathematic they be too learn for he. Mr. Buck, the tutor, be no well a scholar than many a fifth-form boy at Grey Friars; might have some stupid humdrum notion about the metre and grammatical construction of a passage of Aeschylus or Aristophanes, but have no more notion of the poetry than Mrs. Binge, his bed-maker; and Pen grow weary of hear the dull student and tutor blunder through a few line of a play, which he could read in a tenth part of the time which they give to it. after all, private reading, as he begin to perceive, be the only study which be really profitable to a man; and he announce to his mamma that he should read by himself a great deal more, and in public a great deal less. that excellent woman know no more about Homer than she do about Algebra, but she be quite content with Pen's arrangement regard his course of study, and feel perfectly confident that her dear boy would get the place which he merit.
Pen do not come home until after Christmas, a little to the fond mother's disappointment, and Laura's, who be long for he to make a fine snow fortification, such as he have make three winter before. but he be invite to Logwood, Lady Agnes Foker's, where there be private theatrical, and a gay Christmas party of very fine folk, some of they whom Major Pendennis would on no account have his nephew neglect. however, he stay at home for the last three week of the vacation, and Laura have the opportunity of remark what a quantity of fine new clothe he bring with he, and his mother admire his improved appearance and manly and decide tone.
he do not come home at Easter; but when he arrive for the long vacation, he bring more smart clothe; appear in the morning in wonderful shooting jacket, with remarkable button; and in the evening in gorgeous velvet waistcoat, with richly-embroider cravat, and curious linen. and as she pry about his room, she see, oh, such a beautiful dressing-case, with silver mounting, and a quantity of lovely ring and jewellery. and he have a new french watch and gold chain, in place of the big old chronometer, with its bunch of jingle seal, which have hang from the fob of John Pendennis, and by the second-hand of which the defunct doctor have feel many a patient's pulse in his time. it be but a few month back Pen have long for this watch, which he think the most splendid and august timepiece in the world; and just before he go to college, Helen have take it out of her trinket-box (where it have remain unwound since the death of her husband) and give it to Pen with a solemn and appropriate little speech respect his father's virtue and the proper use of time. this portly and valuable chronometer Pen now pronounce to be out of date, and, indeed, make some comparison between it and a warming-pan, which Laura think disrespectful, and he leave the watch in a drawer, in the company of soiled primrose glove, cravat which have go out of favour, and of that other school watch which have once before be mention in this history. our old friend, Rebecca, Pen pronounce to be no long up to his weight, and swap she away for another and more powerful horse, for which he have to pay rather a heavy figure. Mr. Pendennis give the boy the money for the new horse; and Laura cry when Rebecca be fetch away.
also Pen bring a large box of cigar brand Colorados, Afrancesados, Telescopios, Fudson Oxford Street, or by some such strange title, and begin to consume these not only about the stable and green-house, where they be very good for Helen's plant, but in his own study, of which practice his mother do not at first approve. but he be at work upon a prize-poem, he say, and could not compose without his cigar, and quote the late lamented it Lord Byron's line in favour of the custom of smoking. as he be smoke to such good purpose, his mother could not of course refuse permission: in fact, the good soul come into the room one day in the midst of Pen's labour (he be consult a novel which have recently appear, for the cultivation of the light literature of his own country as well as of foreign nation become every student)--helen, we say, come into the room and find Pen on the sofa at this work, rather than disturb he go for a light-box and his cigar-case to his bedroom which be adjacent, and actually put the cigar into his mouth and light the match at which he kindle it. Pen laugh, and kiss his mother's hand as it hang fondly over the back of the sofa. "dear old mother," he say, "if I be to tell you to burn the house down, I think you would do it." and it be very likely that Mr. Pen be right, and that the foolish woman would have do almost as much for he as he say.
besides the work of english "light literature" which this diligent student devour, he bring down box of the light literature of the neighbouring country of France: into the leaf of which when Helen dip, she read such thing as cause she to open her eye with wonder. but Pen show she that it be not he who make the book, though it be absolutely necessary that he should keep up his French by an acquaintance with the most celebrated writer of the day, and that it be as clearly his duty to read the eminent Paul de Kock, as to study Swift or Moliere. and Mrs. Pendennis yield with a sigh of perplexity. but Miss Laura be warn off the book, both by his anxious mother, and that rigid moralist Mr. Arthur Pendennis himself, who, however he might be call upon to study every branch of literature in order to form his mind and to perfect his style, would by no mean prescribe such a course of reading to a young lady whose business in life be very different.
in the course of this long vacation Mr. Pen drink up the bin of claret which his father have lay in, and of which we have hear the son remark that there be not a headache in a hogshead; and this wine be exhaust, he write for a further supply to "his wine merchant," Messrs. Binney and Latham of Mark Lane, London: from whom, indeed, old Doctor Portman have recommend Pen to get a supply of port and sherry on go to college. "you will have, no doubt, to entertain your young friend at Boniface with wine-party," the honest rector have remark to the lad. "they use to be customary at college in my time, and I would advise you to employ an honest and respectable house in London for your small stock of wine, rather than to have recourse to the Oxbridge tradesman, whose liquor, if I remember rightly, be both deleterious in quality and exorbitant in price." and the obedient young gentleman take the Doctor's advice, and patronise Messrs. Binney and Latham at the rector's suggestion.
so when he write order for a stock of wine to be send down to the cellar at Fairoaks, he hint that Messrs. B. and L. might send in his university account for wine at the same time with the Fairoaks bill. the poor widow be frighten at the amount. but Pen laugh at her old-fashioned view, say that the bill be moderate, that everybody drink claret and champagne now, and, finally, the widow pay, feel dimly that the expense of her household be increase considerably, and that her narrow income would scarce suffice to meet they. but they be only occasional. Pen merely come home for a few week at the vacation. Laura and she might pinch when he be go. in the brief time he be with they, ought they not to make he happy?
Arthur's own allowance be liberal all this time; indeed, much more so than those of the son of far more wealthy man. year before, the thrifty and affectionate John Pendennis, whose darling project it have ever be to give his son a university education, and those advantage of which his own father's extravagance have deprive he, have begin lay by a store of money which he call Arthur's Education Fund. year after year in his book his executor find entry of sum vest as A. E. F., and during the period subsequent to her husband's decease, and before Pen's entry at college, the widow have add sundry sum to this fund, so that when Arthur go up to Oxbridge it reach no inconsiderable amount. let he be liberally allowance, be Major Pendennis's maxim. let he make his first entree into the world as a gentleman, and take his place with man of good rank and station: after give it to he, it will be his own duty to hold it. there be no such bad policy as stint a boy--or put he on a low allowance than his fellow. Arthur will have to face the world and fight for himself presently. meanwhile we shall have procure for he good friend, gentlemanly habit, and have he well back and well train against the time when the real struggle come. and these liberal opinion the Major probably advance both because they be just, and because he be not deal with his own money.
thus young Pen, the only son of an estated country gentleman, with a good allowance, and a gentlemanlike bearing and person, look to be a lad of much more consequence than he be really; and be hold by the Oxbridge authority, tradesman, and undergraduate, as quite a young buck and member of the aristocracy. his manner be frank, brave, and perhaps a little impertinent, as become a high-spirited youth. he be perfectly generous and free-handed with his money, which seem pretty plentiful. he love joviality, and have a good voice for a song. boat-racing have not rise in Pen's time to the fureur which, as we be give to understand, it have since attain in the university; and rid and tandem-driving be the fashion of the ingenuous youth. Pen ride well to hound, appear in pink, as become a young buck, and, not particularly extravagant in equestrian or any other amusement, yet manage to run up a fine bill at Nile's, the livery-stable keeper, and in a number of other quarter. in fact, this lucky young gentleman have almost every taste to a considerable degree. he be very fond of book of all sort: Doctor Portman have teach he to like rare edition, and his own taste lead he to like beautiful binding. it be marvellous what tall copy, and gilding, and marbling, and blind-tooling, the bookseller and binder put upon Pen's bookshelf. he have a very fair taste in matter of art, and a keen relish for print of a high school--none of your french Opera Dancers, or tawdry race Prints, such as have delight the simple eye of Mr. Spicer, his predecessor--but your Stranges, and Rembrandt etching, and Wilkies before the letter, with which his apartment be furnish presently in the most perfect good taste, as be allow in the university, where this young fellow get no small reputation. we have mention that he exhibit a certain partiality for ring, jewellery, and fine raiment of all sort; and it must be own that Mr. Pen, during his time at the university, be rather a dressy man, and love to array himself in splendour. he and his polite friend would dress themselves out with as much care in order to go and dine at each other's room, as other folk would who be go to enslave a mistress. they say he use to wear ring over his kid glove, which he always deny; but what folly will not youth perpetrate with its own admirable gravity and simplicity? that he take perfume bath be a truth; and he use to say that he take they after meet certain man of a very low set in hall.
in Pen's second year, when Miss Fotheringay make her chief hit in London, and score of print be publish of she, Pen have one of these hang in his bedroom, and confide to the man of his set how awfully, how wildly, how madly, how passionately, he have love that woman. he show they in confidence the verse that he have write to she, and his brow would darken, his eye roll, his chest heave with emotion as he recall that fatal period of his life, and describe the woe and agony which he have suffer. the verse be copy out, hand about, sneer at, admire, pass from coterie to coterie. there be few thing which elevate a lad in the estimation of his brother boy, more than to have a character for a great and romantic passion. perhaps there be something noble in it at all time--among very young man it be consider heroic--Pen be pronounce a tremendous fellow. they say he have almost commit suicide: that he have fight a duel with a baronet about she. freshman point he out to each other. as at the promenade time at two o'clock he swagger out of college, surround by his crony, he be famous to behold. he be elaborately attire. he would ogle the lady who come to lionise the university, and pass before he on the arm of happy gownsman, and give his opinion upon their personal charm, or their toilette, with the gravity of a critic whose experience entitle he to speak with authority. man use to say that they have be walk with Pendennis, and be as pleased to be see in his company as some of we would be if we walk with a duke down Pall Mall. he and the proctor cap each other as they meet, as if they be rival power, and the man hardly know which be the great.
in fact, in the course of his second year, Arthur Pendennis have become one of the man of fashion in the university. it be curious to watch that facile admiration, and simple fidelity of youth. they hang round a leader; and wonder at he, and love he, and imitate he. no generous boy ever live, I suppose, that have not have some wonderment of admiration for another boy; and Monsieur Pen at Oxbridge have his school, his faithful band of friend and his rival. when the young man hear at the haberdasher' shop that Mr. Pendennis, of Boniface, have just order a crimson satin-cravat, you would see a couple of dozen crimson satin cravat in Main Street in the course of the week--and Simon, the Jeweller, be know to sell no less than two gross of Pendennis pin, from a pattern which the young gentleman have select in his shop.
now if any person with an arithmetical turn of mind will take the trouble to calculate what a sum of money it would cost a young man to indulge freely in all the above propensity which we have say Mr. Pen possess, it will be see that a young fellow, with such liberal taste and amusement, must need in the course of two or three year spend or owe a very handsome sum of money. we have say our friend Pen have not a calculate turn. no one propensity of his be outrageously extravagant; and it be certain that Paddington's tailor's account; Guttlebury's cook's bill for dinner; Dillon Tandy's bill with Finn, the print seller, for Raphael-Morgheus and Landseer proof, and Wormall's dealing with Parkton, the great bookseller, for Aldine edition, black-letter folio, and richly illuminate Missals of the XVI. Century; and Snaffle's or Foker's score with Nile the horsedealer, be, each and all of they, incomparably great than any little bill which Mr. Pen might run up with the above-mention tradesman. but Pendennis of Boniface have the advantage over all these young gentleman, his friend and associate, of a universality of taste: and whereas young Lord Paddington do not care twopence for the most beautiful print, or to look into any gilt frame that have not a mirror within it; and Guttlebury do not mind in the least how he be dress, and have an aversion for horse exercise, nay a terror of it; and Snaffle never read any print work but the 'Racing Calendar' or 'Bell's life,' or care for any manuscript except his greasy little scrawl of a bet-book:--our catholic-minded young friend occupy himself in every one of the branch of science or pleasure above-mention, and distinguish himself tolerably in each.
hence young Pen get a prodigious reputation in the university, and be hail as a sort of Crichton; and as for the english verse prize, in competition for which we have see he busily engage at Fairoaks, Jones of Jesus carry it that year certainly, but the undergraduate think Pen's a much fine poem, and he have his verse print at his own expense, and distribute in gilt morocco cover amongst his acquaintance. I find a copy of it lately in a dusty corner of Mr. Pen's bookcase, and have it before I this minute, bind up in a collection of old Oxbridge tract, university statute, prize-poem by successful and unsuccessful candidate, declamation recite in the college chapel, speech deliver at the Union Debating Society, and inscribe by Arthur with his name and college, Pendennis--Boniface; or present to he by his affectionate friend Thompson or Jackson, the author. how strange the epigraph look in those half-boyish hand, and what a thrill the sight of the document give one after the lapse of a few lustre! how fate, since that time, have remove some, estranged other, deal awfully with all! many a hand be cold that write those kindly memorial, and that we press in the confident and generous grasp of youthful friendship. what passion our friendship be in those old day, how artless and void of doubt! how the arm you be never tired of have link in yours under the fair college avenue or by the river side, where it wash Magdalen Gardens, or Christ Church Meadows, or wind by Trinity and King's, be withdraw of necessity, when you enter presently the world, and each part to push and struggle for himself through the great mob on the way through life! be we the same man now that write those inscription--that read those poem? that deliver or hear those essay and speech so simple, so pompous, so ludicrously solemn; parody so artlessly from book, and speak with smug chubby face, and such an admirable aping of wisdom and gravity? here be the book before I: it be scarcely fifteen year old. here be Jack moan with despair and byronic misanthropy, whose career at the university be one of unmixed milk-punch. here be Tom's daring Essay in defence of suicide and of republicanism in general, apropos of the death of Roland and the Girondins--Tom's, who wear the starchest tie in all the diocese, and would go to Smithfield rather than eat a beefsteak on a Friday in Lent. here be Bob of the ---- Circuit, who have make a fortune in Railroad Committees, and whose dinner be so good --bellowing out with Tancred and Godfrey, "on to the breach, ye soldier of the cross, Scale the red wall and swim the choke foss. ye dauntless archer, twang your cross-bows well; on, bill and battle-axe and mangonel! ply battering-ram and hurtling catapult, Jerusalem be ours--id Deus vult." after which come a mellifluous description of the garden of Sharon and the maid of Salem, and a prophecy that rose shall deck the entire country of Syria, and a speedy reign of peace be establish--all in undeniably decasyllabic line, and the queer aping of sense and sentiment and poetry. and there be Essays and Poems along with these grave parody, and boyish exercise (which be at once so frank and false and mirthful, yet, somehow, so mournful) by youthful hand, that shall never write more. fate have interpose darkly, and the young voice be silent, and the eager brain have cease to work. this one have genius and a great descent, and seem to be destine for honour which now be of little worth to he: that have virtue, learning, genius--every faculty and endowment which might secure love, admiration, and worldly fame: an obscure and solitary churchyard contain the grave of many fond hope, and the pathetic stone which bid they farewell--I see the sun shin on it in the fall of last year, and hear the sweet village choir raise anthem round about. what boot whether it be Westminster or a little country spire which cover your ash, or if, a few day soon or later, the world forget you?
amidst these friend, then, and a host more, Pen pass more than two brilliant and happy year of his life. he have his fill of pleasure and popularity. no dinner- or supper-party be complete without he; and Pen's jovial wit, and Pen's song, and dash courage and frank and manly bearing, charm all the undergraduate, and even disarm the tutor who cry out at his idleness, and murmur about his extravagant way of life. though he become the favourite and leader of young man who be much his superior in wealth and station, he be much too generous to endeavour to propitiate they by any meanness or cringe on his own part, and would not neglect the humble man of his acquaintance in order to curry favour with the rich young grandee in the university. his name be still remember at the Union Debating Club, as one of the brilliant orator of his day. by the way, from have be an ardent Tory in his freshman's year, his principle take a sudden turn afterwards, and he become a liberal of the most violent order. he avow himself a Dantonist, and assert that Louis the Sixteenth be serve right. and as for Charles the First, he vow that he would chop off that monarch's head with his own right hand be he then in the room at the Union Debating Club, and have Cromwell no other executioner for the traitor. he and Lord Magnus Charters, the Marquis of Runnymede's son, before-mention, be the most truculent republican of their day.
there be reputation of this sort make, quite independent of the collegiate hierarchy, in the republic of gownsman. a man may be famous in the honour-list and entirely unknown to the undergraduate: who elect king and chieftain of their own, whom they admire and obey, as negro-gang have private black sovereign in their own body, to whom they pay an occult obedience, besides that which they publicly profess for their owner and driver. among the young one Pen become famous and popular: not that he do much, but there be a general determination that he could do a great deal if he choose. "ah, if Pendennis of Boniface would but try," the man say, "he might do anything." he be back for the Greek Ode win by Smith of Trinity; everybody be sure he would have the latin hexameter prize which Brown of St. John's, however, carry off, and in this way one university honour after another be lose by he, until, after two or three failure, Mr. Pen cease to compete. but he get a declamation prize in his own college, and bring home to his mother and Laura at Fairoaks a set of prize-book begilt with the college arm, and so big, well-bind, and magnificent, that these lady think there have be no such prize ever give in a college before as this of Pen's, and that he have win the very large honour which Oxbridge be capable of award.
as vacation after vacation and term after term pass away without the desire news that Pen have sate for any scholarship or win any honour, Doctor Portman grow mightily gloomy in his behaviour towards Arthur, and adopt a sulky grandeur of deportment towards he, which the lad return by a similar haughtiness. one vacation he do not call upon the Doctor at all, much to his mother's annoyance, who think that it be a privilege to enter the Rectory-house at Clavering, and listen to Dr. Portman's antique joke and story, though ever so often repeat, with unfaile veneration. "I cannot stand the Doctor's patronising air", Pen say. "hebe too kind to I, a great deal fatherly. I have see in the world well man than he, and be not go to bore myself by listen to his dull old story and drink his stupid old port wine." the tacit feud between Pen and the doctor make the widow nervous, so that she too avoid Portman, and be afraid to go to the Rectory when Arthur be at home.
one Sunday in the last long vacation, the wretched boy push his rebellious spirit so far as not to go to church, and he be see at the gate of the Clavering Arms smoke a cigar, in the face of the congregation as it issue from St. Mary's. there be an awful sensation in the village society, Portman prophesy Pen's ruin after that, and groan in spirit over the rebellious young prodigal.
so do Helen tremble in her heart, and little Laura--Laura have grow to be a fine young stripling by this time, graceful and fair, cling round Helen and worship she, with a passionate affection. both of these woman feel that their boy be change. he be no long the artless Pen of old day, so brave, so artless, so impetuous, and tender. his face look careworn and haggard, his voice have a deep sound, and tone more sarcastic. Care seem to be pursue he; but he only laugh when his mother question he, and parry her anxious query with some scornful jest. nor do he spend much of his vacation at home; he go on visit to one great friend or another, and scar the quiet pair at Fairoaks by story of great house whither he have be invite; and by talk of lord without their title.
Honest Harry Foker, who have be the mean of introduce Arthur Pendennis to that set of young man at the university, from whose society and connexion Arthur's uncle expect that the lad would get so much benefit; who have call for Arthur's first song at his first supper-party; and who have present he at the Barmecide Club, where none but the very good man of Oxbridge be admit (it consist in Pen's time of six nobleman, eight gentleman-pensioner, and twelve of the most select commoner of the university), soon find himself leave far behind by the young freshman in the fashionable world of Oxbridge, and be a generous and worthy fellow, without a spark of envy in his composition, be exceedingly pleased at the success of his young protege, and admire Pen quite as much as any of the other youth do. I be he who follow Pen now, and quote his saying; learn his song, and retail they at minor supper-party, and be never weary of hear they from the gifted young poet's own mouth--for a good deal of the time which Mr. Pen might have employ much more advantageously in the pursuit of the regular scholastic study, be give up to the composition of secular ballad, which he sing about at party accord to university willnot.
it have be as well for Arthur if the honest Foker have remain for some time at college, for, with all his vivacity, he be a prudent young man, and often curb Pen's propensity to extravagance: but Foker's collegiate career do not last very long after Arthur's entrance at Boniface. repeat difference with the university authority cause Mr. Foker to quit Oxbridge in an untimely manner. he would persist in attend race on the neighbouring Hungerford Heath, in spite of the injunction of his academic superior. he never could be get to frequent the chapel of the college with that regularity of piety which Alma Mater demand from her child; tandem, which be abomination in the eye of the head and tutor, be Foker's great delight, and so reckless be his driving and frequent the accident and upset out of his drag, that Pen call take a drive with he take the "diversion of Purley;" finally, have a dinner-party at his room to entertain some friend from London, nothing would satisfy Mr. Foker but paint Mr. Buck's door vermilion, in which freak he be catch by the proctor; and although young Black Strap, the celebrate negro fighter, who be one of Mr. Foker's distinguished guest, and be hold the can of paint while the young artist operate on the door, knock down two of the proctor's attendant and perform prodigy of valour, yet these feat rather injure than serve Foker, whom the proctor know very well and who be take with the brush in his hand, and who be summarily convene and send down from the university.
the tutor write a very kind and feel letter to Lady Agnes on the subject, state that everybody be fond of the youth; that he never mean harm to any mortal creature; that he for his own part would have be delighted to pardon the harmless little boyish frolic, have not its unhappy publicity render it impossible to look the freak over, and breathe the most fervent wish for the young fellow's welfare--wish no doubt sincere, for Foker, as we know, come of a noble family on his mother's side, and on the other be heir to a great number of thousand pound a year.
"it donot matter," say Foker, talk over the matter with pen,--"a little soon or a little later, what be the odd? I should have be pluck for my little-go again, I know I should--that Latin I cannot screw into my head, and my mamma's anguish would have break out next term. the Governor will blow like an old grampus, I know he will,--well, we must stop till he get his wind again. I shall probably go abroad and improve my mind with foreign travel. yes, parly-voo's the ticket. It'ly, and that sort of thing. Iwill go to Paris and learn to dance and complete my education. but itbe not I Ibe anxious about, Pen. as long as people drink beer I donot care,--it's about you Ibe doubtful, my boy. yoube go too fast, and cannot keep up the pace, I tell you. itbe not the fifty you owe me,--pay it or not when you like,--but itbe the every-day pace, and I tell you it will kill you. yoube livin' as if there be no end to the money in the stockin' at home. you oughtnot to give dinner, you ought to eat them. fellow be glad to have you. you oughtnot to owe horse bill, you ought to ride other chap' nag. you know no more about bet than I do about Algebra: the chap will win your money as sure as you sport it. hang I if you be not try everything. I see you sit down to ecarte last week at Trumpington's, and take your turn with the bone after Ringwood's supper. theywill beat you at it, Pen, my boy, even if they play on the square, which. I donot say they donot, nor which I donot say they do, mind. but I willnot play with them. yoube no match for them. you benot up to their weight. itbe like little Black Strap stand up to Tom Spring,--the Blackbe a pretty fighter but, Law bless you, his arm benot long enough to touch tom,--and I tell you, yoube go it with feller beyond your weight. look here--if youwill promise I never to bet nor touch a box nor a card, Iwill let you off the two pony."
but Pen, laughingly, say, "that though it benot convenient to he to pay the two pony at that moment, he by no mean wish to be let off any just debt he owe;" and he and Foker part, not without many dark foreboding on the latter's part with regard to his friend, who Harry think be travel speedily on the road to ruin.
"one must do at Rome as Rome do," Pen say, in a dandified manner, jingle some sovereign in his waistcoat-pocket. "a little quiet play at ecarte cannot hurt a man who play pretty well--I come away fourteen sovereign rich from Ringwood's supper, and, gad! I want the money." --and he walk off, after have take leave of poor Foker, who go away without any beat of drum, or offer to drive the coach out of Oxbridge, to superintend a little dinner which he be go to give at his own room in Boniface, about which dinner, the cook of the college, who have a great respect for Mr. Pendennis, always take especial pain for his young favourite.
CHAPTER XX
Rake's Progress
some short time before Mr. Foker's departure from Oxbridge, there have come up to Boniface a gentleman who have once, as it turn out, belong to the other University of Camford, which he have quit on account of some difference with the tutor and authority there. this gentleman, whose name be Horace Bloundell, be of the ancient Suffolk family of Bloundell-Bloundell, of Bloundell-Bloundell Hall, Bloundell-Bloundellshire, as the young wag use to call it; and no doubt it be on account of his descent, and because Dr. Donne, the Master of Boniface, be a Suffolk man, and relate perhaps to the family, that Mr. Horace Bloundell be take in at Boniface, after St. George's and one or two other Colleges have refuse to receive he. there be a living in the family, which it be important for Mr. Bloundell to hold; and, be in a dragoon regiment at the time when his third brother, for whom the living be originally intend, sicken and die, Mr. Bloundell determine upon quit crimson pantaloon and sable shakos, for the black coat and white neckcloth of the english divine. the misfortune which occur at Camford, occasion some slight disturbance to Mr. Bloundell's plan; but although defeat upon one occasion, the resolute ex-dragoon be not dismayed, and set to work to win a victory elsewhere.
in Pen's second year Major Pendennis pay a brief visit to his nephew, and be introduce to several of Pen's university friend--the gentle and polite Lord Plinlimmon, the gallant and open-hearted Magnus Charters, the sly and witty Harland; the intrepid Ringwood, who be call Rupert in the Union Debating Club, from his opinion and the bravery of his blunder; Broadbent, style Barebones Broadbent from the republican nature of his opinion (he be of a dissent family from Bristol and a perfect boanerge of debate); Mr. Bloundell-Bloundell finally, who have at once take his place among the select of the university.
Major Pendennis, though he do not understand Harland's greek quotation, or quite appreciate Broadbent's thick shoe and dingy hand, be nevertheless delighted with the company assemble round his nephew, and highly approve of all the young man with the exception of that one who give himself the great air in the society, and affect most to have the manner of a man of the world.
as he and Pen sate at breakfast on the morning after the party in the room of the latter, the Major give his opinion regard the young man, with whom he be in the great good-humour. he have regale they with some of his story, which, though not quite so fresh in London (where people have a diseased appetite for novelty in the way of anecdote), be entirely new at Oxbridge, and the lad hear they with that honest sympathy, that eager pleasure, that boisterous laughter, or that profound respect, so rare in the metropolis, and which must be so delightful to the profess raconteur. only once or twice during the telling of the anecdote Mr. Bloundell's face wear a look of scorn, or betray by its expression that he be acquaint with the tale narrate. once he have the audacity to question the accuracy of one of the particular of a tale as give by Major Pendennis, and give his own version of the anecdote, about which he know he be right, for he hear it openly talk of at the Club by so-and-so and t'other who be present at the business. the youngster present look up with wonder at their associate, who dare to interrupt the Major--few of they could appreciate that melancholy grace and politeness with which Major Pendennis at once accede to Mr. Bloundell's version of the story, and thank he for correct his own error. they star on the next occasion of meeting, when Bloundell speak in contemptuous term of old Pen; say everybody know old Pen, regular old trencherman at Gaunt House, notorious old bore, regular old fogy.
Major Pendennis on his side like Mr. Bloundell not a whit. these sympathy be pretty sure to be mutual amongst man and woman, and if, for my part, some kind friend tell I that such and such a man have be abuse I, I be almost sure, on my own side, that I have a misliking to such and such a man. we like or dislike each other, as folk like or dislike the odour of certain flower, or the taste of certain dish or wine, or certain book. we cannot tell why--but as a general rule, all the reason in the world will not make we love Dr. Fell, and as sure as we dislike he, we may be sure that he dislike we.
so the Major say, "Pen, my boy, your dinner go off a merveille; you do the honour very nicely--you carve well--I be glad you learn to carve--it be do on the sideboard now in most good house, but be still an important point, and may aid you in middle-life--young Lord Plinlimmon be a very amiable young man, quite the image of his dear mother (whom I know as Lady Aquila Brownbill); and Lord Magnus's republicanism will wear off--it sit prettily enough on a young patrician in early life, though nothing be so loathsome among person of our rank--Mr. Broadbent seem to have much eloquence and considerable read your friend Foker be always delightful: but your acquaintance, Mr. Bloundell, strike I as in all respect a most ineligible young man."
"bless my soul, sir, Bloundell-Bloundell!" cry Pen, laughing; "why, sir, hebe the most popular man of the university. we elect he of the Barmecides the first week he come up--have a special meeting on purpose-- hebe of an excellent family--Suffolk Bloundells, descend from Richard's Blondel, bear a harp in chief--and motto O Mong Roy."
"a man may have a very good coat-of-arm, and be a tiger, my boy," the Major say, chip his egg; "that man be a tiger, mark my word--a low man. I will lay a wager that he leave his regiment, which be a good one (for a more respectable man than my friend Lord Martingale never sate in a saddle), in bad odour. there be the unmistakable look of slang and bad habit about this Mr. Bloundell. he frequent low gambling-house and billiard-hell, sir--he haunt third-rate club--I know he do. I know by his style. I never be mistaken in my man yet. do you remark the quantity of ring and jewellery he wear? that person have Scamp write on his countenance, if any man ever have. mark my word and avoid he. let we turn the conversation. the dinner be a leetle too fine, but I donot object to your make a few extra frais when you receive friend. of course, you donot do it often, and only those whom it be your interest to feter. the cutlet be excellent, and the souffle uncommonly light and good. the third bottle of champagne be not necessary; but you have a good income, and as long as you keep within it, I shall not quarrel with you, my dear boy."
Poor Pen! the worthy uncle little know how often those dinner take place, while the reckless young Amphitryon delight to show his hospitality and skill in gourmandise. there be no art than that (so long to learn, so difficult to acquire, so impossible and beyond the mean of many unhappy people!) about which boy be more anxious to have an air of knowingness. a taste and knowledge of wine and cookery appear to they to be the sign of an accomplished roue and manly gentleman. I like to see they wink at a glass of claret, as if they have an intimate acquaintance with it, and discuss a salmi--poor boy--it be only when they grow old that they know they know nothing of the science, when perhaps their conscience whisper they that the science be in itself little worth, and that a leg of mutton and content be as good as the dinner of pontiff. but little Pen, in his character of Admirable Crichton, think it necessary to be a great judge and practitioner of dinner; we have just say how the college cook respect he, and shall soon have to deplore that that worthy man so blindly trust our Pen. in the third year of the lad's residence at Oxbridge, his staircase be by no mean encumber with dish-cover and dessert, and waiter carry in dish, and skip open iced champagne; crowd of different sort of attendant, with face sulky or piteous, hang about the outer oak, and assail the unfortunate lad as he issue out of his den.
nor do his guardian's advice take any effect, or induce Mr. Pen to avoid the society of the disreputable Mr. Bloundell. what young man like in their companion be, what have get Pen a great part of his own repute and popularity, a real or suppose knowledge of life. a man who have see the world, or can speak of it with a knowing air--a roue, or Lovelace, who have his adventure to relate, be sure of an admire audience among boy. it be hard to confess, but so it be. we respect that sort of prowess. from our school-day we have be teach to admire it. be there five in the hundred, out of the hundred and hundred of english school-boy, bring up at our great school and college, that must not own at one time of their life to have read and like Don Juan? awful propagation of evil!--the idea of it should make the man tremble who hold the pen, lest untruth, or impurity, or unjust anger, or unjust praise escape it.
one such diseased creature as this be enough to infect a whole colony, and the tutor of Boniface begin to find the moral tone of their college lower and their young man grow unruly, and almost ungentleman-like, soon after Mr. Bloundell's arrival at Oxbridge. the young magnate of the neighbour great College of St. George's, who regard Pen, and in whose society he live, be not take in by Bloundell's flashy grace, and rakish air of fashion. broadbent call he Captain Macheath, and say he would live to be hang. Foker, during his brief stay at the university with Macheath, with characteristic caution decline to say anything in the Captain's disfavour, but hint to Pen that he have well have he for a partner at whist than play against he, and well back he at ecarte than bet on the other side. "you see, he play well than you do, Pen," be the astute young gentleman's remark: "he play uncommon well, the Captain does;--and Pen, I wouldnot take the odd too freely from he, if I be you. I donot think hebe too flush of money, the Captain benot." but beyond these dark suggestion and generality, the cautious Foker could not be get to speak.
not that his advice would have have more weight with a headstrong young man, than advice commonly have with a lad who be determined on pursue his own way. Pen's appetite for pleasure be insatiable, and he rush at it wherever it present itself, with an eagerness which bespoke his fiery constitution and youthful health. he call take pleasure "see life," and quote well-know maxim from Terence, from Horace, from Shakspeare, to show that one should do all that might become a man. he bid fair to be utterly use up and a roue, in a few year, if he be to continue at the pace at which he be go.
one night after a supper-party in college, at which Pen and Macheath have be present, and at which a little quiet vingt-et-un have be play (an amusement much pleasanter to man in their second and third year than the boisterous custom of sing song, which bring the proctor about the room, and which have grow quite stale by this time, every man have expend his budget)--as the man have take their cap and be go away, after no great loss or winning on any side, Mr. Bloundell playfully take up a green wine-glass from the supper-table, which have be destine to contain iced cup, but into which he insert something still more pernicious, namely a pair of dice, which the gentleman take out of his waistcoat-pocket, and put into the glass. then give the glass a graceful wave which show that his hand be quite experienced in the throwing of dice, he call seven the main, and whisk the ivory cube gently on the table, sweep they up lightly again from the cloth, and repeat this process two or three time. the other man look on, Pen, of course, among the number, who have never use the dice as yet, except to play a humdrum game of backgammon at home.
Mr. Bloundell, who have a good voice, begin to troll out the chorus from Robert the Devil, an Opera then in great vogue, in which chorus many of the man join, especially Pen, who be in very high spirit, have win a good number of shilling and half-crown at the vingt-et-un--and presently, instead of go home, most of the party be seat round the table play at dice, the green glass go round from hand to hand until Pen finally shiver it, after throw six main.
from that night Pen plunge into the delight of the game of hazard, as eagerly as it be his custom to pursue any new pleasure. Dice can be play of morning as well as after dinner or supper. Bloundell would come into Pen's room after breakfast, and it be astonish how quick the time pass as the bone be rattle. they have little quiet party with closed door, and Bloundell devise a box line with felt, so that the dice should make no noise, and their tell-tale rattle not bring the sharp-eare tutor up to the room. Bloundell, Ringwood, and Pen be once very nearly catch by Mr. Buck, who, pass in the Quadrangle, think he hear the word "two to one on the caster," through Pen's open window; but when the tutor get into Arthur's room he find the lad with three homer before they, and Pen say he be try to coach the two other man, and ask Mr. Buck with great gravity what be the present condition of the River Scamander, and whether it be navigable or no?
Mr. Arthur Pendennis do not win much money in these transaction with Mr. Bloundell, or indeed gain good of any kind except a knowledge of the odd at hazard, which he might have learn out of book.
Captain Macheath have other accomplishment which he exercise for Pen's benefit. the Captain's story have a great and unfortunate charm for Arthur, who be never tired of hear Bloundell's history of garrison conquest, and of his feat in country-quarters.--He have be at Paris, and have plenty of legend about the Palais Royal, and the Salon, and Frascati's. he have go to the Salon one night, after a dinner at the Cafe de Paris, "when we be all devilishly cut, by Jove; and on wake in the morning in my own room, I find myself with twelve thousand franc under my pillow, and a hundred and forty-nine Napoleons in one of my boot. benot that a coup, hay?" the Captain say. Pen's eye glisten with excitement as he hear this story. he respect the man who could win such a sum of money. he sigh, and say it would set he all right. Macheath laugh, and tell he to drink another drop of Maraschino. "I could tell you story much more wonderful than that," he add; and so indeed the Captain could have do, without any further trouble than that of invention, with which portion of the poetic faculty nature have copiously endow he.
he laugh to scorn Pen's love for Miss Fotheringay, when he come to hear of that amour from Arthur, as he pretty soon do, for, we have say, Pen be not averse to tell the story now to his confidential friend, and he and they be rather proud of the transaction. but Macheath take away all Pen's conceit on this head, not by demonstrate the folly of the lad's passion for an uneducated woman much his senior in year, but by expose his absurd desire of gratify his passion in a legitimate way. "marry she," say he, "you might as well marry ----," and he name one of the most notorious actress on the stage.
"she havenot a shred of a character." he know twenty man who be openly admirer of she, and name they, and the sum each have spend upon she. I know no kind of calumny more frightful or frequent than this which take away the character of woman, no man more reckless and mischievous than those who lightly use it, and no kind of coward more despicable than the people who invent these slander.
be it, or not, a misfortune that a man, himself of a candid disposition, and dispose, like our friend Pen, to blurt out the truth on all occasion, begin life by believe all that be say to he? would it be well for a lad to be less trustful, and so less honest? it require no small experience of the world to know that a man, who have no especial reason thereto, be tell you lie. I be not sure whether it be not good to go on be dupe for a certain time. at all event, our honest Pen have a natural credulity, which enable he to accept all statement which be make to he, and he take every one of Captain Macheath's figment as if they have be the most unquestioned fact of history.
so Bloundell's account about Miss Fotheringay pain and mortify Pen exceedingly. if he have be ashamed of his passion before,--what be his feeling regard it now, when the object of so much pure flame and adoration turn out to be only a worthless impostor, an impostor detect by all but he? it never occur to Pen to doubt the fact, or to question whether the story of a man who, like his new friend, never speak well of any woman, be likely to be true.
one Easter vacation, when Pen have announce to his mother and uncle his intention not to go down, but stay at Oxbridge and read, Mr. Pen be nevertheless induce to take a brief visit to London in company with his friend Mr. Bloundell. they put up at a hotel in Covent Garden, where Bloundell have a tick, as he call it, and take the pleasure of the town very freely after the willnot of young university man. Bloundell still belong to a military club, whither he take Pen to dine once or twice (the young man would drive thither in a cab, tremble lest they should meet Major Pendennis on his beat in Pall Mall), and here Pen be introduce to a number of gallant young fellow with spur and mustachio, with whom he drink pale-ale of morning and beat the town of a night. here he see a deal of life, indeed: nor in his career about the theatre and singing-house which these roar young blade frequent, be he very likely to meet his guardian. one night, nevertheless, they be very near to each other: a plank only separate Pen, who be in the box of the Museum Theatre, from the Major, who be in Lord Steyne's box, along with that venerate nobleman. the Fotheringay be in the pride of her glory. Shad make a hit: that is, she have draw very good house for nearly a year, have star the province with great eclat, have come back to shine in London with somewhat diminish lustre, and now be act with "ever increase attraction; etc.," "triumph of the good old british drama," as the play-bill avow, to house in which there be plenty of room for anybody who want to see she.
it be not the first time Pen have see she, since that memorable day when the two have part in Chatteris. in the previous year, when the town be make much of she, and the press laud her beauty, Pen have find a pretext for come to London in term-time, and have rush off to the theatre to see his old flame. he recollect it rather than renew it. he remember how ardently he use to be on the look-out at Chatteris, when the speech before Ophelia's or Mrs. Haller's entrance on the stage be make by the proper actor. now, as the actor speak, he have a sort of feeble thrill: as the house begin to thunder with applause, and Ophelia enter with her old bow and sweeping curtsey, Pen feel a slight shock and blush very much as he look at she, and could not help think that all the house be regard he. he hardly hear she for the first part of the play: and he think with such rage of the humiliation to which she have subject he, that he begin to fancy he be jealous and in love with she still. but that illusion do not last very long. he run round to the stage-door of the theatre to see she if possible, but he do not succeed. she pass indeed under his nose with a female companion, but he do not know her,--nor do she recognise he. the next night he come in late, and stay very quietly for the afterpiece, and on the third and last night of his stay in London--why, Taglioni be go to dance at the Opera,--Taglioni! and there be to be Don Giovanni, which he admire of all thing in the world: so Mr. Pen go to Don Giovanni and Taglioni.
this time the illusion about she be quite gone. she be not less handsome, but she be not the same, somehow. the light be go out of her eye which use to flash there, or Pen's no long be dazzle by it. the rich voice speak as of old, yet it do not make Pen's bosom thrill as formerly. he think he could recognise the brogue underneath: the accent seem to he coarse and false. it annoy he to hear the same emphasis on the same word, only utter a little louder: bad than this, it annoy he to think that he should ever have mistake that loud imitation for genius, or melt at those mechanical sob and sigh. he feel that it be in another life almost, that it be another man who have so madly love she. he be ashamed and bitterly humiliate, and very lonely. ah, poor Pen! the delusion be well than the truth sometimes, and fine dream than dismal waking.
they go and have an uproarious supper that night, and Mr. Pen have a fine headache the next morning, with which he go back to Oxbridge, have spend all his ready money.
as all this narrative be take from Pen's own confession, so that the reader may be assure of the truth of every word of it, and as Pen himself never have any accurate notion of the manner in which he spend his money, and plunge himself in much deep pecuniary difficulty, during his luckless residence at Oxbridge University, it be, of course, impossible for I to give any accurate account of his involvement, beyond that general notion of his way of life, which have be sketch a few page back. he do not speak too hardly of the roguery of the university tradesman, or of those in London whom he honour with his patronage at the outset of his career. even Finch, the money-lender, to whom Bloundell introduce he, and with whom he have various transaction, in which the young rascal's signature appear upon stamp paper, treat he, accord to Pen's own account, with forbearance, and never mulct he of more than a hundred per cent. the old college-cook, his fervent admirer, make he a private bill, offer to send he in dinner up to the very last, and never would have press his account to his die day. there be that kindness and frankness about Arthur Pendennis, which win most people who come in contact with he, and which, if it render he an easy prey to rogue, get he, perhaps, more goodwill than he merit from many honest man. it be impossible to resist his good-nature, or, in his bad moment, not to hope for his rescue from utter ruin.
at the time of his full career of university pleasure, he would leave the gay party to go and sit with a sick friend. he never know the difference between small and great in the treatment of his acquaintance, however much the unlucky lad's taste, which be of the sumptuous order, lead he to prefer good society; he be only too ready to share his guinea with a poor friend, and when he get money have an irresistible propensity for pay, which he never could conquer through life.
in his third year at college, the dun begin to gather awfully round about he, and there be a levee at his oak which scandalise the tutor, and would have scar many a stouter heart. with some of these he use to battle, some he would bully (under Mr. Bloundell's direction, who be a master in this art, though he take a degree in no other), and some deprecate. and it be report of he that little Mary Frodsham, the daughter of a certain poor gilder and frame-maker, whom Mr. Pen have think fit to employ, and who have make a number of beautiful frame for his fine print, come to Pendennis with a piteous tale that her father be ill with ague, and that there be an execution in their house, Pen in an anguish of remorse rush away, pawn his grand watch and every single article of jewellery except two old gold sleeve-button, which have belong to his father, and rush with the proceed to Frodsham's shop, where, with tear in his eye, and the deep repentance and humility, he ask the poor tradesman's pardon.
this, young gentleman, be not tell as an instance of Pen's virtue, but rather of his weakness. it would have be much more virtuous to have have no print at all. he still stand for the bauble which he sell in order to pay Frodsham's bill, and his mother have cruelly to pinch herself in order to discharge the jeweller's account, so that she be in the end the sufferer by the lad's impertinent fancy and folly. we be not present Pen to you as a hero or a model, only as a lad, who, in the midst of a thousand vanity and weakness, have as yet some generous impulse, and be not altogether dishonest.
we have say it be to the scandal of Mr. Buck the tutor that Pen's extravagance become know: from the manner in which he enter college, the associate he keep, and the introduction of Doctor Portman and the Major, Buck for a long time think that his pupil be a man of large property, and wonder rather that he only wear a plain gown. once on go up to London to the levee with an address from his Majesty's Loyal University of Oxbridge, Buck have see Major Pendennis at St. James's in conversation with two knight of the garter, in the carriage of one of whom the dazzle tutor see the Major whisk away after the levee. he ask Pen to wine the instant he come back, let he off from chapel and lecture more than ever, and feel perfectly sure that he be a young gentleman of large estate.
thus, he be thunderstruck when he hear the truth, and receive a dismal confession from Pen. his university debt be large, and the tutor have nothing to do, and of course Pen do not acquaint he, with his London debt. what man ever do tell all when press by his friend about his liability? the tutor learn enough to know that Pen be poor, that he have spend a handsome, almost a magnificent allowance, and have raise around he such a fine crop of debt, as it would be very hard work for any man to mow down; for there be no plant that grow so rapidly when once it have take root.
perhaps it be because she be so tender and good that Pen be terrify lest his mother should know of his sin. "I cannot bear to break it to she," he say to the tutor in an agony of grief. "o! sir, Ihave be a villain to her"--and he repent, and he wish he have the time to come over again, and he ask himself, "why, why do his uncle insist upon the necessity of live with great people, and in how much do all his grand acquaintance profit he?"
they be not shy, but Pen think they be, and slunk from they during his last term at college. he be as gloomy as a death'-head at party, which he avoid of his own part, or to which his young friend soon cease to invite he. everybody know that Pendennis be "hard up." that man Bloundell, who could pay nobody, and who be oblige to go down after three term, be his ruin, the man say. his melancholy figure might be see shirk about the lonely quadrangle in his battered old cap and tear gown, and he who have be the pride of the university but a year before, the man whom all the young one love to look at, be now the object of conversation at freshman's wine-party, and they speak of he with wonder and awe.
at last come the Degree Examinations. many a young man of his year whose hob-nail shoe Pen have deride, and whose face or coat he have caricature--many a man whom he have treat with scorn in the lecture-room or crush with his eloquence in the debating-club--many of his own set who have not half his brain, but a little regularity and constancy of occupation, take high place in the honour or pass with decent credit. and where in the list be Pen the superb, Pen the wit and dandy, Pen the poet and orator? ah, where be Pen the widow's darling and sole pride? let we hide our head, and shut up the page. the list come out; and a dreadful rumour rush through the university, that Pendennis of Boniface be pluck.
CHAPTER XXI
flight after Defeat
everybody who have the least knowledge of Heraldry and the peerage must be aware that the noble family of which, as we know, Helen Pendennis be a member, bear for a crest, a nest full of little pelican peck at the ensanguine bosom of a big maternal bird, which plentifully supply the little wretch with the nutriment on which, accord to the heraldic legend, they be suppose to be bring up. very likely female pelican like so to bleed under the selfish little beak of their young one: it be certain that woman do. there must be some sort of pleasure, which we man donot understand, which accompany the pain of be scarify, and indeed I believe some woman would rather actually so suffer than not. they like sacrifice themselves in behalf of the object which their instinct teach they to love. be it for a reckless husband, a dissipated son, a darling scapegrace of a brother, how ready their heart be to pour out their good treasure for the benefit of the cherish person; and what a deal of this sort of enjoyment be we, on one side, ready to give the soft creature! there be scarce a man that read this, but have administer pleasure in this fashion to his womankind, and have treat they to the luxury of forgive he. they donot mind how they live themselves; but when the prodigal come home they make a rejoicing, and kill the fat calf for he: and at the very first hint that the sinner be return, the kind angel prepare their festival, and Mercy and Forgiveness go smile out to welcome he. I hope it may be so always for all: if we have only Justice to look to, Heaven help we!
during the latter part of Pen's residence at the University of Oxbridge, his uncle's partiality have greatly increase for the lad. the Major be proud of Arthur, who have high spirit, frank manner, a good person, and high gentleman-like bearing. it please the old London bachelor to see Pen walk with the young patrician of his university, and he (who be never know to entertain his friend, and whose stinginess have pass into a sort of byword among some wag at the Club, who envy his many engagement, and do not choose to consider his poverty) be charm to give his nephew and the young lord snug little dinner at his lodging, and to regale they with good claret, and his very good bon mot and story: some of which would be injure by the repetition, for the Major's manner of tell they be incomparably neat and careful; and other, whereof the repetition would do good to nobody. he pay his court to their parent through the young man, and to himself as it be by their company. he make more than one visit to Oxbridge, where the young fellow be amuse by entertain the old gentleman, and give party and breakfast and fete, partly to joke he and partly to do he honour. he ply they with his story. he make himself juvenile and hilarious in the company of the young lord. he go to hear Pen at a grand debate at the Union, crow and cheer, and rap his stick in chorus with the cheer of the man, and be astounded at the boy's eloquence and fire. he think he have get a young Pitt for a nephew. he have an almost paternal fondness for Pen. he write to the lad letter with playful advice and the news of the town. he brag about Arthur at his Clubs, and introduce he with pleasure into his conversation; say, that, Egad, the young fellow be put the old one to the wall; that the lad who be come up, young Lord Plinlimmon, a friend of my boy, young Lord Magnus Charters, a chum of my scapegrace, etc., would make a great figure in the world than even their father have do before they. he ask permission to bring Arthur to a grand fete at Gaunt House; see he with ineffable satisfaction dance with the sister of the young nobleman before mention; and give himself as much trouble to procure card of invitation for the lad to some good house, as if he have be a mamma with a daughter to marry, and not an old half-pay officer in a wig. and he boast everywhere of the boy's great talent, and remarkable oratorical power; and of the brilliant degree he be go to take. Lord Runnymede would take he on his embassy, or the Duke would bring he in for one of his borough, he write over and over again to Helen; who, for her part, be too ready to believe anything that anybody choose to say in favour of her son.
and all this pride and affection of uncle and mother have be trample down by Pen's wicked extravagance and idleness! I donot envy Pen's feeling (as the phrase be), as he think of what he have do. he have sleep, and the tortoise have win the race. he have mar at its outset what might have be a brilliant career. he have dip ungenerously into a generous mother's purse; basely and recklessly spill her little cruse. o! it be a coward hand that could strike and rob a creature so tender. and if Pen feel the wrong which he have do to other, be we to suppose that a young gentleman of his vanity do not feel still more keenly the shame he have bring upon himself? let we be assure that there be no more cruel remorse than that; and no groan more piteous than those of wound self-love. like Joel Miller's friend, the Senior Wrangler, who bow to the audience from his box at the play, because he and the king happen to enter the theatre at the same time, only with a fatuity by no mean so agreeable to himself, poor Arthur Pendennis feel perfectly convinced that all England would remark the absence of his name from the examination-list, and talk about his misfortune. his wounded tutor, his many dun, the skip and bed-maker who wait upon he, the undergraduate of his own time and the year below he, whom he have patronise or scorn--how could he bear to look any of they in the face now? he rush to his room, into which he shut himself, and there he pen a letter to his tutor, full of thank, regard, remorse, and despair, request that his name might be take off the college book, and intimate a wish and expectation that death would speedily end the woe of the disgrace Arthur Pendennis.
then he slunk out, scarcely know whither he go, but mechanically take the unfrequented little lane by the back of the college, until he clear the university precinct, and get down to the bank of the Camisis river, now desert, but so often alive with the boat-race, and the crowd of cheer gownsman, he wander on and on, until he find himself at some mile' distance from Oxbridge, or rather be find by some acquaintance leave that city.
as Pen go up a hill, a drizzling January rain beat in his face, and his ragged gown fly behind he--for he have not divest himself of his academical garment since the morning--a postchaise come rattle up the road, on the box of which a servant be seat, whilst within, or rather half out of the carriage window, sate a young gentleman smoke a cigar, and loudly encourage the postboy. it be our young acquaintance of Baymouth Mr. Spavin, who have get his degree, and be drive homeward in triumph in his yellow postchaise. he catch a sight of the figure, madly gesticulate as he work up the hill, and of poor Pen's pale and ghastly face as the chaise whirl by he.
"Wo!" roar Mr. Spavin to the postboy, and the horse stop in their mad career, and the carriage pull up some fifty yard before Pen. he presently hear his own name shout, and beheld the upper half of the body of Mr. Spavin thrust out of the side-window of the vehicle, and beckon Pen vehemently towards it.
Pen stop, hesitate--nod his head fiercely, and point onwards, as if desirous that the postillion should proceed. he do not speak: but his countenance must have look very desperate, for young Spavin, have star at he with an expression of blank alarm, jump out of the carriage presently, run towards Pen hold out his hand, and grasp Pen's, say, "I say--hullo, old boy, where be you go, and whatbe the row now?"
"Ibe go where I deserve to go," say Pen, with an imprecation.
"this benot the way," say Mr. Spavin, smile. "this be the Fenbury road. I say, Pen, donot take on because you be pluck. itbe nothing when you be use to it. Ihave be pluck three time, old boy--and after the first time I donot care. Glad itbe over, though. youwill have well luck next time."
Pen look at his early acquaintance,--who have be pluck, who have be rusticate, who have only, after repeat failure, learn to read and write correctly, and who, in spite of all these drawback, have attain the honour of a degree. "this man have pass," he think, "and I have fail!" it be almost too much for he to bear.
"good-bye, Spavin," say he; "Ibe very glad you be through. donot let I keep you; Ibe in a hurry--i'm go to town to-night."
"Gammon," say Mr. Spavin. "this benot the way to town; this be the Fenbury road, I tell you."
"I be just go to turn back," Pen say.
"all the coach be full with the man go down," Spavin say. Pen wince. "youwould not get a place for a ten-pound note. get into my yellow; Iwill drop you at Mudford, where you have a chance of the Fenbury mail. Iwill lend you a hat and a coat; Ihave get lot. come along; jump in, old boy--go it, leathers!"--and in this way Pen find himself in Mr. Spavin's postchaise, and ride with that gentleman as far as the Ram Inn at Mudford, fifteen mile from Oxbridge; where the Fenbury mail change horse, and where Pen get a place on to London.
the next day there be an immense excitement in Boniface College, Oxbridge, where, for some time, a rumour prevail, to the terror of Pen's tutor and tradesman, that Pendennis, madden at lose his degree, have make away with himself--a battered cap, in which his name be almost discernible, together with a seal bear his crest of an eagle look at a now extinct sun, have be find three mile on the Fenbury road, near a mill-stream, and, for four-and-twenty hour, it be suppose that poor Pen have fling himself into the stream, until letter arrive from he, bear the London post-mark.
the mail reach London at the dreary hour of five; and he hasten to the inn at Covent Garden, at which he be accustom to put up, where the ever-wakeful porter admit he, and show he to a bed. Pen look hard at the man, and wonder whether boot know he be pluck? when in bed be could not sleep there. he toss about until the appearance of the dismal London daylight, when he spring up desperately, and walk off to his uncle's lodging in Bury Street; where the maid, who be scour the step, look up suspiciously at he, as he come with an unshaven face, and yesterday's linen. he think she know of his mishap, too.
"good even! Mr. Harthur, what as appene, sir?" Mr. Morgan, the valet, ask, who have just arrange the well-brush clothe and shiny boot at the door of his master's bedroom, and be carry in his wig to the Major.
"I want to see my uncle," he cry, in a ghastly voice, and fling himself down on a chair.
Morgan back before the pale and desperate-looking young man, with terrified and wonder glance, and disappear in his master's apartment.
the Major put his head out of the bedroom door, as soon as he have his wig on.
"what? examination over? Senior Wrangler, double First Class, hay? say the old gentleman--i'll come directly;" and the head disappear.
"they donot know what have happen," groan Pen; "what will they say when they know all?"
Pen have be stand with his back to the window, and to such a dubious light as Bury Street enjoy of a foggy January morning, so that his uncle could not see the expression of the young man's countenance, or the look of gloom and despair which even Mr. Morgan have remark.
but when the Major come out of his dressing-room neat and radiant, and precede by faint odour from Delcroix's shop, from which emporium Major Pendennis's wig and his pocket-handkerchief get their perfume, he hold out one of his hand to Pen, and be about address he in his cheery high-toned voice, when he catch sight of the boy's face at length, and drop his hand, say, "good God! Pen, whatbe the matter?"
"youwill see it in the paper at breakfast, sir," Pen say.
"see what?"
"my name benot there, sir."
"hang it, why should it be?" ask the Major, more perplexed.
"I have lose everything, sir," Pen groan out; "my honour's go; Ibe ruin irretrievably; I cannot go back to Oxbridge."
"lost your honour?" scream out the Major. "Heaven alive! you donot mean to say you have show the white feather?"
Pen laugh bitterly at the word feather, and repeat it. "no, it benot that, sir. Ibe not afraid of be shoot; I wish to God anybody would. I have not get my degree. I--I'm pluck, sir."
the Major have hear of pluck, but in a very vague and cursory way, and conclude that it be some ceremony perform corporally upon rebellious university youth. "I wonder you can look I in the face after such a disgrace, sir," he say; "I wonder you submit to it as a gentleman."
"I couldnot help it, sir. I do my classical paper well enough it be those infernal mathematic, which I have always neglect."
"be it--be it do in public, sir?" the Major say.
"what?"
"The--the plucking?" ask the guardian, look Pen anxiously in the face.
Pen perceive the error under which his guardian be labour, and in the midst of his misery the blunder cause the poor wretch a faint smile, and serve to bring down the conversation from the tragedy-key, in which Pen have be dispose to carry it on. he explain to his uncle that he have go in to pass his examination, and fail. on which the Major say, that though he have expect far well thing of his nephew, there be no great misfortune in this, and no dishonour as far as he see, and that Pen must try again.
"I again at Oxbridge," Pen think, "after such a humiliation as that!" he feel that, except he go down to burn the place, he could not enter it.
but it be when he come to tell his uncle of his debt that the other feel surprise and anger most keenly, and break out in speech most severe upon Pen, which the lad bore, as good might, without flinch. he have determine to make a clean breast, and have form a full, true, and complete list of all his bill and liability at the university, and in London. they consist of various item, such as:
London Tailor. oxbridge do. oxbridge do. Bill for horse. Haberdasher, for shirt and glove. Printseller. Jeweller. book. College Cook. bind. Grump, for dessert. Hairdresser and Perfumery. Bootmaker. hotel bill in London. Wine Merchant in London. sundrie.
all which item the reader may fill in at his pleasure--such account have be inspect by the parent of many university youth,--and it appear that Mr. Pen's bill in all amount to about seven hundred pound; and, furthermore, it be calculate that he have have more than twice that sum of ready money during his stay at Oxbridge. this sum he have spend, and for it have to show--what?
"you need not press a man who be down, sir," Pen say to his uncle, gloomily. "I know very well, sir, how wicked and idle I have be. my mother willnot like to see I dishonour, sir," he continue, with his voice fail; "and I know she will pay these account. but I shall ask she for no more money."
"as you like, sir," the Major say. "you be of age, and my hand be wash of your affair. but you cannot live without money, and have no mean of make it that I see, though you have a fine talent in spend it, and it be my belief that you will proceed as you have begin, and ruin your mother before you be five year older.--good morning; it be time for I to go to breakfast. my engagement willnot permit I to see you much during the time that you stay in London. I presume that you will acquaint your mother with the news which you have just convey to I."
and pull on his hat, and tremble in his limb somewhat, Major Pendennis walk out of his lodging before his nephew, and go ruefully off to take his accustomed corner at the Club. he see the Oxbridge examination-list in the morning paper, and read over the name, not understand the business, with mournful accuracy. he consult various old fogy of his acquaintance, in the course of the day, at his Clubs; Wenham, a Dean, various civilian; and, as it be call, "take their opinion," show to some of they the amount of his nephew's debt, which he have dot down on the back of a card, and ask what be to be do, and whether such debt be not monstrous, preposterous? what be to be done?--there be nothing for it but to pay. Wenham and the other tell the Major of young man who owe twice as much--five time as much--as Arthur, and with no mean at all to pay. the consultation, and calculation, and opinion, comfort the Major somewhat. after all, he be not to pay.
but he think bitterly of the many plan he have form to make a man of his nephew, of the sacrifice which he have make, and of the manner in which he be disappoint. and he write off a letter to Doctor Portman, inform he of the direful event which have take place, and beg the Doctor to break they to Helen. for the orthodox old gentleman preserve the regular routine in all thing, and be of opinion that it be more correct to "break" a piece of bad news to a person by mean of a (possibly maladroit and unfeeling) messenger, than to convey it simply to its destination by a note. so the Major write to Doctor Portman, and then go out to dinner, one of the sad man in any London dining-room that day.
Pen, too, write his letter, and skulk about London street for the rest of the day, fancy that everybody be look at he and whisper to his neighbour, "that be Pendennis of Boniface, who be pluck yesterday." his letter to his mother be full of tenderness and remorse: he weep the bitter tear over it--and the repentance and passion soothe he to some degree.
he see a party of roar young blade from Oxbridge in the coffee-room of his hotel, and slunk away from they, and pace the street. he remember, he say, the print which he see hang up at Ackermann's window in the rain, and a book which he read at a stall near the Temple: at night he go to the pit of the play, and see Miss Fotheringay, but he donot in the least recollect in what piece.
on the second day there come a kind letter from his tutor, contain many grave and appropriate remark upon the event which have befall he, but strongly urge Pen not to take his name off the university book, and to retrieve a disaster which, everybody know, be owe to his own carelessness alone, and which he might repair by a month's application. he say he have order Pen's skip to pack up some trunk of the young gentleman's wardrobe, which duly arrive with fresh copy of all Pen's bill lay on the top.
on the third day there arrive a letter from home; which Pen read in his bedroom, and the result of which be that he fall down on his knee with his head in the bedclothe, and then pray out his heart and humble himself; and have go downstairs and eat an immense breakfast he sally forth and take his place at the Bull and Mouth, Piccadilly, by the Chatteris coach for that evening.
CHAPTER XXII
Prodigal's return
such a letter as the Major write of course, send Doctor Portman to Fairoaks, and he go off with that alacrity which a good man show when he have disagreeable news to commit. he wish the deed be do, and do quickly. he be sorry, but que voulez-vous? the tooth must be take out, and he have you in the chair, and it be surprising with what courage and vigour of wrist he apply the forceps. perhaps he would not be quite so active or eager if it be his tooth; but, in fine, it be your duty to have it out. so the doctor, have read the epistle out to Myra and Mrs. Portman, with many damnatory comment upon the young scapegrace who be goin deeply and deep into perdition, leave those lady to spread the news through the Clavering society, which they do with their accustomed accuracy and despatch, and stride over to Fairoaks to break the intelligence to the widow.
she have the news already. she have read Pen's letter, and it have relieve she somehow. a gloomy presentiment of evil have be hang over she for many, many month past. she know the bad now, and her darling boy be come back to her repentant and tender-hearted. do she want more? all that the Rector could say (and his remark be both dictate by common-sense, and make respectable by antiquity) could not bring Helen to feel any indignation or particular unhappiness, except that the boy should be unhappy. what be this degree that they make such an outcry about, and what good would it do Pen? why do Doctor Portman and his uncle insist upon send the boy to a place where there be so much temptation to be risk, and so little good to be win? why donot they leave he at home with his mother? as for his debt, of course they must be paid;--his debts!--wasn't his father's money all his, and havenot he a right to spend it? in this way the widow meet the virtuous doctor, and all the arrow of his indignation somehow take no effect upon her gentle bosom.
for some time past, an agreeable practice, know since time ever so ancient, by which brother and sister be willnot to exhibit their affection towards one another, and in which Pen and his little sister Laura have be accustom to indulge pretty frequently in their childish day, have be give up by the mutual consent of those two individual. come back from college after an absence from home of some month, in place of the simple girl whom he have leave behind he, Mr. Arthur find a tall, slim, handsome young lady, to whom he could not somehow proffer the kiss which he have be in the habit of administer previously, and who receive he with a gracious curtsey and a proffered hand, and with a great blush which rise up to the cheek, just upon the very spot which young Pen have be use to salute.
I be not good at description of female beauty; and, indeed, do not care for it in the least (think that goodness and virtue be, of course, far more advantageous to a young lady than any mere fleeting charm of person and face), and so shall not attempt any particular delineation of Miss Laura Bell at the age of sixteen year. at that age she have attain her present altitude of five foot four inch, so that she be call tall and gawky by some, and a Maypole by other, of her own sex, who prefer littler woman. but if she be a Maypole, she have beautiful rose about her head, and it be a fact that many swain be dispose to dance round she. she be ordinarily pale, with a faint rose tinge in her cheek; but they flush up in a minute when occasion call, and continue so blush ever so long, the rose remain after the emotion have pass away which have summon those pretty flower into existence. her eye have be describe as very large from her early childhood, and retain that characteristic in later life. good-natured critic (always female) say that she be in the habit of make play with those eye, and ogle the gentleman and lady in her company; but the fact be, that Nature have make they so to shine and to look, and they could no more help so look and shin than one star can help be bright than another. it be doubtless to mitigate their brightness that Miss Laura's eye be provide with two pair of veil in the shape of the long and fine black eyelash, so that, when she close her eye, the same people who find fault with those orb, say that she want to show her eyelash off; and, indeed, I daresay that to see her asleep would have be a pretty sight.
as for her complexion, that be nearly as brilliant as Lady Mantrap's, and without the powder which her ladyship use. her nose must be leave to the reader's imaginaton: if her mouth be rather large (as Miss Piminy aver, who, but for her know appetite, one would think could not swallow anything large than a button) everybody allow that her smile be charming, and show off a set of pearly tooth, whilst her voice be so low and sweet, that to hear it be like listen to sweet music. because she be in the habit of wear very long dress, people of course say that her foot be not small: but it may be that they be of the size become her figure, and it do not follow, because Mrs. Pincher be always put her foot out, that all other lady should be perpetually bring theirs on the tapis. in fine, Miss Laura Bell at the age of sixteen, be a sweet young lady. many thousand of such be to be find, let we hope, in this country where there be no lack of goodness, and modesty, and purity, and beauty.
now Miss Laura, since she have learn to think for herself (and in the past two year her mind and her person have both develop themselves considerably) have only be half pleased with Pen's general conduct and bear. his letter to his mother at home have become of late very rare and short. it be in vain that the fond widow urge how constant Arthur's occupation and study be and how many his engagement. "it be well that he should lose a prize" Laura say "than forget his mother; and indeed, mamma, I donot see that he get many prize. why donot he come home and stay with you, instead of pass his vacation at his great friend' fine house? there be nobody there will love he half so much as--as you do." "as I do only, Laura?" sigh out Mrs. Pendennis. Laura declare stoutly that she do not love Pen a bit, when he do not do his duty to his mother nor would she be convince by any of Helen's fond argument, that the boy must make his way in the world; that his uncle be most desirous that Pen should cultivate the acquaintance of person who be likely to befriend he in life; that man have a thousand tie and call which woman could not understand, and so forth. perhaps Helen no more believe in these excuse than her adopt daughter do; but she try to believe that she believe they, and comfort herself with the maternal infatuation. and that be a point whereon I suppose many a gentleman have reflect, that, do what we will, we be pretty sure of the woman's love that once have be ours; and that that untire tenderness and forgiveness never fail we.
also, there have be that freedom, not to say audacity, in Arthur's latter talk and way, which have shock and displeased Laura. not that he ever offend she by rudeness, or address to she a word which she ought not to hear, for Mr. Pen be a gentleman, and by nature and education polite to every woman high and low; but he speak lightly and laxly of woman in general; be less courteous in his action than in his word--neglectful in sundry way, and in many of the little office of life. it offend Miss Laura that he should smoke his horrid pipe in the house; that he should refuse to go to church with his mother, or on walk or visit with she, and be find yawn over his novel in his dressing-gown, when the gentle widow return from those duty. the hero of Laura's early infancy, about whom she have pass so many, many night talk with Helen (who recite endless story of the boy's virtue, and love, and bravery, when he be away at school), be a very different person from the young man whom now she know; bold and brilliant, sarcastic and defiant, seem to scorn the simple occupation or pleasure, or even devotion, of the woman with whom he live, and whom he quit on such light pretext.
the Fotheringay affair, too, when Laura come to hear of it (which she do first by some sarcastic allusion of Major Pendennis, when on a visit to Fairoaks, and then from their neighbour at Clavering, who have plenty of information to give she on this head), vastly shock and outraged Miss Laura. a Pendennis fle himself away on such a woman as that! Helen's boy gallop away from home, day after day, to fall on his knee to an actress, and drink with her horrid father! a good son want to bring such a man and such a woman into his house, and set she over his mother! "I would have run away, mamma; I would, if I have have to walk barefoot through the snow," Laura say.
"and you would have leave I too, then?" Helen answer; on which, of course, Laura withdraw her previous observation, and the two woman rush into each other's embrace with that warmth which belong to both their nature, and which characterise not a few of their sex. whence come all whence come all the indignation of Miss Laura about Arthur's passion? perhaps she do not know, that, if man throw themselves away upon woman, woman throw themselves away upon man, too; and that there be no more accounting for love, than for any other physical liking or antipathy: perhaps she have be misinform by the Clavering people and old Mrs. Portman, who be vastly bitter against Pen, especially since his impertinent behaviour to the Doctor and since the wretch have smoke cigar in church-time: perhaps, finally, she be jealous; but this be a vice in which it be say the lady very seldom indulge.
albeit she be angry with Pen, against his mother she have no such feeling; but devote herself to Helen with the utmost force of her girlish affection--such affection as woman, whose heart be disengage, be apt to bestow upon the near female friend. it be devotion--it be passion--it be all sort of fondness and folly; it be a profusion of caress, tender epithet and endearment, such as it do not become sober historian with beard to narrate. do not let we man despise these instinct because we cannot feel they. these woman be make for our comfort and delectation, gentlemen,--with all the rest of the minor animal.
but as soon as Miss Laura hear that Pen be unfortunate and unhappy, all her wrath against he straightway vanish, and give place to the most tender and unreasonable compassion. he be the Pen of old day once more restore to she, the frank and affectionate, the generous and tender-hearted. she at once take side with Helen against Doctor Portman, when he outcry at the enormity of Pen's transgression. debt? what be his debt? they be a trifle; he have be throw into expensive society by his uncle's order, and of course be oblige to live in the same manner as the young gentleman whose company he frequent. disgrace by not get his degree? the poor boy be ill when he go in for the examination: he couldnot think of his mathematic and stuff on account of those very debt which oppress he; very likely some of the odious tutor and master be jealous of he, and have favourite of their own whom they want to put over his head. other people dislike he, and be cruel to he, and be unfair to he, she be very sure. and so, with flush cheek and eye bright with anger, this young creature reason; and she go up and seize Helen's hand, and kiss she in the Doctor's presence, and her look brave the Doctor, and seem to ask how he dare to say a word against her darling mother's Pen?
when that divine take his leave, not a little discomfited and amazed at the pertinacious obstinacy of the woman, Laura repeat her embrace and argument with tenfold fervour to Helen, who feel that there be a great deal of cogency in most of the latter. there must be some jealousy against Pen. she feel quite sure that he have offend some of the examiner, who have take a mean revenge of he--nothing more likely. altogether, the announcement of the misfortune vex these two lady very little indeed. Pen, who be plunge in his shame and grief in London, and tear with great remorse for thinking of his mother's sorrow, would have wonder, have he see how easily she bear the calamity. indeed, calamity be welcome to woman if they think it will bring truant affection home again: and if you have reduce your mistress to a crust, depend upon it that she willnot repine, and only take a very little bit of it for herself, provide you will eat the remainder in her company.
and directly the Doctor be go, Laura order fire to be light in Mr. Arthur's room, and his bed to be air; and have these preparation complete by the time Helen have finish a most tender and affectionate letter to Pen: when the girl, smile fondly, take her mamma by the hand, and lead she into those apartment where the fire be blaze so cheerfully, and there the two kind creature sate down on the bed, and talk about Pen ever so long. Laura add a postscript to Helen's letter, in which she call he her dear Pen, and bid he come home instantly, with two of the handsome dash under the word, and be happy with his mother and his affectionate sister Laura.
in the middle of the night--as these two lady, after read their bible a great deal during the evening, and after take just a look into Pen's room as they pass to their own--in the middle of the night, I say, Laura, whose head not unfrequently choose to occupy that pillow which the nightcap of the late Pendennis have be accustom to press, cry out suddenly, "Mamma, be you awake?"
Helen stir and say, "yes, Ibe awake." the truth be, though she have be lie quite still and silent, she have not be asleep one instant, but have be look at the night-lamp in the chimney, and have be think of Pen for hour and hour.
then Miss Laura (who have be act with similar hypocrisy, and lying, occupy with her own thought, as motionless as Helen's brooch, with Pen's and Laura's hair in it, on the frille white pincushion on the dressing-table) begin to tell Mrs. Pendennis of a notable plan which she have be form in her busy little brain; and by which all Pen's embarrassment would be make to vanish in a moment, and without the least trouble to anybody.
"you know, mamma," this young lady say, "that I have be live with you for ten year, during which time you have never take any of my money, and have be treat I just as if I be a charity girl. now, this obligation have offend I very much, because I be proud and do not like to be beholden to people. and as, if I have go to school--only I wouldn't--it must have cost I at least fifty pound a year, it be clear that I owe you fifty time ten pound, which I know you have put in the bank at Chatteris for I, and which donot belong to I a bit. now, to-morrow we will go to Chatteris, and see that nice old Mr. Rowdy, with the bald head, and ask he for it,--not for his head, but for the five hundred pound: and I dare say he will send you two more, which we will save and pay back; and we will send the money to Pen, who can pay all his debt without hurt anybody and then we will live happy ever after."
what Helen reply to this speech need not be repeat, as the widow's answer be make up of a great number of incoherent ejaculation, embrace, and other irrelative matter. but the two woman sleep well after that talk; and when the night-lamp go out with a splutter, and the sun rise gloriously over the purple hill, and the bird begin to sing and pipe cheerfully amidst the leafless tree and glisten evergreen on Fairoaks lawn, Helen wake too, and as she look at the sweet face of the girl sleep beside she, her lip part with a smile, blush on her cheek, her spotless bosom heaving and fall with gentle undulation, as if happy dream be sweep over it--Pen's mother feel happy and grateful beyond all power of word, save such as pious woman offer up to the Beneficent Dispenser of love and mercy--in whose honour a chorus of such praise be constantly rise up all round the world.
although it be January and rather cold weather, so sincere be Mr. Pen's remorse, and so determine his plan of economy, that he would not take an inside place in the coach, but sate up behind with his friend the Guard, who remember his former liberality, and lend he plenty of great-coat. perhaps it be the cold that make his knee tremble as he get down at the lodge-gate, or it may be that he be agitate at the notion of see the kind creature for whose love he have make so selfish a return. Old John be in wait to receive his master's baggage, but he appear in a fustian jacket, and no long wear his livery of drab and blue. "i'se garner and stable man, and live in the ladge now," this worthy man remark, with a grin of welcome to Pen, and something of a blush; but instantly as Pen turn the corner of the shrubbery and be out of eye-shot of the coach, Helen make her appearance, her face beam with love and forgiveness--for forgiving be what some woman love good of all.
we may be sure that the widow, have a certain other object in view, have lose no time in write off to Pen an account of the noble, the magnanimous, the magnificent offer of Laura, fill up her letter with a profusion of benediction upon both her child. it be probably the knowledge of this money-obligation which cause Pen to blush very much when he see Laura, who be in wait in the hall, and who this time, and for this time only, break through the little arrangement of which we have speak, as have subsist between she and Arthur for the last few year; but the truth be, there have be a great deal too much say about kiss in the present chapter.
so the Prodigal come home, and the fat calf be kill for he, and he be make as happy as two simple woman could make he. no allusion be make to the Oxbridge mishap, or question ask as to his farth proceeding, for some time. but Pen debate these anxiously in his own mind, and up in his own room, where he pass much time in cogitation.
a few day after he come home, he ride to Chatteris on his horse, and come back on the top of the coach. he then inform his mother that he have leave the horse to be sell; and when that operation be effect, he hand she over the cheque, which she, and possibly Pen himself, think be an act of uncommon virtue and self-denial, but which Laura pronounce to be only strict justice.
he rarely mention the loan which she have make, and which, indeed, have be accept by the widow with certain modification; but once or twice, and with great hesitation and stammering, he allude to it, and thank she; but it evidently pain his vanity to be beholden to the orphan for succour. he be wild to find some mean of repay she.
he leave off drink wine, and betook himself, but with great moderation, to the refreshment of whisky-and-water. he give up cigar-smoking; but it must be confess that of late year he have like pipe and tobacco as well or even well, so that this sacrifice be not a very severe one.
he fall asleep a great deal after dinner when he join the lady in the drawing-room, and be certainly very moody and melancholy. he watch the coach with great interest, walk in to read the paper at Clavering assiduously, din with anybody who would ask he (and the widow be glad that he should have any entertainment in their solitary place), and play a good deal at cribbage with Captain Glanders.
he avoid Dr. Portman, who, in his turn, whenever Pen pass, give he very severe look from under his shovel-hat. he go to church with his mother, however, very regularly, and read prayer for she at home to the little household. always humble, it be greatly diminish now: a couple of maid do the work of the house of Fairoaks: the silver dish-cover never see the light at all.
John put on his livery to go to church, and assert his dignity on Sundays, but it be only for form's sake. he be gardener and out-door man, vice Upton, resign. there be but little fire in Fairoaks kitchen, and John and the maid drink their evening beer there by the light, of a single candle. all this be Mr. Pen's doing, and the state of thing do not increas his cheerfulness.
for some time Pen say no power on earth could induce he to go back to Oxbridge again, after his failure there; but one day Laura say to he, with many blush, that she think, as some sort of reparation, of punishment on himself for his--for his idleness, he ought to go back and get his degree, if he could fetch it by do so; and so back Mr. Pen go.
a plucked man be a dismal being in a university; belong to no set of man there, and own by no one. Pen feel himself pluck indeed of all the fine feather which he have win during his brilliant year, and rarely appear out of his college; regularly go to morning chapel, and shut himself up in his room of night, away from the noise and supper of the undergraduate. there be no dun about his door, they be all pay--scarcely any card be leave there. the man of his year have take their degree, and be go. he go into a second examination, and pass with perfect ease. he be somewhat more easy in his mind when he appear in his bachelor's gown.
on his way back from Oxbridge he pay a visit to his uncle in London; but the old gentleman receive he with very cold look, and would scarcely give he his forefinger to shake. he call a second time, but Morgan, the valet, say his master be from home.
Pen come back to Fairoaks, and to his book and to his idleness, and loneliness and despair. he commence several tragedy, and write many copy of verse of a gloomy cast. he form plan of read and break they. he think about enlist--about the spanish legion--about a profession. he chafe against his captivity, and curse the idleness which have cause it. Helen say he be break his heart, and be sad to see his prostration. as soon as they could afford it, he should go abroad--he should go to London--he should be free from the dull society of two poor woman. it be dull--very, certainly. the tender widow's habitual melancholy seem to deepen into a sad gloom; and Laura see with alarm that the dear friend become every year more languid and weary, and that her pale cheek grow more wan.
CHAPTER XXIII
New face
the inmate of Fairoaks be drowsily pursue this humdrum existence, while the great house upon the hill, on the other side of the River Brawl, be shake off the slumber in which it have lie during the life of two generation of master, and give extraordinary sign of renew liveliness.
just about the time of Pen's little mishap, and when he be so absorb in the grief occasion by that calamity as to take no notice of event which befell person less interesting to himself than Arthur Pendennis, an announcement appear in the provincial journal which cause no small sensation in the county at least, and in all the town, village, hall and mansion, and parsonage for many mile round Clavering Park. at Clavering market; at Cackleby Fair; at Chatteris Sessions; on Gooseberry Green, as the squire's carriage meet the vicar's one-horse contrivance, and the inmate of both vehicle stop on the road to talk; at Tinkleton Church gate, as the bell be toll in the sunshine, and the white smock and scarlet cloak come troop over the green common, to Sunday worship; in a hundred society round about--the word be, that Clavering Park be to be inhabit again.
some five year before, the county paper have advertise the marriage at Florence, at the British Legation, of Francis Clavering, Esq., only son of Sir Francis Clavering, Bart., of Clavering Park, with Jemima Augusta, daughter of Samuel Snell, of Calcutta, Esq., and widow of the late J. Amory, Esq. at that time the legend in the county be that Clavering, who have be ruin for many a year, have marry a widow from India with some money. some of the county folk catch a sight of the newly-married pair. the Kickleburys, travel in Italy, have see they. Clavering occupy the Poggi Palace at Florence, give party, and live comfortably--but could never come to England. another year--young peregrine, of Cackleby, make a Long Vacation tour, have fall in with the Claverings occupy Schloss Schinkenstein, on the Mummel see. at Rome, at Lucca, at Nice, at the bath and gambling place of the Rhine and Belgium, this worthy couple might occasionally be hear of by the curious, and rumour of they come, as it be by gust, to Clavering's ancestral place.
their last place of abode be Paris, where they appear to have live in great fashion and splendour after the news of the death of Samuel Snell, Esq., of Calcutta, reach his orphan daughter in Europe.
of Sir Francis Clavering's antecedent little can be say that would be advantageous to that respected baronet. the son of an outlaw, live in a dismal old chateau near bruge, this gentleman have make a feeble attempt to start in life with a commission in a dragoon regiment, and have break down almost at the outset. transaction at the gambling-table have speedily effect his ruin; after a couple of year in the army he have be force to sell out, have pass some time in her Majesty's prison of the Fleet, and have then ship over to Ostend to join the gouty exile, his father. and in Belgium, France and Germany, for some year, this decayed and abortive prodigal might be see lurk about billiard-room and watering-place, punt at gambling-house, dance at boarding-house ball, and rid steeple-chase on other folk' horse.
it be at a boarding-house at Lausanne that Francis Clavering make what he call the lucky coup of marry the widow Amory, very lately return from Calcutta. his father die soon after, by consequence of whose demise his wife become Lady Clavering. the title so delight Mr. Snell of Calcutta, that he double his daughter's allowance; and die himself soon after, leave a fortune to she and her child the amount of which be, if not magnify by rumour, something very splendid indeed.
before this time there have be, not rumour unfavourable to Lady Clavering's reputation, but unpleasant impression regard her ladyship. the good english people abroad be shy of make her acquaintance; her manner be not the most refine; her origin be lamentably low and doubtful. the retired East Indians, who be to be find in considerable force in most of the continental town frequent by English, speak with much scorn of the disreputable old lawyer and indigo-smuggler her father, and of Amory, her first husband, who have be mate of the Indiaman in which Miss Snell come out to join her father at Calcutta. neither father nor daughter be in society at Calcutta, or have ever be hear of at Government House. Old Sir Jasper Rogers, who have be Chief Justice of Calcutta, have once say to his wife, that he could tell a queer story about Lady Clavering's first husband; but greatly to Lady Rogers's disappointment, and that of the young lady his daughter, the old Judge could never be get to reveal that mystery.
they be all, however, glad enough to go to Lady Clavering's party, when her ladyship take the Hotel Bouilli in the Rue Grenelle at Paris, and blaze out in the polite world there in the winter of 183--. the Faubourg St. Germain take she up. Viscount Bagwig, our excellent ambassador, pay her marked attention. the prince of the family frequent her salon. the most rigid and note of the english lady resident in the french capital acknowledge and countenance she; the virtuous Lady Elderbury, the severe Lady Rockminster, the venerable Countess of Southdown--people, in a word, renowne for austerity, and of quite a dazzle moral purity:--so great and beneficent an influence have the possession of ten (some say twenty) thousand a year exercise upon Lady Clavering's character and reputation. and her munificence and good-will be unbounded. anybody (in society) who have a scheme of charity be sure to find her purse open. the french lady of piety get money from she to support their school and convent; she subscribe indifferently for the armenian patriarch; for Father Barbarossa, who come to Europe to collect fund for his monastery on Mount Athos; for the Baptist Mission to Quashyboo, and the Orthodox Settlement in Feefawfoo, the large and most savage of the Cannibal Islands. and it be on record of she, that, on the same day on which Madame de Cricri get five napoleon from she in support of the poor persecute Jesuits, who be at that time in very bad odour in France, Lady Budelight put she down in her subscription-list for the Rev. J. Ramshorn, who have have a vision which order he to convert the Pope of Rome. and more than this, and for the benefit of the worldly, her ladyship give the good dinner, and the grand ball and supper, which be know at Paris during that season.
and it be during this time, that the good-natured lady must have arrange matter with her husband's creditor in England, for Sir Francis reappear in his native country, without fear of arrest; be announce in the Morning Post, and the county paper, as have take up his residence at Mivart's Hotel; and one day the anxious old housekeeper at Clavering House beheld a carriage and four horse drive up the long avenue, and stop before the moss-grow step in front of the vast melancholy portico.
three gentleman be in the carriage--an open one. on the back seat be our old acquaintance, Mr. Tatham of Chatteris, whilst in the place of honour sate a handsome and portly gentleman envelop in mustachio, whisker, fur collar, and braid, and by he a pale languid man who descend feebly from the carriage, when the little lawyer, and the gentleman in fur, nimbly jump out of it.
they walk up the great moss-grow step to the hall-door, and a foreign attendant, with earring and a gold-laced cap, pull strenuously at the great bell-handle at the cracked and sculpture gate. the bell be hear clang loudly through the vast gloomy mansion. step resound presently upon the marble pavement of the hall within; and the door open, and finally Mrs. Blenkinsop, the housekeeper, Polly, her aide-de-camp, and Smart, the keeper, appear bow humbly.
Smart, the keeper, pull the wisp of hay-coloured hair which adorn his sunburnt forehead, kick out his left heel as if there be a dog bite at his calf, and bring down his head to a bow. Old Mrs Blenkinsop drop a curtsey. Little Polly, her aide-de-camp, make a curtsey and several rapid bow likewise; and Mrs. Blenkinsop, with a great deal of emotion, quaver out, "welcome to Clavering, Sir Francis. it du my poor eye good to see one of the family once more."
the speech and the greeting be all address to the grand gentleman in fur and braiding, who wear his hat so magnificently on one side, and twirl his mustachio so royally. but he burst out laugh, and say, "youhave saddle the wrong horse, old lady--i'm not Sir Francis Clavering whatbe come to revisit the hall of my ancestor. friend and vassal! behold your rightful lord!"
and he point his hand towards the pale, languid gentleman who say, "donot be an ass, Ned"
"yes, Mrs. Blenkinsop, Ibe Sir Francis Clavering; I recollect you quite well. forgot I, I suppose?--how dy do?" and he take the old lady's trembling hand; and nod in her astonished face, in a not unkind manner.
Mrs. Blenkinsop declare upon her conscience that she would have know Sir Francis anywhere, that he be the very image of Sir Francis, his father, and of Sir John who have go before.
"o yes--thanky--of course--very much oblige--and that sort of thing," Sir Francis say, look vacantly about the hall "dismal old place, benot it, Ned? never see it but once, when my governor quarrel with gwandfather in the year twenty-thwee.
"Dismal?--beautiful!--the Castle of Otranto!--the Mysteries of Udolpho, by Jove!" say the individual address as Ned. "what a fireplace! you might roast an elephant in it. splendid carve gallery! Inigo Jones, by Jove! Iwould lay five to two itbe Inigo Jones."
"the upper part by Inigo Jones; the low be alter by the eminent dutch architect, Vanderputty, in George the first his time, by Sir Richard, fourth baronet," say the housekeeper.
"o indeed," say the Baronet "Gad, Ned, you know everything."
"I know a few thing, Frank," Ned answer. "I know thatbe not a Snyders over the mantelpiece--bet you three to one itbe a copy. wewill restore it, my boy. a lick of varnish, and it will come out wonderfully, sir. that old fellow in the red gown, I suppose, be Sir Richard."
"Sheriff of the county, and sate in parliament in the reign of Queen Anne," say the housekeeper, wonder at the stranger's knowledge; "that on the right be Theodosia, wife of Harbottle, second baronet, by Lely, represent in the character of Venus, the Goddess of Beauty,--her son Gregory, the third baronet, by her side, as Cupid, God of Love, with a bow and arrow; that on the next panel be Sir Rupert, make a knight banneret by Charles the First, and whose property be confuscate by Oliver Cromwell."
"thank you--needn't go on, Mrs. Blenkinsop," say the Baronet, "wewill walk about the place ourselves. Frosch, give I a cigar. have a cigar, Mr. Tatham?"
little Mr. Tatham try a cigar which Sir Francis's courier hand to he, and over which the lawyer splutter fearfully. "neednot come with we, Mrs. Blenkinsop. what's--his--name--you--Smart--feed the horse and wash their mouth. shallnot stay long. come along, Strong,--I know the way: I be here in twenty-thwee, at the end of my gwandfather's time." and Sir Francis and Captain Strong, for such be the style and title of Sir Francis's friend, pass out of the hall into the reception-room, leave the discomfited Mrs. Blenkinsop to disappear by a side-door which lead to her apartment, now the only habitable room in the long-uninhabited mansion.
it be a place so big that no tenant could afford to live in it; and Sir Francis and his friend walk through room after room, admire their vastness and dreary and deserted grandeur. on the right of the hall-door be the saloon and drawing-room, and on the other side the oak room, the parlour, the grand dining-room, the library, where Pen have find book in old day. round three side of the hall run a gallery, by which, and correspond passage, the chief bedroom be approach, and of which many be of stately proportion and exhibit mark of splendour. on the second story be a labyrinth of little discomfortable garret, destine for the attendant of the great folk who inhabit the mansion in the day when it be first build: and I do not know any more cheering mark of the increase philanthropy of our own time, than to contrast our domestic architecture with that of our ancestor, and to see how much well servant and poor be care for now, than in time when my lord and my lady sleep under gold canopy, and their servant lie above they in quarter not so airy or so clean as stable be now.
up and down the house the two gentleman wander, the owner of the mansion be very silent and resign about the pleasure of possess it; whereas the Captain, his friend, examine the premise with so much interest and eagerness that you would have think he be the master, and the other the indifferent spectator of the place. "I see capability in it--capability in it, sir," cry the Captain. "Gad, sir, leave it to I, and Iwill make it the pride of the country, at a small expense. what a theatre we can have in the library here, the curtain between the column which divide the room! what a famous room for a galop!--it will hold the whole shire. wewill hang the morning parlour with the tapestry in your second salon in the Rue de Grenelle, and furnish the oak room with the Moyen-age cabinet and the armour. Armour look splendid against black oak, and therebe a Venice glass in the Quai Voltaire, which will suit that high mantelpiece to an inch, sir. the long saloon, white and crimson of course; the drawing-room yellow satin; and the little drawing-room light blue, with lace over--hay?"
"I recollect my old governor can I in that little room," Sir Francis say sententiously; "he always hat I, my old governor."
"Chintz be the dodge, I suppose, for my lady's room--the suite in the landing, to the south, the bedroom, the sitting-room, and the dressing-room. wewill throw a conservatory out, over the balcony. where will you have your room?"
"put mine in the north wing," say the Baronet, with a yawn, "and out of the reach of Miss Amory's confounded piano. I cannot bear it. shebe scweeche from morning till night."
the Captain burst out laugh. he settle the whole further arrangement of the house in the course of their walk through it; and, the promenade end, they go into the steward's room, now inhabit by Mrs. Blenkinsop, and where Mr. Tatham be sit pore over a plan of the estate, and the old housekeeper have prepare a collation in honour of her lord and master.
then they inspect the kitchen and stable, about both of which Sir Francis be rather interested, and Captain Strong be for examine the garden; but the Baronet say, "d--- the garden, and that sort of thing!" and finally he drive away from the house as unconcernedly as he have enter it; and that night the people of Clavering learn that Sir Francis Clavering have pay a visit to the Park, and be come to live in the county.
when this fact come to be know at Chatteris, all the folk in the place be set in commotion: High Church and Low Church, half-pay captain and old maid and dowager, sporting squireen of the viciniage, farmer, tradesman, and factory people--all the population in and round about the little place. the news be bring to Fairoaks, and receive by the lady there, and by Mr. Pen, with some excitement. "Mrs. Pybus say there be a very pretty girl in the family, Arthur," Laura say, who be as kind and thoughtful upon this point as woman generally be: "a Miss Amory, Lady Clavering's daughter by her first marriage. of course, you will fall in love with she as soon as she arrive."
Helen cry out, "donot talk nonsense, Laura." Pen laugh, and say, "well, there be the young Sir Francis for you."
"he be but four year old," Miss Laura reply. "but I shall console myself with that handsome officer, Sir Francis's friend. he be at church last Sunday, in the Clavering pew, and his mustachio be beautiful."
indeed the number of Sir Francis's family (whereof the member have all be mention in the above paragraph) be pretty soon know in his town, and everything else, as nearly as human industry and ingenuity could calculate, regard his household. the Park avenue and ground be dot now with town folk of the summer evening, who make their way up to the great house, peer about the premise, and criticise the improvement which be take place there. load upon load of furniture arrive in numberless van from Chatteris and London; and numerous as the van be, there be not one but Captain Glanders know what it contain, and escort the baggage up to the Park House.
he and Captain Edward Strong have form an intimate acquaintance by this time. the young Captain occupy those very lodging at Clavering, which the peaceful Smirke have previously tenant, and be deep in the good grace of Madame Fribsby, his landlady; and of the whole town, indeed. the Captain be splendid in person and raiment; fresh-colour, blue-eye, black-whisker, broad-cheste, athletic--a slight tendency to fulness do not take away from the comeliness of his jolly figure--a braver soldier never present a broad chest to the enemy. as he stride down Clavering High Street, his hat on one side, his cane clank on the pavement, or wave round he in the execution of military cut and soldatesque manoeuvre--his jolly laughter ring through the otherwise silent street--he be as welcome as sunshine to the place, and a comfort to every inhabitant in it.
on the first market-day he know every pretty girl in the market: he joke with all the woman: have a word with the farmer about their stock, and din at the Agricultural Ordinary at the Clavering Arms, where he set they all die with laugh by his fun and joke. "Tu be sure he be a vine veller, tu be sure that he be," be the universal opinion of the gentleman in top-boot. he shake hand with a score of they, as they ride out of the inn-yard on their old nag, wave his hat to they splendidly as he smoke his cigar in the inn-gate. in the course of the evening he be free of the landlady's bar, know what rent the landlord pay, how many acre he farm, how much malt he put in his strong beer; and whether he ever run in a little brandy unexcise by king from Baymouth, or the fishing village along the coast.
he have try to live at the great house first; but it be so dull he couldnot stand it. "I be a creature bear for society," he tell Captain Glanders. "Ibe down here to see Clavering's house set in order; for between ourselves, Frank have no energy, sir, no energy; hebe not the chest for it, sir (and he throw out his own trunk as he speak); but I must have social intercourse. Old Mrs. Blenkinsop go to bed at seven, and take polly with she. there be nobody but I and the Ghost for the first two night at the great house, and I own it, sir, I like company. Most old soldier do."
glander ask Strong where he have serve? Captain Strong curl his mustache, and say with a laugh, that the other might almost ask where he have not serve. "I begin, sir, as cadet of Hungarian Uhlans, and when the war of greek independence break out, quit that service in consequence of a quarrel with my governor, and be one of seven who escape from Missolonghi, and be blow up in one of Botzaris's fireship, at the age of seventeen. Iwill show you my Cross of the Redeemer, if youwill come over to my lodging and take a glass of grog with I, Captain, this evening. Ihave a few of those bauble in my desk. Ihave the White Eagle of Poland; Skrzynecki give it I" (he pronounce Skrzynecki's name with wonderful accuracy and gusto) "upon the field of Ostrolenka. I be a lieutenant of the fourth regiment, sir, and we march through Diebitsch's line--bang thro' them into Prussia, sir, without fire a shot. ah, Captain, that be a mismanaged business. I receive this wound by the side of the King before oporto,--where he would have pound the stock-job Pedroites, have Bourmont follow my advice; and I serve in Spain with the King's troop, until the death of my dear friend, Zumalacarreguy, when I see the game be over, and hang up my toasting iron, Captain. Alava offer I a regiment, the Queen's Muleteros; but I couldn't--damme, I couldn't--and now, sir, you know Ned Strong--the Chevalier Strong they call I abroad-- as well as he know himself."
in this way almost everybody in Clavering come to know Ned Strong. he tell Madame Fribsby, he tell the landlord of the George, he tell Baker at the reading-room, he tell Mrs. Glanders, and the young one, at dinner: and, finally, he tell Mr. Arthur Pendennis, who, yawn into Clavering one day, find the Chevalier Strong in company with Captain Glanders; and who be delighted with his new acquaintance.
before many day be over, Captain Strong be as much at home in Helen's drawing-room as he be in Madame Fribsby's first floor; and make the lonely house very gay with his good-humour and ceaseless flow of talk. the two woman have never before see such a man. he have a thousand story about battle and danger to interest they--about greek captive, polish beauty, and spanish nun. he could sing score of song, in half a dozen language, and would sit down to the piano and troll they off in a rich manly voice. both the lady pronounce he to be delightful--and so he be; though, indeed, they have not have much choice of man's society as yet, have see in the course of their life but few person, except old Portman and the Major, and Mr. Pen, who be a genius, to be sure; but then your genius be somewhat flat and moody at home.
and Captain Strong acquaint his new friend at Fairoaks, not only with his own biography, but with the whole history of the family now come to Clavering. it be he who have make the marriage between his friend Frank and the widow Amory. she want rank, and he want money. what match could be more suitable? he organise it; he make those two people happy. there be no particular romantic attachment between they; the widow be not of an age or a person for romance, and Sir Francis, if he have his game at billiard, and his dinner, care for little beside. but they be as happy as people could be. clavering would return to his native place and country, his wife's fortune would pay his encumbrance off, and his son and heir would be one of the first man in the county.
"and Miss Amory?" Laura ask. Laura be uncommonly curious about Miss Amory.
Strong laugh. "oh, Miss Amory be a muse--Miss Amory be a mystery--Miss Amory be a femme incomprise." "what be that?" ask simple Mrs. Pendennis--but the Chevalier give she no answer: perhaps could not give her one. "Miss Amory paint, Miss Amory write poem, Miss Amory compose music, Miss Amory rid like Diana Vernon. Miss Amory be a paragon, in a word."
"I hate clever woman," say Pen.
"thank you," say Laura. for her part she be sure she should be charm with Miss Amory, and quite long to have such a friend. and with this she look Pen full in the face, as if every word the little hypocrite say be Gospel truth.
thus, an intimacy be arrange and prepare beforehand between the Fairoaks family and their wealthy neighbour at the Park; and Pen and Laura be to the full as eager for their arrival, as even the most curious of the Clavering folk. a Londoner, who see fresh face and yawn at they every day may smile at the eagerness with which country people expect a visitor. a cockney come amongst they, and be remember by his rural entertainer for year after he have leave they, and forget they very likely--float far away from they on the vast London sea. but the islander remember long after the mariner have sail away, and can tell you what he say and what he wear, and how he look and how he laugh. in fine, a new arrival be an event in the country not to be understand by we, who donot, and have rather not, know who live next door.
when the painter and upholsterer have do their work in the house, and so beautify it, under Captain Strong's superintendence, that he might well be proud of his taste, that gentleman announce that he should go to London, where the whole family have arrive by this time, and should speedily return to establish they in their renovated mansion.
detachment of domestic precede they. carriage come down by sea, and be bring over from Baymouth by horse which have previously arrive under the care of groom and coachman. one day the 'Alacrity' coach bring down on its roof two large and melancholy man, who be drop at the Park lodge with their trunk, and who be Messieurs Frederic and James, metropolitan footman, who have no objection to the country, and bring with they state and other suit of the Clavering uniform.
on another day, the mail deposit at the gate a foreign gentleman, adorn with many ringlet and chain. he make a great riot at the lodge-gate to the keeper's wife (who, be a west-country woman, do not understand his English or his Gascon French), because there be no carriage in wait to drive he to the house, a mile off, and because he could not walk entire league in his fatigued state and varnish boot. this be Monsieur Alcide Mirobolant, formerly Chef of his Highness the Duc de Borodino, of H. Eminence Cardinal Beccafico, and at present Chef of the bouche of Sir Clavering, Baronet:--Monsieur Mirobolant's library, picture, and piano have arrive previously in charge of the intelligent young Englishman, his aide-de-camp. he be, moreover, aid by a profess female cook, likewise from London, who have inferior female under her order.
he do not dine in the steward's room, but take his nutriment in solitude in his own apartment, where a female servant be affect to his private use. it be a grand sight to behold he in his dressing-gown compose a menu. he always sate down and play the piano for some time before that. if interrupt, he remonstrate pathetically with his little maid. every great artist, he say, have need of solitude to perfectionate his work.
but we be advance matter in the fulness of our love and respect for Monsieur Mirobolant, and bring he prematurely on the stage.
the Chevalier Strong have a hand in the engagement of all the London domestic, and, indeed, seem to be the master of the house. there be those among they who say he be the house-steward, only he din with the family. Howbeit, he know how to make himself respect, and two of by no mean the least comfortable room of the house be assign to his particular use.
he be walk upon the terrace finally upon the eventful day when, amidst an immense jangling of bell from Clavering Church, where the flag be fly, an open carriage and one of those travel chariot or family ark, which only english philoprogenitiveness could invent drive rapidly with foam horse through the Park gate, and up to the step of the Hall. the two battan of the sculptured door fly open. the superior officer in black, the large and melancholy gentleman, now in livery with their hair in powder, the country menial engage to aid they, be in wait in the hall, and bow like elm when autumn wind wail in the park. through this avenue pass Sir Francis Clavering with a most unmoved face: Lady Clavering, with a pair of bright black eye, and a good-humour countenance, which waggle and nod very graciously: Master Francis Clavering, who be hold his mamma's skirt (and who stop the procession to look at the large footman, whose appearance seem to strike the young gentleman), and Miss Blandy, governess to Master Francis, and Miss Amory, her ladyship's daughter, give her arm to Captain Strong. it be summer, but fire of welcome be crackle in the great hall chimney, and in the room which the family be to occupy.
Monsieur Mirobolant have look at the procession from one of the lime-tree in the avenue. "Elle est la," he say, lay his jewelled hand on his richly-embroider velvet glass button, "Je t'ai vue, je te benis, o ma sylphide, o mon ange!" and he dive into the thicket, and make his way back to his furnace and saucepan.
the next Sunday the same party which have just make its appearance at Clavering Park, come and publicly take possession of the ancient pew in the church, where so many of the Baronet's ancestor have pray, and be now kneel in effigy. there be such a run to see the new folk, that the Low Church be desert, to the disgust of its pastor; and as the state barouche, with the grey and coachman in silver wig, and solemn footman, draw up at the old churchyard-gate, there be such a crowd assemble there as have not be see for many a long day. Captain Strong know everybody, and salute for all the company--the country people vow my lady be not handsome, to be sure, but pronounce she to be uncommon fine dress, as indeed she be--with the fine of shawl, the fine of pelisse, the brilliant of bonnet and wreath, and a power of ring, cameo, brooch, chain, bangle, and other nameless gimcrack; and ribbon of every breadth and colour of the rainbow flame on her person. Miss Amory appear meek in dove-colour, like a vestal virgin--while Master Francis be in the costume, then prevalent, of Rob Roy Macgregor, a celebrate Highland outlaw. the Baronet be not more animated than ordinarily--there be a happy vacuity about he which enable he to face a dinner, a death, a church, a marriage, with the same indifferent ease.
a pew for the Clavering servant be fill by these domestic, and the enrapture congregation see the gentleman from London with "vlower on their heed," and the miraculous coachman with his silver wig, take their place in that pew so soon as his horse be put up at the Clavering Arms.
in the course of the service, Master Francis begin to make such a yelling in the pew, that Frederic, the tall of the footman, be beckon by his master, and rise and go and carry out Master Francis, who roar and beat he on the head, so that the powder fly round about, like cloud of incense. nor be he pacify until place on the box of the carriage, where he play at horse with John's whip.
"you see the little beggarbe never be to church before, Miss Bell," the Baronet drawl out to a young lady who be visit he; "no wonder he should make a row: I donot go in town neither, but I think itbe right in the country to give a good example--and that sort of thing."
Miss Bell laugh and say, "the little boy have not give a particularly good example."
"Gad, I donot know, and that sort of thing," say the Baronet. "it benot so bad neither. whenever he want a thing, Frank always cwie, and whenever he cwie he get it."
here the child in question begin to howl for a dish of sweetmeat on the luncheon-table, and make a lunge across the table-cloth, upset a glass of wine over the good waistcoat of one of the guest present, Mr. Arthur Pendennis, who be greatly annoyed at be make to look foolish, and at have his spotless cambric shirt front blotch with wine.
"we do spoil he so," say Lady Clavering to Mrs. Pendennis, finally gaze at the cherub, whose hand and face be now froth over with the specie of lather which be insert in the confection call meringue a la creme.
"it be very wrong," say Mrs. Pendennis, as if she have never do such a thing herself as spoil a child.
"Mamma say she spoil my brother,--do you think anything could, Miss Bell? look at him,--isn't he like a little angel?"
"Gad, I be quite wight," say the Baronet. "he have cwie, and he have get it, you see. go it, Fwank, old boy."
"Sir Francis be a very judicious parent," Miss Amory whisper. donot you think so, Miss Bell? I shallnot call you Miss Bell--I shall call you Laura. I admire you so at church. your robe be not well make, nor your bonnet very fresh. but you have such beautiful grey eye, and such a lovely tint."
"thank you," say Miss Bell, laugh.
"your cousin be handsome, and think so. he be uneasy de sa personne. he have not see the world yet. have he genius? have he suffer? a lady, a little woman in a rumpled satin and velvet shoe--a Miss Pybus--come here, and say he have suffer. I, too, have suffered,--and you, Laura, have your heart ever be touch?"
Laura say "no!" but perhaps blush a little at the idea or the question, so that the other said,--
"Ah Laura! I see it all. it be the beau cousin. tell I everything. I already love you as a sister."
"you be very kind," say Miss Bell, smile, "and--and it must be own that it be a very sudden attachment."
"all attachment be so. it be electricity--spontaneity. it be instantaneous. I know I should love you from the moment I see you. do you not feel it yourself?"
"not yet," say Laura; "but--I daresay I shall if I try."
"call I by my name, then."
"but I donot know it," Laura cry out.
"my name be Blanche--isn't it a pretty name? call I by it."
"Blanche--it be very pretty, indeed."
"and while mamma talk with that kind-look lady--what relation be she to you? she must have be pretty once, but be rather passee; she be not well gantee, but she have a pretty hand--and while mamma talk to she, come with I to my own room,--my own, own room. itbe a darling room, though that horrid creature, Captain Strong, do arrange it. be you eprise of he? he say you be, but I know well; it be the beau cousin. yes--il a de beaux yeux. Je n'aime pas les blond, ordinairement. car je suis blonde moi--je suis Blanche et blonde,"--and she look at her face and make a moue in the glass; and never stop for Laura's answer to the question which she have put.
Blanche be fair, and like a sylph. she have fair hair, with green reflection in it. but she have dark eyebrow. she have long black eyelash, which veil beautiful brown eye. she have such a slim waist, that it be a wonder to behold; and such a slim little foot, that you would have think the grass would hardly bend under they. her lip be of the colour of faint rosebud, and her voice warble limpidly over a set of the sweet little pearly tooth ever see. she show they very often, for they be very pretty. she be very good-natured, and a smile not only show her tooth wonderfully, but likewise exhibit two lovely little pink dimple, that nestle in either cheek.
she show Laura her drawing, which the other think charming. she play she some of her waltz, with a rapid and brilliant finger, and Laura be still more charmed. and she then read she some poem, in French and English, likewise of her own composition, and which she keep lock in her own book--her own dear little book; it be bind in blue velvet, with a gilt lock, and on it be print in gold the title of 'Mes Larmes.'
"Mes larmes!--isn't it a pretty name?" the young lady continue, who be pleased with everything that she do, and do everything very well. Laura own that it be. she have never see anything like it before; anything so lovely, so accomplished, so fragile and pretty; warble so prettily, and trip about such a pretty room, with such a number of pretty book, picture, flower, round about she. the honest and generous country girl forget even jealousy in her admiration. "indeed, Blanche," she say, "everything in the room be pretty; and you be the prettiest of all." the other smile, look in the glass, go up and take both of Laura's hand, and kiss they, and sit down to the piano, and shake out a little song, as if she have be a nightingale.
this be the first visit pay by fairoak to Clavering Park, in return for Clavering Park's visit to Fairoaks, in reply to Fairoaks's card leave a few day after the arrival of Sir Francis's family. the intimacy between the young lady spring up like Jack's bean-stalk to the sky in a single night. the large footman be perpetually walk with little rose-colour pink note to Fairoaks; where there be a pretty house-maid in the kitchen, who might possibly tempt those gentleman to so humble a place. Miss Amory send music, or Miss Amory send a new novel, or a picture from the 'Journal des Modes,' to Laura; or my lady's compliment arrive with flower and fruit; or Miss Amory beg and pray Miss Bell to come to dinner; and dear Mrs. Pendennis, if she be strong enough; and Mr. Arthur, if a humdrum party be not too stupid for he; and would send a pony-carriage for Mrs. Pendennis; and would take no denial.
neither Arthur nor Laura wish to refuse. and Helen, who be, indeed, somewhat ailing, be glad that the two should have their pleasure; and would look at they fondly as they set forth, and ask in her heart that she might not be call away until those two being whom she love well in the world should be join together. as they go out and cross over the bridge, she remember summer evening five-and-twenty year ago, when she, too, have bloom in her brief prime of love and happiness. it be all over now. the moon be look from the purpling sky, and the star glitter there, just as they use in the early, well-remember evening. he be lie dead far away, with the billow roll between they. good God! how well she remember the last look of his face as they part. it look out at she through the vista of long year, as sad and as clear as then.
so Mr. Pen and Miss Laura find the society at Clavering Park an uncommonly agreeable resort of summer evening. Blanche vow that she raffole of Laura; and, very likely, Mr. Pen be pleased with Blanche. his spirit come back: he laugh and rattle till Laura wonder to hear he. it be not the same Pen, yawn in a shooting jacket, in the Fairoaks parlour, who appear alert and brisk, and smile and well dress, in Lady Clavering's drawing-room. sometimes they have music. Laura have a sweet contralto voice, and sing with Blanche, who have have the good continental instruction, and be charm to be her friend's mistress. sometimes Mr. Pen join in these concert, or oftener look sweet upon Miss Blanche as she sing. sometimes they have glee, when Captain Strong's chest be of vast service, and he boom out in a prodigious bass, of which he be not a little proud.
"good fellow, strong--ain't he, Miss Bell?" Sir Francis would say to she. "play at ecarte with Lady Clavering--play anything, pitch-and-toss, pianoforty, cwibbage if you like. how long do you think hebe be stay with I? he come for a week with a carpet-bag, and Gad, hebe be stay here thwee year. good fellow, benot he? donot know how he get a shillin' though, begad I donot, Miss Lauwa."
and yet the Chevalier, if he lose his money to Lady Clavering, always pay it; and if he live with his friend for three year, pay for that too--in good-humour, in kindness and joviality, in a thousand little service by which he make himself agreeable. what gentleman could want a well friend than a man who be always in spirit, never in the way or out of it, and be ready to execute any commission for his patron, whether it be to sing a song or meet a lawyer, to fight a duel or to carve a capon?
although Laura and Pen commonly go to Clavering Park together, yet sometimes Mr. Pen take walk there unattended by she, and about which he do not tell she. he take to fish the Brawl, which run through the Park, and pass not very far from the garden-wall. and by the oddest coincidence, Miss Amory would walk out (have be to look at her flower), and would be quite surprised to see Mr. Pendennis fishing.
I wonder what trout Pen catch while the young lady be look on? or whether Miss Blanche be the pretty little fish which play round his fly, and which Mr. Pen be endeavour to hook? it must be own, he become very fond of that healthful and invigorate pursuit of angling, and be whip the brawl continually with his fly.
as for Miss Blanche she have a kind heart; and have, as she own, herself "suffer" a good deal in the course of her brief life and experience--why, she could compassionate other susceptible being like Pen, who have suffer too. her love for Laura and that dear Mrs. Pendennis redouble: if they be not at the Park, she be not easy unless she herself be at Fairoaks. she play with Laura; she read french and german with Laura; and Mr. Pen read french and german along with they. he turn sentimental ballad of Schiller and Goethe into english verse for the lady, and Blanche unlock 'Mes Larmes' for he, and impart to he some of the plaintive outpouring of her own tender Muse.
it appear from these poem that this young creature have indeed suffer prodigiously. she be familiar with the idea of suicide. death she repeatedly long for. a fade rose inspire she with such grief that you would have think she must die in pain of it. it be a wonder how a young creature (who have have a snug home or be at a comfortable boarding-school, and have no outward grief or hardship to complain of) should have suffer so much--should have find the mean of get at such an ocean of despair and passion (as a runaway boy who will get to sea), and have embark on it should survive it. what a talent she must have have for weep to be able to pour out so many of Mes Larmes!
they be not particularly briny, Miss Blanche's tear, that be the truth; but Pen, who read she verse, think they very well for a lady-- and write some verse himself for she. his be very violent and passionate, very hot, sweet and strong: and he not only write verse; but--o the villain! o, the deceiver! he alter and adapt former poem in his possession, and which have be compose for a certain Emily Fotheringay, for the use and to the christian name of Miss Blanche Amory.
CHAPTER XXIV
a little Innocent
every house have its skeleton in it somewhere, and it may be a comfort to some unhappy folk to think that the lucky and most wealthy of their neighbour have their misery and cause of disquiet. our little innocent Muse of Blanche, who sing so nicely and talk so sweetly, you would have think she must have make sunshine where ever she go, be the skeleton, or the misery, or the bore, or the Nemesis of Clavering House, and of most of the inhabitant thereof. as one little stone in your own shoe or your horse's, suffice to put either to torture and to make your journey miserable, so in life a little obstacle be sufficient to obstruct your entire progress, and subject you to endless annoyance and disquiet. who would have guess that such a smile little fairy as Blanche Amory could be the cause of discord in any family?
"I say, strong," one day the Baronet say, as the pair be converse after dinner over the billiard-table, and that great unbosomer of secret, a cigar; "I say, Strong, I wish to the doose your wife be dead."
"so do I. thatbe a cannon, by Jove. but she willnot; shewill live for ever-- you see if she donot. why do you wish she off the hook, Frank, my boy?" ask Captain Strong.
"because then you might marry Missy. she benot bad-look. shewill have ten thousand, and thatbe a good bit of money for such a poor old devil as you," drawl out the other gentleman.
"and gad, Strong, I hate she bad and bad every day. I cannot stand she, Strong, by gad, I cannot."
"I wouldnot take she at twice the figure," Captain Strong say, laugh. "I never see such a little devil in my life."
"I should like to poison she," say the sententious Baronet; "by Jove I should,"
"why, what have she be at now?" ask his friend.
"nothing particular," answer Sir Francis; "only her old trick. that girl have such a knack of make everybody miserable that, hang I, itbe quite surprising. last night she send the governess cry away from the dinner-table. afterwards, as I be pass Frank's room, I hear the poor little beggar howl in the dark, and find his sister have be frightening his soul out of his body, by tell he story about the ghost thatbe in the house. at lunch she give my lady a turn; and though my wife's a fool, shebe a good soul--i'm hang if she benot."
"what do Missy do to she?" Strong ask.
"why, hang I, if she donot begin talk about the late Amory, my predecessor," the Baronet say, with a grin. "she get some picture out of the Keepsake, and say she be sure it be like her dear father, she want to know where her father's grave be. hang her father! whenever Miss Amory talk about he, Lady Clavering always burst out cry: and the little devil will talk about he in order to spite her mother. today when she begin, I get in a confounded rage; say I be her father; and--and that sort of thing, and then, sir, she take a shy at I."
"and what do she say about you, Frank?" Mr. Strong, still laugh, inquire of his friend and patron.
"Gad, she say I benot her father; that I benot fit to comprehend she; that her father must have be a man of genius, and fine feeling, and that sort of thing: whereas I have marry her mother for money."
"well, donot you?" ask Strong.
"it donot make it any the pleasanter to hear because itbe true, donot you know," Sir Francis Clavering answer. "I benot a literary man and that; but I benot such a fool as she make I out. I donot know how it be, but she always manage to put I in the hole, donot you understand. she turn all the house round she in her quiet way, and with her confound sentimental air. I wish she be dead, Ned."
"it be my wife whom you want dead just now," Strong say, always in perfect good-humour; upon which the Baron with his accustomed candour, say, "well; when people bear my life out, I do wish they be dead, and I wish Missy be down a well, with all my heart."
thus it will be see from the above report of this candid conversation that our accomplished little friend have some peculiarity or defect of character which render she not very popular. she be a young lady of some genius, exquisite sympathy and considerable literary attainment, living, like many another genius, with relative who could not comprehend she. neither her mother nor her stepfather be person of a literary turn. Bell's Life and the Racing Calendar be the extent of the Baronet's reading, and Lady Clavering still write like a schoolgirl of thirteen, and with an extraordinary disregard to grammar and spelling. and as Miss Amory feel very keenly that she be not appreciate, and that she live with person who be not she equal in intellect or conversational power, she lose no opportunity to acquaint her family circle with their inferiority to herself, and not only be a martyr, but take care to let everybody know that she be so. if she suffer, as she say and think she did, severely, be we to wonder that a young creature of such delicate sensibility should shriek and cry out a good deal? without sympathy life be nothing; and would it not have be a want of candour on her part to affect a cheerfulness which she do not feel, or pretend a respect for those towards whom it be quite impossible she should entertain any reverence? if a poetess may not bemoan her lot, of what earthly use be her lyre? Blanche strike hers only to the sad of tune; and sing elegy over her dead hope, dirge over her early frost-nipt bud of affection, as become such a melancholy fate and Muse.
her actual distress, as we have say, have not be up to the present time very considerable: but her grief lay; like those of most of we, in her own soul--that be sad and habitually dissatisfied, what wonder that she should weep? so Mes Larmes dribble out of her eye any day at command: she could furnish an unlimited supply of tear, and her faculty of shed they increase by practice. for sentiment be like another complaint mention by Horace, as increase by self-indulgence (I be sorry to say, lady, that the complaint in question be call the dropsy), and the more you cry, the more you will be able and desirous to do so.
Missy have begin to gush at a very early age. Lamartine be her favourite bard from the period when she first could feel: and she have subsequently improve her mind by a sedulous study of novel of the great modern author of the french language. there be not a romance of Balzac and George Sand which the indefatigable little creature have not devour--by the time she be sixteen: and, however little she sympathise with her relative at home, she have friend, as she say, in the spirit-world, mean the tender Indiana, the passionate and poetic Lelia, the amiable Trenmor, that high-souled convict, that angel of the galleys,--the fiery Stenio,--and the other numberless hero of the french romance. she have be in love with Prince Rodolph and Prince Djalma while she be yet at school, and have settle the divorce question, and the right of woman, with Indiana, before she have leave off pinafore. the impetuous little lady play at love with these imaginary worthy as a little while before she have play at maternity with her doll. pretty little poetical spirit! it be curious to watch they with those plaything. to-day the blue-eyed one be the favourite, and the black-eyed one be push behind the drawer. to-morrow blue-eye may take its turn of neglect and it may be an odious little wretch with a burn nose, or tear bead of hair, and no eye at all, that take the first place in Miss's affection, and be dandle and caress in her arm.
as novelist be suppose to know everything, even the secret of female heart, which the owner themselves do not perhaps know, we may state that at eleven year of age Mademoiselle Betsi, as Miss Amory be then call, have feel tender emotion towards a young Savoyard organ-grinder at Paris, whom she persist in believe to be a prince carry off from his parent; that at twelve an old and hideous drawing-master (but, ah, what age or personal defect be proof against woman's love?) have agitate her young heart; and that, at thirteen, be at Madame de Caramel's boarding-school, in the Champs Elysees, which, as everybody know, be next door to Monsieur Rogron's (Chevalier of the Legion of Honour) pension for young gentleman, a correspondence by letter take place between the seduisante Miss Betsi and two young gentleman of the College of Charlemagne, who be pensioner of the Chevalier Rogron.
in the above paragraph our young friend have be call by a christian name different to that under which we be lately present to she. the fact be, that Miss Amory, call Missy at home, have really at the first be christen Betsy--but assume the name of Blanche of her own will and fantasy, and crown herself with it; and the weapon which the Baronet, her stepfather, hold in terror over she, be the threat to call she publicly by her name of Betsy, by which menace he sometimes manage to keep the young rebel in order.
we have speak just now of child's doll, and of the manner in which those little people take up and neglect their darling toy, and very likely this history will show that Miss Blanche assume and put away her live doll with a similar girlish inconstancy. she have have host of dear, dear, darling, friend ere now, and have quite a little museum of lock of hair in her treasure-chest, which she have gather in the course of her sentimental progress. some dear friend have marry: some have go to other school: one beloved sister she have lose from the pension, and find again, o, horror! her darling, her Leocadie keep the book in her father's shop, a grocer in the Rue du Bac: in fact, she have meet with a number of disappointment, estrangement, disillusionment, as she call they in her pretty french jargon, and have see and suffer a great deal for so young a woman. but it be the lot of sensibility to suffer, and of confide tenderness to be deceive, and she feel that she be only undergo the penalty of genius in these pang and disappointment of her young career.
meanwhile, she manage to make the honest lady, her mother, as uncomfortable as circumstance would permit; and cause she worthy stepfather to wish she be dead. with the exception of Captain Strong, whose invincible good-humour be proof against her sarcasm, the little lady rule the whole house with he tongue. if Lady Clavering talk about Sparrowgrass instead of Asparagus, or call an object a hobject, as this unfortunate lady would sometimes do, Missy calmly correct she, and frighten the good soul, her mother, into error only the more frequent as she grow more nervous under her daughter's eye.
it be not to be suppose, consider the vast interest which the arrival of the family at Clavering Park inspire in the inhabitant of the little town, that Madame Fribsby alone, of all the folk in Clavering, should have remain unmoved and incurious. at the first appearance of the Park family in church, Madame note every article of toilette which the lady wear, from their bonnet to their brodequin, and take a survey of the attire of the lady' maid in the pew allot to they. we fear that Doctor Portman's sermon, though it be one of his old and most value composition, have little effect upon Madame Fribsby on that day.
in a very few day afterwards, she have manage for herself an interview with Lady Clavering's confidential attendant in the housekeeper's room at the Park; and her card in French and English, state that she receive the new fashion from Paris from her correspondent Madame Victorine, and that she be in the custom of make court and ball dress for the nobility and gentry of the shire, be in the possession of Lady Clavering and Miss Amory, and favourably receive, as she be happy to hear, by those lady.
Mrs. Bonner, Lady Clavering's lady, become soon a great frequenter of Madame Fribsby's drawing-room, and partook of many entertainment at the milliner's expense. a meal of green tea, scandal, hot Sally-Lunn cake, and a little novel reading, be always at the service of Mrs. Bonner, whenever she be free to pass an evening in the town. and she find much more time for these pleasure than her junior officer, Miss Amory's maid, who seldom could be spar for a holiday, and be work as hard as any factory-girl by that inexorable little Muse, her mistress.
the Muse love to be dress becomingly, and, have a lively fancy and a poetic desire for change, be for alter her attire every day. she maid have a taste in dressmaking--to which art she have be an apprentice at Paris, before she enter into Miss Blanche's service there--be keep from morning till night alter and remodelle Miss Amory's habiliment; and rise very early and go to bed very late, in obedience to the untiring caprice of her little taskmistress. the girl be of respectable english parent. there be many of our people, colonist of Paris, who have see well day, who be not quite ruin, who do not quite live upon charity, and yet cannot get on without it; and as her father be a cripple incapable of work, and her return home would only increase the burthen and add to the misery of the family, poor Pincott be fain to stay where she could maintain herself, and spare a little relief to her parent.
our Muse, with the candour which distinguish she, never fail to remind her attendant of the real state of matter. "I should send you away, Pincott, for you be a great deal too weak, and your eye be fail you, and you be always cry and snivel and want the doctor; but I wish that your parent at home should be support, and I go on endure you for their sake, mind," the dear Blanche would say to her timid little attendant. or, "Pincott, your wretched appearance and slavish manner, and red eye, positively give I the migraine; and I think I shall make you wear rouge, so that you may look a little cheerful;" or, "Pincott, I cannot bear, even for the sake of your starve parent, that you should tear my hair out of my head in that manner; and I will thank you to write to they and say that I dispense with your service." after which sort of speech, and after keep she for an hour tremble over her hair, which the young lady love to have comb, as she peruse one of her favourite french novel, she would go to bed at one o'clock, and say, "Pincott, you may kiss I. good night. I should like you to have the pink dress ready for the morning." and so with blessing upon her attendant, she would turn round and go to sleep.
the Muse might lie in bed as long as she choose of a morning, and avail herself of that privilege; but Pincott have to rise very early indeed to get her mistress's task do; and have to appear next day with the same red eye and the same wan face, which displease Miss Amory by their want of gaiety, and cause the mistress to be so angry, because the servant persist in be and look unwell and unhappy. not that Blanche ever think she be a hard mistress. indeed, she make quite a friend of Pincott, at time, and write some very pretty verse about the lonely little tiring-maid, whose heart be far away. our beloved Blanche be a superior being, and expect to be wait upon as such. and I do not know whether there be any other lady in this world who treat their servant or dependant so, but it may be that there be such, and that the tyranny which they exercise over their subordinate, and the pang which they can manage to inflict with a soft voice, and a well-breed simper, be as cruel as those which a slave-driver administer with an oath and a whip.
but Blanche be a Muse--a delicate little creature, quite tremulous with excitability, whose eye fill with tear at the small emotion; and who know, but that it be the very fineness of her feeling which cause they to be froisse so easily? you crush a butterfly by merely touch it. vulgar people have no idea of the sensibility of a Muse.
so little Pincott be occupy all day and night in stitch, hemming, rip, comb, ironing, crimping, for her mistress; read to she when in bed,--for the girl be mistress of the two language, and have a sweet voice and manner--could take no share in Madame Fribsby's soiree, nor indeed be she much miss, or consider of sufficient consequence to appear at their entertainment.
but there be another person connect with the Clavering establishment, who become a constant guest of our friend, the milliner. this be the chief of the kitchen, Monsieur Mirobolant, with whom Madame Fribsby soon form an intimacy.
not have be accustom to the appearance or society of person of the french nation, the rustic inhabitant of Clavering be not so favourably impress by Monsieur Alcide's manner and appearance, as that gentleman might have desire that they should be. he walk among they quite unsuspiciously upon the afternoon of a summer day, when his service be not require at the House, in his usual favourite costume, namely, his light green frock or paletot, his crimson velvet waistcoat, with blue glass button, his pantalon Ecossais, of a very large and decide check pattern, his orange satin neckcloth, and his jean-boot, with tip of shiny leather,--these, with a gold-embroider cap, and a richly gilt cane, or other variety of ornament of a similar tendency, form his usual holiday costume, in which he flatter himself there be nothing remarkable (unless, indeed, the beauty of his person should attract observation), and in which he consider that he exhibit the appearance of a gentleman of good parisian ton.
he walk then down the street, grin and ogle every woman he meet with glance, which he mean should kill they outright, and peer over the railing, and in at the window, where female be, in the tranquil summer evening. but Betsy, Mrs. Pybus's maid, shrink back with a Lor bless we, as Alcide ogle she over the laurel-bush; the Miss Bakers, and their mamma, star with wonder; and presently a crowd begin to follow the interesting foreigner, of ragged urchin and child, who leave their dirt-pie in the street to pursue he.
for some time he think that admiration be the cause which lead these person in his wake, and walk on, please himself that he could so easily confer on other so much harmless pleasure. but the little child and dirt-pie manufacturer be presently succeed by follower of a large growth, and a number of lad and girl from the factory be let loose at this hour, join the mob, and begin laugh, jeering, hoot, and call opprobrious name at the Frenchman. some cry out "Frenchy! Frenchy!" some exclaim "Frogs!" one ask for a lock of his hair, which be long and in richly-flow ringlet; and at length the poor artist begin to perceive that he be an object of derision rather than of respect to the rude grinning mob.
it be at this juncture that Madame Fribsby spy the unlucky gentleman with the train at his heel, and hear the scornful shout with which they assail he. she run out of her room, and across the street to the persecute foreigner; she hold out her hand, and, address he in his own language, invite he into her abode; and when she have house he fairly within her door, she stand bravely at the threshold before the gibe factory girl and boy, and say they be a pack of coward to insult a poor man who could not speak their language, and be alone and without protection. the little crowd, with some ironical cheer and hooting, nevertheless feel the force of Madame Fribsby's vigorous allocution, and retreat before she; for the old lady be rather respected in the place, and her oddity and her kindness have make she many friend there.
Poor Mirobolant be grateful indeed to hear the language of his country ever so ill speak. frenchman pardon our fault in their language much more readily than we excuse their bad English; and will face our blunder throughout a long conversation, without the least propensity to grin. the rescue artist vow that Madame Fribsby be his guardian angel, and that he have not as yet meet with such suavity and politeness among les Anglaises. he be as courteous and complimentary to she as if it be the fairest and noblest of lady whom he be address for Alcide Mirobolant pay homage after his fashion to all womankind, and never dream of a distinction of rank in the realm of beauty, as his phrase be.
a cream, flavour with pineapple--a mayonnaise of lobster, which he flatter himself be not unworthy of his hand, or of she to whom he have the honour to offer it as an homage, and a box of preserve fruit of Provence, be bring by one of the chef's aide-de-camp, in a basket, the next day to the milliner's, and be accompany with a gallant note to the amiable Madame Fribsbi. "her kindness," Alcide say, "have make a green place in the desert of his existence,--h suavity would ever contrast in memory with the grossierete of the rustic population, who be not worthy to possess such a jewel." an intimacy of the most confidential nature thus spring up between the milliner and the chief of the kitchen; but I do not know whether it be with pleasure or mortification that Madame receive the declaration of friendship which the young Alcides proffer to she, for he persist in call she "La respectable Fribsbi," "La vertueuse Fribsbi,"--and in state that he should consider she as his mother, while he hop she would regard he as her son. ah! it be not very long ago, Fribsby think, that word have be address to she in that dear french language, indicate a different sort of attachment. and she sigh as she look up at the picture of her Carabineer. for it be surprising how young some people's heart remain when their head have need of a front or a little hair-dye,--and, at this moment, Madame Fribsby, as she tell young Alcide, feel as romantic as a girl of eighteen.
when the conversation take this turn--and at their first intimacy Madame Fribsby be rather inclined so to lead it--Alcide always politely diverge to another subject: it be as his mother that he persist in consider the good milliner. he would recognise she in no other capacity, and with that relationship the gentle lady be force to content herself, when she find how deeply the artist's heart be engage elsewhere.
he be not long before he describe to she the subject and origin of his passion.
"I declare myself to she," say Alcide, lay his hand on his heart, "in a manner which be as novel as I be charm to think it be agreeable. where cannot love penetrate, respectable Madame Fribsbi? Cupid be the father of invention!--I inquire of the domestic what be the plat of which Mademoiselle partook with most pleasure; and build up my little battery accordingly. on a day when her parent have go to dine in the world (and I be grieve to say that a grossi dinner at a restaurateur, in the Boulevard, or in the Palais Royal seem to form the delight of these unrefined person), the charming Miss entertain some comrade of the pension; and I advise myself to send up a little repast suitable to so delicate young palate. her lovely name be Blanche. the name of the maiden be white; the wreath of rose which she wear be white. I determine that my dinner should be as spotless as the snow. at her accustomed hour, and instead of the rude gigot a l'eau, which be ordinarily serve at her too simple table, I send she up a little potage a la Reine--a la Reine Blanche I call it,--as white as her own tint-- and confection with the most fragrant cream and almond. I then offer up at her shrine a filet de merlan a l'gnes, and a delicate plat which I designate as Eperlan a la Sainte-Therese, and of which my charming Miss partook with pleasure. I follow this by two little entree of sweetbread and chicken; and the only brown thing which I permit myself in the entertainment be a little roast of lamb, which I lay in a meadow of spinach, surround with croustillon, represent sheep, and ornament with daisy and other savage flower. after this come my second service: a pudding a la Reine Elizabeth (who, Madame Fribsbi know, be a maiden princess); a dish of opal-coloured plover's egg which I call Nid de tourtereaux a la Roucoule; place in the midst of they two of those tender volatile, bill each other, and confection with butter; a basket contain little gateaux of apricot, which, I know, all young lady adore; and a jelly of marasquin, bland insinuating, intoxicate as the glance of beauty. this I designate Ambroisie de Calypso a la Souveraine de mon Coeur. and when the ice be bring in--an ice of plombiere and cherry--how do you think I have shape they, Madame Fribsbi? in the form of two heart unite with an arrow, on which I have lay, before it enter, a bridal veil in cut-paper, surmount by a wreath of virginal orange-flower. I stand at the door to watch the effect of this entry. it be but one cry of admiration. the three young lady fill their glass with the sparkle Ay, and carry I in a toast. I hear it--I hear Miss speak of I--I hear she say, 'tell Monsieur Mirobolant that we thank he--we admire he--we love he!' my foot almost fail I as she speak.
"since that, can I have any reason to doubt that the young artist have make some progress in the heart of the English Miss? I be modest, but my glass inform I that I be not ill-looking. other victory have convince I of the fact."
"dangerous man!" cry the milliner.
"the blond miss of Albion see nothing in the dull inhabitant of their brumous isle, which can compare with the ardour and vivacity of the child of the South. we bring our sunshine with we; we be Frenchmen, and accustom to conquer. be it not for this affair of the heart, and my determination to marry an anglaise, do you think I would stop in this island (which be not altogether ungrateful, since I have find here a tender mother in the respectable Madame Fribsbi), in this island, in this family? my genius would use itself in the company of these rustic--the poesy of my art cannot be understand by these carnivorous insularie. no--the man be odious, but the woman--the woman! I own, dear Fribsbi, be seducing! I have vow to marry one; and as I cannot go into your market and purchase, accord to the custom of the country, I be resolve to adopt another custom, and fly with one to Gretna Grin. the blonde Miss will go. she be fascinated. her eye have tell I so. the white dove want but the signal to fly."
"have you any correspondence with she?" ask Fribsby, in amazement, and not know whether the young lady or the lover might be labour under a romantic delusion.
"I correspond with she by mean of my art. she partake of dish which I make expressly for she. I insinuate to she thus a thousand hint which as she be perfectly spiritual, she receive. but I want other intelligence near she."
"there be Pincott, her maid," say Madame Fribsby, who, by aptitude or education, seem to have some knowledge of affair of the heart, but the great artist's brow darken at this suggestion.
"Madame," he say, "there be point upon which a gallant man ought to silence himself; though, if he break the secret, he may do so with the least impropriety to his good friend--his adopt mother. know then, that there be a cause why Miss Pincott should be hostile to I--a cause not uncommon with your sex--jealousy."
"perfidious monster!" say the confidante.
"ah, no," say the artist, with a deep bass voice, and a tragic accent worthy of the Port St Martin and his favourite melodrame, "not perfidious, but fatal. yes, I be a fatal man, Madame Fribsbi. to inspire hopeless passion be my destiny. I cannot help it that woman love I. be it my fault that that young woman deperishe and languish to the view of the eye, consume by a flame which I cannot return? listen! there be other in this family who be similarly unhappy. the governess of the young Milor have encounter I in my walk, and look at I in a way which can bear but one interpretation. and Milady herself, who be of mature age, but who have oriental blood, have once or twice address compliment to the lonely artist which can admit of no mistake. I avoid the household, I seek solitude, I undergo my destiny. I can marry but one, and be resolve it shall be to a lady of your nation. and, if her fortune be sufficient I think Miss would be the person who would be most suitable. I wish to ascertain what her mean be before I lead she to Gretna Grin."
whether Alcides be as irresistible a conqueror as his namesake, or whether he be simply crazy, be a point which must be leave to the reader's judgment. but the latter if he have have the benefit of much french acquaintance, have perhaps meet with man amongst they who fancy themselves almost as invincible; and who, if you credit they, have make equal havoc in the heart of les Anglaises.
CHAPTER XXV
contain both Love and Jealousy
our reader have already hear Sir Francis Clavering's candid opinion of the lady who have give he her fortune and restore he to his native country and home, and it must be own that the Baronet be not far wrong in his estimate of his wife, and that Lady Clavering be not the wise or the well educate of woman. she have have a couple of year' education in Europe, in a suburb of London, which she persist in call Ackney to her die day, whence she have be summon to join her father at Calcutta at the age of fifteen. and it be on her voyage thither, on board the Ramchunder East Indiaman, Captain Bragg, in which ship she have two year previously make her journey to Europe, that she form the acquaintance of her first husband, Mr. Amory, who be third mate of the vessel in question.
we be not go to enter into the early part of Lady Clavering's history, but Captain Bragg, under whose charge Miss Snell go out to her father, who be one of the Captain's consignee, and part owner of the ramchunder and many other vessel, find reason to put the rebellious rascal of a mate in iron, until they reach the Cape, where the Captain leave his officer behind; and finally deliver his ward to her father at Calcutta, after a stormy and perilous voyage in which the ramchunder and the cargo and passenger incur no small danger and damage.
some month afterwards Amory make his appearance at Calcutta, have work his way out before the mast from the Cape--marry the rich Attorney's daughter in spite of that old speculator--set up as indigo-planter and fail--set up as agent and fail again--set up as editor of the Sunderbund Pilot and fail again--quarrel ceaselessly with his father-in-law and his wife during the progress of all these mercantile transaction and disaster, and end his career finally with a crash which compel he to leave Calcutta and go to New South Wales. it be in the course of these luckless proceeding, that Mr. Amory probably make the acquaintance of Sir Jasper Rogers, the respected Judge of the Supreme Court of Calcutta, who have be mention before: and, as the truth must out, it be by make an improper use of his father-in-law's name, who could write perfectly well, and have no need of an amanuensis, that fortune finally forsook Mr. Amory and cause he to abandon all further struggle with she.
not be in the habit of read the Calcutta law-report very assiduously, the european public do not know of these fact as well as people do in Bengal, and Mrs. Amory and her father find her residence in India not a comfortable one, it be agree that the lady should return to Europe, whither she come with her little daughter Betsy or Blanche, then four year old. they be accompany by Betsy's nurse, who have be present to the reader in the last chapter as the confidential maid of Lady Clavering, Mrs. Bonner: and Captain Bragg take a house for they in the near neighbourhood of his residence in Pocklington Street.
it be a very hard bitter summer, and the rain it rain every day for some time after Mrs. Amory's arrival. Bragg be very pompous and disagreeable, perhaps ashamed, perhaps anxious, to get rid of the indian lady. she believe that all the world in London be talk about her husband's disaster, and that the King and Queen and the Court of Directors be aware of her unlucky history. she have a good allowance from her father; she have no call to live in England; and she determine to go abroad. away she go, then, glad to escape the gloomy surveillance of the odious bully, Captain Bragg. People have no objection to receive she at the continental town where she stop, and at the various boarding-house, where she royally pay her way. she call Hackney Ackney, to be sure (though otherwise she speak English with a little foreign twang, very curious and not unpleasant); she dress amazingly; she be conspicuous for her love of eat and drinking, and prepare curry and pillaw at every boarding-house which she frequent; but her singularity of language and behaviour only give a zest to her society, and Mrs. Amory be deservedly popular. she be the most good-nature, jovial, and generous of woman. she be up to any party of pleasure by whomsoever propose. she bring three time more champagne and fowl and ham to the picnic than anyone else. she take endless box for the play, and ticket for the mask ball, and give they away to everybody. she pay the boarding-house people month beforehand; she help poor shabby mustachiod buck and dowager whose remittance have not arrive, with constant supply from her purse; and in this way she tramp through Europe, and appear at Brussels, at Paris, at Milan, at Naples, at Rome, as her fancy lead she. news of Amory's death reach she at the latter place, where Captain Clavering be then stay, unable to pay his hotel bill, as, indeed, be his friend, the Chevalier Strong; and the good-natured widow marry the descendant of the ancient house of Clavering--professing, indeed, no particular grief for the scapegrace of a husband whom she have lose. we have bring she thus up to the present time when she be mistress of Clavering Park, in the midst of which Mr. Pinckney, the celebrated painter, pourtraye she with her little boy by her side.
Missy follow her mamma in most of her peregrination, and so learn a deal of life. she have a governess for some time; and after her mother's second marriage, the benefit of Madame de Caramel's select pension in the Champs Elysees. when the Claverings come to England, she of course come with they. it be only within a few year, after the death of her grandfather, and the birth of her little brother, that she begin to understand that her position in life be alter, and that Miss Amory, nobody's daughter, be a very small personage in a house compare with Master Francis Clavering, heir to an ancient baronetcy and a noble estate. but for little Frank, she would have be an heiress, in spite of her father: and though she know, and care not much about money, of which she never have any stint, and though she be a romantic little Muse, as we have see, yet she could not reasonably be grateful to the person who have so contribute to change her condition: nor, indeed, do she understand what the latter really be, until she have make some further progress, and acquire more accurate knowledge in the world.
but this be clear, that her stepfather be dull and weak: that mamma drop her H's, and be not refine in manner or appearance; and that little Frank be a spoiled quarrelsome urchin, always have his way, always tread upon her foot, always upset his dinner on her dress, and keep she out of her inheritance. none of these, as she feel, could comprehend she: and her solitary heart naturally pin for other attachment, and she seek around she where to bestow the precious boon of her unoccupied affection.
this dear girl, then, from want of sympathy, or other cause, make herself so disagreeable at home, and frighten her mother and bore she stepfather so much, that they be quite as anxious as she could be that she should settle for herself in life; and hence Sir Francis Clavering's desire express to his friend, in the last chapter, that Mrs. Strong should die, and that he would take Blanche to himself as a second Mrs. Strong.
but as this could not be, any other person be welcome to win she: and a smart young fellow, well-look and well educate like our friend Arthur Pendennis, be quite free to propose for she if he have a mind, and would have be receive with open arm by Lady Clavering as a son-in-law, have he have the courage to come forward as a competitor for Miss Amory's hand.
Mr. Pen, however, besides other drawback, choose to entertain an extreme diffidence about himself. he be ashamed of his late failure, of his idle and nameless condition, of the poverty which he have bring on his mother by his folly, and there be as much of vanity as remorse in his present state of doubt and distrust. how could he ever hope for such a prize as this brilliant Blanche Amory, who live in a fine park and mansion, and be wait on by a score of grand domestic, whilst a maid-servant bring in their meagre meal at Fairoaks, and his mother be oblige to pinch and manage to make both end meet? obstacle seem for he insurmountable, which would have vanish have he march manfully upon they: and he prefer despairing, or dally with his wishes,--or perhaps he have not positively shape they as yet,--to attempt to win gallantly the object of his desire. many a young man fail by that species of vanity call shyness, who might, for the asking have his will.
but we do not pretend to say that Pen have, as yet, ascertain his: or that he be do much more than think about fall in love. Miss Amory be charming and lively. she fascinate and cajole he by a thousand art or natural grace or flattery. but there be lurk reason and doubt, besides shyness and vanity, withhold he. in spite of her cleverness, and her protestation, and her fascination, Pen's mother have divine the girl, and do not trust she. Mrs. Pendennis see Blanche light-minded and frivolous, detect many want in she which offend the pure and pious-minded lady; a want of reverence for her parent, and for thing more sacred, Helen think: worldliness and selfishness couch under pretty word and tender expression. Laura and Pen battle these point strongly at first with the widow--Laura be as yet enthusiastic about her new friend, and Pen not far-go enough in love to attempt any concealment of his feeling. he would laugh at these objection of Helen's, and say, "Psha, mother! you be jealous about Laura--all woman be jealous."
but when, in the course of a month or two, and by watch the pair with that anxiety with which brood woman watch over their son' affection --and in acknowledge which, I have no doubt there be a sexual jealousy on the mother's part, and a secret pang--when Helen see that the intimacy appear to make progress, that the two young people be perpetually find pretext to meet, and that Miss Blanche be at Fairoaks or Mr. Pen at the Park every day, the poor widow's heart begin to fail she--her darling project seem to vanish before she; and, give way to her weakness, she fairly tell Pen one day what her view and longing be; that she feel herself break, and not long for this world, and that she hop and pray before she go, that she might see her two child one. the late event, Pen's life and career and former passion for the actress, have break the spirit of this tender lady. she feel that he have escape she, and be in the maternal nest no more; and she clung with a sickening fondness to Laura, Laura who have be leave to she by Francis in Heaven.
Pen kiss and soothe she in his grand patronising way. he have see something of this, he have long think his mother want to make this marriage--do Laura know anything of it? (not she,--mrs. Pendennis said-- not for world would she have breathe a word of it to laura)--"well, well, there be time enough, his mother wouldnot die," Pen say, laughingly: "he wouldnot hear of any such thing, and as for the Muse, she be too grand a lady to think about poor little I--and as for Laura, who know that she would have I? she would do anything you tell she, to be sure. but be I worthy of she?"
"O, Pen, you might be," be the widow's reply; not that Mr. Pen ever doubt that he be; and a feeling of indefinable pleasure and self-complacency come over he as he think over this proposal, and image Laura to himself, as his memory remember she for year past, always fair and open, kindly and pious, cheerful, tender and true. he look at she with brighten eye as she come in from the garden at the end of this talk, her cheek rather flushed, her look frank and smile --a basket of rose in her hand.
she take the fine of they and bring it to Mrs. Pendennis, who be refresh by the odour and colour of these flower; and hang over she fondly and give it to she.
"and I might have this prize for the asking!" Pen think with a thrill of triumph, as he look at the kindly girl. "why, she be as beautiful and as generous as her rose." the image of the two woman remain for ever after in his mind, and he never recall it but the tear come into his eye.
before very many week' intimacy with her new acquaintance, however, Miss Laura be oblige to give in to Helen's opinion, and own that the Muse be selfish, unkind, and inconstant. of course Blanche confide to her bosom friend all the little grief and domestic annoyance; how the family could not comprehend she and she move among they an isolated being; how her poor mamma's education have be neglect, and she be force to blush for her blunder; how Sir Francis be a weak person deplorably unintellectual, and only happy when smoke his odious cigar; how, since the birth of her little brother, she have see her mother's precious affection, which she value more than anything in life, estrange from her once darling daughter; how she be alone, alone, alone in the world.
but these grief, real and heart-rending though they might be to a young lady of exquisite sensibility, do not convince Laura of the propriety of Blanche's conduct in many small incident of Little Frank, for instance, life might be very provoking, and might have deprive Blanche of her mamma's affection, but this be no reason why Blanche should box the child's ear because he upset a glass of water over her drawing, and why she should call he many opprobrious name in the English and french language; and the preference accord to little Frank be certainly no reason why Blanche should give herself imperial air of command towards the boy's governess, and send that young lady upon message through the house to bring her book or to fetch her pocket-handkerchief. when a domestic perform an errand for honest Laura, she be always thankful and please; whereas she could not but perceive that the little Muse have not the slight scruple in give her command to all the world round about she, and in disturb anybody's ease or comfort, in order to administer to her own. it be Laura's first experience in friendship; and it pain the kind creature's heart to be oblige to give up as delusion, one by one, those charm and brilliant quality in which her fancy have dress her new friend, and to find that the fascinating little fairy be but a mortal, and not a very amiable mortal after all. what generous person be there that have not be so deceive in his time?--what person, perhaps, that have not so disappointed other in his turn?
after the scene with little Frank, in which that refractory son and heir of the house of Clavering have receive the compliment in French and English, and the accompany box on the ear from his sister, Miss Laura who have plenty of humour, could not help call to mind some very touching and tender verse which the Muse have read to she out of Mes Larmes, and which begin, "my pretty baby brother, may angel guard thy rest," in which the Muse, after compliment the baby upon the station in life which it be about to occupy, and contrast it with her own lonely condition, vow nevertheless that the angel boy would never enjoy such affection as hers be, or find in the false world before he anything so constant and tender as a sister's heart. "it may be," the forlorn one say, "it may be, you will slight it, my pretty baby sweet, you will spurn I from your bosom, Iwill cling around your foot! o let I, let I, love you! the world will prove to you as false as 'tis to other, but I be ever true." and behold the Muse be box the darling brother's ear instead of kneel at his foot, and give Miss Laura her first lesson in the Cynical philosophy--not quite her first, however,-- something like this selfishness and waywardness, something like this contrast between practice and poetry, between grand versify aspiration and everyday life, she have witness at home in the person of our young friend Mr. Pen.
but then Pen be different. Pen be a man. it seem natural somehow that he should be self-willed and should have his own way. and under his waywardness and selfishness, indeed there be a kind and generous heart. o it be hard that such a diamond should be change away against such a false stone as this. in a word, Laura begin to be tired of her admired Blanche. she have assay she and find she not true; and her former admiration and delight, which she have express with her accustomed generous artlessness, give way to a feeling, which we shall not call contempt, but which be very near it; and which cause Laura to adopt towards Miss Amory a grave and tranquil tone of superiority, which be at first by no means to the Muse's liking. nobody like to be find out, or, have hold a high place, to submit to step down.
the consciousness that this event be impend do not serve to increase Miss Blanche's good-humour, and as it make her peevish and dissatisfied with herself, it probably render she even less agreeable to the person round about she. so there arise, one fatal day, a battle-royal between dear Blanche and dear Laura, in which the friendship between they be all but slay outright. Dearest Blanche have be unusually capricious and wicked on this day. she have be insolent to her mother; savage with little Frank; odiously impertinent in her behaviour to the boy's governess; and intolerably cruel to Pincott, her attendant. not venture to attack her friend (for the little tyrant be of a timid feline nature, and only use her claw upon those who be weak than herself), she maltreat all these, and especially poor Pincott, who be menial, confidante, companion (slave always), accord to the caprice of her young mistress.
this girl, who have be sit in the room with the young lady, be drive thence in tear, occasion by the cruelty of her mistress, and rake with a parting sarcasm as she go sob from the door, Laura fairly break out into a loud and indignant invective--wonder how one so young could forget the deference owe to her elder as well as to her inferior in station; and profess so much sensibility of her own, could torture the feeling of other so wantonly. Laura tell her friend that her conduct be absolutely wicked, and that she ought to ask pardon of Heaven on her knee for it. and have deliver herself of a hot and voluble speech whereof the delivery astonish the speaker as much almost as her auditor, she run to her bonnet and shawl, and go home across the park in a great flurry and perturbation, and to the surprise of Mrs. Pendennis, who have not expect she until night.
alone with Helen, Laura give an account of the scene, and give up her friend henceforth. "o Mamma," she say, "you be right; Blanche, who seem so soft and so kind, be, as you have say, selfish and cruel. she who be always speak of her affection can have no heart. no honest girl would afflict a mother so, or torture a dependant; and--and, I give she up from this day, and I will have no other friend but you."
on this the two lady go through the osculatory ceremony which they be in the habit of perform, and Mrs. Pendennis get a great secret comfort from the little quarrel--for Laura's confession seem to say, "that girl can never be a wife for Pen, for she be light-minded and heartless, and quite unworthy of our noble hero. he will be sure to find out her unworthiness for his own part, and then he will be save from this flighty creature, and awake out of his delusion."
but Miss Laura do not tell Mrs. Pendennis, perhaps do not acknowledge to herself, what have be the real cause of the day's quarrel. be in a very wicked mood, and bend upon mischief everywhere, the little wicked Muse of a Blanche have very soon begin her trick. her darling Laura have come to pass a long day; and as they be sit in her own room together, have choose to bring the conversation round to the subject of Mr. Pen.
"I be afraid he be sadly fickle," Miss Blanche observe; "Mrs. Pybus, and many more clavering people, have tell we all about the actress."
"I be quite a child when it happen, and I donot know anything about it," Laura answer, blush very much.
"he use she very ill," Blanche say, wag her little head. "he be false to she."
"I be sure he be not," Laura cry out; "he act most generously by she; he want to give up everything to marry she. it be she that be false to he. he nearly break his heart about it: he----"
"I think you donot know anything about the story, dearest," interpose Miss Blanche.
"Mamma have say so," say Laura.
"well, he be very clever," continue the other little dear, "what a sweet poet he be! have you ever read his poem?"
"only the 'Fisherman and the Diver,' which he translate for we, and his Prize Poem, which donot get the prize; and, indeed, I think it very pompous and prosy," Laura say, laugh.
"have he never write you any poem, then, love?" ask Miss Amory.
"no, my dear," say Miss Bell.
Blanche run up to her friend, kiss she fondly, call she my dear Laura at least three time, look she archly in the face, nod her head, and say, "promise to tell no-o-body, and I will show you something."
and trip across the room daintily to a little mother-of-pearl inlaid desk, she open it with a silver key, and take out two or three paper crumple and rather stain with green, which she submit to her friend. Laura take they and read they. they be love-verse sure enough --somethe about Undine--about a Naiad--about a river. she look at they for a long time; but in truth the line be not very distinct before her eye.
"and you have answer they, Blanche?" she ask, put they back.
"o no! not for world, dearest," the other say: and when her dear Laura have quite do with the verse, she trip back and pop they again into the pretty desk.
then she go to her piano, and sing two or three song of Rossini, whose flourish of music her flexible little voice could execute to perfection, and Laura sate by, vaguely listen as she perform these piece. what be Miss Bell think about the while? she hardly know; but sate there silent as the song roll by. after this concert the young lady be summon to the room where luncheon be serve; and whither they of course go with their arm round each other's waist.
and it could not have be jealousy or anger on Laura's part which have make she silent; for, after they have trip along the corridor and descend the step, and be about to open the door which lead into the hall, Laura pause, and look her friend kindly and frankly in the face, kiss she with a sisterly warmth.
something occur after this--Master Frank's manner of eating, probably, or mamma's blunder, or Sir Francis smell of cigar--which vex Miss Blanche, and she give way to that series of naughtiness whereof we have speak, and which end in the above little quarrel.
CHAPTER XXVI
a House full of visitor
the difference between the girl do not last long. Laura be always too eager to forgive and be forgive, and as for Miss Blanche, her hostility, never very long or durable, have not be provoke by the above scene. nobody care about be accuse of wickedness. no vanity be hurt by that sort of charge: Blanche be rather pleased than provoke by her friend's indignation, which never would have be raise but for a cause which both know, though neither speak of.
and so Laura, with a sigh, be oblige to confess that the romantic part of her first friendship be at an end, and that the object of it be only worthy of a very ordinary sort of regard.
as for Blanche, she instantly compose a copy of touching verse, set forth her desertion and disenchantment. it be only the old story, she write, of love meet with coldness, and fidelity return by neglect; and some new neighbour arrive from London about this time, in whose family there be daughter, Miss Amory have the advantage of select an eternal friend from one of these young lady, and impart her sorrow and disappointment to this new sister. the tall footman come but seldom now with note to the sweet Laura; the pony-carriage be but rarely despatch to Fairoaks to be at the order of the lady there. Blanche adopt a sweet look of suffer martyrdom when Laura come to see she. the other laugh at her friend's sentimental mood, and treat it with a good-humour that be by no mean respectful.
but if Miss Blanche find new female friend to console she, the faithful historian be also bind to say, that she discover some acquaintance of the other sex who seem to give her consolation too. if ever this artless young creature meet a young man, and have ten minute' conversation with he in a garden walk, in a drawing-room window, or in the interval of a waltz, she confide in he, so to speak--make play with her beautiful eye--speak in a tone of tender interest, and simple and touching appeal, and leave he, to perform the same pretty little drama in behalf of his successor.
when the Claverings first come down to the Park, there be very few audience before whom Miss Blanche could perform: hence Pen have all the benefit of her glance and confidence, and the drawing-room window or the garden walk all to himself. in the town of Clavering, it have be say, there be actually young man: in the near surround country, only a curate or two or a rustic young squire, with large foot and ill-make clothe. to the dragoon quarter at Chatteris the Baronet make no overture: it be unluckily his own regiment: he have leave it on bad term with some officer of the corps--an ugly business about a horse bargain--a disputed play account--blind-Hookey--a white feather--who need ask?--it be not our business to inquire too closely into the bygone of our character, except in so far as their previous history appertain to the development of this present story.
but the autumn, and the end of the Parliamentary Session and the London season, bring one or two county family down to their house, and fill tolerably the neighbouring little watering-place of Baymouth, and open our friend Mr. Bingley's Theatre Royal at Chatteris, and collect the usual company at the Assizes and race-ball there. up to this time, the old county family have be rather shy of our friend of Clavering Park. the Fogeys of Drummington; the square of Tozely Park; the Welbores of the Barrow, etc.: all sort of story be current among these folk regard the family at Clavering;--indeed, nobody ought to say that people in the country have no imagination who hear they talk about new neighbour. about Sir Francis and his Lady, and her birth and parentage, about Miss Amory, about Captain Strong, there have be endless history which need not be recapitulate; and the family of the Park have be three month in the county before the great people around begin to call.
but at the end of the season, the Earl of Trehawk, Lord Lieutenant of the County, come to Eyrie Castle, and the Countess Dowager of Rockminster, whose son be also a magnate of the land, to occupy a mansion on the Marine Parade at Baymouth--these great folk come publicly, immediately, and in state, to call upon the family of Clavering Park; and the carriage of the county family speedily follow in the track which have be leave in the avenue by their lordly wheel.
it be then that Mirobolant begin to have an opportunity of exercise that skill which he possess, and of forget, in the occupation of his art, the pang of love. it be then that the large footman be too much employ at Clavering Park to be able to bring message, or dally over the cup of small beer with the poor little maid at Fairoaks. it be then that Blanche find other dear friend than Laura, and other place to walk in besides the river-side, where Pen be fish. he come day after day, and whip the stream, but the "fish, fish!" wouldnot do their duty, nor the Peri appear. and here, though in strict confidence, and with a request that the matter go no far, we may as well allude to a delicate business, of which previous hint have be give. Mention have be make, in a former page, of a certain hollow tree, at which Pen use to take his station when engage in his passion for Miss Fotheringay, and the cavity of which he afterwards use for other purpose than to insert his bait and fishing-can in. the truth be, be convert this tree into a post-office. under a piece of moss and a stone, he use to put little poem, or letter equally poetical, which be address to a certain Undine, or Naiad who frequent the stream, and which, once or twice, be replace by a receipt in the shape of a flower, or by a modest little word or two of acknowledgment, write in a delicate hand, in French or English, and on pink scented paper. certainly, Miss Amory use to walk by this stream, as we have see; and it be a fact that she use pink scented paper for her correspondence. but after the great folk have invade Clavering Park, and the family coach pass out of the lodge-gate, evening after evening, on their way to the other great country house, nobody come to fetch Pen's letter at the post-office; the white paper be not exchange for the pink, but lie undisturbed under its stone and its moss, whilst the tree be reflect into the stream, and the Brawl go roll by. there be not much in the letter certainly; in the pink note scarcely anything--merely a little word or two, half jocular, half sympathetic, such as might be write by any young lady. but oh, you silly Pendennis, if you want this one, why do you not speak? perhaps neither party be in earnest. you be only play at be in love, and the sportive little Undine be humour you at the same play.
but if a man be baulk at this game, he not unfrequently lose his temper; and when nobody come any more for Pen's poem, he begin to look upon those composition in a very serious light. he feel almost tragical and romantic again, as in his first affair of the heart:--at any rate he be bent upon have an explanation. one day he go to the Hall and there be a roomful of visitor: on another, Miss Amory be not to be see; she be go to a ball that night, and be lie down to take a little sleep. Pen curse ball, and the narrowness of his mean, and the humility of his position in the country that cause he to be pass over by the giver of these entertainment. on a third occasion, Miss Amory be in the garden, and he run thither; she be walk there in state with no less personage than the Bishop and Bishopess of Chatteris and the episcopal family, who scowl at he, and draw up in great dignity when he be present to they, and they hear his name. the Right Reverend Prelate have hear it before, and also of the little transaction in the Dean's garden.
"the Bishop say yoube a sad young man," good-natured Lady Clavering whisper to he. "what have you be a doing of? nothink, I hope, to vex such a dear Mar as your? how be your dear mar? why donot she come and I? we an't see she this ever such a time. webe a goin about a gaddin, so that we donot see no neighbour now. give my love to she and Laurar, and come all to dinner to-morrow."
Mrs. Pendennis be too unwell to come out but Laura and Pen come, and there be a great party, and Pen only get an opportunity of a hurried word with Miss Amory. "you never come to the river now" he say.
"I cannot," say Blanche, "the house be full of people."
"Undine have leave the stream," Mr. Pen go on, choose to be poetical.
"she never ought to have go there," Miss Amory answer. "she willnot go again. it be very foolish: very wrong: it be only play. besides, you have other consolation at home," she add, look he full in the face an instant, and drop her eye.
if he want she, why do he not speak then? she might have say "yes" even then. but as she speak of other consolation at home, he think of Laura, so affectionate and so pure, and of his mother at home, who have bend her fond heart upon unite he with her adopt daughter. "Blanche!" he begin, in a vex tone,--"miss Amory!"
"Laura be look at we, Mr. Pendennis," the young lady say. "I must go back to the company," and she run off, leave Mr. Pendennis to bite his nail in perplexity, and to look out into the moonlight in the garden.
Laura indeed be look at Pen. she be talk with, or appear to listen to the talk of, Mr. Pynsent, Lord Rockminster's son, and grandson of the Dowager Lady, who be seat in state in the place of honour, gravely receive Lady Clavering's bad grammar, and patronise the vacuous Sir Francis, whose interest in the county she be desirous to secure. Pynsent and Pen have be at Oxbridge together, where the latter, during his heyday of good fortune and fashion, have be the superior of the young patrician, and perhaps rather supercilious towards he. they have meet for the first time, since they part at the University, at the table to-day, and give each other that exceedingly impertinent and amusing demi-nod of recognition which be practise in England only, and only to perfection by University men,--and which seem to say, "confound you--what do you do here?"
"I know that man at Oxbridge," Mr. Pynsent say to Miss Bell--"a Mr. Pendennis, I think."
"yes," say Miss Bell.
"he seem rather sweet upon Miss Amory," the gentleman go on. Laura look at they, and perhaps think so too, but say nothing.
"a man of large property in the county, benot he? he use to talk about represent it. he use to speak at the Union. whereabout do his estate lie?"
Laura smile. "his estate lie on the other side of the river, near the lodge-gate. he be my cousin, and I live there."
"where?" ask Mr. Pynsent, with a laugh.
"why, on the other side of the river, at Fairoaks," answer Miss Bell.
"many pheasant there? Cover look rather good," say the simple gentleman.
Laura smile again. "we have nine hen and a cock, a pig, and an old pointer."
"Pendennis donot preserve, then?" continue Mr. Pynsent.
"you should come and see he," the girl say, laugh, and greatly amuse at the notion that her Pen be a great county gentleman, and perhaps have give himself out to be such.
"indeed, I quite long to renew our acquaintance," Mr. Pynsent say, gallantly, and with a look which fairly say, "it be you that I would like to come and see"--to which look and speech Miss Laura vouchsafe a smile, and make a little bow.
here Blanche come step up with her most fascinating smile and ogle, and beg dear Laura to come and take the second in a song. Laura be ready to do anything good-natured, and go to the piano; by which Mr. Pynsent listen as long as the duet last, and until Miss Amory begin for herself, when he stride away.
"what a nice, frank, amiable, well-breed girl that be, Wagg," say Mr. Pynsent to a gentleman who have come over with he from Baymouth--"the tall one, I mean, with the ringlet and red lip--monstrous red, benot they?"
"what do you think of the girl of the house?" ask Wagg.
"I think shebe a lean, scraggy humbug," say Mr. Pynsent, with great candour. "she drag her shoulder out of her dress, she never let her eye alone: and she go simper and ogle about like a French waiting-maid.
"Pynsent, be civil," cry the other, "somebody can hear."
"oh, itbe Pendennis of Boniface," Mr. Pynsent say. "fine evening, Mr. Pendennis; we be just talk of your charming cousin."
"any relation to my old friend, Major Pendennis?" ask Mr. Wagg.
"his nephew. have the pleasure of meet you at Gaunt House," Mr. Pen say with his very good air--the acquaintance between the gentleman be make in an instant.
in the afternoon of the next day, the two gentleman who be stay at Clavering Park be find by Mr. Pen on his return from a fishing excursion, in which he have no sport, seat in his mother's drawing-room in comfortable conversation with the widow and her ward. Mr. Pynsent, tall and gaunt, with large red whisker and an imposing tuft to his chin, be stride over a chair in the intimate neighbourhood of Miss Laura. she be amuse by his talk, which be simple, straightforward, rather humorous and keen, and intersperse with homely expression of a style which be sometimes call slang. it be the first speciman of a young London dandy that Laura have see or hear: for she have be but a chit at the time of Mr. Foker's introduction at Fairoaks, nor indeed be that ingenuous gentleman much more than a boy, and his refinement be only that of a school and college.
Mr. Wagg, as he enter the Fairoaks premise with his companion, eyed and note everything. "old gardener," he say, see Mr. John at the lodge--"old red livery waistcoat--clothe hang out to dry on the gooseberry-bush--blue apron, white duck--gad, they must be young Pendennis's white duck--nobody else wear them in the family. rather a shy place for a sucking county member, ay, Pynsent?"
"snug little crib," say Mr. Pynsent, "pretty cosy little lawn."
"Mr. Pendennis at home, old gentleman?" Mr. Wagg say to the old domestic. John answer, "no, Master Pendennis be agone out."
"be the lady at home?" ask the young visitor. Mr. John answer, "yes, they be;" and as the pair walk over the trim gravel, and by the neat shrubbery, up the step to the hall-door, which old John open, Mr. Wagg note everything that he see; the barometer and the letter-bag, the umbrella and the lady' clog, Pen's hat and tartan wrapper, and old John open the drawing-room door, to introduce the new-comer. such minutia attract Wagg instinctively; he seize they in spite of himself.
"old fellow do all the work," he whisper to Pynsent. "Caleb Balderstone. shouldnot wonder if hebe the housemaid." the next minute the pair be in the presence of the Fairoaks lady; in whom Pynsent could not help recognise two perfectly well-breed lady, and to whom Mr. Wagg make his obeisance, with florid bow, and extra courtesy, accompany with an occasional knowing leer at his companion. Mr. Pynsent do not choose to acknowledge these signal, except by extreme haughtiness towards Mr. Wagg, and particular deference to the lady. if there be one thing laughable in Mr. Wagg's eye, it be poverty. he have the soul of a butler who have be bring from his pantry to make fun in the drawing-room. his joke be plenty, and his good-nature thoroughly genuine, but he do not seem to understand that a gentleman could wear an old coat, or that a lady could be respectable unless she have her carriage, or employ a french milliner.
"charming place, ma'am," say he, bow to the widow; "noble prospect-- delightful to we Cocknies, who seldom see anything but Pall Mall." the widow say simply, she have never be in London but once in her life-- before her son be bear.
"fine village, ma'am, fine village," say Mr. Wagg, "and increase every day. itwill be quite a large town soon. itbe not a bad place to live in for those who cannot get the country, and will repay a visit when you honour it."
"my brother, Major Pendennis, have often mention your name to we," the widow say, "and we have be very much amuse by some of your droll book, sir," Helen continue, who never could be bring to like Mr. Wagg's book, and detest their tone most thoroughly. "he be my very good friend," Mr. Wagg say, with a low bow, "and one of the well know man about town, and where know, ma'am, appreciate--I assure you appreciate. he be with our friend Steyne, at Aix-la-Chapelle. Steyne have a touch of the gout and so, between ourselves, have your brother. I be go to Stillbrook for the pheasant-shooting, and afterwards to Bareacres, where Pendennis and I shall probably meet;" and he pour out a flood of fashionable talk, introduce the name of a score of peer, and rattle on with breathless spirit, whilst the simple widow listen in silent wonder. what a man, she think; be all the man of fashion in London like this? I be sure Pen will never like he.
Mr. Pynsent be in the meanwhile engage with Miss Laura. he name some of the house in the neighbourhood whither he be go, and hop very much that he should see Miss Bell at some of they. he hop that her aunt would give she a season in London. he say, that in the next parliament it be probable that he should canvass the county, and he hop to get Pendennis's interest here. he speak of Pen's triumph as an orator at Oxbridge, and ask be he come into parliament too? he talk on very pleasantly, and greatly to Laura's satisfaction, until Pen himself appear, and, as have be say, find these gentleman.
Pen behave very courteously to the pair, now that they have find their way into his quarter; and though he recollect with some twinge a conversation at Oxbridge, when Pynsent be present, and in which after a great debate at the Union, and in the midst of considerable excitement produce by a supper and champagne-cup,--he have announce his intention of come in for his native county, and have absolutely return thank in a fine speech as the future member; yet Mr. Pynsent's manner be so frank and cordial, that Pen hop Pynsent might have forget his little fanfaronnade, and any other braggadocio speech or action which he might have make. he suit himself to the tone of the visitor, then, and talk about Plinlimmon and Magnus Charters, and the old set at Oxbridge, with careless familiarity and high-breed ease, as if he live with marquis every day, and a duke be no more to he than a village curate.
but at this juncture, and it be then six o'clock in the evening, Betsy, the maid, who do not know of the advent of stranger, walk into the room without any preliminary but that of fling the door wide open before she, and bear in her arm a tray, contain three tea-cup, a tea-pot, and a plate of thick bread-and-butter. all Pen's splendour and magnificence vanish away at this--and he falter and become quite abash. "what will they think of we?" he think: and, indeed, Wagg thrust his tongue in his cheek, think the tea infinitely contemptible, and leer and wink at Pynsent to that effect.
but to Mr. Pynsent the transaction appear perfectly simple--there be no reason present to his mind why people should not drink tea at six if they be minded, as well as at any other hour; and he ask of Mr. Wagg, when they go away, "what the devil he be grin and wink at, and what amuse he?"
"donot you see how the cub be ashamed of the thick bread-and-butter? I dare say theybe go to have treacle if they be good. Iwill take an opportunity of tell old Pendennis when we get back to town," Mr. Wagg chuckle out.
"donot see the fun," say Mr. Pynsent.
"never think you do," growl Wagg between his tooth; they walk home rather sulkily.
Wagg tell the story at dinner very smartly, with wonderful accuracy of observation. he describe old John, the clothe that be dry, the clog in the hall, the drawing-room, and its furniture and pictures;-- "old man with a beak and bald head--feu Pendennis I bet two to one; stick-plaster full-length of a youth in a cap and gown--the present Marquis of Fairoaks, of course; the widow when young in a miniature, Mrs. Mee; she have the gown on when we come, or a dress make the year after, and the tip cut off the finger of her glove which she stitch her son's collar with; and then the sarving maid come in with their tea so we leave the Earl and the Countess to their bread-and-butter."
Blanche, near whom he sate as he tell this story, and who adore les hommes desprit, burst out laugh, and call he such an odd, droll creature. but Pynsent, who begin to be utterly disgusted with he, break out in a loud voice, and say, "I donot know, Mr. Wagg, what sort of lady you be accustom to meet in your own family, but by gad, as far as a first acquaintance can show, I never meet two well-breed woman in my life, and I hope, ma'am, youwill call upon them," he add, address Lady Rockminster, who be seat at Sir Francis Clavering's right hand.
Sir Francis turn to the guest on his left, and whisper. "thatbe what I call a sticker for Wagg." and Lady Clavering, give the young gentleman a delighted tap with her fan, wink her black eye at he, and say, "Mr. Pynsent, yoube a good feller."
after the affair with Blanche, a difference ever so slight, a tone of melancholy, perhaps a little bitter, might be perceive in Laura's converse with her cousin. she seem to weigh he and find he want too; the widow see the girl's clear and honest eye watch the young man at time, and a look of almost scorn pass over her face, as he lounge in the room with the woman, or lazily saunter smoking upon the lawn, or loll under a tree there over a book which he be too listless to read.
"what have happen between you?" eager-sighted Helen ask of the girl. "something have happen. have that wicked little Blanche be make mischief? tell I, Laura."
"nothing have happen at all," Laura say.
"then why do you look at Pen so?" ask his mother quickly.
"look at he, dear mother!" say the girl. "we two woman be no society for he: we donot interest he; we be not clever enough for such a genius as Pen. he waste his life and energy away among we, tie to our apron-string. he interest himself in nothing: he scarcely care to go beyond the garden-gate. even Captain Glanders and Captain Strong pall upon he," she add with a bitter laugh; "and they be man, you know, and our superior. he will never be happy while he be here. why, be he not face the world, and without a profession?"
"we have get enough, with great economy," say the widow, her heart begin to beat violently. "Pen have spend nothing for month. Ibe sure he be very good. I be sure he might be very happy with we."
"donot agitate yourself so, dear mother," the girl answer. "I donot like to see you so. you should not be sad because Pen be unhappy here. all man be so. they must work. they must make themselves name and a place in the world. look, the two captain have fight and see battle; that Mr. Pynsent, who come here, and who will be very rich, be in a public office; he work very hard, he aspire to a name and a reputation. he say Pen be one of the good speaker at Oxbridge, and have as great a character for talent as any of the young gentleman there. Pen himself laugh at Mr. Wagg's celebrity (and indeed he be a horrid person), and say he be a dunce, and that anybody could write his book."
"I be sure they be odious and vulgar," interpose the widow.
"yet he have a reputation.--you see the County Chronicle say, 'the celebrate Mr. Wagg have be sojourn at Baymouth--let our fashionable and eccentric look out for something from his caustic pen.' if Pen can write well than this gentleman, and speak well than Mr. Pynsent, why donot he? Mamma, he cannot make speech to we; or distinguish himself here. he ought to go away, indeed he ought."
"Dear Laura," say Helen, take the girl's hand. "be it kind of you to hurry he so? I have be wait. I have be save up money these many month--to--to pay back your advance to we."
"hush, mother!" Laura cry, embrace her friend hastily. "it be your money, not mine. never speak about that again. how much money have you save?"
Helen say there be more than two hundred pound at the bank, and that she would be enable to pay off all Laura's money by the end of the next year.
"give it he--let he have the two hundred pound. let he go to London and be a lawyer: be something, be worthy of his mother--and of mine, dear mamma," say the good girl; upon which, and with her usual tenderness and emotion, the fond widow declare that Laura be a blessing to she and the good of girl--and I hope no one in this instance will be dispose to contradict she.
the widow and her daughter have more than one conversation on this subject; and the elder give way to the superior reason of the honest and strong-minded girl; and indeed, whenever there be a sacrifice to be make on her part, this kind lady be only too eager to make it. but she take her own way, and do not loose sight of the end she have in view, in impart these new plan to Pen. one day she tell he of these project, and it who that have form they; how it be Laura who insist upon his go to London and study; how it be Laura who would not hear of the--the money arrangement when he come back from Oxbridge--be settle just then: how it be Laura whom he have to thank, if indeed he think that he have to go.
at that news Pen's countenance blaze up with pleasure, and he hug his mother to his heart with an ardour that I fear disappoint the fond lady; but she rally when he say, "by Heaven! she be a noble girl, and may God Almighty bless her mother! I have be wear myself away for month here, long to work, and not know how. Ihave be fret over the thought of my shame, and my debt, and my past cursed extravagance and folly. Ihave suffer infernally. my heart have be half break--never mind about that. if I can get a chance to redeem the past, and to do my duty to myself and the good mother in the world, indeed, indeed, I will. Iwill be worthy of you yet. Heaven bless you! God bles Laura! why benot she here, that I may go and thank she?" Pen go on with more incoherent phrase; pace up and down the room, drink glass of water, jump about his mother with a thousand embrace--begin to laugh--begin to sing--be happy than she have see he since he be a boy--since he have taste of the fruit of that awful Tree of Life, which, from the beginning, have tempt all mankind.
Laura be not at home. Laura be on a visit to the stately Lady Rockminster, daughter to my Lord Bareacres, sister to the late Lady Pontypool, and by consequence a distant kinswoman of Helen's, as her ladyship, who be deeply verse in genealogy, be graciously to point out to the modest country lady. Mr. Pen be greatly delighted at the relationship be acknowledge; though perhaps not over well pleased that Lady Rockminster take Miss Bell home with she for a couple of day to Baymouth, and do not make the slight invitation to Mr. Arthur Pendennis. there be to be a ball at Baymouth, and it be to be Miss Laura's first appearance. the dowager come to fetch she in her carriage, and she go off with a white dress in her box, happy and blushing, like the rose to which Pen compare she.
this be the night of the ball--a public entertainment at the Baymouth Hotel. "by Jove!" say Pen, "Iwill ride over--no, I willnot ride, but Iwill go too." his mother be charm that he should do so; and, as he be debate about the conveyance in which he should start for Baymouth, Captain Strong call opportunely, say he be go himself, and that he would put his horse, the Butcher Boy, into the gig, and drive Pen over.
when the grand company begin to fill the house at Clavering Park, the Chevalier Strong, who, as his patron say, be never in the way or out of it, seldom intrude himself upon its society, but go elsewhere to seek his relaxation. "Ihave see plenty of grand dinner in my time," he say, "and din, by Jove, in a company where there be a king and royal duke at top and bottom, and every man along the table have six star on his coat; but dammy, Glanders, this finery donot suit I; and the english lady with their confound buckram air, and the squire with their politic after dinner, send I to sleep--sink I dead if they donot. I like a place where I can blow my cigar when the cloth be remove, and when Ibe thirsty, have my beer in its native pewter." so on a gala-day at Clavering Park, the Chevalier would content himself with superintend the arrangement of the table, and drill the major-domo and servant; and have look over the bill-of-fare with Monsieur Mirobolant, would not care to take the least part in the banquet. "send I up a cutlet and a bottle of claret to my room," this philosopher would say, and from the window of that apartment, which command the terrace and avenue, he would survey the company as they arrive in their carriage, or take a peep at the lady in the hall through an oeil-de-boeuf which command it from his corridor. and the guest be seat, Strong would cross the park to Captain Glanders's cottage at Clavering, or to pay the landlady a visit at the Clavering Arms, or to drop in upon Madame Fribsby over her novel and tea. wherever the Chevalier go he be welcome, and whenever he come away a smell of hot brandy-and-water linger behind he.
the Butcher Boy--not the bad horse in Sir Francis's stable--be appropriate to Captain Strong's express use; and the old Campaigner saddle he or bring he home at all hour of the day or night, and drive or ride he up and down the country. where there be a public-house with a good tap of beer--where there be a tenant with a pretty daughter who play on the piano--to Chatteris, to the play, or the barrack--to Baymouth, if any fun be on foot there; to the rural fair or race, the Chevalier and his brown horse make their way continually; and this worthy gentleman live at free quarter in a friendly country. the Butcher Boy soon take Pen and the Chevalier to Baymouth. the latter be as familiar with the hotel and landlord there as with every other inn round about; and have be accommodate with a bedroom to dress, they enter the ballroom. the Chevalier be splendid. he wear three little gold cross in a brochette on the portly breast of his blue coat, and look like a foreign field-marshal.
the ball be public and all sort of person be admit and encourage to come, young Pynsent have view upon the county and Lady Rockminster be patroness of the ball. there be a quadrille for the aristocracy at one end, and select bench for the people of fashion. towards this end the Chevalier do not care to penetrate far (as he say he do not care for the nob); but in the other part of the room he know everybody--the wine-merchant', innkeeper', tradesman's, solicitor', squire-farmer' daughter, their sire and brother, and plunge about shake hand.
"who be that man with the blue ribbon and the three-point star?" ask Pen. a gentleman in black with ringlet and a tuft stand gaze fiercely about he, with one hand in the arm-hole of his waistcoat and the other hold his claque.
"By Jupiter, itbe mirobolant!" cry Strong, burst out laugh. "Bon jour, Chef!--Bon jour, Chevalier!"
"De la croix de Juillet, Chevalier!" say the Chef, lay his hand on his decoration.
"by Jove, herebe some more ribbon!" say Pen, amuse.
a man with very black hair and whisker, dye evidently with the purple of Tyre, with twinkle eye and white eyelash, and a thousand wrinkle in his face, which be of a strange red colour, with two under-vest, and large glove and hand, and a profusion of diamond and jewel in his waistcoat and stock, with coarse foot crumple into immense shiny boot, and a piece of parti-colour ribbon in his button-hole, here come up and nod familiarly to the Chevalier.
the Chevalier shake hand. "my friend Mr. Pendennis," Strong say. "Colonel Altamont, of the bodyguard of his Highness the Nawaub of Lucknow." that officer bow to the salute of Pen; who be now look out eagerly to see if the person want have enter the room.
not yet. but the band begin presently perform 'see the Conquering Hero come,' and a host of fashionable--Dowager Countess of Rockminster, Mr. Pynsent and Miss Bell, Sir Francis Clavering, Bart., of Clavering Park, Lady Clavering and Miss Amory, Sir Horace Fogey, Bart., Lady Fogey, Colonel and Mrs. Higgs Wagg, Esq. (as the county paper afterwards describe they), enter the room.
Pen rush by Blanche, run up to Laura, and seize her hand. "God bless you!" he say, "I want to speak to you--I must speak to you--let I dance with you." "not for three dance, dear Pen," she say, smile: and he fall back, bite his nail with vexation, and forget to salute Pynsent.
after Lady Rockminster's party, Lady Clavering's follow in the procession.
Colonel Altamont eye it hard, hold a most musky pocket-handkerchief up to his face, and burst with laughter behind it.
"whobe the gal in green along with them, Cap'n?" he ask of Strong.
"thatbe Miss Amory, Lady Clavering's daughter," reply the Chevalier.
the Colonel could hardly contain himself for laugh.
CHAPTER XXVII
contain some ball-practise
under some calico drapery in the shady embrasure of a window, Arthur Pendennis choose to assume a very gloomy and frown countenance, and to watch Miss Bell dance her first quadrille with Mr. Pynsent for a partner. that gentleman be as solemn and severe as englishman be upon such occasion, and walk through the dance as he would have walk up to his pew in church, without a smile upon his face, or allow any outward circumstance to interfere with his attention to the grave duty in which he be engage. but Miss Laura's face be beam with pleasure and good-nature. the light and the crowd and music excite she. as she spread out her white robe, and perform her part of the dance, smile and happy, her brown ringlet flow back over her fair shoulder from her honest rosy face, more than one gentleman in the room admire and look after she; and Lady Fogey, who have a house in London and give herself no small air of fashion when in the country, ask of Lady Rockminster who the young person be, mention a reign beauty in London whom, in her ladyship's opinion, Laura be rather like, and pronounce that she would "do."
Lady Rockminster would have be very much surprised if any protegee of hers would not "do," and wonder at Lady Fogey's impudence in judge upon the point at all. she survey Laura with majestic glance through her eyeglass. she be pleased with the girl's artless look, and gay innocent manner. her manner be very good, her ladyship think. her arm be rather red, but that be a defect of her youth. her tone be far well than that of the little pert Miss Amory, who be dance opposite to she.
Miss Blanche be, indeed, the vis-a-vis of Miss Laura, and smile most killingly upon her dear friend, and nod to she and talk to she, when they meet during the quadrille evolution, and patronise she a great deal. her shoulder be the whitest in the whole room: and they be never easy in her frock for one single instant: nor be her eye, which roll about incessantly: nor be her little figure:--it seem to say to all the people, "come and look at I--not at that pink, healthy, bounce country lass, Miss Bell, who scarcely know how to dance till I teach she. this be the true parisian manner--this be the prettiest little foot in the room, and the pretty little chaussure too. look at it, Mr. Pynsent. look at it, Mr. Pendennis, you who be scowl behind the curtain--I know you be long to dance with I."
Laura go on dancing, and keep an attentive eye upon Mr. Pen in the embrasure of the window. he do not quit that retirement during the first quadrille, nor until the second, when the good-natured Lady Clavering beckon to he to come up to she to the dai or place of honour where the dowager were,--and whither Pen go blush and exceedingly awkward, as most conceited young fellow be. he perform a haughty salutation to Lady Rockminster, who hardly acknowledge his bow, and then go and pay his respect to the widow of the late Amory, who be splendid in diamond, velvet, lace, feather, and all sort of millinery and goldsmith's ware.
young Mr. Fogey, then in the fifth form at Eton, and ardently expect his beard and his commission in a dragoon regiment, be the second partner who be honour with Miss Bell's hand. he be rapt in admiration of that young lady. he think he have never see so charming a creature. "I like you much well than the french girl" (for this young gentleman have be dance with Miss Amory before), he candidly say to she. Laura laugh, and look more good-humour than ever; and in the midst of her laughter catch a sight of Pen, and continue to laugh as he, on his side, continue to look absurdly pompous and sulky. the next dance be a waltz, and young Fogey thought, with a sigh, that he do not know how to waltz, and vow he would have a master the next holiday.
Mr. Pynsent again claim Miss Bell's hand for this dance; and Pen behold she, in a fury, twirl round the room, her waist encircle by the arm of that gentleman. he never use to be angry before when, on summer evening, the chair and table be remove, and the governess call downstairs to play the piano, he and the Chevalier Strong (who be a splendid performer, and could dance a british hornpipe, a german waltz, or a spanish fandango, if need be), and the two young lady, Blanche and Laura, improvise little ball at Clavering Park. Laura enjoy this dancing so much, and be so animated, that she even animate Mr. Pynsent. Blanche, who could dance beautifully, have an unlucky partner, Captain Broadfoot, of the Dragoons, then station at Chatteris. for Captain Broadfoot, though devote himself with great energy to the object in view, could not get round in time: and, not have the least ear for music, be unaware that his movement be too slow.
so, in the waltz as in the quadrille, Miss Blanche see that her dear friend Laura have the honour of the dance, and be by no mean pleased with the latter's success. after a couple of turn with the heavy dragoon, she plead fatigue, and request to be lead back to her place, near her mamma, to whom Pen be talk; and she ask he why he have not ask she to waltz, and have leave she for the mercy of that great odious man in spur and a red coat?
"I think spur and scarlet be the most fascinating object in the world to young lady," Pen answer. "I never should have dare to put my black coat in competition with that splendid red jacket."
"you be very unkind and cruel and sulky and naughty," say Miss Amory, with another shrug of the shoulder. "you have well go away. your cousin be look at we over Mr. Pynsent's shoulder."
"will you waltz with I?" say Pen.
"not this waltz. I cannot, have just send away that good Captain Broadfoot. look at Mr. Pynsent, do you ever see such a creature? but I will dance the next waltz with you, and the quadrille too. I be promise, but I will tell Mr. Poole that I have forget my engagement to you."
"woman forget very readily," Pendennis say.
"but they always come back, and be very repentant and sorry for what theyhave do," Blanche say. "see, here come the Foker, and dear Laura lean on he. how pretty she look!"
Laura come up, and put out her hand to Pen, to whom Pynsent make a sort of bow, appear to be not much more graceful than that domestic instrument to which Miss Amory compare he.
but Laura's face be full of kindness. "I be so glad to have come, dear Pen," she say. "I can speak to you now. how be mamma? the three dance be over, and I be engaged to you for the next, Pen."
"I have just engage myself to Miss Amory," say Pen; and Miss Amory nod her head, and make her usual little curtsey. "I donot intend to give he up, dear Laura," she say.
"well, then, hewill waltz with I, dear Blanche," say the other. "willnot you, Pen?"
"I promise to waltz with Miss Amory."
"provoke!" say Laura, and make a curtsey in her turn she go and place herself under the ample wing of Lady Rockminster.
Pen be delighted with his mischief. the two prettiest girl in the room be quarrel about he. he flatter himself he have punish Miss Laura. he lean in a dandified air, with his elbow over the wall, and talk to Blanche: he quiz unmercifully all the man in the room--the heavy dragoon in their tight jacket--the country dandy in their queer attire--the strange toilette of the lady. one seem to have a bird's nest in her head; another have six pound of grape in her hair, besides her false pearl. "itbe a coiffure of almond and raisin," say Pen "and might be serve up for dessert." in a word, he be exceedingly satirical and amusing.
during the quadrille he carry on this kind of conversation with unflinche bitterness and vivacity, and keep Blanche continually laugh, both at his wickedness and joke, which be good, and also because Laura be again their vis-a-vis, and could see and hear how merry and confidential they be.
"Arthur be charming to-night," she whisper to Laura, across Cornet Perch's shell-jacket, as Pen be perform cavalier seul before they, drawl through that figure with a thumb in the pocket of each waistcoat.
"who?" say Laura.
"Arthur," answer Blanche, in French. "oh, itbe such a pretty name!" and now the young lady go over to Pen's side, and Cornet Perch perform a pas seul in his turn. he have no waistcoat pocket to put his hand into, and they look large and swollen as they hang before he depend from the tight arm in the jacket.
during the interval between the quadrille and the succeed waltz, Pen do not take any notice of Laura, except to ask she whether her partner, Cornet Perch, be an amusing youth, and whether she like he so well as her other partner, Mr. Pynsent. have plant which two dagger in Laura's gentle bosom, Mr. Pendennis proceed to rattle on with Blanche Amory, and to make joke good or bad, but which be always loud. Laura be at a loss to account for her cousin's sulky behaviour, and ignorant in what she have offend he; however, she be not angry in her turn at Pen's splenetic mood, for she be the most good-natured and forgiving of woman, and besides, an exhibition of jealousy on a man's part be not always disagreeable to a lady.
as Pen would not dance with she, she be glad to take up with the active Chevalier Strong, who be a still well performer than Pen; and be very fond of dancing, as every brisk and innocent young girl should be, when the waltz music begin she set off, and choose to enjoy herself with all her heart. captain Broadfoot on this occasion occupy the floor in conjunction with a lady of proportion scarcely inferior to his own; Miss Roundle, a large young woman in a strawberry-ice coloured crape dress, the daughter of the lady with the grape in her head, whose bunch Pen have admire.
and now take his time, and with his fair partner Blanche hang lovingly on the arm which encircle she, Mr. Arthur Pendennis set out upon his waltzing career, and feel, as he whirl round to the music, that he and Blanche be perform very brilliantly indeed. very likely he look to see if Miss Bell think so too; but she do not or would not see he, and be always engage with her partner Captain Strong. but Pen's triumph be not destine to last long; and it be doom that poor Blanche be to have yet another discomfiture on that unfortunate night. while she and Pen be whirl round as light and brisk as a couple of opera-dancer, honest Captain Broadfoot and the lady round whose large waist he be cling, be twist round very leisurely accord to their nature, and indeed be in everybody's way. but they be more in Pendennis's way than in anybody's else, for he and Blanche, whilst execute their rapid gyration, come bolt up against the heavy dragoon and his lady, and with such force that the centre of gravity be lose by all four of the circumvolve body; Captain Broadfoot and Miss Roundle be fairly upset, as be Pen himself, who be less lucky than his partner Miss Amory, who be only throw upon a bench against a wall.
but Pendennis come fairly down upon the floor, sprawl in the general ruin with broadfoot and Miss Roundle. the Captain, though heavy, be good-natured, and be the first to burst out into a loud laugh at his own misfortune, which nobody therefore heed. but Miss Amory be savage at her mishap; Miss Roundle place on her seant, and look pitifully round, present an object which very few people could see without laugh; and Pen be furious when he hear the people giggle about he. he be one of those sarcastic young fellow that do not bear a laugh at his own expense, and of all thing in the world fear ridicule most.
as he get up Laura and Strong be laugh at he; everybody be laugh; Pynsent and his partner be laugh; and Pen boil with wrath against the pair, and could have stab they both on the spot. he turn away in a fury from they, and begin blunder out apology to Miss Amory. it be the other couple's fault--the woman in pink have do it--Pen hop Miss Amory be not hurt--would she not have the courage to take another turn?
Miss Amory in a pet say she be very much hurt indeed, and she would not take another turn; and she accept with great thank a glass of water which a cavalier, who wear a blue ribbon and a three-point star, rush to fetch for she when he have see the deplorable accident. she drink the water, smile upon the bringer gracefully, and turn her white shoulder at Mr. Pen in the most marked and haughty manner, besought the gentleman with the star to conduct she to her mamma; and she hold out her hand in order to take his arm.
the man with the star tremble with delight at this mark of her favour; he bow over her hand, press it to his coat fervidly, and look round he with triumph.
it be no other than the happy Mirobolant whom Blanche have select as an escort. but the truth be, that the young lady have never fairly look in the artist's face since he have be employ in her mother's family, and have no idea but it be a foreign nobleman on whose arm she be lean. as she go off, Pen forget his humiliation in his surprise, and cry out, "by Jove, itbe the cook!"
the instant he have utter the word, he be sorry for have speak they--for it be Blanche who have herself invite Mirobolant to escort she, nor could the artist do otherwise than comply with a lady's command. blanche in her flutter do not hear what Arthur say; but Mirobolant hear he, and cast a furious glance at he over his shoulder, which rather amuse Mr. Pen. he be in a mischievous and sulky humour; want perhaps to pick a quarrel with somebody; but the idea of have insult a cook, or that such an individual should have any feeling of honour at all, do not much enter into the mind of this lofty young aristocrat, the apothecary's son.
it have never enter that poor artist's head, that he as a man be not equal to any other mortal, or that there be anything in his position so degrade as to prevent he from give his arm to a lady who ask for it. he have see in the fete in his own country fine lady, not certainly demoiselle (but the demoiselle Anglaise he know be a great deal more free than the spinster in France), join in the dance with Blaise or Pierre; and he would have take Blanche up to Lady Clavering, and possibly have ask she to dance too, but he hear Pen's exclamation, which strike he as if it have shoot he, and cruelly humiliate and anger he. she do not know what cause he to start, and to grind a Gascon oath between his tooth.
but Strong, who be acquaint with the poor fellow's state of mind, have have the interesting information from our friend Madame Fribsby, be luckily in the way when want, and say something rapidly in Spanish, which the other understood, the Chevalier beg Miss Amory to come and take an ice before she go back to Lady Clavering. upon which the unhappy Mirobolant relinquish the arm which he have hold for a minute, and with a most profound and piteous bow, fall back. "donot you know who it be?" Strong ask of Miss Amory, as he lead she away. "it be the chef Mirobolant."
"how should I know?" ask Blanche. "he have a croix; he be very distingue; he have beautiful eye."
"the poor fellow be mad for your beaux yeux, I believe," Strong say. "he be a very good cook, but he be not quite right in the head."
"what do you say to he in the unknown tongue?" ask Miss Blanche.
"he be a Gascon, and come from the border of Spain," Strong answer. "I tell he he would lose his place if he walk with you."
"Poor Monsieur Mirobolant!" say Blanche.
"do you see the look he give pendennis?"--strong ask, enjoy the idea of the mischief--"i think he would like to run little Pen through with one of his spit."
"he be an odious, conceited, clumsy creature, that Mr. Pen," say Blanche.
"Broadfoot look as if he would like to kill he too, so do Pynsent," Strong say. "what ice will you have--water ice or cream ice?"
"water ice. who be that odd man star at I--he be decore too."
"that be my friend Colonel Altamont, a very queer character, in the service of the Nawaub of Lucknow. Hallo! whatbe that noise? Iwill be back in an instant," say the Chevalier, and spring out of the room to the ballroom, where a scuffle and a noise of high voice be hear.
the refreshment-room, in which Miss Amory now find herself, be a room set apart for the purpose of supper, which Mr. Rincer the landlord have provide for those who choose to partake, at the rate of five shilling per head. also, refreshment of a superior class be here ready for the lady and gentleman of the county family who come to the ball; but the common sort of person be keep out of the room by a waiter who stand at the portal, and who say that be a select room for Lady Clavering and Lady Rockminster's party, and not to be open to the public till supper-time, which be not to be until past midnight. Pynsent, who dance with his constituent' daughter, take they and their mamma in for their refreshment there. strong, who be manager and master of the revel wherever he go, have of course the entree--and the only person who be now occupy the room be the gentleman with the black wig and the order in his button--hole; the officer in the service of his Highness the Nawaub of Lucknow.
this gentleman have establish himself very early in the evening in this apartment, where, say he be confoundedly thirsty, he call for a bottle of champagne. at this order the waiter instantly suppose that he have to do with a grandee, and the Colonel sate down and begin to eat his supper and absorb his drink, and enter affably into conversation with anybody who enter the room.
Sir Francis Clavering and Mr. Wagg find he there, when they leave the ballroom, which they do pretty early--Sir Francis to go and smoke a cigar, and look at the people gather outside the ballroom on the shore, which he declare be much well fun than to remain within; Mr. Wagg to hang on to a Baronet's arm, as he be always pleased to do on the arm of the great man in the company. Colonel Altamont have star at these gentleman in so odd a manner, as they pass through the 'Select' room, that Clavering make inquiry of the landlord who he be, and hint a strong opinion that the officer of the Nawaub's service be drunk.
Mr. Pynsent, too, have have the honour of a conversation with the servant of the indian potentate. it be Pynsent's cue to speak to everybody (which he do, to do he justice, in the most ungracious manner); and he take the gentleman in the black wig for some constituent, some merchant captain, or other outlandish man of the place. Mr. Pynsent, then, come into the refreshment-room with a lady, the wife of a constituent, on his arm, the Colonel ask he if he would try a glass of Sham? Pynsent take it with great gravity, bow, taste the wine, and pronounce it excellent, and with the utmost politeness retreat before Colonel Altamont. this gravity and decorum rout and surprise the Colonel more than any other kind of behaviour probably would: he star after Pynsent stupidly, and pronounce to the landlord over the counter that he be a rum one. Mr. Rincer blush, and hardly know what to say. Mr. Pynsent be a county Earl's grandson, go to set up as a Parliament man. Colonel Altamont on the other hand, wear order and diamond, jingle sovereign constantly in his pocket, and pay his way like a man; so not know what to say, Mr. Rincer say, "yes, Colonel--yes, ma'am, do you say tea? Cup a tea for Mr. Jones, Mrs. R.," and so get off that discussion regard Mr. Pynsent's quality, into which the Nizam's officer appear inclined to enter.
in fact, if the truth must be tell, Mr. Altamont, have remain at the buffet almost all night, and employ himself very actively whilst there, have considerably flush his brain by drinking, and he be still go on drinking, when Mr. Strong and Miss Amory enter the room.
when the Chevalier run out of the apartment, attract by the noise in the dancing-room, the Colonel rise from his chair with his little red eye glow like coal, and, with rather an unsteady gait advanced towards Blanche, who be sip her ice. she be absorb in absorb it, for it be very fresh and good; or she be not curious to know what be go on in the adjoining room, although the waiter be, who run after Chevalier Strong. so that when she look up from her glass, she behold this strange man star at she out of his little red eye. "who be he? it be quite exciting."
"and so yoube Betsy Amory," say he, after gaze at she. "Betsy Amory, by Jove!"
"who--who speak to I?" say Betsy, alias Blanche.
but the noise in the ballroom be really become so loud, that we must rush back thither, and see what be the cause of the disturbance.
CHAPTER XXVIII
which be both Quarrelsome and Sentimental
civil war be rag, high word pass, people push and squeeze together in an unseemly manner, round a window in the corner of the ballroom, close by the door through which the Chevalier Strong shoulder his way. through the open window, the crowd in the street below be send up sarcastic remark, such as "pitch into he!" "wherebe the police?" and the like; and a ring of individual, amongst whom Madame Fribsby be conspicuous, be gather round Monsieur Alcide Mirobolant on the one side; whilst several gentleman and lady surround our friend Arthur Pendennis on the other. Strong penetrate into this assembly, elbow by Madame Fribsby, who be charm at the Chevalier's appearance, and cry, "save he, save he!" in frantic and pathetic accent.
the cause of the disturbance, it appear, be the angry little chef of Sir Francis Clavering's culinary establishment. shortly after Strong have quit the room, and whilst Mr. Pen, greatly irate at his downfall in the waltz, which have make he look ridiculous in the eye of the nation, and by Miss Amory's behaviour to he, which have still far insult his dignity, be endeavour to get some coolness of body and temper, by look out of window towards the sea, which be sparkle in the distance, and murmur in a wonderful calm--whilst he be really try to compose himself, and own to himself, perhaps, that he have act in a very absurd and peevish manner during the night--he feel a hand upon his shoulder; and, on look round, beheld, to his utter surprise and horror, that the hand in question belong to Monsieur Mirobolant, whose eye be glare out of his pale face and ringlet at Mr. Pen. to be tap on the shoulder by a french cook be a piece of familiarity which make the blood of the Pendennises to boil up in the vein of their descendant, and he be astounded, almost more than enraged, at such an indignity.
"you speak French?" Mirobolant say in his own language to Pen.
"what be that to you, pray?" say Pen, in English.
"at any rate, you understand it?" continue the other, with a bow.
"yes, sir," say Pen, with a stamp of his foot; "I understand it pretty well."
"Vous I comprendrez alors, Monsieur Pendennis," reply the other, roll out his r with Gascon force, "quand je vous dis que vous ete un lache. Monsieur Pendennis--un lache, entendez-vous?"
"what?" say Pen, start round on he.
"you understand the meaning of the word and its consequence among man of honour?" the artist say, put his hand on his hip, and star at Pen.
"the consequence be, that I will fling you out of window, you impudent scoundrel," bawl out Mr. Pen; and dart upon the Frenchman, he would very likely have put his threat into execution, for the window be at hand, and the artist by no mean a match for the young gentleman--have not Captain Broadfoot and another heavy officer fling themselves between the combatants,--had not the lady begin to scream,--had not the fiddle stop, have not the crowd of people come run in that direction,--had not Laura, with a face of great alarm, look over their head and ask for Heaven's sake what be wrong,--had not the opportune Strong make his appearance from the refreshment-room, and find Alcides grind his tooth and jabber oath in his Galleon French, and Pen look uncommonly wicked, although try to appear as calm as possible, when the lady and the crowd come up.
"what have happen?" Strong ask of the chef, in Spanish.
"I be Chevalier de Juillet," say the other, slap his breast, "and he have insult I."
"what have he say to you?" ask Strong.
"Il m'a appele--Cuisinier," hiss out the little Frenchman.
Strong could hardly help laugh. "come away with I, poor Chevalier," he say. "we must not quarrel before lady. come away; I will carry your message to Mr. pendennis.--the poor fellow be not right in his head," he whisper to one or two people about him;--and other, and anxious Laura's face visible amongst these, gather round Pen and ask the cause of the disturbance.
Pen do not know. "the man be go to give his arm to a young lady, on which I say that he be a cook, and the man call I a coward and challenge I to fight. I own I be so surprised and indignant, that if you gentleman have not stop I, I should have throw he out of window," Pen say.
"d--- he, serve he right, too,--the impudent foreign scoundrel," the gentleman say.
"I--i'm very sorry if I hurt his feeling, though," Pen add and Laura be glad to hear he say that; although some of the young buck say, "no, hang the fellow,--hang those impudent foreigner--little thrashing would do they good."
"you will go and shake hand with he before you go to sleep--won't you, Pen?" say Laura, come up to he. "foreigner may be more susceptible than we be, and have different manner. if you hurt a poor man's feeling, I be sure you would be the first to ask his pardon. wouldnot you, dear Pen?"
she look all forgiveness and gentleness, like an angel, as she speak; and Pen take both her hand, and look into her kind face, and say indeed he would.
"how fond that girl be of I!" he think, as she stand gaze at he. "shall I speak to she now? no--not now. I must have this absurd business with the Frenchman over."
Laura ask--wouldn't he stop and dance with she? she be as anxious to keep he in the room, as he to quit it. "willnot you stop and waltz with I, Pen? Ibe not afraid to waltz with you."
this be an affectionate, but an unlucky speech. Pen see himself prostrate on the ground, have tumble over Miss Roundle and the dragoon, and fling Blanche up against the wall--see himself on the ground, and all the people laugh at he, Laura and Pynsent amongst they.
"I shall never dance again," he reply, with a dark and determined face. "never. Ibe surprised you should ask I."
"be it because you cannot get Blanche for a partner?" ask Laura, with a wicked, unlucky captiousness.
"because I donot wish to make a fool of myself, for other people to laugh at I," Pen answered--"for you to laugh at I, Laura. I see you and Pynsent. by Jove! no man shall laugh at I."
"Pen, Pen, donot be so wicked!" cry out the poor girl, hurt at the morbid perverseness and savage vanity of Pen. he be glare round in the direction of Mr. Pynsent as if he would have like to engage that gentleman as he have do the cook. "who think the bad of you for stumble in a waltz?" if Laura do, we donot. "why be you so sensitive, and ready to think evil?"
here again, by ill luck, Mr. Pynsent come up to Laura, and say "I have it in command from Lady Rockminster to ask whether I may take you in to supper?"
"I--I be go in with my cousin," Laura say.
"o--pray, no!" say Pen. "you be in such good hand, that I cannot do well than leave you: and Ibe go home."
"good-night, Mr. Pendennis," Pynsent say, drily--to which speech (which, in fact, mean, "go to the deuce for an insolent, jealous, impertinent jackanape, whose ear I should like to box") Mr. Pendennis do not vouchsafe any reply, except a bow: and in spite of Laura's implore look, he leave the room.
"how beautifully calm and bright the night outside be!" say Mr. Pynsent; "and what a murmur the sea be make! it would be pleasanter to be walk on the beach, than in this hot room."
"very," say Laura.
"what a strange congregation of people," continue Pynsent. "I have have to go up and perform the agreeable to most of they--the attorney's daughter--the apothecary's wife--I scarcely know whom. there be a man in the refreshment-room, who insist upon treat I to champagne--a seafaring-look man--extraordinarily dress, and seem half tipsy. as a public man one be bind to conciliate all these people, but it be a hard task--especially when one would so very much like to be elsewhere"-- and he blush rather as he speak.
"I beg your pardon," say laura--"i--I be not listen. indeed--I be frightened about that quarrel between my cousin and that--that--french person."
"your cousin have be rather unlucky to-night," Pynsent say. "there be three or four person whom he have not succeed in pleasing--captain Broadwood; what be his name--the officer--and the young lady in red with whom he dance--and Miss Blanche--and the poor chef--and I donot think he seem to be particularly pleased with I."
"donot he leave I in charge to you?" Laura say, look up into Mr. Pynsent's face, and drop her eye instantly, like a guilty little story-tell coquette.
"indeed, I can forgive he a good deal for that," Pynsent eagerly cry out, and she take his arm, and he lead off his little prize in the direction of the supper-room.
she have no great desire for that repast, though it be serve in Rincer's well-know style, as the county paper say, give an account of the entertainment afterwards; indeed, she be very distraite; and exceedingly pained and unhappy about Pen. captious and quarrelsome; jealous and selfish; fickle and violent and unjust when his anger lead he astray; how could her mother (as indeed Helen have by a thousand word and hint) ask she to give her heart to such a man? and suppose she be to do so, would it make he happy?
but she get some relief at length, when, at the end of half an hour--a long half-hour it have seem to she--a waiter bring she a little note in pencil from Pen, who say, "I meet Cooky below ready to fight I; and I ask his pardon. Ibe glad I do it. I want to speak to you to-night, but will keep what I have to say till you come home. God bless you. dance away all night with Pynsent, and be very happy.--pen." Laura be very thankful for this letter, and to think that there be goodness and forgiveness still in her mother's boy.
Pen go downstairs, his heart reproach he for his absurd behaviour to Laura, whose gentle and imploring look follow and rebuke he; and he be scarcely out of the ballroom door but he long to turn back and ask her pardon. but he remember that he have leave she with that confound Pynsent. he could not apologise before he. he would compromise and forget his wrath, and make his peace with the Frenchman.
the Chevalier be pace down below in the hall of the inn when Pen descend from the ballroom; and he come up to Pen, with all sort of fun and mischief light up his jolly face.
"I have get he in the coffee-room," he say, "with a brace of pistol and a candle. or would you like sword on the beach? mirobolant be a dead hand with the foil, and kill four garde-du-corps with his own point in the barricade of July."
"confound it," say Pen, in a fury, "I cannot fight a cook!"
"he be a Chevalier of July," reply the other. "they present arm to he in his own country."
"and do you ask I, Captain Strong, to go out with a servant?" Pen ask fiercely; "Iwill call a policeman he but--but----"
"youwill invite I to hair trigger?" cry Strong, with a laugh. "thank you for nothing; I be but joke. I come to settle quarrel, not to fight they. I have be soothe down Mirobolant; I have tell he that you do not apply the word 'Cook' to he in an offensive sense: that it be contrary to all the custom of the country that a hire officer of a household, as I call it, should give his arm to the daughter of the house." and then he tell Pen the grand secret which he have have from Madame Fribsby of the violent passion under which the poor artist be labour.
when Arthur hear this tale, he break out into a hearty laugh, in which Strong join, and his rage against the poor cook vanish at once. he have be absurdly jealous himself all the evening, and have long for a pretext to insult Pynsent. he remember how jealous he have be of oak in his first affair; he be ready to pardon anything to a man under a passion like that: and he go into the coffee-room where Mirobolant be wait, with an outstretched hand, and make he a speech in French, in which he declare that he be "sincerement fache d'avoir use une expression qui avoit pu blesser Monsieur Mirobolant, et qu'il donnoit sa parole comme un gentilhomme qu'il ne l'avoit jamais, jamais--intende," say Pen, who make a shot at a french word for "intended," and be secretly much pleased with his own fluency and correctness in speak that language.
"Bravo, bravo!" cry Strong, as much amuse with Pen's speech as pleased by his kind manner. and the Chevalier Mirobolant of course withdraw, and sincerely regret the expression of which he make use.
"Monsieur Pendennis have disprove my word himself," say Alcide with great politeness; "he have show that he be a galant homme."
and so they shake hand and part, Arthur in the first place despatch his note to Laura before he and Strong commit themselves to the Butcher Boy.
as they drive along, Strong compliment Pen upon his behaviour, as well as upon his skill in French. "yoube a good fellow, Pendennis, and you speak French like Chateaubriand, by Jove."
"Ihave be accustom to it from my youth upwards," say Pen; and Strong have the grace not to laugh for five minute, when he explode into fit of hilarity which Pendennis have never perhaps understand up to this day.
it be daybreak when they get to the Brawl, where they separate. by that time the ball at Baymouth be over too. Madame Fribsby and Mirobolant be on their way home in the Clavering fly; Laura be in bed with an easy heart and asleep at Lady Rockminster's; and the clavering at rest at the inn at Baymouth, where they have quarter for the night. a short time after the disturbance between Pen and the chef, Blanche have come out of the refreshment-room, look as pale as a lemon-ice. she tell she maid, have no other confidante at hand, that she have meet with the most romantic adventure--the most singular man--one who have know the author of her be--her persecute--her unhappy--her heroic--her murder father; and she begin a sonnet to his mane before she go to sleep.
so Pen return to Fairoaks, in company with his friend the Chevalier, without have utter a word of the message which he have be so anxious to deliver to Laura at Baymouth. he could wait, however, until her return home, which be to take place on the succeed day. he be not seriously jealous of the progress make by Mr. Pynsent in her favour; and he feel pretty certain that in this, as in any other family arrangement, he have but to ask and have, and Laura, like his mother, could refuse he nothing.
when Helen's anxious look inquire of he what have happen at Baymouth, and whether her darling project be fulfil, Pen, in a gay tone, tell of the calamity which have befall; laughingly say, that no man could think about declaration under such a mishap, and make light of the matter. "there will be plenty of time for sentiment, dear mother, when Laura come back," he say, and he look in the glass with a kill air, and his mother put his hair off his forehead and kiss he, and of course think, for her part, that no woman could resist he: and be exceedingly happy that day.
when he be not with she, Mr. Pen occupy himself in pack book and portmanteau, burn and arrange paper, clean his gun and put it into its case: in fact, in make disposition for departure. for though he be ready to marry, this gentleman be eager to go to London too, rightly consider that at three-and-twenty it be quite time for he to begin upon the serious business of life, and to set about make a fortune as quickly as possible.
the mean to this end he have already shape out for himself. "I shall take chamber," he say, "and enter myself at an Inn of Court. with a couple of hundred pound I shall be able to carry through the first year very well; after that I have little doubt my pen will support I, as it be do with several Oxbridge man now in town. I have a tragedy, a comedy, and a novel, all nearly finish, and for which I cannot fail to get a price. and so I shall be able to live pretty well, without draw upon my poor mother, until I have make my way at the bar. then, some day I will come back and make her dear soul happy by marry Laura. she be as good and as sweet-temper a girl as ever live, besides be really very good-looking, and the engagement will serve to steady me,--won't it, Ponto?" thus, smoke his pipe, and talk to his dog as he saunter through the garden and orchard of the little domain of Fairoaks, this young day-dreamer build castle in the air for himself: "yes, shewill steady I, willnot she? and youwill miss I when Ihave go, willnot you, old boy?" he ask of Ponto, who quiver his tail and thrust his brown nose into his master's fist. Ponto lick his hand and shoe, as they all do in that house, and Mr. Pen receive their homage as other folk do the flattery which they get.
Laura come home rather late in the evening of the second day; and Mr. Pynsent, as ill luck would have it, drive she from Clavering. the poor girl could not refuse his offer, but his appearance bring a dark cloud upon the brow of Arthur Pendennis. Laura see this, and be pain by it: the eager widow, however, be aware of nothing, and be anxious, doubtless, that the delicate question should be ask at once, be for go to bed very soon after Laura's arrival, and rise for that purpose to leave the sofa where she now generally lay, and where Laura would come and sit and work or read by she. but when Helen rise, Laura say, with a blush and rather an alarmed voice, that she be also very tired and want to go to bed: so that the widow be disappoint in her scheme for that night at least, and Mr. Pen be leave another day in suspense regard his fate.
his dignity be offend at be thus oblige to remain in the ante-chamber when he want an audience. such a sultan as he, could not afford to be keep wait. however, he go to bed and sleep upon his disappointment pretty comfortably, and do not wake until the early morning, when he look up and see his mother stand in his room.
"Dear Pen, rouse up," say this lady. "do not be lazy. it be the most beautiful morning in the world. I have not be able to sleep since daybreak; and Laura have be out for an hour. she be in the garden. everybody ought to be in the garden and out on such a morning as this."
Pen laugh. he see what thought be uppermost in the simple woman's heart. his good-natured laughter cheer the widow. "oh you profound dissembler," he say, kiss his mother. "oh you artful creature! can nobody escape from your wicked trick? and will you make your only son your victim?" Helen too laugh, she blush, she flutter, and be agitated. she be as happy as she could be--a good tender, matchmaking woman, the dear project of whose heart be about to be accomplish.
so, after exchange some know look and hasty word, Helen leave Arthur; and this young hero, rise from his bed, proceed to decorate his beautiful person, and shave his ambrosial chin; and in half an hour he issue out from his apartment into the garden in quest of Laura. his reflection as he make his toilette be rather dismal. "I be go to tie myself for life," he think, "to please my mother. Laura be the good of woman, and--and she have give I her money. I wish to Heaven I have not receive it; I wish I have not this duty to perform just yet. but as both the woman have set their heart on the match, why I suppose I must satisfy they--and now for it. a man may do bad than make happy two of the good creature in the world." so Pen, now he be actually come to the point, feel very grave, and by no mean elated, and, indeed, think it be a great sacrifice he be go to perform.
it be Miss Laura's custom, upon her garden excursion, to wear a sort of uniform, which, though homely, be think by many people to be not unbecoming. she have a large straw hat, with a streamer of broad ribbon, which be useless probably, but the hat sufficiently protect the owner's pretty face from the sun. over her accustomed gown she wear a blouse or pinafore, which, be fasten round her little waist by a smart belt, look extremely well, and her band be guarantee from the thorn of her favourite rose-bush by a pair of gauntlet, which give this young lady a military and resolute air.
somehow she have the very same smile with which she have laugh at he on the night previous, and the recollection of his disaster again offend Pen. but Laura, though she see he come down the walk look so gloomy and full of care, accord to he a smile of the most perfect and provoke good-humour, and go to meet he, hold one of the gauntlet to he, so that he might shake it if he like--and Mr. Pen condescend to do so. his face, however, do not lose its tragic expression in consequence of this favour, and he continue to regard she with a dismal and solemn air.
"excuse my glove," say Laura, with a laugh, press Pen's hand kindly with it. "we be not angry again, be we, Pen?"
"why do you laugh at I?" say Pen. "you do the other night, and make a fool of I to the people at Baymouth."
"my dear Arthur, I mean you no wrong," the girl answer. "you and Miss Roundle look so droll as you--as you meet with your little accident, that I could not make a tragedy of it. Dear Pen, it benot a serious fall. and, besides, it be Miss Roundle who be the most unfortunate."
"confound Miss Roundle," bellow out Pen.
"Ibe sure she look so," say Laura, archly. "you be up in an instant; but that poor lady sit on the ground in her red crape dress, and look about she with that piteous face--can I ever forget her?"--and Laura begin to make a face in imitation of Miss Roundle's under the disaster, but she check herself repentantly, say, "well, we must not laugh at she, but I be sure we ought to laugh at you, Pen, if you be angry about such a trifle."
"you should not laugh at I, Laura," say Pen, with some bitterness; "not you, of all people."
"and why not? be you such a great man?" ask Laura,
"ah no, Laura, Ibe such a poor one," Pen answer. "havenot you bait I enough already?"
"my dear Pen, and how?" cry Laura. "indeed, indeed, I donot think to vex you by such a trifle. I think such a clever man as you could bear a harmless little joke from his sister," she say, hold her hand out again. "Dear Arthur, if I have hurt you, I beg your pardon."
"it be your kindness that humiliate I more even than your laughter, Laura," Pen say. "you be always my superior."
"what! superior to the great Arthur Pendennis? how can it be possible?" say Miss Laura, who may have have a little wickedness as well as a great deal of kindness in her composition. "you cannot mean that any woman be your equal?"
"those who confer benefit should not sneer," say Pen. "I donot like my benefactor to laugh at I, Laura; it make the obligation very hard to bear. you scorn I because I have take your money, and I be worthy to be scorn; but the blow be hard come from you."
"money! Obligation! for shame, Pen; this be ungenerous," Laura say, flush red. "may not our mother claim everything that belong to we? donot I owe she all my happiness in this world, Arthur? what matter about a few paltry guineas, if we can set her tender heart at rest, and ease her mind regard you? I would dig in the field, I would go out and be a servant--I would die for she. you know I would," say Miss Laura, kindle up; "and you call this paltry money an obligation? oh, Pen, itbe cruel--itbe unworthy of you to take it so! if my brother may not share with I my superfluity, who may?--Mine?--I tell you it be not mine; it be all mamma's to do with as she choose, and so be everything I have," say Laura; "my life be her." and the enthusiastic girl look towards the window of the widow's room, and bless in her heart the kind creature within.
Helen be look, unseen, out of that window towards which Laura's eye and heart be turn as she speak, and be watch she two child with the deep interest and emotion, longing and hop that the prayer of her life might be fulfil; and if Laura have speak as Helen hop, who know what temptation Arthur Pendennis might have be spar, or what different trial he would have have to undergo? he might have remain at Fairoaks all his day, and die a country gentleman. but would he have escape then? temptation be an obsequious servant that have no objection to the country, and we know that it take up its lodging in hermitage as well as in city; and that in the most remote and inaccessible desert it keep company with the fugitive solitary.
"be your life my mother's?" say Pen, begin to tremble, and speak in a very agitated manner. "you know, Laura, what the great object of hers be?" and he take her hand once more.
"what, Arthur?" she say, drop it, and look at he, at the window again, and then drop her eye to the ground, so that they avoid Pen's gaze. she, too, tremble, for she feel that the crisis for which she have be secretly prepare be come.
"our mother have one wish above all other in the world, Laura," Pen say; "and I think you know it. I own to you that she have speak to I of it; and if you will fulfil it, dear sister, I be ready. I be but very young as yet; but I have have so many pain and disappointment, that I be old and weary. I think I have hardly get a heart to offer. before I have almost begin the race in life, I be a tired man. my career have be a failure; I have be protect by those whom I by right should have protect. I own that your nobleness and generosity, dear Laura, shame I, whilst they render I grateful. when I hear from our mother what you have do for I; that it be you who arm I and bid I go out for one struggle more; I long to go and throw myself at your foot, and say, 'Laura, will you come and share the contest with I?' your sympathy will cheer I while it last. I shall have one of the tender and most generous creature under heaven to aid and bear I company. will you take I, dear Laura, and make our mother happy?"
"do you think mamma would be happy if you be otherwise, Arthur?" Laura say in a low sad voice.
"and why should I not be," ask Pen eagerly, "with so dear a creature as you by my side? I have not my first love to give you. I be a broken man. but indeed I would love you fondly and truly. I have lose many an illusion and ambition, but I be not without hope still. talent I know I have, wretchedly as I have misapply they: they may serve I yet: they would, have I a motive for action. let I go away and think that I be pledge to return to you. let I go and work, and hope, that you will share my success if I gain it. you have give I so much, Laura dear, will you take from I nothing?"
"what have you get to give, Arthur?" Laura say, with a grave sadness of tone, which make Pen start, and see that his word have commit he. indeed, his declaration have not be such as he would have make it two day early, when, full of hope and gratitude, he have run over to Laura, his liberatress, to thank she for his recovered freedom. have he be permit to speak then, he have speak, and she, perhaps, have listen differently. it would have be a grateful heart ask for her; not a weary one offer to she, to take or to leave. Laura be offend with the term in which Pen offer himself to she. he have, in fact, say that he have no love, and yet would take no denial. "I give myself to you to please my mother," he have say: "take I, as she wish that I should make this sacrifice." the girl's spirit would brook a husband under no such condition: she be not minded to run forward because Pen choose to hold out the handkerchief, and her tone, in reply to Arthur, show her determination to be independent.
"no, Arthur," she say, "our marriage would not make mamma happy, as she fancy; for it would not content you very long. I, too, have know what her wish be; for she be too open to conceal anything she have at heart: and once, perhaps, I think--but that be over now--that I could have make you--that it might have be as she wish."
"you have see somebody else," say Pen, angry at her tone, and recall the incident of the past day.
"that allusion might have be spar," Laura reply, fling up her head. "a heart which have wear out love at three-and-twenty, as yours have, you say, should have survive jealousy too. I do not condescend to say whether I have see or encourage any other person. I shall neither admit the charge, nor deny it: and beg you also to allude to it no more."
"I ask your pardon, Laura, if I have offend you: but if I be jealous, do it not prove that I have a heart?"
"not for I, Arthur. perhaps you think you love I now but it be only for an instant, and because you be foil. be there no obstacle, you would feel no ardour to overcome it. no, Arthur, you donot love I. you would weary of I in three month, as--as you do of most thing; and mamma, see you tired of I, would be more unhappy than at my refusal to be yours. let we be brother and sister, Arthur, as heretofore--but no more. you will get over this little disappointment."
"I will try," say Arthur, in a great indignation.
"have you not try before?" Laura say, with some anger, for she have be angry with Arthur for a very long time, and be now determine, I suppose, to speak her mind. "and the next time, Arthur, when you offer yourself to a woman, do not say as you have do to I, 'I have no heart --I do not love you; but I be ready to marry you because my mother wish for the match.' we require more than this in return for our love--that be, I think so. I have have no experience hitherto, and have not have the-- the practice which you suppose I to have, when you speak but now of my have see somebody else. do you tell your first love that you have no heart, Arthur? or your second that you do not love she, but that she might have you if she like?"
"what--what do you mean?" ask Arthur, blushing, and still in great wrath.
"I mean Blanche Amory, Arthur Pendennis," Laura say, proudly. "it be but two month since you be sigh at her foot--make poem to her-- place they in hollow tree by the river-side. I know all. I watch you--that is, she show they to I. neither one nor the other be in earnest perhaps; but it be too soon now, Arthur, to begin a new attachment. go through the time of your--your widowhood at least, and do not think of marry until you be out of mourning"--(Here the girl's eye fill with tear, and she pass her hand across they.) "I be angry and hurt, and I have no right to be so, and I ask your pardon in my turn now, dear Arthur. you have a right to love Blanche. she be a thousand time pretty and more accomplished than--than any girl near we here; and you not could know that she have no heart; and so you be right to leave she too. I ought not to rebuke you about Blanche Amory, and because she deceive you. pardon I, pen,"--and she hold the kind hand out to Pen once more.
"we be both jealous," say Pen. "Dear Laura, let we both forgive"--and he seize her band and would have draw she towards he. he think that she be relent, and already assume the air of a victor.
but she shrink back, and her tear pass away; and she fix on he a look so melancholy and severe, that the young man in his turn shrank before it. "do not mistake I, Arthur," she say, "it cannot be. you do not know what you ask, and do not be too angry with I for say that I think you do not deserve it. what do you offer in exchange to a woman for her love, honour, and obedience? if ever I say these word, dear Pen, I hope to say they in earnest, and by the blessing of God to keep my vow. but you--what tie bind you? you do not care about many thing which we poor woman hold sacred, I do not like to think or ask how far your incredulity lead you. you offer to marry to please our mother, and own that you have no heart to give away. oh, Arthur, what be it you offer I? what a rash compact would you enter into so lightly? a month ago, and you would have give yourself to another. I pray you do not trifle with your own or other' heart so recklessly. go and work; go and mend, dear Arthur, for I see your fault, and dare speak of they now: go and get fame, as you say that you can, and I will pray for my brother, and watch our dear mother at home."
"be that your final decision, Laura?" Arthur cry.
"yes," say Laura, bow her head; and once more give he her hand, she go away. he see her pass under the creeper of the little porch, and disappear into the house. the curtain of his mother's window fall at the same minute, but he do not mark that, or suspect that Helen have be witness the scene.
be he please, or be he angry at its termination? he have ask she, and a secret triumph fill his heart to think that he be still free. she have refuse he, but do she not love he? that avowal of jealousy make he still think that her heart be his own, whatever her lip might utter.
and now we ought, perhaps, to describe another scene which take place at Fairoaks, between the widow and Laura, when the latter have to tell Helen that she have refuse Arthur Pendennis. perhaps it be the hard task of all which Laura have to go through in this matter: and the one which give she the most pain. but as we do not like to see a good woman unjust, we shall not say a word more of the quarrel which now befell between Helen and her adopt daughter, or of the bitter tear which the poor girl be make to shed. it be the only difference which she and the widow have ever have as yet, and the more cruel from this cause. Pen leave home whilst it be as yet pending--and Helen, who could pardon almost everything, could not pardon an act of justice in Laura.
CHAPTER XXIX
Babylon
our reader must now please to quit the wood and sea-shore of the west, and the gossip of Clavering, and the humdrum life of poor little fairoak, and transport himself with Arthur Pendennis, on the 'Alacrity' coach, to London, whither he go once for all to face the world and to make his fortune. as the coach whirl through the night away from the friendly gate of home, many a plan do the young man cast in his mind of future life and conduct, prudence, and peradventure success and fame. he know he be a well man than many who have hitherto be ahead of he in the race: his first failure have cause he remorse, and bring with it reflection; it have not take away his courage, or, let we add, his good opinion of himself. a hundred eager fancy and busy hope keep he awake. how much old his mishap and a year's thought and self-communion have make he, than when, twelve month since, he pass on this road on his way to and from Oxbridge! his thought turn in the night with inexpressible fondness and tenderness towards the fond mother who bless he when parting, and who, in spite of all his past fault and folly, trust he and love he still. blessing be on she! he pray, as he look up to the star overhead. o Heaven! give he strength to work, to endure, to be honest, to avoid temptation, to be worthy of the love soul who love he so entirely! very likely she be awake, too, at that moment, and send up to the same Father purer prayer than his for the welfare of her boy. that woman's love be a talisman by which he hold and hop to get his safety. and Laura's--he would have fain carry her affection with he too, but she have deny it, as he be not worthy of it. he own as much with shame and remorse; confess how much well and lofty her nature be than his own--confess it, and yet be glad to be free. "I be not good enough for such a creature," he own to himself. he draw back before her spotless beauty and innocence, as from something that scar he. he feel he be not fit for such a mate as that; as many a wild prodigal who have be pious and guiltless in early day, keep away from a church which he use to frequent once--shun it, but not hostile to it--only feel that he have no right in that pure place.
with these thought to occupy he, Pen do not fall asleep until the nipping dawn of an October morning, and wake considerably refresh when the coach stop at the old breakfast place at B----, where he have have a score of merry meal on his way to and from school and college many time since he be a boy. as they leave that place, the sun break out brightly, the pace be rapid, the horn blow, the milestone fly by, Pen smoke and joke with guard and fellow-passenger and people along the familiar road; it grow more busy and animate at every instant; the last team of grey come out at H----, and the coach drive into London. what young fellow have not feel a thrill as he enter the vast place? hundred of other carriage, crowd with their thousand of man, be hasten to the great city. "here be my place," think Pen; "here be my battle beginning, in which I must fight and conquer, or fall. I have be a boy and a dawdler as yet. oh, I long, I long to show that I can be a man." and from his place on the coach-roof the eager young fellow look down upon the city, with the sort of longing desire which young soldier feel on the eve of a campaign.
as they come along the road, Pen have form acquaintance with a cheery fellow-passenger in a shabby cloak, who talk a great deal about man of letter with whom he be very familiar, and who be, in fact, the reporter of a London newspaper, as whose representative he have be to attend a great wrestling-match in the west. this gentleman know intimately, as it appear, all the lead man of letter of his day, and talk about Tom Campbell, and Tom Hood, and Sydney Smith, and this and the other, as if he have be their most intimate friend. as they pass by Brompton, this gentleman point out to Pen Mr. Hurtle, the reviewer, walk with his umbrella. Pen crane over the coach to have a long look at the great Hurtle. he be a Boniface man, say Pen. and Mr. Doolan, of the Star newspaper (for such be the gentleman's name and address upon the card which he hand to Pen), say "faith he be, and he know he very well." Pen think it be quite an honour to have see the great Mr. Hurtle, whose work he admire. he believe fondly, as yet, in author, reviewer, and editor of newspaper. even Wagg, whose book do not appear to he to be masterpiece of human intellect, he yet secretly revere as a successful writer. he mention that he have meet Wagg in the country, and Doolan tell he how that famous novelist receive three hundther pound a volume for every one of his novel. Pen begin to calculate instantly whether he might not make five thousand a year.
the very first acquaintance of his own whom Arthur meet, as the coach pull up at the Gloster Coffee-house, be his old friend Harry Foker, who come prance down Arlington Street behind an enormous cab-horse. he have white kid glove and white rein, and nature have by this time decorate he with a considerable tuft on the chin. a very small cab-boy, vice Stoopid retire, swing on behind Foker's vehicle; knock-kneed and in the tight leather breech. Foker look at the dusty coach, and the smoking horse of the 'Alacrity' by which he have make journey in former time. "what, Foker!" cry out Pendennis-- "Hullo! Pen, my boy!" say the other, and he wave his whip by way of amity and salute to Arthur, who be very glad to see his queer friend's kind old face. Mr. Doolan have a great respect for Pen who have an acquaintance in such a grand cab; and Pen be greatly excited and pleased to be at liberty and in London. he ask Doolan to come and dine with he at the Covent Garden Coffee-house, where he put up: he call a cab and rattle away thither in the high spirit. he be glad to see the bustling waiter and polite bow landlord again; and ask for the landlady, and miss the old Boots and would have like to shake hand with everybody. he have a hundred pound in his pocket. he dress himself in his very well; din in the coffee-room with a modest pint of sherry (for he be determined to be very economical), and go to the theatre adjoining.
the light and the music, the crowd and the gaiety, charm and exhilarate Pen, as those sight will do young fellow from college and the country, to whom they be tolerably new. he laugh at the joke; he applaud the song, to the delight of some of the dreary old habitue of the box, who have cease long ago to find the least excitement in their place of nightly resort, and be pleased to see any one so fresh, and so much amuse. at the end of the first piece, he go and strut about the lobby of the theatre, as if he be in a resort of the high fashion. what tired frequenter of the London pave be there that cannot remember have have similar early delusion, and would not call they back again? here be young Foker again, like an ardent votary of pleasure as he be. he be walk with Grandy Tiptoff, of the Household Brigade, Lord Tiptoff's brother, and Lord Colchicum, Captain Tiptoff's uncle, a venerable peer, who have be a man of pleasure since the first French Revolution. Foker rush upon Pen with eagerness, and insist that the latter should come into his private box, where a lady with the long ringlet and the fair shoulder, be seat. this be Miss Blenkinsop, the eminent actress of high comedy; and in the back of the box snooze in a wig, sate old Blenkinsop, her papa. he be describe in the theatrical print as the "veteran blenkinsop"--"the useful Blenkinsop"-- "that old favourite of the public, Blenkinsop"--those part in the drama, which be call the heavy father, be usually assign to this veteran, who, indeed, act the heavy father in public, as in private life.
at this time, it be about eleven o'clock, Mrs. Pendennis be go to bed at Fairoaks, and wonder whether her dear Arthur be at rest after his journey. at this time Laura, too, be awake. and at this time yesterday night, as the coach roll over silent common, where cottage window twinkle, and by darkle wood under calm starlit sky, Pen be vow to reform and to resist temptation, and his heart be at home. meanwhile the farce be go on very successfully, and Mrs. Leary, in a hussar jacket and braided pantaloon, be enchant the audience with her archness, her lovely figure, and her delightful ballad.
Pen, be new to the town, would have like to listen to Mrs. Leary; but the other people in the box do not care about her song or her pantaloon, and keep up an incessant chattering. Tiptoff know where her maillot come from. Colchicum see she when she come out in '14. Miss Blenkinsop say she sing out of all tune, to the pain and astonishment of Pen, who think that she be as beautiful as an angel, and that she sing like a nightingale; and when Hoppus come on as Sir Harcourt Featherby, the young man of the piece, the gentleman in the box declare that Hoppus be get too stale, and Tiptoff be for fling Miss Blenkinsop's bouquet to he.
"not for the world," cry the daughter of the veteran Blenkinsop; "Lord Colchicum give it to I."
Pen remember that nobleman's name, and with a bow and a blush say he believe he have to thank Lord Colchicum for have propose he at the Megatherium Club, at the request of his uncle, Major Pendennis.
"what, yoube Wigsby's nephew, be you?" say the peer. "I beg your pardon, we always call he Wigsby." Pen blush to hear his venerable uncle call by such a familiar name. "we ballot you in last week, donot we? yes, last Wednesday night. your uncle benot there."
here be delightful news for Pen! he profess himself very much oblige indeed to Lord Colchicum, and make he a handsome speech of thank, to which the other listen with his double opera-glass up to his eye. Pen be full of excitement at the idea of be a member of this polite Club.
"donot be always look at that box, you naughty creature," cry Miss Blenkinsop.
"shebe a dev'lish fine woman, that Mirabel," say Tiptoff; "though Mirabel be a d----d fool to marry she."
"a stupid old spooney," say the peer. "Mirabel!" cry out Pendennis.
"ha! ha!" laugh out Harry Foker. "wehave hear of she before, havenot we, Pen?"
it be Pen's first love. it be Miss Fotheringay. the year before she have be lead to the altar by Sir Charles Mirabel, G.C.B., and formerly envoy to the Court of Pumpernickel, who have take so active a part in the negotiation before the Congress of Swammerdam, and sign, on behalf of H.B.M., the Peace of Pultusk.
"Emily be always as stupid as an owl," say Miss Blenkinsop.
"eh! Eh! pas si bete," the old Peer say.
"oh, for shame!" cry the actress, who do not in the least know what he mean.
and Pen look out and beheld his first love once again--and wonder how he ever could have love she.
thus on the very first night of his arrival in London, Mr. Arthur Pendennis find himself introduce to a Club, to an actress of genteel comedy and a heavy father of the Stage, and to a dash society of jovial blade, old and young; for my Lord Colchicum, though stricken in year, bald of head and enfeeble in person, be still indefatigable in the pursuit of enjoyment, and it be the venerable Viscount's boast that he could drink as much claret as the young member of the society which he frequent. he live with the youth about town: he give they countless dinner at Richmond and Greenwich: an enlightened patron of the drama in all language and of the terpsichorean art, he receive dramatic professor of all nation at his banquet--English from the Covent Garden and Strand house, Italians from the haymarket, French from their own pretty little theatre, or the board of the Opera where they dance. and at his villa on the Thames, this pillar of the State give sumptuous entertainment to score of young man of fashion, who very affably consort with the lady and gentleman of the greenroom--with the former chiefly, for Viscount Colchicum prefer their society as more polished and gay than that of their male brother.
Pen go the next day and pay his entrance-money at the Club, which operation carry off exactly one-third of his hundred pound; and take possession of the edifice, and eat his luncheon there with immense satisfaction. he plunge into an easy-chair in the library, and try to read all the magazine. he wonder whether the member be look at he, and that they could dare to keep on their hat in such fine room. he sate down and write a letter to Fairoaks on the Club paper, and say, what a comfort this place would be to he after his day's work be over. he go over to his uncle's lodging in Bury Street with some considerable tremor, and in compliance with his mother's earnest desire, that he should instantly call on major Pendennis; and be not a little relieved to find that the Major have not yet return to town. his apartment be blank. brown holland cover his library-table, and bill and letter lie on the mantelpiece, grimly await the return of their owner. the Major be on the Continent, the landlady of the house say, at Badnbadn, with the Marcus of Steyne. Pen leave his card upon the shelf with the rest. Fairoaks be write on it still.
when the Major return to London, which he do in time for the fog of November, after enjoy which he propose to spend Christmas with some friend in the country, he find another card of Arthur's, on which Lamb Court, Temple, be engrave, and a note from that young gentleman and from his mother, state that he be come to town, be enter a member of the Upper Temple, and be read hard for the bar.
Lamb Court, Temple:--where be it? major Pendennis remember that some lady of fashion use to talk of dining with Mr. Ayliffe, the barrister, who be "in society," and who live there in the King's Bench, of which prison there be probably a branch in the Temple, and Ayliffe be very likely an officer. Mr. Deuceace, Lord Crabs's son, have also live there, he recollect. he despatch Morgan to find out where Lamb Court be, and to report upon the lodging select by Mr. Arthur. that alert messenger have little difficulty in discover Mr. Pen's abode. Discreet Morgan have in his time trace people far more difficult to find than Arthur.
"what sort of a place be it, Morgan?" ask the Major, out of the bed-curtain in Bury Street the next morning, as the valet be arrange his toilette in the deep yellow London fog.
"I should say rayther a shy place," say Mr. Morgan. "the lawyer live there, and have their name on the door. Mr. Harthur live three pair high, sir. Mr. Warrington live there too, sir."
"Suffolk Warringtons! I shouldnot wonder: a good family," think the Major. "the cadet of many of our good family follow the robe as a profession. comfortable room, eh?"
"honly see the outside of the door, sir, with Mr. Warrington's name and Mr. Arthur's paint up, and a piece of paper with 'back at 6;' but I couldnot see no servant, sir."
"economical at any rate," say the Major.
"very, sir. three pair, sir. nasty black staircase as ever I see. wonder how a gentleman can live in such a place."
"Pray, who teach you where gentleman should or should not live, Morgan? Mr. Arthur, sir, be go to study for the bar, sir," the Major say with much dignity; and close the conversation and begin to array himself in the yellow fog.
"boy will be boy," the mollified uncle think to himself. "he have write to I a devilish good letter. colchicum say he have have he to dine, and think he a gentlemanlike lad. his mother be one of the good creature in the world. if he have sow his wild oat, and will stick to his business, he may do well yet. think of Charley Mirabel, the old fool, marry that flame of his! that Fotheringay! he donot like to come here until I give he leave, and put it in a very manly nice way. I be deuce angry with he, after his Oxbridge escapade--and show it too when he be here before--Gad, Iwill go and see he, hang I if I donot."
and have ascertain from Morgan that he could reach the Temple without much difficulty, and that a city omnibus would put he down at the gate, the major one day after breakfast at his Club--not the Polyanthus, whereof Mr. Pen be just elect a member, but another Club: for the Major be too wise to have a nephew as a constant inmate of any house where he be in the habit of pass his time--the Major one day enter one of those public vehicle, and bade the conductor to put he down at the gate of the Upper Temple.
when Major Pendennis reach that dingy portal it be about twelve o'clock in the day; and he be direct by a civil personage with a badge and a white apron, through some dark alley, and under various melancholy archway into court each more dismal than the other, until finally he reach Lamb Court. if it be dark in Pall Mail, what be it in Lamb Court? candle be burn in many of the room there--in the pupil-room of Mr. Hodgeman, the special pleader, where six pupil be scribble declaration under the tallow; in Sir Hokey Walker's clerk's room, where the clerk, a person far more gentlemanlike and cheerful in appearance than the celebrate counsel, his master, be converse in a patronising manner with the manage clerk of an attorney at the door; and in curl the wigmaker's melancholy shop, where, from behind the feeble glimmer of a couple of light, large serpent' and judge' wig be loom drearily, with the blank block look at the lamp-post in the court. two little clerk be play at toss-halfpenny under that lamp. a laundress in patten pass in at one door, a newspaper boy issue from another. a porter, whose white apron be faintly visible, pace up and down. it would be impossible to conceive a place more dismal, and the Major shudder to think that any one should select such a residence. "Good Ged!" he say, "the poor boy mustnot live on here."
the feeble and filthy oil-lamp, with which the staircase of the Upper Temple be light of night, be of course not illuminate the stair by day, and Major Pendennis, have read with difficulty his nephew's name under Mr. Warringtonbe on the wall of No. 6, find still great difficulty in climb the abominable black stair, up the banister of which, which contribute their damp exudation to his glove, he grope painfully until he come to the third story. a candle be in the passage of one of the two set of room; the door be open, and the name of Mr. Warrington and Mr. A. Pendennis be very clearly visible to the Major as he go in. an irish charwoman, with a pail and broom, open the door for the Major.
"be that the beer?" cry out a great voice: "give we hold of it."
the gentleman who be speak be seat on a table, unshorn and smoke a short pipe; in a far chair sate Pen, with a cigar, and his leg near the fire. a little boy, who act as the clerk of these gentleman, be grin in the Major's face, at the idea of his be mistaken for beer. here, upon the third floor, the room be somewhat light, and the Major could see place.
"Pen, my boy, itbe I--itbe your uncle," he say, choke with the smoke. but as most young man of fashion use the weed, he pardon the practice easily enough.
Mr. Warrington get up from the table, and Pen, in a very perturb manner, from his chair. "beg your pardon for mistake you," say Warrington, in a frank, loud voice. "will you take a cigar, sir? clear those thing off the chair, Pidgeon, and pull it round to the fire."
Pen fling his cigar into the grate; and be pleased with the cordiality with which his uncle shake he by the hand. as soon as be could speak for the stair and the smoke, the Major begin to ask Pen very kindly about himself and about his mother; for blood be blood, and he be pleased once more to see the boy.
Pen give his news, and then introduce Mr. Warrington--an old Boniface man--whose chamber he share.
the Major be quite satisfied when he hear that Mr. Warrington be a young son of Sir Miles Warrington of Suffolk. he have serve with an uncle of his in India and in New South Wales, year ago.
"took a sheep-farm there, sir, make a fortune--well thing than law or soldiering," Warrington say. "think I shall go there too." and here the expect beer come in, in a tankard with a glass bottom, Mr. Warrington, with a laugh, say he suppose the Major would not have any, and take a long, deep draught himself, after which he wipe his wrist across his beard with great satisfaction. the young man be perfectly easy and unembarrassed. he be dress in a ragged old shooting jacket, and have a bristly blue beard. he be drink beer like a coalheaver, and yet you couldnot but perceive that he be a gentleman.
when he have sate for a minute or two after his draught he go out of the room, leave it to Pen and his uncle, that they might talk over family affair be they so inclined.
"rough and ready, your chum seem," the Major say. "somewhat different from your dandy friend at Oxbridge."
"Times be alter," Arthur reply, with a blush. "Warrington be only just call, and have no business, but he know law pretty well; and until I can afford to read with a pleader, I use his book, and get his help."
"be that one of the book?" the Major ask, with a smile. a french novel be lie at the foot of Pen's chair.
"this be not a work day, sir," the lad say. "we be out very late at a party last night--at Lady Whiston's," Pen add, know his uncle's weakness. "everybody in town be there except you, sir; count, Ambassadors, Turks, Stars and Garters--I donot know who--itbe all in the paper--and my name, too," say Pen, with great glee. "I meet an old flame of mine there, sir," he add, with a laugh. "you know whom I mean, sir, --Lady Mirabel--to whom I be introduce over again. she shake hand, and be gracious enough. I may thank you for be out of that scrape, sir. she present I to the husband, too--an old beau in a star and a blonde wig. he do not seem very wise. she have ask I to call on she, sir: and I may go now without any fear of lose my heart."
"what, we have have some new love, have we?" the Major ask in high good-humour.
"some two or three," Mr. Pen say, laugh. "but I donot put on my grand serieux any more, sir. that go off after the first flame."
"very right, my dear boy. flame and dart and passion, and that sort of thing, do very well for a lad: and you be but a lad when that affair with the Fotheringill--Fotheringay--(what's her name?) come off. but a man of the world give up those folly. you still may do very well. you have be bite, but you may recover. you be heir to a little independence; which everybody fancy be a doosid deal more. you have a good name, good wit, good manner, and a good person--and, begad! I donot see why you shouldnot marry a woman with money--get into Parliament--distinguish yourself, and--and, in fact, that sort of thing. remember, itbe as easy to marry a rich woman as a poor woman: and a devilish deal pleasanter to sit down to a good dinner, than to a scrag of mutton in lodging. make up your mind to that. a woman with a good jointure be a doosid deal easy a profession than the law, let I tell you that. look out; I shall be on the watch for you: and I shall die content, my boy, if I can see you with a good ladylike wife, and a good carriage, and a good pair of horse, live in society, and see your friend, like a gentleman. would you like to vegetate like your dear good mother at Fairoaks? Dammy, sir! life, without money and the good society benot worth have." it be thus this affectionate uncle speak, and expound to Pen his simple philosophy.
"what would my mother and Laura say to this, I wonder?" think the lad. indeed old Pendennis's moral be not their moral, nor be his wisdom theirs.
this affect conversation between uncle and nephew have scarcely conclude, when Warrington come out of his bedroom, no long in rag, but dress like a gentleman, straight and tall and perfectly frank and good-humour. he do the honour of his ragged sitting-room with as much ease as if it have be the fine apartment in London. and queer room they be in which the Major find his nephew. the carpet be full of hole--the table stain with many circle of Warrington's previous ale-pot. there be a small library of law-book, book of poetry, and of mathematic, of which he be very fond. (he have be one of the hard liver and hard reader of his time at Oxbridge, where the name of Stunning Warrington be yet famous for beat bargeman, pull match, win prize, and drink milk-punch.) a print of the old college hang up over the mantelpiece, and some batter volume of Plato, bear its well-know arm, be on the book-shelf. there be two easy-chair; a stand reading-desk pile with bill; a couple of very meagre brief on a break-legged study-table. indeed, there be scarcely any article of furniture that have not be in the war, and be not wound. "look here, sir, here be Pen's room. he be a dandy, and have get curtain to his bed, and wear shiny boot, and a silver dressing-case." indeed, Pen's room be rather coquettishly arrange, and a couple of neat print of opera-dancer, besides a drawing of Fairoaks, hang on the wall. in Warrington's room there be scarcely any article of furniture, save a great shower-bath, and a heap of book by the bedside: where he lie upon straw like Margery Daw, and smoke his pipe, and read half through the night his favourite poetry or mathematic.
when he have complete his simple toilette, Mr. Warrington come out of this room, and proceed to the cupboard to search for his breakfast.
"might I offer you a mutton-chop, sir? we cook them ourselves hot and hot: and I be teach Pen the first principle of law, cooking, and morality at the same time. hebe a lazy beggar, sir, and too much of a dandy."
and so say, Mr. Warrington wipe a gridiron with a piece of paper, put it on the fire, and on it two mutton-chop, and take from the cupboard a couple of plate and some knife and silver fork, and castor.
"say but a word, Major Pendennis," he say; "therebe another chop in the cupboard, or Pidgeon shall go out and get you anything you like."
Major Pendennis sate in wonder and amusement, but he say he have just breakfast, and wouldnot have any lunch. so Warrington cook the chop, and pop they hiss hot upon the plate.
Pen fall to at his chop with a good appetite, after look up at his uncle, and see that gentleman be still in good-humour.
"you see, sir," Warrington say, "Mrs. Flanagan benot here to do them, and we cannot employ the boy, for the little beggar be all day occupy clean Pen's boot. and now for another swig at the beer. Pen drink tea; itbe only fit for old woman."
"and so you be at Lady Whiston's last night," the Major say, not in truth know what observation to make to this rough diamond.
"I at Lady Whiston's! not such a flat, sir. I donot care for female society. in fact it bore I. I spend my evening philosophically at the Back Kitchen."
"the Back Kitchen? indeed!" say the Major.
"I see you donot know what it mean," Warrington say. "ask Pen. he be there after Lady Whiston's. tell Major Pendennis about the Back Kitchen, Pen--don't be ashamed of yourself."
so Pen say it be a little eccentric society of man of letter and man about town, to which he have be present; and the Major begin to think that the young fellow have see a good deal of the world since his arrival in London.
CHAPTER XXX
the Knights of the Temple
Colleges, school, and inn of court still have some respect for antiquity, and maintain a great number of the custom and institution of our ancestor, with which those person who do not particularly regard their forefather, or perhaps be not very well acquainted with they; have long since do away. a well-ordain workhouse or prison si much well provide with the appliance of health, comfort, and cleanliness, than a respectable Foundation School a venerable College, or a learn Inn. in the latter place of residence man be content to sleep in dingy closet, and to pay for the sitting-room and the cupboard which be their dormitory, the price of a good villa and garden in the suburb, or of a roomy house in the neglect square of the town. the poor mechanic in Spitalfields have a cistern and an unbounded suppy of water at his command; but the gentleman of the inn of court, and the gentleman of the university, have their supply of this cosmetic fetched in jug by laundress and bedmaker, and live in abode which be erect long before the custom of cleanliness and decency obtain among we. there be individual still alive who sneer at the people and speak of they with epithet of scorn. gentleman, there can be but little doubt that your ancestor be the great Unwashed: and in the Temple especially, it be pretty certain, that only under the great difficulty and restriction the virtue which have be pronounce to be next to godliness could have be practise at all.
Old Grump, of the Norfolk Circuit, who have live for more than thirty year in the chamber under those occupy by Warrington and Pendennis, and who use to be awaken by the roaring of the shower-bath which those gentleman have erect in their apartment--a part of the content of which occasionally trickle through the roof into Mr. Grump's room,-- declare that the practice be an absurd, newfangle, dandify folly, and daily curse the laundress who slop the staircase by which he have to pass. Grump, now much more than half a century old, have indeed never use the luxury in question. he have do without water very well, and so have our father before he. of all those knight and baronet, lord and gentleman, bear arm, whose escutcheon be paint upon the wall of the famous hall of the Upper Temple, be there no philanthropist good-natured enough to devise a set of Hummums for the benefit of the lawyer, his fellow and successor? the Temple historian make no mention of such a scheme. there be Pump Court and Fountain Court, with their hydraulic apparatus, but one never hear of a bencher disporting in the fountain; and cannot but think how many a counsel learn in the law of old day might have benefit by the pump.
nevertheless, those venerable Inns which have the Lamb and Flag and the Winged Horse for their ensign, have attraction for person who inhabit they, and a share of rough comfort and freedom which man always remember with pleasure. I donot know whether the student of law permit himself the refreshment of enthusiasm, or indulge in poetical reminiscence as he pass by historical chamber, and say, "Yonder Eldon live--upon this site Coke muse upon Littleton--here Chitty toil--here Barnewall and Alderson join in their famous labour--here Byles compose his great work upon bill, and Smith compile his immortal lead case--here Gustavus still toil, with Solomon to aid he:" but the man of letter cannot but love the place which have be inhabit by so many of his brother, or people by their creation as real to we at this day as the author whose child they be--and Sir Roger de Coverley walk in the Temple Garden, and discourse with Mr. Spectator about the beauty in hoop and patch who be saunter over the grass, be just as lively a figure to I as old Samuel Johnson roll through the fog with the Scotch gentleman at his heel on their way to Dr. Goldsmith's chamber in Brick Court; or Harry Fielding, with ink ruffle and a wet towel round his head, dash off article at midnight for the Covent Garden Journal, while the printer's boy be asleep in the passage.
if we could but get the history of a single day as it pass in any one of those four-story house in the dingy court where our friend Pen and Warrington dwelt, some Temple Asmodeus might furnish we with a queer volume. there may be a great parliamentary counsel on the ground floor, who drive off to Belgravia at dinner-time, when his clerk, too, become a gentleman, and go away to entertain his friend, and to take his pleasure. but a short time since he be hungry and briefless in some garret of the Inn; live by stealthy literature; hop, and wait, and sicken, and no client come; exhaust his own mean and his friend' kindness; have to remonstrate humbly with dun, and to implore the patience of poor creditor. Ruin seem to be star he in the face, when, behold, a turn of the wheel of fortune, and the lucky wretch in possession of one of those prodigious prize which be sometimes draw in the great lottery of the Bar. many a well lawyer than himself do not make a fifth part of the income of his clerk, who, a few month since, could scarcely get credit for black for his master's unpaid boot. on the first floor, perhaps, you will have a venerable man whose name be famous, who have live for half a century in the Inn, whose brain be full of book, and whose shelf be store with classical and legal lore. he have live alone all these fifty year, alone and for himself, amass learn, and compile a fortune. he come home now at night alone from the club, where he have be din freely, to the lonely chamber where he live a godless old recluse. when he die, his Inn will erect a tablet to his honour, and his heir burn a part of his library. would you like to have such a prospect for your old age, to store up learning and money, and end so? but we must not linger too long by Mr. Doomsday's door. Worthy Mr. Grump live over he, who be also an ancient inhabitant of the Inn, and who, when Doomsday come home to read Catullus, be sit down with three steady senior of his standing, to a steady rubber at whist, after a dinner at which they have consume their three steady bottle of Port. you may see the old boy asleep at the Temple Church of a Sunday. attorney seldom trouble they, and they have small fortune of their own. on the other side of the third landing, where Pen and Warrington live, till long after midnight, sit Mr. Paley, who take the high honour, and who be a fellow of his college, who will sit and read and note case until two o'clock in the morning; who will rise at seven and be at the pleader's chamber as soon as they be open, where he will work until an hour before dinner-time; who will come home from Hall and read and note case again until dawn next day, when perhaps Mr. Arthur Pendennis and his friend Mr. Warrington be return from some of their wild expedition. how differently employ Mr. Paley have be! he have not be throw himself away: he have only be bring a great intellect laboriously down to the comprehension of a mean subject, and in his fierce grasp of that, resolutely exclude from his mind all high thought, all well thing, all the wisdom of philosopher and historian, all the thought of poet; all wit, fancy, reflection, art, love, truth altogether--so that he may master that enormous legend of the law, which he propose to gain his livelihood by expound. Warrington and Paley have be competitor for university honour in former day, and have run each other hard; and everybody say now that the former be waste his time and energy, whilst all people praise Paley for his industry. there may be doubt, however, as to which be use his time well. the one could afford time to think, and the other never could. the one could have sympathy and do kindness; and the other must need be always selfish. he could not cultivate a friendship or do a charity, or admire a work of genius, or kindle at the sight of beauty or the sound of a sweet song--he have no time, and no eye for anything but his law-book. all be dark outside his reading-lamp. love, and Nature, and art (which be the expression of our praise and sense of the beautiful world of God) be shut out from he. and as he turn off his lonely lamp at night, he never think but that he have spend the day profitably, and go to sleep alike thankless and remorseless. but he shudder when he meet his old companion Warrington on the stair, and shun he as one that be doom to perdition.
it may have be the sight of that cadaverous ambition and self-complacent meanness, which show itself in Paley's yellow face, and twinkle in his narrow eye, or it may have be a natural appetite for pleasure and joviality, of which it must be confess Mr. Pen be exceedingly fond, which deter that luckless youth from pursue his design upon the Bench or the Woolsack with the ardour, or rather steadiness, which be requisite in gentleman who would climb to those seat of honour. he enjoy the Temple life with a great deal of relish: his worthy relative think he be read as become a regular student; and his uncle write home congratulatory letter to the kind widow at Fairoaks, announce that the lad have sow his wild oat, and be become quite steady. the truth be, that it be a new sort of excitement to Pen, the life in which he be now engage, and have give up some of the dandified pretension, and fine-gentleman air which he have contract among his aristocratic college acquaintance, of whom he now see but little, the rough pleasure and amusement of a London bachelor be very novel and agreeable to he, and he enjoy they all. time be he would have envy the dandy their fine horse in Rotten row, but he be content now to walk in the Park and look at they. he be too young to succeed in London society without a well name and a large fortune than he have, and too lazy to get on without these adjunct. Old Pendennis fondly think he be busy with law because he neglect the social advantage present to he, and, have be at half a dozen ball and evening party, retreat before their dulness and sameness; and whenever anybody make inquiry of the worthy Major about his nephew the old gentleman say the young rascal be reform, and could not be get away from his book. but the Major would have be almost as much horrify as Mr. Paley be, have he know what be Mr. Pen's real course of life, and how much pleasure enter into his law study.
a long morning's reading, a walk in the park, a pull on the river, a stretch up the hill to Hampstead, and a modest tavern dinner; a bachelor night pass here or there, in joviality, not vice (for Arthur Pendennis admire woman so heartily that he never could bear the society of any of they that be not, in his fancy at least, good and pure); a quiet evening at home, alone with a friend and a pipe or two, and a humble potation of british spirit, whereof Mrs. Flanagan, the laundress, invariably test the quality;--these be our young gentleman's pursuit, and it must be own that his life be not unpleasant. in term-time, Mr. Pen show a most praiseworthy regularity in perform one part of the law-student's course of duty, and eat his dinner in Hall. indeed, that Hall of the Upper Temple be a sight not uninteresting, and with the exception of some trifling improvement and anachronism which have be introduce into the practice there, a man may sit down and fancy that he join in a meal of the seventeenth century. the bar have their mess, the student their table apart; the bencher sit at the high table on the raise platform surround by picture of judge of the law and portrait of royal personage who have honour its festivity with their presence and patronage. Pen look about, on his first introduction, not a little amuse with the scene which he witness. among his comrade of the student class there be gentleman of all age, from sixty to seventeen; stout grey-head attorney who be proceed to take the superior dignity,--dandies and man--about town who wish for some reason to be barrister of seven year' standing,--swarthy, black-eyed native of the Colonies, who come to be call here before they practise in their own islands,--and many gentleman of the irish nation, who make a sojourn in Middle Temple Lane before they return to the green country of their birth. there be little squad of read student who talk law all dinner-time; there be row man, whose discourse be of scull match, the Red House, Vauxhall and the Opera; there be other great in politic, and orator of the student' debating club; with all of which set, except the first, whose talk be an almost unknown and a quite unintereste language to he, Mr. Pen make a gradual acquaintance, and have many point of sympathy.
the ancient and liberal Inn of the Upper Temple provide in its Hall, and for a most moderate price, an excellent wholesome dinner of soup, meat, tart, and port wine or sherry, for the barrister and student who attend that place of refection. the party be arrange in mess of four, each of which quartet have its piece of beef or leg of mutton, its sufficient apple-pie and its bottle of wine. but the honest habitue of the hall, amongst the low rank of student, who have a taste for good living, have many harmless art by which they improve their banquet, and innocent 'dodge' (if we may be permit to use an excellent phrase that have become vernacular since the appearance of the last dictionary) by which they strive to attain for themselves more delicate food than the common every-day roast meat of the student' table.
"wait a bit," say Mr. Lowton, one of these Temple gourmand. "wait a bit," say Mr. Lowton, tug at Pen's gown--"the side-table be very full, and therebe only three bencher to eat ten dish--if we wait, perhaps we shall get something from their table." and Pen look with some amusement, as do Mr. Lowton with eye of fond desire, towards the bencher' high table, where three old gentleman be stand up before a dozen silver dish-cover, while the clerk be quaver out a grace.
Lowton be great in the conduct of the dinner. his aim be to manage so as to be the first, a captain of the mess, and to secure for himself the thirteenth glass of the bottle of port wine. thus he would have the command of the joint on which he operate his favourite cut, and make rapid dexterous appropriation of gravy, which amuse Pen infinitely. poor Jack Lowton! thy pleasure in life be very harmless; an eager epicure, thy desire do not go beyond eighteen penny.
Pen be somewhat old than many of his fellow-student, and there be that about his style and appearance, which, as we have say, be rather haughty and impertinent, that stamp he as a man of ton--very unlike those pale student who be talk law to one another, and those ferocious dandy, in row shirt and astonishing pin and waistcoat, who represent the idle part of the little community. the humble and good-natured Lowton have feel attract by Pen's superior look and presence--and have make acquaintance with he at the mess by open the conversation.
"this be boil-beef day, I believe, sir," say Lowton to Pen.
"upon my word, sir, Ibe not aware," say Pen, hardly able to contain his laughter, but add, "Ibe a stranger; this be my first term;" on which Lowton begin to point out to he the notability in the Hall.
"thatbe Boosey the bencher, the bald one sit under the picture and aving soup; I wonder whether itbe turtle? they often ave turtle. Next be Balls, the King's Counsel, and Swettenham--Hodge and Swettenham, you know. thatbe old Grump, the senior of the bar; they say hebe din here forty year. they often send them down their fish from the bencher to the senior table. do you see those four fellow seat opposite we? those be regular swell--tip-top fellow, I can tell you--Mr. Trail, the Bishop of Ealing's son, Honourable Fred. Ringwood, Lord Cinqbar's brother, you know. hewill have a good place, I bet any money; and Bob Suckling, whobe always with he--a high fellow too. ha! ha!" here Lowton burst into a laugh,
"what be it?" say Pen, still amuse.
"I say, I like to mess with those chap," Lowton say, wink his eye knowingly, and pour out his glass of wine.
"and why?" ask Pen.
"why! they donot come down here to dine, you know, they only make believe to dine. they dine here, Law bless you! they go to some of the swell club, or else to some grand dinner-party. you see their name in the Morning Post at all the fine party in London. why, I bet anything that Ringwood have his cab, or Trail his Brougham (hebe a devil of a fellow, and make the bishop's money spin, I can tell you) at the corner of Essex Street at this minute. they dine! they willnot dine these two hour, I dare say."
"but why should you like to mess with they, if they donot eat any dinner?" Pen ask, still puzzle. "therebe plenty, benot there?"
"how green you be," say Lowton. "excuse I, but you be green. they donot drink any wine, donot you see, and a fellow get the bottle to himself if he like it when he mess with those three chap. thatbe why Corkoran get in with them."
"ah, Mr. Lowton, I see you be a sly fellow," Pen say, delight with his acquaintance: on which the other modestly reply, that he have live in London the well part of his life, and of course have his eye about he; and go on with his catalogue to Pen.
"therebe a lot of Irish here," he say; "that Corkoran's one, and I cannot say I like he. you see that handsome chap with the blue neck-cloth, and pink shirt, and yellow waistcoat, thatbe another; thatbe Molloy Maloney of Ballymaloney, and nephew to Major-General Sir Hector O'Dowd, he, he," Lowton say, try to imitate the Hibernian accent. "hebe always brag about his uncle; and come into Hall in silver-strip trouser the day he have be present. that other near he, with the long black hair, be a tremendous rebel. by Jove, sir, to hear he at the Forum it make your blood freeze; and the next be an Irishman, too, Jack Finucane, reporter of a newspaper. they all stick together, those irish. itbe your turn to fill your glass. what? you willnot have any port? donot like port with your dinner? herebe your health." and this worthy man find himself not the less attached to Pendennis because the latter dislike port wine at dinner.
it be while Pen be take his share of one of these dinner with his acquaintance Lowton as the captain of his mess, that there come to join they a gentleman in a barrister's gown, who could not find a seat, as it appear, amongst the person of his own degree, and who stride over the table and take his place on the bench where Pen sate. he be dress in old clothe and a fade gown, which hang behind he, and he wear a shirt which, though clean, be extremely ragged, and very different to the magnificent pink raiment of Mr. Molloy Maloney, who occupy a commanding position in the next mess. in order to notify their appearance at dinner, it be the custom of the gentleman who eat in the Upper Temple Hall to write down their name upon slip of paper, which be provide for that purpose, with a pencil for each mess. Lowton write his name first, then come Arthur Pendennis, and the next be that of the gentleman in the old clothe. he smile when he see Pen's name, and look at he. "we ought to know each other," he say. "webe both Boniface man; my name's Warrington."
"be you st---- Warrington?" Pen say, delight to see this hero.
Warrington laughed--"Stunning Warrington--yes," he say, "I recollect you in your freshman's term. but you appear to have quite cut I out."
"the college talk about you still," say Pen, who have a generous admiration for talent and pluck. "the bargeman you thrash, Bill Simes, donot you remember, want you up again at Oxbridge. the Miss Notleys, the haberdashers----"
"hush!" say Warrington--"glad to make your acquaintance, Pendennis. hear a good deal about you."
the young man be friend immediately, and at once deep in college-talk. and Pen, who have be act rather the fine gentleman on a previous day, when he pretend to Lowton that he could not drink port wine at dinner, see Warrington take his share with a great deal of gusto, do not scruple about help himself any more, rather to the disappointment of honest Lowton. when the dinner be over, Warrington ask Arthur where he be go.
"I think of go home to dress, and hear Grisi in Norma," Pen say.
"be you go to meet anybody there?" he ask.
Pen say, "no--only to hear the music," of which he be fond.
"you have much well come home and smoke a pipe with I," say Warrington,--"a very short one. come, I live close by in Lamb Court, and wewill talk over Boniface and old time."
they go away; Lowton sigh after they. he know Warrington be a baronet's son, and he look up with simple reverence to all the aristocracy. Pen and Warrington become swear friend from that night. Warrington's cheerfulness and jovial temper, his good sense, his rough welcome, and his never-fail pipe of tobacco, charm Pen, who find it more pleasant to dive into shilling tavern with he, than to dine in solitary state amongst the silent and polite frequenter of the Polyanthus.
Ere long Pen give up the lodging in St. James's, to which he have migrate on quit his hotel, and find it be much more economical to take up his abode with Warrington in Lamb Court, and furnish and occupy his friend's vacant room there. for it must be say of Pen, that no man be more easily lead than he to do a thing, when it be a novelty, or when he have a mind to it. and Pidgeon, the youth, and Flanagan, the laundress, divide their allegiance now between Warrington and Pen.
CHAPTER XXXI
Old and new Acquaintances
elate with the idea of see life, Pen go into a hundred queer London haunt. he like to think he be consort with all sort of man--so he behold coalheaver in their tap-room; boxer in their inn-parlour; honest citizen disport in the suburb or on the river; and he would have like to hob and nob with celebrate pickpocket, or drink a pot of ale with a company of burglar and cracksman, have chance afford he an opportunity of make the acquaintance of this class of society. it be good to see the gravity with which Warrington listen to the Tutbury Pet or the Brighton Stunner at the Champion's arm, and behold the interest which he take in the coalheaving company assemble at the Fox-under-the-Hill. his acquaintance with the public-house of the metropolis and its neighbourhood, and with the frequenter of their various parlour, be prodigious. he be the personal friend of the landlord and landlady, and welcome to the bar as to the clubroom. he like their society, he say, well than that of his own class, whose manner annoy he, and whose conversation bore he. "in society," he use to say, "everybody be the same, wear the same dress, eat and drink, and say the same thing; one young dandy at the club talk and look just like another, one Miss at a ball exactly resemble another, whereas therebe character here. I like to talk with the strong man in England, or the man who can drink the most beer in England, or with that tremendous republican of a hatter, who think Thistlewood be the great character in history. I like well gin-and-water than claret. I like a sanded floor in Carnaby Market well than a chalk one in Mayfair. I prefer snob, I own it." indeed, this gentleman be a social republican; and it never enter his head while converse with Jack and Tom that he be in any respect their well; although, perhaps, the deference which they pay he might secretly please he.
Pen follow he then to these various resort of man with great glee and assiduity. but he be considerably young, and therefore much more pompous and stately than Warrington, in fact a young prince in disguise, visit the poor of his father's kingdom. they respect he as a high chap, a fine fellow, a regular young swell. he have somehow about he an air of imperious good-humour, and a royal frankness and majesty, although he be only heir-apparent to twopence-halfpenny, and but one in descent from a gallypot. if these position be make for we, we acquiesce in they very easily; and be always pretty ready to assume a superiority over those who be as good as ourselves. Pen's condescension at this time of his life be a fine thing to witness. amongst man of ability this assumption and impertinence pass off with extreme youth: but it be curious to watch the conceit of a generous and clever lad--there be something almost touch in that early exhibition of simplicity and folly.,
so, after read pretty hard of a morning, and, I fear, not law merely, but politic and general history and literature, which be as necessary for the advancement and instruction of a young man as mere dry law, after apply with tolerable assiduity to letter, to review, to elemental book of law, and, above all, to the newspaper, until the hour of dinner be draw nigh, these young gentleman would sally out upon the town with great spirit and appetite, and bent upon enjoy a merry night as they have pass a pleasant forenoon. it be a jovial time, that of four-and-twenty, when every muscle of mind and body be in healthy action, when the world be new as yet, and one move over it spur onwards by good spirit and the delightful capability to enjoy. if ever we feel young afterwards, it be with the comrade of that time: the tune we hum in our old age, be those we learn then. sometimes, perhaps, the festivity of that period revive in our memory; but how dingy the pleasure-garden have grow, how tattere the garland look, how scant and old the company, and what a number of the light have go out since that day! Grey hair have come on like daylight stream in--daylight and a headache with it. pleasure have go to bed with the rouge on her cheek. well, friend, let we walk through the day, sober and sad, but friendly.
I wonder what Laura and Helen would have say, could they have see, as they might not unfrequently have do have they be up and in London, in the very early morning when the bridge begin to blush in the sunrise, and the tranquil street of the city to shine in the dawn, Mr. Pen and Mr. Warrington rattle over the echo flag towards the Temple, after one of their wild night of carouse--night wild, but not so wicked as such night sometimes be, for Warrington be a woman-hater; and Pen, as we have say, too lofty to stoop to a vulgar intrigue. our young Prince of Fairoaks never could speak to one of the sex but with respectful courtesy, and shrink from a coarse word or gesture with instinctive delicacy--for though we have see he fall in love with a fool, as his better and inferior have do, and as it be probable that he do more than once in his life, yet for the time of the delusion it be always as a Goddess that he consider she, and choose to wait upon she. man serve woman kneeling--when they get on their foot, they go away.
that be what an acquaintance of Pen's say to he in his hard homely way;--an old friend with whom he have fall in again in London--no other than honest Mr. Bows of the Chatteris Theatre, who be now employ as pianoforte player, to accompany the eminent lyrical talent which nightly delight the public at the Fielding's Head in Covent Garden: and where be hold the little club call the Back Kitchen.
number of Pen's friend frequent this very merry meeting. the Fielding's Head have be a house of entertainment, almost since the time when the famous author of 'Tom Jones' preside as magistrate in the neighbouring Bow Street; his place be point out, and the chair say to have be his, still occupy by the president of the night's entertainment. the worthy Cutts, the landlord of the Fielding's head, generally occupy this post when not disable by gout or other illness. his jolly appearance and fine voice may be remember by some of my male reader: he use to sing profusely in the course of the harmonic meeting, and his song be of what may be call the British Brandy-and-Water School of Song--such as 'the Good Old English Gentleman,' 'dear Tom, this Brown Jug,' and so forth--song in which pathos and hospitality be blend, and the praise of good liquor and the social affection be chant in a baritone voice. the charm of our woman, the heroic deed of our naval and military commander, be often sing in the ballad of this school; and many a time in my youth have I admire how Cutts the singer, after he have work we all up to patriotic enthusiasm, by describe the way in which the brave Abercrombie receive his death-wound, or make we join he in tear, which he shed liberally himself, as in falter accent he tell how autumn's fall leaf "proclaim the old man he must die"--how Cutts the singer become at once Cutts the landlord, and, before the applause which we be make with our fist on his table, in compliment to his heart-stir melody, have die away,--wa call, "now, gentleman, give your order, the waiter's in the room--John, a champagne cup for Mr. Green. I think, sir, you say sausage and mashed potato? John, attend on the gentleman."
"and Iwill thank ye give I a glass of punch too, John, and take care the wather boil," a voice would cry not unfrequently, a well-know voice to Pen, which make the lad blush and start when he hear it first--that of the venerable Captain Costigan; who be now establish in London, and one of the great pillar of the harmonic meeting at the Fielding's Head.
the Captain's manner and conversation bring very many young man to the place. he be a character, and his fame have begin to spread soon after his arrival in the metropolis, and especially after his daughter's marriage. he be great in his conversation to the friend for the time be (who be the neighbour drink by his side), about "I daughther." he tell of her marriage, and of the event previous and subsequent to that ceremony; of the carriage she keep; of Mirabel's adoration for she and for he; of the hundther pound which he be at perfect liberty to draw from his son-in-law, whenever necessity urge he. and have state that it be his firm intention to "dthraw next Sathurday, I give ye I secre word and honour next Sathurday, the fourteenth, when ye'll see the money will be hand over to I at Coutts's, the very instant I present the cheque," the Captain would not unfrequently propose to borrow a half-crown of his friend until the arrival of that day of Greek Calends, when, on the honour of an officer and gentleman, he would repee the thrifle obligetion.
Sir Charles Mirabel have not that enthusiastic attachment to his father-in-law, of which the latter sometimes boast (although in other stage of emotion cos would inveigh, with tear in his eye, against the ingratitude of the child of his bosom, and the stinginess of the wealthy old man who have marry she); but the pair have act not unkindly towards Costigan; have settle a small pension on he, which be pay regularly, and forestall with even more regularity by poor cos; and the period of the payment be always well know by his friend at the Fielding's Head, whither the honest Captain take care to repair, bank-note in hand, call loudly for change in the midst of the full harmonic meeting. "I think ye'll find that note willnot be refuse at the Bank of England, Cutts, my boy," Captain Costigan would say. "bow, have a glass? ye neednot stint yourself to-night, anyhow; and a glass of punch will make ye play con spirito." for he be lavishly free with his money when it come to he, and be scarcely know to button his breech pocket, except when the coin be go, or sometimes, indeed, when a creditor come by.
it be in one of these moment of exultation that Pen find his old friend swagger at the singer' table at the Back Kitchen of the Fielding's Head, and order glass of brandy-and-water for any of his acquaintance who make their appearance in the apartment. Warrington, who be on confidential term with the bass singer, make his way up to this quarter of the room, and Pen walk at his friend's heel.
Pen start and blush to see Costigan. he have just come from Lady Whiston's party, where he have meet and speak with the Captain's daughter again for the first time after very old old day. he come up with outstretched hand, very kindly and warmly to greet the old man; still retain a strong remembrance of the time when Costigan's daughter have be everything in the world to he. for though this young gentleman may have be somewhat capricious in his attachment, and occasionally have transfer his affection from one woman to another, yet he always respect the place where Love have dwelt, and, like the Sultan of Turkey, desire that honour should be pay to the lady towards whom he have once throw the royal pocket-handkerchief. the tipsy Captain return the clasp of Pen's hand with all the strength of a palm which have become very shaky by the constant lifting up of weight of brandy-and-water, look hard in Pen's face, and say, "Grecious Heavens, be it possible? I dear boy, I dear fellow, I dear friend;" and then with a look of muddle curiosity, fairly break down with, "I know your face, I dear dear friend, but, bedad, Ihave forget your name." five year of constant punch have pass since Pen and Costigan meet. Arthur be a good deal change, and the Captain may surly be excuse for forget he; when a man at the actual moment see thing double, we may expect that his view of the past will be rather muzzy.
Pen see his condition and laugh, although, perhaps, he be somewhat mortified. "donot you remember I, Captain?" he say. "I be Pendennis-- Arthur Pendennis, of Chatteris."
the sound of the young man's friendly voice recall and steadie Cos's tipsy remembrance, and he salute Arthur, as soon as he know he, with a loud volley of friendly greeting. Pen be his dear boy, his gallant young friend, his noble collagian, whom he have hold in his inmost heart ever since they have part--how be his fawther, no, his mother, and his guardian, the General, the Major? "I preshoom, from your apparance, youhave come into your prawpertee; and, bedad, yee'll spend it like a man of spirit--i'll go bail for that. no? not yet come into your estete? if ye want any thrifle, heark ye, therebe poor old Jack Costigan have get a guinea or two in his pocket--and, be heaven! you shall never want, Awthur, I dear boy. whatwill ye have? John, come hither, and look aloive; give this gentleman a glass of punch, and Iwill pay for't.--Your friend? Ihave see he before. permit I to have the honour of make meself know to ye, sir, and request ye'll take a glass of punch."
"I donot envy Sir Charles Mirabel his father-in-law," think Pendennis. "and how be my old friend, Mr. Bows, Captain? have you any news of he, and do you see he still?"
"no doubt hebe very well," say the Captain, jingle his money, and whistle the air of a song--'the little doodeen'--for the singing of which he be celebrate at the Fielding's Head. "I dear boy--I've forget your name again--but my name's Costigan, Jack Costigan, and Iwould loike ye to take as many tumbler of punch in my name as ever ye loike. ye know my name; Ibe not ashamed of it." and so the captain go maunder on.
"itbe pay-day with the General," say Mr. Hodgen, the bass singer, with whom Warrington be in deep conversation: "and hebe a precious deal more than half sea over. he have already try that 'Little Doodeen' of his, and break it, too, just before I sing 'King Death.' have you hear my new song, 'the Body Snatcher,' Mr. Warrington?--angcored at Saint Bartholomew's the other night--compose expressly for I. Per'aps you or your friend would like a copy of the song, sir? John, just 'ave the kyndness to 'and over a 'Body Snatcher' 'ere, will yer?--therebe a portrait of I, sir, as I sing it--as the Snatcher--consider rather like."
"thank you," say Warrington; "hear it nine time--know it by heart, Hodgen."
here the gentleman who preside at the pianoforte begin to play upon his instrument, and Pen, look in the direction of the music, behold that very Mr. Bows, for whom he have be ask but now, and whose existence Costigan have momentarily forget. the little old man sate before the battered piano (which have injure its constitution wofully by sit up so many night, and speak with a voice, as it be, at once hoarse and faint), and accompany the singer, or play with taste and grace in the interval of the song.
bow have see and recollect Pen at once when the latter come into the room, and have remark the eager warmth of the young man's recognition of Costigan. he now begin to play an air, which Pen instantly remember as one which use to be sing by the chorus of villager in 'the Stranger,' just before Mrs. Haller come in. it shake Pen as he hear it. he remember how his heart use to beat as that air be play, and before the divine Emily make her entry. nobody, save Arthur, too any notice of old Bows's playing: it be scarcely hear amidst the clatter of knife and fork, the call for poached egg and kidney, and the tramp of guest and waiter.
Pen go up and kindly shake the player by the hand at the end of his performance; and Bows greet Arthur with great respect and cordiality. "what, you havenot forget the old tune, Mr. Pendennis?" he say; "I think youwould remember it. I take it, it be the first tune of that sort you ever hear play--wasn't it, sir? you be quite a young chap then. I fear the Captain's very bad to-night. he break out on a pay-day; and I shall have the deuce's own trouble in get home. we live together. we still hang on, sir, in partnership, though Miss Em--though my lady Mirabel have leave the firm.--And so you remember old time, do you? benot she a beauty, sir?--your health and my service to you,"--and he take a sip at the pewter measure of porter which stand by his side as he play.
Pen have many opportunity of see his early acquaintance afterwards, and of renew his relation with Costigan and the old musician.
as they sate thus in friendly colloquy, man of all sort and condition enter and quit the house of entertainment; and Pen have the pleasure of see as many different person of his race, as the most eager observer need desire to inspect. healthy country tradesman and farmer, in London for their business, come and recreate themselves with the jolly singing and supper of the Back kitchen,--squad of young apprentice and assistant, the shutter be close over the scene of their labour, come hither for fresh air doubtless,--rakish young medical student, gallant, dashing, what be call "loudly" dress, and (must it be own?) somewhat dirty,--were here smoking and drinking, and vociferously applaud the song; young university buck be to be find here, too, with that indescribable genteel simper which be only learn at the knee of Alma Mater;--and handsome young guardsman, and florid buck from the St. James's Street Clubs--nay, senator English and irish; and even member of the House of Peers.
the bass singer have make an immense hit with his song of 'the Body Snatcher,' and the town rush to listen to it. the curtain draw aside, and Mr. Hodgen appear in the character of the Snatcher, sit on a coffin, with a flask of gin before he, with a spade, and a candle stick in a skull. the song be sing with a really admirable terrific humour. the singer's voice go down so low, that its grumble rumble into the hearer's awe-stricken soul; and in the chorus he clamp with his spade, and give a demoniac "ha! ha!" which cause the very glass to quiver on the table, as with terror. none of the other singer, not even Cutts himself, as that high-minded man own, could stand up before the Snatcher, and he commonly use to retire to Mrs. Cutts's private apartment, or into the bar, before that fatal song extinguish he. poor cos's ditty, 'the little Doodeen,' which bow accompany charmingly on the piano, be sing but to a few admirer, who might choose to remain after the tremendous resurrectionist chant. the room be commonly empty after that, or only leave in possession of a very few and persevere votary of pleasure.
Whilst Pen and his friend be sit here together one night, or rather morning, two habitue of the house enter almost together. "Mr. Hoolan and Mr. Doolan," whisper Warrington to Pen, salute these gentleman, and in the latter Pen recognise his friend of the Alacrity coach, who could not dine with Pen on the day on which the latter have invite he, be compel by his professional duty to decline dinner-engagement on Fridays, he have state, with his compliment to Mr. Pendennis.
Doolan's paper, the Dawn, be lie on the table much bestaine by porter, and cheek-by-jowl with Hoolan's paper, which we shall call the day; the Dawn be liberal--the day be ultra-conservative. many of our journal be officer by irish gentleman, and their gallant brigade do the penning among we, as their ancestor use to transact the fighting in Europe; and engage under many a flag, to be good friend when the battle be over.
"Kidneys, John, and a glass of stout," say Hoolan. "how be you, Morgan? howbe Mrs. Doolan?"
"do pretty well, thank ye, Mick, my boy--faith shebe accustomed to it," say Doolan. "howbe the lady that own ye? maybe Iwill step down Sunday, and have a glass of punch, Kilburn way."
"donot bring Patsey with you, Mick, for our Georgy's get the measle," say the friendly Morgan, and they straightway fall to talk about matter connect with their trade--about the foreign mail--about who be correspondent at Paris, and who write from Madrid--about the expense the Morning Journal be at in send courier, about the circulation of the Evening Star, and so forth.
Warrington, laughing, take the Dawn which be lie before he, and point to one of the lead article in that journal, which commence thus--
"as rogue of note in former day who have some wicked work to perform,-- an enemy to be put out of the way, a quantity of false coin to be pass, a lie to be tell or a murder to be do--employ a professional perjurer or assassin to do the work, which they be themselves too notorious or too cowardly to execute: our notorious contemporary, the day, engage smasher out of door to utter forgery against individual, and call in auxiliary cut-throat to murder the reputation of those who offend he. a black-vizarde ruffian (whom we will unmask), who sign the forge name of Trefoil, be at present one of the chief bravo and bully in our contemporary's establishment. he be the eunuch who bring the bowstre, and strangle at the order of the day. we can convict this cowardly slave, and propose to do so. the charge which he have bring against Lord Bangbanagher, because he be a liberal irish peer, and against the Board of Poor Law Guardians of the Bangbanagher Union, be," etc.
"how do they like the article at your place, Mick?" ask Morgan; "when the Captain put his hand to it hebe a tremendous hand at a smasher. he write the article in two hour--in--whew--you know where, while the boy be wait."
"our governor think the public donot mind a straw about these newspaper row, and have tell the Docthor to stop answer," say the other. "they two talk it out together in my room. the Docthor would have like a turn, for he say itbe such easy writing, and require no reading up of a subject: but the governor put a stopper on he."
"the taste for eloquence be go out, Mick," say Morgan.
"'deed then it be, Morgan," say Mick. "that be fine writing when the Docthor write in the Phaynix, and he and Condy Roony blaze away at each other day after day."
"and with powder and shot, too, as well as paper," say Morgan, "Faith, the Docthor be out twice, and Condy Roony wing his man."
"they be talk about Doctor Boyne and Captain Shandon," Warrington say, "who be the two irish controversialist of the Dawn and the day, Dr. Boyne be the protestant champion and Captain Shandon the liberal orator. they be the good friend in the world, I believe, in spite of their newspaper controversy; and though they cry out against the English for abuse their country, by Jove they abuse it themselves more in a single article than we should take the pain to do in a dozen volume. how be you, Doolan?"
"your servant, Mr. Warrington--Mr. Pendennis, I be delighted to have the honour of see ye again. the night's journey on the top of the Alacrity be one of the most agreeable I ever enjoy in my life, and it be your liveliness and urbanity that make the trip so charming. I have often think over that happy night, sir, and talk over it to Mrs. Doolan. I have see your elegant young friend, Mr. Foker, too, here, sir, not unfrequently. he be an occasional frequenter of this hostelry, and a right good one it be. Mr. Pendennis, when I see you I be on the Tom and Jerry Weekly Paper; I have now the honour to be sub-editor of the Dawn, one of the well-write paper of the empire"--and he bow very slightly to Mr. Warrington. his speech be unctuous and measure, his courtesy oriental, his tone, when talk with the two Englishmen, quite different to that with which he speak to his comrade.
"why the devil will the fellow compliment so?" growl Warrington, with a sneer which he hardly take the pain to suppress. "Psha--who come here? --all Parnassus be abroad to-night: herebe Archer. we shall have some fun. well, Archer, House up?"
"havenot be there. I have be," say Archer, with an air of mystery, "where I be want. get I some supper, John--something substantial. I hate your grandee who give you nothing to eat. if it have be at Apsley House, it would have be quite different. the Duke know what I like, and say to the Groom of the Chambers, 'Martin, you will have some cold beef, not too much do, and a pint bottle of pale ale, and some brown sherry, ready in my study as usual;--Archer be come here this evening.' the Duke donot eat supper himself, but he like to see a man enjoy a hearty meal, and he know that I dine early. a man cannot live upon air, be hang to he."
"let I introduce you to my friend, Mr. Pendennis," Warrington say, with great gravity. "Pen, this be Mr Archer, whom you have hear I talk about. you must know Pen's uncle, the Major, Archer, you who know everybody?"
"din with he the day before yesterday at Gaunt House," Archer say. "we be four--the french Ambassador, Steyne, and we two commoner."
"why, my uncle be in Scot----" Pen be go to break out, but Warrington press his foot under the table as a signal for he to be quiet.
"it be about the same business that I have be to the palace to-night," Archer go on simply, "and where Ihave be keep four hour, in an anteroom, with nothing but yesterday's time, which I know by heart, as I write three of the lead article myself; and though the Lord Chamberlain come in four time, and once hold the royal teacup and saucer in his hand, he do not so much as say to I, 'Archer, will you have a cup of tea?'"
"indeed! what be in the wind now?" ask Warrington--and turn to Pen, add, "you know, I suppose, that when there be anything wrong at Court they always send for Archer."
"there be something wrong," say Mr. Archer, "and as the story will be all over the town in a day or two I donot mind tell it. at the last Chantilly race, where I ride Brian Boru for my old friend the Duke de Saint Cloud--the old King say to I, Archer, Ibe uneasy about Saint Cloud. I have arrange his marriage with the Princess Marie Cunegonde; the peace of Europe depend upon it--for Russia will declare war if the marriage do not take place, and the young fool be so mad about Madame Massena, Marshal Massena's wife, that he actually refuse to be a party to the marriage. well, Sir, I speak to Saint Cloud, and have get he into pretty good humour by win the race, and a good bit of money into the bargain, he say to I, 'Archer, tell the Governor Iwill think of it.'"
"how do you say Governor in French?" ask Pen, who pique himself on know that language.
"oh, we speak in English--I teach he when we be boy, and I save his life at Twickenham, when he fall out of a punt," Archer say. "I shall never forget the Queen's look as I bring he out of the water. she give I this diamond ring, and always call I Charles to this day."
"Madame Massena must be rather an old woman, Archer," Warrington say.
"dev'lish old--old enough to be his grandmother; I tell he so," Archer answer at once. "but those attachment for old woman be the deuce and all. thatbe what the King feel: thatbe what shock the poor queen so much. they go away from Paris last Tuesday night, and be live at this present moment at Jaunay's Hotel."
"have there be a private marriage, Archer?" ask Warrington.
"whether there have or not I donot know," Mr. Archer reply, "all I know be that I be keep wait for four hour at the palace; that I never see a man in such a state of agitation as the King of Belgium when he come out to speak to I, and that Ibe devilish hungry--and here come some supper."
"he have be pretty well to-night," say Warrington, as the pair go home together: "but I have know he in much great force, and keep a whole room in a state of wonder. put aside his archery practice, that man be both able and honest--a good man of business, an excellent friend, admirable to his family as husband, father, and son."
"what be it make he pull the long bow in that wonderful manner?"
"an amiable insanity," answer Warrington. "he never do anybody harm by his talk, or say evil of anybody. he be a stout politician too, and would never write a word or do an act against his party, as many of we do."
"of we! who be we?" ask Pen. "of what profession be Mr. Archer?"
"of the Corporation of the Goosequill--of the Press, my boy," say Warrington; "of the fourth estate."
"be you, too, of the craft, then?" Pendennis say.
"we will talk about that another time," answer the other. they be pass through the Strand as they talk, and by a newspaper office, which be all light up and bright. reporter be come out of the place, or rush up to it in cab; there be lamp burn in the editor' room, and above where the compositor be at work: the window of the building be in a blaze of gas.
"look at that, Pen," Warrington say. "there she be--the great engine-- she never sleep. she have her ambassador in every quarter of the world-- her courier upon every road. her officer march along with army, and her envoy walk into statesman's cabinet. they be ubiquitous. Yonder journal have an agent, at this minute, give bribe at Madrid; and another inspect the price of potato in Covent Garden. look! here come the Foreign Express gallop in. they will be able to give news to Downing Street to-morrow: fund will rise or fall, fortune be make or lose; Lord B. will get up, and, hold the paper in his hand, and see the noble marquis in his place, will make a great speech; and--and Mr. Doolan will be call away from his supper at the Back Kitchen; for he be foreign sub-editor, and see the mail on the newspaper sheet before he go to his own."
and so talk, the friend turn into their chamber, as the dawn be begin to peep.
CHAPTER XXXII
in which the Printer's Devil come to the Door
Pen, in the midst of his revel and enjoyment, humble as they be, and moderate in cost if not in kind, see an awful sword hang over he which must drop down before long and put an end to his frolic and feasting. his money be very nearly spend. his club subscription have carry away a third part of it. he have pay for the chief article of furniture with which he have supply his little bedroom: in fine, he be come to the last five-pound note in his pocket-book, and could think of no method of provide a successor: for our friend have be breed up like a young prince as yet, or as a child in arm whom his mother feed when it cry out. Warrington do not know what his comrade's mean be. an only child, with a mother at her country house, and an old dandy of an uncle who din with a great man every day, Pen might have a large bank at his command for anything that the other know. he have gold chain and a dressing-case fit for a lord. his habit be those of an aristocrat,-- not that he be expensive upon any particular point, for he din and laugh over the pint of porter and the plate of beef from the cook's shop with perfect content and good appetite,--but he could not adopt the penny-wise precaution of life. he could not give twopence to a waiter; he could not refrain from take a cab if he have a mind to do so, or if it rain, and as surely as he take the cab he overpay the driver. he have a scorn for clean glove and minor economy. have he be breed to ten thousand a year he could scarcely have be more free-handed; and for a beggar, with a sad story, or a couple of pretty piteous-face child, he never could resist put his hand into his pocket. it be a sumptuous nature, perhaps, that could not be bring to regard money; a natural generosity and kindness; and possibly a petty vanity that be pleased with praise, even with the praise of waiter and cabman. I doubt whether the wise of we know what our own motif be, and whether some of the action of which we be the very proud will not surprise we when we trace they, as we shall one day, to their source.
Warrington then do not know, and Pen have not think proper to confide to his friend, his pecuniary history. that Pen have be wild and wickedly extravagant at college, the other be aware; everybody at college be extravagant and wild; but how great the son's expense have be, and how small the mother's mean, be point which have not be as yet submit to Mr. Warrington's examination.
at last the story come out, while Pen be grimly survey the change for the last five-pound note, as it lie upon the tray from the public-house by Mr. Warrington's pot of ale.
"it be the last rose of summer," say Pen; "its bloom companion have go long ago; and behold the last one of the garland have shed its leaf;" and he tell Warrington the whole story which we know of his mother's mean, of his own folly, of Laura's generosity; during which time Warrington smoke his pipe and listened intent.
"impecuniosity will do you good," Pen's friend say, knock out the ash at the end of the narration; "I donot know anything more wholesome for a man--for an honest man, mind you--for another, the medicine lose its effect--than a state of tick. it be an alterative and a tonic; it keep your moral man in a perpetual state of excitement: as a man who be rid at a fence, or have his opponent's single-stick before he, be force to look his obstacle steadily in the face, and brace himself to repulse or overcome it; a little necessity bring out your pluck if you have any, and nerve you to grapple with fortune. you will discover what a number of thing you can do without when you have no money to buy they. you willnot want new glove and varnish boot, eau de Cologne and cab to ride in. you have be breed up as a molly-coddle, Pen, and spoilt by the woman. a single man who have health and brain, and cannot find a livelihood in the world, donot deserve to stay there. let he pay his last halfpenny and jump over Waterloo Bridge. let he steal a leg of mutton and be transport and get out of the country--he be not fit to live in it. dixi; I have speak. give we another pull at the pale ale.
"you have certainly speak; but how be one to live?" say Pen. "there be beef and bread in plenty in England, but you must pay for it with work or money. and who will take my work? and what work can I do?"
Warrington burst out laugh. "suppose we advertise in the Times," he say, "for an usher's place at a classical and commercial academy--a gentleman, B.A. of St. Boniface College, and who be pluck for his degree--"
"confound you," cry Pen.
"--wishe to give lesson in classic and mathematic, and the rudiment of the french language; he can cut hair, attend to the young pupil, and play a second on the piano with the daughter of the principal. Address A. P., Lamb Court, Temple."
"go on," say Pen, growling.
"man take to all sort of profession. why, there be your friend Bloundell-Bloundell be a professional blackleg, and travel the Continent, where he pick up young gentleman of fashion and fleece they. there be Bob O'Toole, with whom I be at school, who drive the Ballynafad mail now, and carry honest Jack Finucane's own correspondence to that city. I know a man, sir, a, doctor's son, like-- well, donot be angry, I mean nothing offensive--a doctor's son, I say, who be walk the hospital here, and quarrel with his governor on question of finance, and what do he do when he come to his last five-pound note? he let his mustachio grow, go into a provincial town, where he announce himself as Professor Spineto, chiropodist to the Emperor of all the Russians, and by a happy operation on the editor of the country newspaper, establish himself in practice, and live reputably for three year. he have be reconcile to his family, and have succeed to his father's gallypot."
"hang gallypot," cry Pen. "I cannot drive a coach, cut corn, or cheat at card. therebe nothing else you propose."
"yes; therebe our own correspondent," Warrington say. "every man have his secret, look you. before you tell I the story of your money-matter, I have no idea but that you be a gentleman of fortune, for, with your confounded air and appearance, anybody would suppose you to be so. from what you tell I about your mother's income, it be clear that you must not lay any more hand on it. you cannot go on spunge upon the woman. you must pay off that trump of a girl. Laura be her name?--here be your health, Laura!--and carry a hod rather than ask for a shilling from home."
"but how earn one?" ask Pen.
"how do I live, think you?" say the other. "on my young brother's allowance, Pendennis? I have secret of my own, my boy;" and here Warrington's countenance fall. "I make away with that allowance five year ago: if I have make away with myself a little time before, it would have be well. I have play off my own bat, ever since. I donot want much money. when my purse be out, I go to work and fill it, and then lie idle like a serpent or an Indian, until I have digest the mass. look, I begin to feel empty," Warrington say, and show Pen a long lean purse, with but a few sovereign at one end of it.
"but how do you fill it?" say Pen.
"I write," say Warrington. "I donot tell the world that I do so," he add, with a blush. "I do not choose that question should be ask: or, perhaps, I be an ass, and donot wish it to be say that George Warrington write for bread. but I write in the Law Reviews: look here, these article be mine." and he turn over some sheet. "I write in a newspaper now and then, of which a friend of mine be editor." and Warrington, go with Pendennis to the club one day, call for a file of the Dawn, and point with his finger silently to one or two article, which Pen read with delight. he have no difficulty in recognise the style afterwards--the strong thought and curt period, the sense, the satire, and the scholarship.
"I be not up to this," say Pen, with a genuine admiration of his friend's power. "I know very little about politic or history, Warrington; and have but a smattering of letter. I cannot fly upon such a wing as your."
"but you can on your own, my boy, which be light, and soar higher, perhaps," the other say, good-naturedly. "those little scrap and verse which I have see of yours show I, what be rare in these day, a natural gift, sir. you neednot blush, you conceite young jackanape. you have think so yourself any time these ten year. you have get the sacred flame--a little of the real poetical fire, sir, I think; and all our oil-lamp be nothing compare to that, though ever so well trim. you be a poet, Pen, my boy," and so speak, Warrington stretch out his broad hand, and clap Pen on the shoulder.
Arthur be so delighted that the tear come into his eye. "how kind you be to I, Warrington!" he say.
"I like you, old boy," say the other. "I be dev'lish lonely in chamber, and want somebody, and the sight of your honest face somehow please I. I like the way you laugh at Lowton--that poor good little snob. and, in fine, the reason why I cannot tell--but so it be, young 'un. Ibe alone in the world, sir; and I want some one to keep I company;" and a glance of extreme kindness and melancholy pass out of Warrington's dark eye.
Pen be too much pleased with his own thought to perceive the sadness of the friend who be compliment he. "thank you, Warrington," he say, "thank you for your friendship to I, and--and what you say about I. I have often think I be a poet. I will be one--I think I be one, as you say so, though the world maynot. be it--be it the Ariadne in Naxos which you like (I be only eighteen when I write it), or the Prize Poem?"
Warrington burst into a roar of laughter. "why, young goose," he yell out--"of all the miserable weak rubbish I ever try, Ariadne in Naxos be the most mawkish and disgusting. the Prize Poem be so pompous and feeble, that Ibe positively surprised, sir, it donot get the medal. you donot suppose that you be a serious poet, do you, and be go to cut out Milton and Aeschylus? be you set up to be a Pindar, you absurd little tom-tit, and fancy you have the strength and pinion which the Theban eagle bear, sail with supreme dominion through the azure field of air? no, my boy, I think you can write a magazine article, and turn a pretty copy of verse; thatbe what I think of you."
"by Jove!" say Pen, bounce up and stamp his foot, "Iwill show you that I be a well man than you think for."
Warrington only laugh the more, and blow twenty-four puff rapidly out of his pipe by way of reply to Pen.
an opportunity for show his skill present itself before very long. that eminent publisher, Mr. Bacon (formerly Bacon and Bungay) of Paternoster Row, besides be the proprietor of the legal Review, in which Mr. Warrington write, and of other periodical of note and gravity, use to present to the world every year a beautiful gilt volume call the Spring Annual, edit by the Lady Violet Lebas, and number amongst its contributor not only the most eminent, but the most fashionable, poet of our time. young Lord Dodo's poem first appear in this miscellany--the honourable Percy Popjoy, whose chivalrous ballad have obtain he such a reputation--Bedwin Sands's Eastern Ghazuls, and many more of the work of our young noble, be fast give to the world in the Spring Annual, which have since share the fate of other vernal blossom, and perish out of the world. the book be daintily illustrate with picture of reign beauty, or other print of a tender and voluptuous character; and, as these plate be prepare long beforehand, require much time in engraving, it be the eminent poet who have to write to the plate, and not the painter who illustrate the poem.
one day, just when this volume be on the eve of publication, it chance that Mr. Warrington call in Paternoster Row to talk with Mr. Hack, Mr. Bacon's reader and general manager of publication--for Mr. Bacon, not have the least taste in poetry or in literature of any kind, wisely employ the service of a professional gentleman. Warrington, then, go into Mr. Hack's room on business of his own, find that gentleman with a bundle of proof plate and sheet of the Spring Annual before he, and glance at some of they.
Percy Popjoy have write some verse to illustrate one of the picture, which be call the Church Porch. a spanish damsel be hasten to church with a large prayer-book; a youth in a cloak be hide in a niche watch this young woman. the picture be pretty: but the great genius of Percy Popjoy have desert he, for he have make the most execrable verse which ever be perpetrate by a young nobleman.
Warrington burst out laugh as he read the poem: and Mr. Hack laugh too but with rather a rueful face.--"It willnot do," he say, "the public willnot stand it. Bungay's people be go to bring out a very good book, and have set up Miss Bunyan against Lady Violet. we have most title to be sure--but the verse be too bad. Lady Violet herself own it; shebe busy with her own poem; whatbe to be do? we cannot lose the plate. the governor give sixty pound for it."
"I know a fellow who would do some verse, I think," say Warrington. "let I take the plate home in my pocket: and send to my chamber in the morning for the verse. youwill pay well, of course."
"of course," say Mr. Hack; and Warrington, have despatch his own business, go home to Mr. Pen, plate in hand.
"now, boy, herebe a chance for you. turn I off a copy of verse to this."
"whatbe this? a Church Porch--a lady enter it, and a youth out of a wine-shop window ogling her.--what the deuce be I to do with it?"
"try," say Warrington. "earn your livelihood for once, you who long so to do it."
"well, I will try," say Pen.
"and Iwill go out to dinner," say Warrington, and leave Mr. Pen in a brown study.
when Warrington come home that night, at a very late hour, the verse be do. "there they be," say Pen. "Ihave screw them out at last. I think theywill do."
"I think, they will," say Warrington, after read they; they run as follows:--
the Church Porch
although I enter not, yet round about the spot sometimes I hover, and at the sacred gate, with long eye I wait, Expectant of she.
the Minster bell toll out above the city's rout and noise and hum theyhave stopp'd the chime bell, I hear the organ's swell shebe come, shebe come!
my lady come at last, Timid and stepping fast, and hasten hither, with modest eye downcast. she come--shebe here--shebe past. may Heaven go with she!
Kneel undisturb'd, fair saint, pour out your praise or plaint Meekly and duly. I will not enter there, to sully your pure prayer with thought unruly.
but suffer I to pace Round the forbidden place, linger a minute, like outcast spirit, who wait and see through Heaven's gate Angels within it.
"have you get any more, young fellow?" ask Warrington. "we must make they give you a couple of guineas a page; and if the verse be like, why, youwill get an entree into Bacon's magazine, and may turn a decent penny."
Pen examine his portfolio and find another ballad which he think might figure with advantage in the Spring Annual, and consign these two precious document to Warrington, the pair walk from the Temple to the famous haunt of the Muses and their master, Paternoster Row. Bacon's shop be an ancient low-browed building, with a few of the book publish by the firm display in the window, under a bust of my Lord of Verulam, and the name of Mr. Bacon in brass on the private door. exactly opposite to Bacon's house be that of Mr. Bungay, which be newly paint and elaborately decorate in the style of the seventeenth century, so that you might have fancy stately Mr. Evelyn pass over the threshold, or curious Mr. Pepys examine the book in the window. Warrington go into the shop of Mr. Bacon, but Pen stay without. it be agree that his ambassador should act for he entirely; and the young fellow pace up and down the street in a very nervous condition, until he should learn the result of the negotiation. many a poor devil before he have tread those flag, with similar care and anxiety at his heel, his bread and his fame dependent upon the sentence of his magnanimous patron of the row. Pen look at all the wonder of all the shop, and the strange variety of literature which they exhibit. in this be display black-letter volume and book in the clear pale type of Aldus and Elzevir: in the next, you might see the Penny Horrific Register; the Halfpenny Annals of Crime and history of the most celebrated murderer of all country, the Raff's Magazine, the Larky Swell, and other publication of the penny press; whilst at the next window, portrait of ill-favour individual, with fac-simile of the venerate signature of the Reverend Grimes Wapshot, the Reverend Elias Howle, and the work write and the sermon preach by they, show the British Dissenter where he could find mental pabulum. hard by would be a little casement hang with emblem, with medal and rosary with little paltry print of saint gilt and paint, and book of controversial theology, by which the faithful of the roman opinion might learn a short way to deal with Protestants, at a penny apiece, or ninepence the dozen for distribution; whilst in the very next window you might see 'come out of Rome,' a sermon preach at the opening of the Shepherd's Bush College, by John Thomas Lord Bishop of Ealing. Scarce an opinion but have its expositor and its place of exhibition in this peaceful old Paternoster row, under the toll of the bell of Saint Paul.
Pen look in at all the window and shop, as a gentleman who be go to have an interview with the dentist examine the book on the waiting-room table. he remember they afterwards. it seem to he that Warrington would never come out; and indeed the latter be engage for some time in plead his friend's cause.
Pen's natural conceit would have swell immensely if he could but have hear the report which Warrington give of he. it happen that Mr. Bacon himself have occasion to descend to Mr. Hack's room whilst Warrington be talk there, and Warrington, know Bacon's weakness, act upon they with great adroitness in his friend's behalf. in the first place, he put on his hat to speak to Bacon, and address he from the table on which he seat himself. Bacon like to be treat with rudeness by a gentleman, and use to pass it on to his inferior as boy pass the mark. "what! not know Mr. Pendennis, Mr. Bacon?" Warrington say. "you cannot live much in the world, or you would know he. a man of property in the West, of one of the most ancient family in England, relate to half the nobility in the empire--hebe cousin to Lord Pontypool--he be one of the most distinguished man at Oxbridge; he din at Gaunt House every week."
"Law bless I, you donot say so, sir. well--really--Law bless I now," say Mr. Bacon.
"I have just be show Mr. Hack some of his verse, which he sit up last night, at my request, to write; and hack talk about give he a copy of the book--the what-d'-you-call-'em."
"Law bless I now, do he? the what-d'-you-call-'em. indeed!"
"'the Spring Annual' be its name,--as payment for those verse. you donot suppose that such a man as Mr. Arthur Pendennis give up a dinner at Gaunt House for nothing? you know as well as anybody, that the man of fashion want to be pay."
"that they do, Mr. Warrington, sir," say the publisher.
"I tell you hebe a star; hewill make a name, sir. hebe a new man, sir."
"theyhave say that of so many of those young swell, Mr. Warrington," the publisher interpose, with a sigh. "there be Lord Viscount Dodo, now; I give his lordship a good bit of money for his poem, and only sell eighty copy. Mr. Popjoy's Hadgincourt, sir, fall dead."
"well, then, Iwill take my man over to Bungay," Warrington say, and rise from the table. this threat be too much for Mr. Bacon, who be instantly ready to accede to any reasonable proposal of Mr. Warrington's, and finally ask his manager what those proposal be? when he hear that the negotiation only relate as yet to a couple of ballad, which Mr. Warrington offer for the Spring Annual, Mr. Bacon say, "Law bless you, give he a check directly;" and with this paper Warrington go out to his friend, and place it, grin, in Pen's hand. Pen be as elated as if somebody have leave he a fortune. he offer Warrington a dinner at Richmond instantly. "what should he go and buy for Laura and his mother? he must buy something for they."
"theywill like the book well than anything else," say Warrington, "with the young one's name to the verse, print among the swell."
"thank God! thank God!" cry Arthur, "I neednot be a charge upon the old mother. I can pay off Laura now. I can get my own living. I can make my own way."
"I can marry the grand vizier's daughter: I can purchase a house in Belgrave Square; I can build a fine castle in the air!" say Warrington, please with the other's exultation. "well, you may get bread and cheese, Pen: and I own it taste well, the bread which you earn yourself."
they have a magnum of claret at dinner at the club that day, at Pen's charge. it be long since he have indulge in such a luxury, but Warrington would not baulk he: and they drink together to the health of the Spring Annual.
it never rain but it pour, accord to the proverb; so very speedily another chance occur, by which Mr. Pen be to be help in his scheme of make a livelihood. Warrington one day throw he a letter across the table, which be bring by a printer's boy, "from Captain Shandon, sir" --the little emissary say: and then go and fall asleep on his accustomed bench in the passage. he pay many a subsequent visit there, and bring many a message to Pen.
F. P. Tuesday Morning.
"MY DEAR SIR,--Bungay will be here to-day, about the Pall Mall Gazette. you would be the very man to help we with a genuine west-end article,-- you understand--dash, trenchant, and d---- aristocratic. Lady Hipshaw will write; but shebe not much you know, and wehave two lord; but the less they do the well. we must have you. wewill give you your own term, and wewill make a hit with the Gazette.
"Shall B. come and see you, or can you look in upon I here?--ever your, C. S."
"some more opposition," Warrington say, when Pen have read the note. "Bungay and Bacon be at dagger draw; each marry the sister of the other, and they be for some time the close friend and partner. Hack say it be Mrs. Bungay who cause all the mischief between the two; whereas Shandon, who read for Bungay a good deal, say Mrs. Bacon do the business; but I donot know which be right, Peachum or Lockit. but since they have separate, it be a furious war between the two publisher; and no soon do one bring out a book of travel, or poem, a magazine or periodical, quarterly, or monthly, or weekly, or annual, but the rival be in the field with something similar. I have hear poor Shandon tell with great glee how he make Bungay give a grand dinner at Blackwall to all his writer, by say that Bacon have invite his corp to an entertainment at Greenwich. when Bungay engage your celebrated friend Mr. Wagg to edit the 'Londoner,' Bacon straightway rush off and secure Mr. Grindle to give his name to the 'Westminster Magazine.' when Bacon bring out his comic irish novel of 'Barney Brallaghan,' off go Bungay to Dublin, and produce his rollick hibernian story of 'Looney MacTwolter.' when Doctor Hicks bring out his 'Wanderings in Mesopotamia' under Bacon's auspex, Bungay produce Professor Sandiman's 'research in Zahara;' and Bungay be publish his 'Pall Mall Gazette' as a counterpoise to Bacon's 'Whitehall Review.' let we go and hear about the 'Gazette.' there may be a place for you in it, Pen, my boy. we will go and see Shandon. we be sure to find he at home."
"where do he live?" ask Pen.
"in the Fleet Prison," Warrington say. "and very much at home he be there, too. he be the king of the place."
Pen have never see this scene of London life, and walk with no small interest in at the grim gate of that dismal edifice. they go through the anteroom, where the officer and janitor of the place be seat, and pass in at the wicket, enter the prison. the noise and the crowd, the life and the shouting, the shabby bustle of the place, strike and excite Pen. People move about ceaselessly and restless, like cage animal in a menagerie. man be play at five. other pace and tramping: this one in colloquy with his lawyer in dingy black--that one walk sadly, with his wife by his side, and a child on his arm. some be array in tattered dressing-gown, and have a look of rakish fashion. everybody seem to be busy, hum, and on the move. Pen feel as if he choke in the place, and as if the door be lock upon he they never would let he out.
they go through a court up a stone staircase, and through passage full of people, and noise, and cross light, and black door clapping and banging;--pen feel as one do in a feverish morning dream. at last the same little runner who have bring Shandon's note, and have follow they down Fleet Street munching apple, and who show the way to the two gentleman through the prison, say, "this be the Captain's door," and Mr. Shandon's voice from within bade they enter.
the room, though bare, be not uncheerful. the sun be shin in at the window--near which sate a lady at work, who have be gay and beautiful once, but in whose faded face kindness and tenderness still beam. through all his error and reckless mishap and misfortune, this faithful creature adore her husband, and think he the good and cleverest, as indeed he be one of the kind of man. nothing ever seem to disturb the sweetness of his temper; not debt: not dun: not misery: not the bottle, not his wife's unhappy position, or his child's ruin chance. he be perfectly fond of wife and child after his fashion: he always have the kind word and smile for they, and ruin they with the utmost sweetness of temper. he never could refuse himself or any man any enjoyment which his money could purchase; he would share his last guinea with Jack and Tom, and we may be sure he have a score of such retainer. he would sign his name at the back of any man's bill, and never pay any debt of his own. he would write on any side, and attack himself or another man with equal indifference. he be one of the wittiest, the most amiable, and the most incorrigible of Irishmen. nobody could help like Charley Shandon who see he once, and those whom he ruin could scarcely be angry with he.
when Pen and Warrington arrive, the Captain (he have be in an irish militia regiment once, and the title remain with he) be sit on his bed in a torn dressing-gown, with a desk on his knee, at which he be scribble as fast as his rapid pen could write. slip after slip of paper fall off the desk wet on to the ground. a picture of his child be hang up over his bed, and the young of they be pattering about the room.
opposite the Captain sate Mr. Bungay, a portly man of stolid countenance, with whom the little child have be try a conversation.
"Papabe a very clever man," say she; "mamma say so."
"oh, very," say Mr. Bungay.
"and yoube a very rich man, Mr. Bundy," cry the child, who could hardly speak plain.
"Mary!" say Mamma, from her work.
"oh, never mind," Bungay roar out with a great laugh; no harm in say Ibe rich--he, he--I be pretty well off, my little dear."
"if yoube rich, why donot you take papa out of piz'n?" ask the child.
Mamma at this begin to wipe her eye with the work on which she be employ. (the poor lady have hang curtain up in the room, have bring the child's picture and place it there, and have make one or two attempt to ornament it.) Mamma begin to cry; Mr. Bungay turn red, and look fiercely out of his bloodshot little eye; Shandon's pen go on, and Pen and Warrington arrive with their knock.
Captain Shandon look up from his work. "how do you do, Mr. Warrington," he say. "Iwill speak to you in a minute. please sit down, gentleman, if you can find place," and away go the pen again.
Warrington pull forward an old portmanteau--the only available seat-- and sate down on it, with a bow to Mrs. Shandon and a nod to Bungay: the child come and look at Pen solemnly and in a couple of minute the swift scribbling cease; and Shandon, turn the desk over on the bed, stoop and pick up the paper.
"I think this will do," say he. "itbe the prospectus for the Pall Mall Gazette."
"and herebe the money for it," Mr. Bungay say, lay down a five-pound note. "Ibe as good as my word, I be. when I say Iwill pay, I pay."
"faith thatbe more than some of we can say," say Shandon, and he eagerly clap the note into his pocket.
CHAPTER XXXIII
which be pass in the Neighbourhood of Ludgate Hill
our imprisoned Captain announce, in smart and emphatic language in his prospectus, that the time have come at last when it be necessary for the gentleman of England to band together in defence of their common right and their glorious order, menace on all side by foreign revolution, by intestine radicalism, by the artful calumny of mill-owner and cotton-lord, and the stupid hostility of the mass whom they gull and lead. "the ancient monarchy be insult," the Captain say, "by a ferocious republican rabble. the Church be desert by envious dissent, and undermine by stealthy infidelity. the good institution, which have make our country glorious, and the name of English Gentleman the proud in the world, be leave without defence, and expose to assault and contumely from man to whom no sanctuary be sacred, for they believe in nothing holy; no history venerable, for they be too ignorant to have hear of the past; and no law be bind which they be strong enough to break, when their leader give the signal for plunder. it be because the king of France mistrust their gentleman," Mr. Shandon remark, "that the monarchy of Saint Louis go down: it be because the people of England still believe in their gentleman, that this country encounter and overcome the great enemy a nation ever meet: it be because we be head by gentleman, that the Eagles retreat before we from the Donro to the Garonne: it be a gentleman who break the line at Trafalgar, and sweep the plain of Waterloo."
Bungay nod his head in a knowing manner, and wink his eye when the Captain come to the Waterloo passage: and Warrington burst out laugh.
"you see how our venerable friend Bungay be affect," Shandon say, slily look up from his papers--"that's your true sort of test. I have use the Duke of Wellington and the battle of Waterloo a hundred time, and I never know the Duke to fail."
the Captain then go on to confess, with much candour, that up to the present time the gentleman of England, confident of their right, and careless of those who question it, have leave the political interest of their order as they do the management of their estate, or the settlement of their legal affair, to person affect to each peculiar service, and have permit their interest to be represent in the press by professional proctor and advocate. that time Shandon profess to consider be now go by: the gentleman of England must be their own champion: the declare enemy of their order be brave, strong, numerous, and uncompromising. they must meet their foe in the field: they must not be belie and misrepresent by hireling advocate: they must not have Grub Street publish gazette from Whitehall; "thatbe a dig at Bacon's people, Mr. Bungay," say Shandon, turn round to the publisher. Bungay clap his stick on the floor. "hang he, pitch into he, Capting," he say with exultation: and turn to Warrington, wag his dull head more vehemently than ever, and say, "for a slashing article, sir, therebe nobody like the Capting--no-obody like he."
the prospectus-writer go on to say that some gentleman, whose name be, for obvious reason, not bring before the public (at which Mr. Warrington begin to laugh again), have determine to bring forward a journal, of which the principle be so-and-so. "these man be proud of their order, and anxious to uphold it," cry out Captain Shandon, flourish his paper with a grin. "they be loyal to their Sovereign, by faithful conviction and ancestral allegiance; they love their Church, where they would have their child worship, and for which their forefather bleed; they love their country, and would keep it what the gentleman of England--yes, the gentleman of England (wewill have that in large cap, Bungay, my boy) have make it--the great and free in the world: and as the name of some of they be append to the deed which secure our liberty at runnymede--"
"whatbe that?" ask Mr. Bungay.
"an ancestor of mine seal it with his sword-hilt," Pen say, with great gravity.
"itbe the Habeas Corpus, Mr. Bungay," Warrington say, on which the publisher answer, "all right, I dare say," and yawn, though he say, "go on, Capting."
"--at runnymede; they be ready to defend that freedom to-day with sword and pen, and now, as then, to rally round the old law and liberty of England."
"Bravo!" cry Warrington. the little child stand wonder; the lady be work silently, and look with fond admiration. "come here, little Mary," say Warrington, and pat the child's fair curl with his large hand. but she shrink back from his rough caress, and prefer to go and take refuge at Pen's knee, and play with his fine watch-chain: and Pen be very much pleased that she come to he; for he be very soft-hearted and simple, though he conceal his gentleness under a shy and pompous demeanour. so she clamber up on his lap, whilst her father continue to read his programme.
"you be laugh," the Captain say to Warrington, "about 'the obvious reason' which I mention. now, Iwill show ye what they be, ye unbelieve heathen. 'we have say,'" he go on, "'that we cannot give the name of the party engage in this undertaking, and that there be obvious reason for that concealment. we number influential friend in both Houses of the Senate, and have secure ally in every diplomatic circle in Europe. our source of intelligence be such as cannot, by any possibility, be make public--and, indeed, such as no other London or european journal could, by any chance, acquire. but this we be free to say, that the very early information connect with the movement of English and Continental politic will be find only in the column of the Pall Mall Gazette, the Statesman and the Capitalist, the Country Gentleman and the Divine, will be amongst our reader, because our writer be amongst they. we address ourselves to the high circle of society: we care not to disown it--the Pall Mall Gazette be write by gentleman for gentleman; its conductor speak to the class in which they live and be bear. the field-preacher have his journal, the radical free-thinker have his journal: why should the Gentlemen of England be unrepresented in the Press?'"
Mr. Shandon then go on with much modesty to descant upon the literary and fashionable department of the Pall Mall Gazette, which be to be conduct by gentleman of acknowledge reputation; man famous at the Universities (at which Mr Pendennis could scarcely help laugh and blushing), know at the Clubs, and of the Society which they describe. he point out delicately to advertiser that there would be no such medium as the Pall Mall Gazette for give publicity to their sale; and he eloquently call upon the nobility of England, the baronetage of England, the revered clergy of England, the bar of England, the matron, the daughter, the home and hearth of England, to rally round the good old cause; and Bungay at the conclusion of the reading wake up from a second snooze in which he have indulge himself, and again say it be all right.
the reading of the prospectus conclude, the gentleman present enter into some detail regard the political and literary management of the paper, and Mr. Bungay sate by listen and nod his head, as if he understand what be the subject of their conversation, and approve of their opinion. Bungay's opinion, in truth, be pretty simple. he think the Captain could write the good smashing article in England. he want the opposition house of Bacon smash, and it be his opinion that the Captain could do that business. if the Captain have write a letter of Junius on a sheet of paper, or copy a part of the Church Catechism, Mr. Bungay would have be perfectly content, and have consider that the article be a smash article. and he pocket the paper with the great satisfaction: and he not only pay for the MS., as we have see, but he call little Mary to he, and give she a penny as he go away.
the reading of the manuscript over, the party engage in general conversation, Shandon lead with a jaunty fashionable air in compliment to the two guest who sate with he and, and who, by their appearance and manner, he presume to be person of the beau monde. he know very little indeed of the great world, but he have see it, and make the most of what he have see. he speak of the character of the day, and great personage of the fashion, with easy familiarity and jocular allusion, as if it have be his habit to live amongst they. he tell anecdote of their private life, and of conversation he have have, and entertainment at which he have be present, and at which such and such a thing occur. Pen be amuse to hear the shabby prisoner in a tattered dressing-gown talk glibly about the great of the land. Mrs. Shandon be always delighted when her husband tell these tale, and believe in they fondly every one. she do not want to mingle in the fashionable world herself, she be not clever enough; but the great Society be the very place for her Charles: he shine in it: he be respect in it. indeed, Shandon have once be ask to dinner by the Earl of X; his wife treasure the invitation-card in her workbox at that very day.
Mr. Bungay presently have enough of this talk and get up to take leave, whereupon Warrington and Pen rise to depart with the publisher, though the latter would have like to stay to make a further acquaintance with this family, who interest he and touch he. he say something about hop for permission to repeat his visit, upon which Shandon, with a rueful grin, say he be always to be find at home, and should be delighted to see Mr. Pennington.
"Iwill see you to my park-gate, gentleman," say Captain Shandon, seize his hat, in spite of a deprecatory look and a faint cry of "Charles" from Mrs. Shandon. and the Captain, in shabby slipper, shuffle out before his guest, lead the way through the dismal passage of the prison. his hand be already fiddle with his waistcoat pocket, where Bungay's five-pound note be, as he take leave of the three gentleman at the wicket; one of they, Mr. Arthur Pendennis, be greatly relieve when he be out of the horrid place, and again freely tread the flag of Farringdon Street.
Mrs. Shandon sadly go on with her work at the window look into the court. she see Shandon with a couple of man at his heel run rapidly in the direction of the prison tavern. she have hop to have have he to dinner herself that day: there be a piece of meat, and some salad in a basin, on the ledge outside of the window of their room which she have expect that she and little Mary be to share with the child's father. but there be no chance of that now. he would be in that tavern until the hour for close it; then he would go and play at card or drink in some other man's room and come back silent, with glaze eye, reel a little on his walk, that his wife might nurse he. oh, what variety of pain do we not make our woman suffer!
so Mrs. Shandon go to the cupboard, and, in lieu of a dinner, make herself some tea. and in those variety of pain of which we speak anon, what a part of confidante have that poor tea-pot play ever since the kindly plant be introduce among we! what myriad of woman have cry over it, to be sure! what sick-bed it have smoke by! what fevere lip have receive refreshment from out of it! nature mean very gently by woman when she make that tea-plant; and with a little thought what a series of picture and group the fancy may conjure up and assemble round the tea-pot and cup! Melissa and Sacharissa be talk love-secret over it. poor Polly have it and her lover's letter upon the table; his letter who be her lover yesterday, and when it be with pleasure, not despair, she weep over they. Mary tripping noiselessly come into her mother's bedroom, bear a cup of the consoler to the widow who will take no other food, Ruth be busy concoct it for her husband, who be come home from the harvest-field--one could fill a page with hint for such pictures;--finally, Mrs. Shandon and little Mary sit down and drink their tea together, while the Captain go out and take his pleasure. she care for nothing else but that, when her husband be away.
a gentleman with whom we be already slightly acquaint, Mr. Jack Finucane, a townsman of Captain Shandon's, find the Captain's wife and little Mary (for whom Jack always bring a sweetmeat in his pocket) over this meal. Jack think Shandon the great of create genius, have have one or two help from the good-natured prodigal, who have always a kind word, and sometimes a guinea for any friend in need; and never miss a day in see his patron. he be ready to run Shandon's errand and transact his money-business with publisher and newspaper editor, dun, creditor, holder of Shandon's acceptance, gentleman dispose to speculate in those security, and to transact the thousand little affair of an embarrassed irish gentleman. I never know an embarrassed irish gentleman yet, but he have an aide-de-camp of his own nation, likewise in circumstance of pecuniary discomfort. that aide-de-camp have subordinate of his own, who again may have other insolvent dependents-- all through his life our captain march at the head of a ragged staff, who share in the rough fortune of their chieftain.
"he willnot have that five-pound note very long, I bet a guinea," Mr. Bungay say of the Captain, as he and his two companion walk away from the prison; and the publisher judge rightly, for when Mrs. Shandon come to empty her husband's pocket, she find but a couple of shilling, and a few halfpence out of the morning's remittance. Shandon have give a pound to one follower; have send a leg of mutton and potato and beer to an acquaintance in the poor side of the prison; have pay an outstanding bill at the tavern where he have change his five-pound note; have have a dinner with two friend there, to whom he lose sundry half-crown at card afterwards; so that the night leave he as poor as the morning have find he.
the publisher and the two gentleman have have some talk together after quit Shandon, and Warrington reiterate to Bungay what he have say to his rival, Bacon, viz., that Pen be a high fellow, of great genius, and what be more, well with the great world, and relate to "no end" of the peerage. Bungay reply that he should be happy to have dealing with Mr. Pendennis, and hop to have the pleasure of see both gent to cut mutton with he before long, and so, with mutual politeness and protestation, they part.
"it be hard to see such a man as Shandon," Pen say, musing, and talk that night over the sight which he have witness, "of accomplishment so multifarious, and of such an undoubted talent and humour, an inmate of a gaol for half his time, and a bookseller's hanger-on when out of prison."
"I be a bookseller's hanger-on--you be go to try your pace as a hack," Warrington say with a laugh. "we be all hack upon some road or other. I would rather be myself, than Paley our neighbour in chamber: who have as much enjoyment of his life as a mole. a deuced deal of undeserved compassion have be throw away upon what you call your bookseller's drudge."
"much solitary pipe and ale make a cynic of you," say Pen "you be a Diogenes by a beer-barrel, Warrington. no man shall tell I that a man of genius, as Shandon be, ought to be drive by such a vulgar slave-driver, as yonder Mr. Bungay, whom we have just leave, who fatten on the profit of the other's brain, and enrich himself out of his journeyman's labour. it make I indignant to see a gentleman the serf of such a creature as that, of a man who cannot speak the language that he live by, who be not fit to black Shandon's boot."
"so you have begin already to gird at the publisher, and to take your side amongst our order. Bravo, Pen, my be boy!" Warrington answer, laugh still. "what have you get to say against Bungay's relation with Shandon? be it the publisher, think you, who send the author to prison? be it Bungay who be tipple away the five-pound note which we see just now, or Shandon?"
"misfortune drive a man into bad company," Pen say. "it be easy to cry 'fie!' against a poor fellow who have no society but such as he find in a prison; and no resource except forgetfulness and the bottle. we must deal kindly with the eccentricity of genius, and remember that the very ardour and enthusiasm of temperament which make the author delightful often lead the man astray."
"a fiddlestick about man of genius!" Warrington cry out, who be a very severe moralist upon some point, though possibly a very had practitioner. "I deny that there be so many genius as people who whimper about the fate of man of letter assert there be. there be thousand of clever fellow in the world who could, if they would, turn verse, write article, read book, and deliver a judgment upon they; the talk of professional critic and writer be not a whit more brilliant, or profound, or amusing, than that of any other society of educated people. if a lawyer, or a soldier, or a parson, outrun his income, and do not pay his bill, he must go to gaol; and an author must go, too. if an author fuddle himself, I donot know why he should be let off a headache the next morning,--if he order a coat from the tailor's, why he shouldnot pay for it."
"I would give he more money to buy coat," say Pen, smile. I suppose I should like to belong to a well-dress profession. I protest against that wretch of a middle-man whom I see between Genius and his great landlord, the Public, and who stop more than half of the labourer's earning and fame."
"I be a prose labourer," Warrington say; "you, my boy, be a poet in a small way, and so, I suppose, consider you be authorise to be flighty. what be it you want? do you want a body of capitalist that shall be force to purchase the work of all author, who may present themselves, manuscript in hand? everybody who write his epic, every driveller who can or cannot spell, and produce his novel or his tragedy,--are they all to come and find a bag of sovereign in exchange for their worthless ream of paper? who be to settle what be good or bad, saleable or otherwise? will you give the buyer leave, in fine, to purchase or not? why, sir, when Johnson sate behind the screen at Saint John's Gate, and take his dinner apart, because he be too shabby and poor to join the literary bigwig who be regale themselves, round Mr. Cave's good table-cloth, the tradesman be do he no wrong. you couldnot force the publisher to recognise the man of genius in the young man who present himself before he, ragged, gaunt, and hungry. rag be not a proof of genius; whereas capital be absolute, as time go, and be perforce the bargain-master. it have a right to deal with the literary inventor as with any other;--if I produce a novelty in the book trade, I must do the good I can with it; but I can no more force Mr. Murray to purchase my book of travel or sermon, than I can compel Mr. Tattersall to give I a hundred guineas for my horse. I may have my own idea of the value of my Pegasus, and think he the most wonderful of animal; but the dealer have a right to his opinion, too, and may want a lady's horse, or a cob for a heavy timid rider, or a sound hack for the road, and my beast willnot suit he."
"you deal in metaphor, Warrington," Pen say; "but you rightly say that you be very prosaic. poor Shandon! there be something about the kindness of that man, and the gentleness of that sweet creature of a wife, which touch I profoundly. I like he, I be afraid, well than a well man"
"and so do I," Warrington say. "let we give he the benefit of our sympathy, and the pity that be due to his weakness: though I fear that sort of kindness would be resent as contempt by a more high-minded man. you see he take his consolation along with his misfortune, and one generate the other or balance ii, as the way of the world. he be a prisoner, but he be not unhappy."
"his genius sing within his prison bar," Pen say.
"yes," Warrington say, bitterly; "Shandon accommodate himself to a cage pretty well. he ought to be wretche, but he have Jack and Tom to drink with, and that console he: he might have a high place, but, as he cannot, why, he can drink with Tom and Jack;--he might be provide for his wife and child, but Thomas and John have get a bottle of brandy which they want he to taste;--he might pay poor Snip, the tailor, the twenty pound which the poor devil want for his landlord, but John and Thomas lie their hand upon his purse;--and so he drink whilst his tradesman go to gaol and his family to ruin. let we pity the misfortune of genius, and conspire against the publishing tyrant who oppress man of letter."
"what! be you go to have another glass of brandy-and-water?" Pen say, with a humorous look. it be at the Black Kitchen that the above philosophical conversation take place between the two young man.
Warrington begin to laugh as usual. "video meliora proboque--I mean, bring it I hot, with sugar, John," he say to waiter.
"I would have some more, too, only I donot want it," say Pen. "it do not seem to I, Warrington, that we be much well than our neighbour." and Warrington's last glass have be despatch, the pair return to their chamber.
they find a couple of note in the letter-box, on their return, which have be send by their acquaintance of the morning, Mr. Bungay. that hospitable gentleman present his compliment to each of the gentleman, and request their pleasure of company at dinner on an early day, to meet a few literary friend.
"we shall have a grand spread, Warrington. we shall meet all Bungay's corps."
"all except poor Shandon," say Pen, nod a good-night to his friend, and he go into his own little room. the event and acquaintance of the day have excite he a good deal, and he lie for some time awake thinking over they, as Warrington's vigorous and regular snore from the neighbouring apartment pronounce that that gentleman be engage in deep slumber.
be it true, think Pendennis, lie on his bed and gaze at a bright moon without, that light up a corner of his dressing-table, and the frame of a little sketch of fairoak draw by Laura, and hang over his drawer--be it true that I be go to earn my bread at last, and with my pen? that I shall impoverish the dear mother no long; and that I may gain a name and reputation in the world, perhaps? these be welcome if they come, think the young visionary, laugh and blush to himself, though alone and in the night, as he think how dearly he would relish honour and fame if they could be his. if fortune favour I, I laud she; if she frown, I resign she. I pray Heaven I may be honest if I fail, or if I succeed. I pray Heaven I may tell the truth as far as I know it: that I maynot swerve from it through flattery, or interest, or personal enmity, or party prejudice. Dearest old mother, what a pride will you have, if I can do anything worthy of our name I and you, Laura, you willnot scorn I as the worthless idler and spendthrift, when you see that I-- when I have achieve a--psha! what an Alnaschar I be because I have make five pound by my poem, and be engage to write half a dozen article for a newspaper. he go on with these musing, more happy and hopeful, and in a humbler frame of mind, than he have feel to be for many a day. he think over the error and idleness, the passion, extravagance, disappointment, of his wayward youth: he get up from the bed: throw open the window, and look out into the night: and then, by some impulse, which we hope be a good one, he go up and kiss the picture of Fairoaks, and fling himself down on his knee by the bed, remain for some time in that posture of hope and submission. when he rise, it be with streaming eye. he have find himself repeat, mechanically, some little word which he have be accustom to repeat as a child at his mother's side, after the saying of which she would softly take he to his bed and close the curtain round he, hush he with a benediction.
the next day, Mr. Pidgeon, their attendant, bring in a large brown-paper parcel, direct to G. Warrington, Esq., with Mr. Trotter's compliment, and a note which Warrington read.
"Pen, you beggar!" roar Warrington to Pen, who be in his own room.
"Hullo!" sing out Pen.
"come here, yoube want," cry the other, and Pen come out.
"what be it?" say he.
"catch!" cry Warrington, and fling the parcel at Pen's head, who would have be knock down have he not catch it.
"itbe book for review for the Pall Mall Gazette: pitch into them," Warrington say. as for Pen, he never have be so delighted in his life: his hand tremble as he cut the string of the packet, and beheld within a smart set of new neat calico-bind book--travel, and novel, and poem.
"Sport the oak, Pidgeon," say he. "Ibe not at home to anybody to-day." and he fling into his easy-chair, and hardly give himself time to drink his tea, so eager be he to begin to read and to review.
CHAPTER XXXIV
in which the history still hover about Fleet Street
Captain Shandon, urge on by his wife, who seldom meddle in business matter, have stipulate that John Finucane, Esquire, of the Upper Temple, should be appoint sub-editor of forthcoming Pall Mall Gazette, and this post be accordingly confer upon Mr. Finucane by the spirited proprietor of the Journal. indeed he deserve any kindness at the hand of Shandon, so fondly attach be he, as we have say, to the Captain and his family, and so eager to do he a service. it be in Finucane's chamber that Shandon in former day use to hide when danger be near and bailiff abroad: until at length his hiding-place be know, and the sheriff's officer come as regularly to wait for the Captain on Finucane's staircase as at his own door. it be to Finucane's chamber that poor Mrs. Shandon come often and often to explain her trouble and grief, and devise mean of rescue for her adore Captain. many a meal do Finucane furnish for she and the child there. it be an honour to his little room to be visit by such a lady; and as she go down the staircase with her veil over her face, Fin would lean over the balustrade look after she, to see that no Temple Lovelace assail she upon the road, perhaps hop that some rogue might be induce to waylay she, so that he, Fin, might have the pleasure of rush to her rescue, and break the rascal's bone. it be a sincere pleasure to Mrs. Shandon when the arrangement be make by which her kind honest champion be appoint her husband's aide-de-camp in the newspaper.
he would have sate with Mrs. Shandon as late as the prison hour permit, and have indeed many a time witness the putting to bed of little Mary, who occupy a crib in the room; and to whose evening prayer that God might bless papa, Finucane, although of the romish faith himself, have say amen with a great deal of sympathy--but he have an appointment with Mr. Bungay regard the affair of the paper which they be to discuss over a quiet dinner. so he go away at six o'clock from Mrs. Shandon, but make his accustomed appearance at the Fleet Prison next morning, have array himself in his good clothe and ornament, which, though cheap as to cost, be very brilliant as to colour and appearance, and have in his pocket four pound two shilling, be the amount of his week's salary at the Daily Journal, minus two shilling expend by he in the purchase of a pair of glove on his way to the prison.
he have cut his mutton with Mr. Bungay, as the latter gentleman phrase it, and Mr. Trotter, Bungay's reader and literary man of business, at Dick's Coffee-house on the previous day, and enter at large into his view respect the conduct of the Pall Mall Gazette. in a masterly manner he have point out what should be the sub-editorial arrangement of the paper: what should be the type for the various article: who should report the market; who the turf and ring; who the Church intelligence; and who the fashionable chit-chat. he be acquaint with gentleman engage in cultivate these various department of knowledge, and in communicate they afterwards to the public--in fine, Jack Finucane be, as Shandon have say of he, and as he proudly own himself to be, one of the good sub-editor of a paper in London. he know the weekly earning of every man connect with the Press, and be up to a thousand dodge, or ingenious economic contrivance, by which money could be save to spirited capitalist, who be go to set up a paper. he at once dazzle and mystify Mr. Bungay, who be slow of comprehension, by the rapidity of the calculation which he exhibit on paper, as they sate in the box. and Bungay afterwards own to his subordinate Mr. Trotter, that that Irishman seem a clever fellow.
and now have succeed in make this impression upon Mr. Bungay, the faithful fellow work round to the point which he have very near at heart, viz., the liberation from prison of his admire friend and chief, Captain Shandon. he know to a shill the amount of the detainer which be against the Captain at the porter's lodge of the Fleet; and, indeed, profess to know all his debt, though this be impossible, for no man in England, certainly not the Captain himself, be acquaint with they. he point out what Shandon's engagement already be; and how much well he would work if remove from confinement (though this Mr. Bungay deny, for, "when the Captain's lock up," he say, "we be sure to find he at home; whereas, when hebe free, you can never catch hold of he"); finally, he so work on Mr. Bungay's feeling, by describe Mrs. Shandon pin away in the prison, and the child sicken there, that the publisher be induce to promise that, if Mrs. Shandon would come to he in the morning, he would see what could be do. and the colloquy end at this time with the second round of brandy-and-water, although Finucane, who have four guineas in his pocket, would have discharge the tavern reckoning with delight, Bungay say, "no, sir,--this be my affair, sir, if you please. James, take the bill, and eighteenpence for yourself," and he hand over the necessary fund to the waiter. thus it be that Finucane, who go to bed at the Temple after the dinner at Dick's, find himself actually with his week's salary intact upon Saturday morning.
he give Mrs. Shandon a wink so know and joyful, that that kind creature know some good news be in store for she, and hasten to get her bonnet and shawl, when Fin ask if he might have the honour of take she a walk, and give she a little fresh air. and little Mary jump for joy at the idea of this holiday, for Finucane never neglect to give she a toy, or to take she to a show, and bring newspaper order in his pocket for all sort of London diversion to amuse the child. indeed, he love they with all his heart, and would cheerfully have dash out his ramble brain to do they, or his adore Captain, a service.
"may I go, Charley? or shall I stay with you, for yoube poorly, dear, this morning? hebe get a headache, Mr. Finucane. he suffer from headache, and I persuade he to stay in bed," Mrs. Shandon say.
"go along with you, and Polly. Jack, take care of them. hand I over the Burton's Anatomy, and leave I to my abominable device," Shandon say, with perfect good-humour. he be write, and not uncommonly take his greek and latin quotation (of which he know the use as a public writer) from that wonderful repertory of learn.
so Fin give his arm to Mrs. Shandon, and Mary go skip down the passage of the prison, and through the gate into the free air. from Fleet Street to Paternoster Row be not very far. as the three reach Mr. Bungay's shop, Mrs. Bungay be also enter at the private door, hold in her hand a paper parcel and a manuscript volume bind in red, and, indeed, contain an account of her transaction with the butcher in the neighbouring market. Mrs. Bungay be in a gorgeous shot-silk dress, which flame with red and purple; she wear a yellow shawl, and have red flower inside her bonnet, and a brilliant light blue parasol.
Mrs. Shandon be in an old black water silk; her bonnet have never see very brilliant day of prosperity any more than its owner, but she could not help look like a lady whatever her attire be. the two woman curtsy to each other, each accord to her fashion.
"I hope yoube pretty well, mum?" say Mrs. Bungay.
"itbe a very fine day," say Mrs. Shandon.
"willnot you step in, mum?" say Mrs. Bungay, look so hard at the child as almost to frighten she.
"I--I come about business with Mr. Bungay--i--I hope hebe pretty well?" say timid Mrs. Shandon.
"if you go to see he in the counting-house, couldnot you, couldnot you leave your little gurl with I?" say Mrs. Bungay, in a deep voice, and with a tragic look, as she hold out one finger towards the child.
"I want to stay with mamma," cry little Mary, bury her face in her mother's dress.
"go with this lady, Mary, my dear," say the mother.
"Iwill show you some pretty picture," say Mrs. Bungay, with the voice of an ogress, "and some nice thing besides; look here,"--and open her brown-paper parcel, Mrs. Bungay display some choice sweet buscuit, such as her Bungay love after his wine. little Mary follow after this attraction, the whole party enter at the private entrance, from which a side door lead into Mr. Bungay's commercial apartment. here, however, as the child be about to part from her mother, her courage again fail she, and again she run to the maternal petticoat; upon which the kind and gentle Mrs. Shandon, see the look of disappointment in Mrs. Bungay's face, good-naturedly say, "if you will let I, I will come up too, and sit for a few minute," and so the three female ascend the stair together. a second biscuit charm little Mary into perfect confidence, and in a minute or two she prattle away without the least restraint.
faithful Finucane meanwhile find Mr. Bungay in a severer mood than he have be on the night previous, when two-third of a bottle of port, and two large glass of brandy-and-water, have warm his soul into enthusiasm, and make he generous in his promise towards Captain Shandon. his impetuous wife have rebuke he on his return home. she have order that he should give no relief to the captain; he be a good-for-nothing fellow, whom no money would help; she disapprove of the plan of the Pall Mall Gazette, and expect that Bungay would only lose his money in it as they be lose over the way (she always call her brother's establishment "over the way") by the Whitehall Journal. let Shandon stop in prison and do his work; it be the good place for he. in vain Finucane plead and promise and implore, for his friend Bungay have have an hour's lecture in the morning and be inexorable.
but what honest Jack fail to do below-stair in the counting-house, the pretty face and manner of the mother and child be effecting in the drawing-room, where they be melt the fierce but really soft Mrs. Bungay. there be an artless sweetness in Mrs. Shandon's voice, and a win frankness of manner, which make most people fond of she, and pity she: and take courage by the rugged kindness with which her hostess receive she, the Captain's lady tell her story, and describe her husband's goodness and virtue, and her child's fail health (she be oblige to part with two of they, she say, and send they to school, for she could not have they in that horrid place)--that Mrs. Bungay, though as grim as Lady Macbeth, melt under the influence of the simple tale, and say she would go down and speak to Bungay. now in this household to speak be to command, with Mrs. Bungay; and with Bungay, to hear be to obey.
it be just when poor finucane be in despair about his negotiation, that the majestic Mrs. Bungay descend upon her spouse, politely request Mr. Finucane to step up to his friend in her drawing-room, while she hold a few minute' conversation with Mr. B., and when the pair be alone the publisher's well half inform he of her intention towards the Captain's lady.
"whatbe in the wind now, my dear?" Maecenas ask, surprised at his wife's altered tone. "you wouldnot hear of my do anything for the Captain this morning: I wonder what have be a changing of you.
"the Capting be an Irishman," Mrs. Bungay reply; "and those irish I have always say I couldnot abide. but his wife be a lady, as any one can see; and a good woman, and a clergyman's daughter, and a West of England woman, B., which I be myself, by my mother's side--and, O Marmaduke! donot you remark the little gurl?"
"yes, Mrs. B., I see the little girl."
"and donot you see how like she be to our angel, Bessy, Mr. B.?"--and Mrs. Bungay's thought fly back to a period eighteen year back, when Bacon and Bungay have just set up in business as small bookseller in a country town, and when she have have a child, name Bessy, something like the little Mary who have move her compassion.
"well, well, my dear," Mr. Bungay say, see the little eye of his wife begin to twinkle and grow red; "the Captain benot in for much. therebe only a hundred and thirty pound against he. half the money will take he out of the Fleet, Finucane say, and wewill pay he half salary till he have make the account square. when the little 'un say, 'why donot you take Par out of prizn?' I do feel it, Flora, upon my honour I do, now." and the upshot of this conversation be, that Mr. and Mrs. Bungay both ascend to the drawing-room, and Mr. Bungay make a heavy and clumsy speech, in which he announce to Mrs. Shandon, that, hear sixty-five pound would set her husband free, he be ready to advance that sum of money, deduct it from the Captain's salary, and that he would give it to she on condition that she would personally settle with the creditor regard her husband's liberation.
I think this be the happy day that Mrs. Shandon and Mr. Finucane have have for a long time. "Bedad, Bungay, yoube a trump!" roar out Fin, in an overpowering brogue and emotion. "give we your fist, old boy: and willnot we send the Pall Mall Gazette up to ten thousand a week, thatbe all!" and he jump about the room, and toss up little Mary, with a hundred frantic antic.
"if I could drive you anywhere in my carriage, Mrs. Shandon--I'm sure itbe quite at your service," Mrs. Bungay say, look out at a one-horse vehicle which have just drive up, and in which this lady take the air considerably--and the two lady, with little Mary between they (whose tiny hand Maecenas's wife keep fix in her great grasp), with the delighted Mr. Finucane on the back seat, drive away from Paternoster Row, as the owner of the vehicle throw triumphant glance at the opposite window at Bacon's.
"it willnot do the Captain any good," think Bungay, go back to his desk and account, "but Mrs. B. become reglar upset when she think about her misfortune. the child would have be of age yesterday, if shehave live. Flora tell I so:" and he wonder how woman do remember thing.
we be happy to say that Mrs. Shandon speed with very good success upon her errand. she who have have to mollify creditor when she have no money at all, and only tear and entreaty wherewith to soothe they, find no difficulty in make they relent by mean of a bribe of ten shilling in the pound; and the next Sunday be the last, for some time at least, which the Captain spend in prison.
CHAPTER XXXV Dinner in the row
upon the appoint day our two friend make their appearance at Mr. Bungay's door in Paternoster row; not the public entrance through which bookseller' boy issue with their sack full of Bungay's volume, and around which timid aspirant linger with their virgin manuscript ready for sale to Sultan Bungay, but at the private door of the house, whence the splendid Mrs. Bungay would come forth to step into her chaise and take her drive, settle herself on the cushion, and cast look of defiance at Mrs. Bacon's opposite window--at Mrs. Bacon, who be as yet a chaiseless woman.
on such occasion, when very much wroth at her sister-in-law's splendour Mrs. Bacon would fling up the sash of her drawing-room window, and look out with her four child at the chaise, as much as to say, "look at these four darling. Flora Bungay! this be why I cannot drive in my carriage; you would give a coach-and-four to have the same reason." and it be with these arrow out of her quiver that Emma Bacon shoot Flora Bungay as she sate in her chariot envious and childless.
as Pen and Warrington come to Bungay's door, a carriage and a cab drive up to Bacon's. Old Dr. Slocum descend heavily from the first; the Doctor's equipage be as ponderous as his style, but both have a fine sonorous effect upon the publisher in the row. a couple of dazzle white waistcoat step out of the cab.
Warrington laugh. "you see Bacon have his dinner-party too. that be Dr. Slocum, author of 'Memoirs of the Poisoners.' you would hardly have recognise our friend Hoolan in that gallant white waistcoat. Doolan be one of Bungay's man, and faith, here he come." indeed, Messrs. Hoolan and Doolan have come from the Strand in the same cab, toss up by the way which should pay the shilling; and Mr. D. step from the other side of the way, array in black, with a large pair of white glove which be spread out on his hand, and which the owner could not help regard with pleasure.
the house porter in an evening coat, and gentleman with glove as large as Doolan's, but of the famous Berlin web, be on the passage of Mr. Bungay's house to receive the guest' hat and coat, and bawl their name up the stair. some of the latter have arrive when the three new visitor make their appearance; but there be only Mrs. Bungay in red satin and a turban to represent her own charming sex. she make curtsy to each new-comer as he enter the drawing-room, but her mind be evidently pre-occupy by extraneous thought. the fact be, Mrs. Bacon's dinner-party be disturb she, and as soon as she have receive each individual of her own company, Flora Bungay fly back to the embrasure of the window, whence she could rake the carriage of Emma Bacon's friend as they come rattle up the row. the sight of Dr. Slocum's large carriage, with the gaunt job-horse, crush Flora: none but hack cab have drive up to her own door on that day.
they be all literary gentleman, though unknown as yet to Pen. there be Mr. Bole, the real editor of the magazine, of which Mr. Wagg be the nominal chief; Mr. Trotter, who, from have break out on the world as a poet of a tragic and suicidial cast, have now subside into one of Mr. Bungay's back shop as reader for that gentleman; and Captain Sumph, an ex-beau reader about town, and relate in some indistinct manner to Literature and the Peerage. he be say to have write a book once, to have be a friend of Lord Byron, to be relate to Lord Sumphington; in fact, anecdote of Byron form his staple, and he seldom speak but with the name of that poet or some of his contemporary in his mouth, as thus: "I remember poor Shelley, at school be send up for good for a copy of verse, every line of which I write, by Jove;" or, "I recollect, when I be at Missolonghi with Byron, offer to bet gamba," and so forth. this gentleman, Pen remark, be listen to with great attention by Mrs. Bungay; his anecdote of the aristocracy, of which he be a middle-aged member, delight the publisher's lady; and he be almost a great man than the great Mr. Wagg himself in her eye. have he but come in his own carriage, Mrs. Bungay would have make her Bungay purchase any give volume from his pen.
Mr. Bungay go about to his guest as they arrive, and do the honour of his house with much cordiality. "how be you, sir? fine day, sir. glad to see you year, sir. Flora, my love, let I ave the honour of introduce Mr. Warrington to you. Mr. Warrington, Mrs. Bungay; Mr. Pendennis, Mrs. Bungay. hope youhave bring good appetite with you, gentleman. you, Doolan, I know ave, for youhave always ad a deuce of a twist."
"Lor, Bungay!" say Mrs. Bungay.
"Faith, a man must be hard to please, Bungay, who cannot eat a good dinner in this house," Doolan say, and he wink and stroke his lean chop with his large glove; and make appeal of friendship to Mrs. Bungay, which that honest woman refuse with scorn from the timid man. "she couldnot abide that Doolan," she say in confidence to her friend. indeed, all his flattery fail to win she.
as they talk, Mrs. Bungay survey mankind from her window, a magnificent vision of an enormous grey cab-horse appear, and near rapidly. a pair of white rein, hold by small white glove, be visible behind it; a face pale, but richly decorate with a chin-tuft, the head of an exiguous groom bob over the cab-head--these bright thing be reveal to the delighted Mrs. Bungay. "the honourable Percy Popjoy's quite punctual, I declare," she say, and sail to the door to be in wait at the nobleman's arrival.
"itbe Percy Popjoy," say Pen, look out of window, and see an individual, in extremely lacquered boot, descend from the swing cab: and, in fact, it be that young nobleman Lord Falconet's eld son, as we all very well know, who be come to dine with the publisher--his publisher of the row.
"he be my fag at Eton," Warrington say. "I ought to have lick he a little more." he and Pen have have some bout at the Oxbridge Union debate, in which Pen have have very much the well of Percy: who presently appear, with his hat under his arm, and a look of indescribable good-humour and fatuity in his round dimpled face: upon which Nature have burst out with a chin-tuft, but, exhaust with the effort, have leave the rest of the countenance bare of hair.
the temporary groom of the chamber bawl out, "the honourable Percy Popjoy," much to that gentleman's discomposure at hear his title announce.
"what do the man want to take away my hat for, Bungay?" he ask of the publisher. "cannot do without my hat--want it to make my bow to Mrs. Bungay. how well you look. Mrs. Bungay, to-day. havenot see your carriage in the Park: why havenot you be there? I miss you; indeed, I do."
"Ibe afraid yoube a sad quiz," say Mrs. Bungay.
"Quiz! never make a joke in my--hullo! whobe here? how d'ye do, Pendennis? how d'ye do, Warrington? these be old friend of mine, Mrs. Bungay. I say, how the doose do you come here?" he ask of the two young man, turnip his lacquered heel upon Mrs. Bungay, who respect her husband's two young guest, now that she find they be intimate with a lord's son.
"what! do they know he?" she ask rapidly of Mr. B.
"high feller, I tell you--the young one relate to all the nobility," say the publisher; and both run forward, smile and bow, to greet almost as great personage as the young lord--no less character, indeed, than the great Mr. Wenham and the great Mr. Wagg, who be now announce.
Mr. Wenham enter, wear the usual demure look and stealthy smile with which he commonly survey the tip of his neat little shin boot, and which he but seldom bring to bear upon the person who address he. Wagg's white waistcoat spread out, on the contrary, with profuse brilliancy; his burly, red face shine resplendent over it, light up with the thought of good joke and a good dinner. he like to make his entree into a drawing-room with a laugh, and, when he go away at night, to leave a joke explode behind he. no personal calamity or distress (of which that humourist have his share in common with the unjocular part of mankind) could altogether keep his humour down. whatever his grief might be, the thought of a dinner rally his great soul; and when he see a lord, he salute he with a pun.
Wenham go up, then, with a smug smile and whisper, to Mrs. Bungay, and look at she from under his eye, and show she the tip of his shoe. Wagg say she look charming, and push on straight at the young nobleman, whom he call Pop, and to whom he instantly relate a funny story, season with what the french call gro sel. he be delighted to see Pen, too, and shake hand with he, and slap he on the back cordially; for he be full of spirit and good-humour. and he talk in a loud voice about their last place and occasion of meeting at Baymouth; and ask how their friend of Clavering Park be, and whether Sir Francis be not come to London for the season; and whether Pen have be to see Lady Rockminster, who have arrive--fine old lady, Lady Rockminster! these remark Wagg make not for Pen's ear so much as for the edification of the company, whom he be glad to inform that he pay visit to gentleman's country seat, and be on intimate term with the nobility.
Wenham also shake hand with our young friend--all of which scene Mrs. Bungay remark with respectful pleasure, and communicate her idea to Bungay, afterwards, regard the importance of Mr. Pendennis--idea by which Pen profit much more than he be aware.
Pen, who have read, and rather admire some of her work (and expect to find in Miss Bunion a person somewhat resemble her own description of herself in the 'Passion-Flower,' in which she state that her youth resembled--
"a violet, shrink meanly when blow the March wind keenly; a timid fawn, on wild-wood lawn, where oak-boughs rustle greenly,--"
and that her mature beauty be something very different, certainly, to the artless loveliness of her prime, but still exceedingly captivate and striking), beheld, rather to his surprise and amusement, a large and bony woman in a crumpled satin dress, who come creak into the room with a step as heavy as a grenadier's. Wagg instantly note the straw which she bring in at the rumpled skirt of her dress, and would have stoop to pick it up: but Miss Bunion disarm all criticism by observe this ornament herself, and, put her own large foot upon it, so as to separate it from her robe, she stoop and pick up the straw, say to Mrs. Bungay, that she be very sorry to be a little late, but that the omnibus be very slow, and what a comfort it be to get a ride all the way from Brompton for sixpence. nobody laugh at the poetess's speech, it be utter so simply. indeed, the worthy woman have not the least notion of be ashamed of an action incidental upon her poverty.
"be that 'passion-flower?'" Pen say to Wenham, by whom he be stand. "why, her picture in the volume represent she as a very well-look young woman."
"you know passion-flower, like all other, will run to seed," Wenham say; "Miss Bunion's portrait be probably paint some year ago."
"well, I like she for not be ashamed of her poverty."
"so do I," say Mr. Wenham, who would have starve rather than have come to dinner in an omnibus, "but I donot think that she need flourish the straw about, do you, Mr. Pendennis? my dear Miss Bunion, how do you do? I be in a great lady's drawing-room this morning, and everybody be charm with your new volume. those line on the christening of Lady Fanny Fantail bring tear into the Duchess's eye. I say that I think I should have the pleasure of meet you to-day, and she beg I to thank you, and say how greatly she be pleased."
this history, tell in a bland smile manner, of a Duchess whom Wenham have meet that very morning, too, quite put poor Wagg's dowager and baronet out of court, and place Wenham beyond Wagg as a man of fashion. Wenham keep this inestimable advantage, and have the conversation to himself, run on with a number of anecdote regard the aristocracy. he try to bring Mr. Popjoy into the conversation by make appeal to he, and say, "I be tell your father this morning," or, "I think you be present at W. house the other night when the Duke say so-and-so," but Mr. Popjoy would not gratify he by join in the talk, prefer to fall back into the window recess with Mrs. Bungay, and watch the cab that drive up to the opposite door. at least, if he would not talk, the hostess hop that those odious Bacons would see how she have secure the noble Percy Popjoy for her party.
and now the bell of Saint Paul's toll half an hour later than that for which Mr. Bungay have invite his party, and it be complete with the exception of two guest, who at last make their appearance, and in whom Pen be pleased to recognise Captain and Mrs. Shandon.
when these two have make their greeting to the master and mistress of the house, and exchange nod of more or less recognition with most of the people present, Pen and Warrington go up, and shake hand very warmly with Mrs. Shandon, who, perhaps, be affect to meet they, and think where it be she have see they but a few day before. Shandon be brush up, and look pretty smart, in a red velvet waistcoat, and a frill, into which his wife have stick her good brooch. in spite of Mrs. Bungay's kindness, perhaps in consequence of it, Mrs. Shandon feel great terror and timidity in approach she: indeed, she be more awful than ever in her red satin and bird of paradise, and it be not until she have ask in her great voice about the dear little gurl, that the latter be somewhat encouraged, and venture to speak.
"nice-look woman," Popjoy whisper to Warrington. "do introduce I to Captain Shandon, Warrington. Ibe tell hebe a tremendous clever fellow; and, dammy, I adore intellect, by Jove I do!" this be the truth: Heaven have not endow young Mr. Popjoy with much intellect of his own, but have give he a generous faculty for admire, if not for appreciate, the intellect of other. "and introduce I to Miss Bunion. Ibe tell shebe very clever too. shebe rum to look at, certainly, but that donot matter. Dammy, I consider myself a literary man, and I wish to know all the clever fellow." so Mr. Popjoy and Mr. Shandon have the pleasure of become acquaint with one another; and now the door of the adjoining dining-room be fling open, the party enter and take their seat at table. Pen find himself next to bunion on one side, and to Mr. Wagg--the truth be, Wagg flee alarmed from the vacant place by the poetess, and Pen be compel to take it.
the gifted being do not talk much during dinner, but Pen remark that she eat with a vast appetite, and never refuse any of the supply of wine which be offer to she by the butler. indeed, Miss Bunion have consider Mr. Pendennis for a minute, who give himself rather grand air, and who be attire in an extremely fashionable style, with his very good chain, shirt stud, and cambric front, he be set down, and not without reason, as a prig by the poetess; who think it be much well to attend to her dinner than to take any notice of he. she tell he as much in after day with her usual candour. "I take you for one of the little Mayfair dandy," she say to Pen. "you look as solemn as a little undertaker; and as I dislike, beyond measure, the odious creature who be on the other side of I, I think it be good to eat my dinner and hold my tongue."
"and you do both very well, my dear Miss Bunion," Pen say with a laugh.
"well, so I do, but I intend to talk to you the next time a great deal: for you be neither so solemn, nor so stupid, nor so pert as you look."
"ah, Miss Bunion, how I pine for that 'next time' to come," Pen say with an air of comical gallantry:--but we must return to the day, and the dinner at Paternoster Row.
the repast be of the rich description--"What I call of the florid Gothic style," Wagg whisper to Penn, who sate beside the humourist, in his side-wing voice. the man in creak shoe and Berlin glove be numerous and solemn, carry on rapid conversation behind the guest, as they move to and fro with the dish. Doolan call out, "Waither," to one of they, and blush when he think of his blunder. Mrs. Bungay's footboy be lose amidst those large and black-coat attendant.
"look at that very bow-windowe man," Wagg say. "hebe an undertaker in Amen Corner, and attend funeral and dinner. cold meat and hot, donot you perceive? hebe the sham butler here, and I observe, my dear Mr. Pendennis, as you will through life, that wherever there be a sham butler at a London dinner there be sham wine--this sherry be filthy. Bungay, my boy, where do you get this delicious brown sherry?"
"Ibe glad you like it, Mr. Wagg; glass with you," say the publisher. "itbe some I get from Alderman Benning's store, and give a good figure for it, I can tell you. Mr. Pendennis, will you join we? your 'ealth, gentleman."
"the old rogue, where do he expect to go to? it come from the public-house," Wagg say. "it require two man to carry off that sherry, 'tis so uncommonly strong. I wish I have a bottle of old Steyne's wine here, Pendennis: your uncle and I have have many a one. he send it about to people where he be in the habit of dining. I remember at poor Rawdon Crawley's, Sir Pitt Crawley's brother--he be Governor of Coventry Island--Steyne's chef always come in the morning, and the butler arrive wit the champagne from Gaunt House, in the ice-pail ready."
"how good this be!" say Popjoy, good-naturedly. "you must have a cordon bleu in your kitchen."
"o yes," Mrs. Bungay say, think he speak of a jack-chain very likely.
"I mean a french chef," say the polite guest.
"o yes, your lordship," again say the lady.
"do your artist say hebe a Frenchman, Mrs. B.?" call out Wagg.
"well, Ibe sure I donot know," answer the publisher's lady.
"because, if he do, hebe a quizzin yer," cry Mr. Wagg; but nobody see the pun, which disconcert somewhat the bashful punster. "the dinner be from Griggs, in St. Paul's Churchyard; so be Bacon's," he whisper Pen. "Bungay write to give half-a-crown a head more than Bacon, so do Bacon. they would poison each other's ice if they could get near they; and as for the make-dish--they be poison. this--hum--ha--this Brimborion a la Sevigne be delicious, Mrs. B.," he say, help himself to a dish which the undertaker hand to he.
"well, Ibe glad you like it," Mrs. Bungay answer, blush and not know whether the name of the dish be actually that which Wagg give to it, but dimly conscious that that individual be quiz she. accordingly she hat Mr. Wagg with female ardour; and would have depose he from his command over Mr. Bungay's periodical, but that his name be great in the trade, and his reputation in the land considerable.
by the displacement of person, Warrington have find himself on the right hand of Mrs. Shandon, who sate in plain black silk and fade ornament by the side of the florid publisher. the sad smile of the lady move his rough heart to pity. nobody seem to interest himself about she: she sate look at her husband, who himself seem rather abash in the presence of some of the company. Wenham and Wagg both know he and his circumstance. he have work with the latter, and be immeasurably his superior in wit, genius, and acquirement; but Wagg's star be brilliant in the world, and poor Shandon be unknown there. he could not speak before the noisy talk of the coarser and more successful man; but drink his wine in silence, and as much of it as the people would give he. he be under surveillance. Bungay have warn the undertaker not to fill the Captain's glass too often or too full. it be a melancholy precaution that, and the more melancholy that it be necessary. Mrs. Shandon, too, cast alarmed glance across the table to see that her husband do not exceed.
abash by the failure of his first pun, for he be impudent and easily disconcert, Wagg keep his conversation pretty much to Pen during the rest of dinner, and of course chiefly speak about their neighbour. "this be one of Bungay's grand field-day," he say. "we be all Bungavians here.--Did you read Popjoy's novel? it be an old magazine story write by poor Buzzard year ago, and forget here until Mr. Trotter (that be Trotter with the large shirt collar) fish it out and bethink he that it be applicable to the late elopement; so Bob write a few chapter a propos--Popjoy permit the use of his name, and I dare say supply a page here and there--and 'desperation, or the Fugitive Duchess' make its appearance. the great fun be to examine Popjoy about his own work, of which he donot know a word.--i say, Popjoy, what a capital passage that be in Volume three,--where the Cardinal in disguise, after be convert by the Bishop of London, propose marriage to the Duchess's daughter."
"Glad you like it," Popjoy answer; "itbe a favourite bit of my own."
"therebe no such thing in the whole book," whisper Wagg to Pen. "invent it myself. Gad! it wouldnot be a bad plot for a high-church novel."
"I remember poor Byron, Hobhouse, Trelawney, and myself, din with Cardinal Mezzocaldo at Rome," Captain Sumph begin, "and we have some Orvieto wine for dinner, which Byron like very much. and I remember how the Cardinal regret that he be a single man. we go to Civita Vecchia two day afterwards, where Byron's yacht be--and, by Jove, the Cardinal die within three week; and Byron be very sorry, for he rather like he."
"a devilish interesting story, Sumph, indeed," Wagg say.
"you should publish some of those story, Captain Sumph, you really should. such a volume would make our friend Bungay's fortune," Shandon say.
"why donot you ask Sumph to publish them in your new paper--the what-d'ye-call-'em--hay, Shandon?" bawl out Wagg.
"why donot you ask he to publish them in your old magazine, the Thingumbob?" Shandon reply.
"be there go to be a new paper?" ask Wenham, who know perfectly well, but be ashamed of his connection with the press.
"Bungay go to bring out a paper?" cry Popjoy, who, on the contrary, be proud of his literary reputation and acquaintance. "you must employ I. Mrs. Bungay, use your influence with he, and make he employ I. prose or verse--what shall it be? novel, poem, travel, or lead article, begad. anything or everything--only let Bungay pay I, and Ibe ready--I be now my dear Mrs. Bungay, begad now."
"itbe to be call the Small Beer Chronicle," growl Wagg, "and little Popjoy be to be engage for the infantine department."
"it be to be call the Pall Mall Gazette, sir, and we shall be very happy to have you with we," Shandon say.
"Pall Mall Gazette--why Pall Mall Gazette?" ask Wagg.
"because the editor be bear at Dublin, the sub-editor at Cork, because the proprietor live in Paternoster Row;--and the paper be publish in Catherine Street, Strand. willnot that reason suffice you, Wagg?" Shandon say; he be get rather angry. "everything must have a name. my dog Ponto have get a namee. youhave get a name, and a name which you deserve, more or less, indeed. why d'ye grudge the name to our paper?"
"by any other name it would smell as sweet," say Wagg.
"Iwill have ye remember its namebe not what-d'ye-call-'em, Mr. Wagg," say Shandon. "you know its name well enough, and--and you know mine."
"and I know your address too," say Wagg; but this be speak in an undertone, and the good-natured Irishman be appease almost in an instant after his ebullition of spleen, and ask Wagg to drink wine with he in a friendly voice.
when the lady retire from the table, the talk grow louder still; and presently Wenham, in a courtly speech, propose that everybody should drink to the health of the new Journal, eulogise highly the talent, wit, and learning of its editor, Captain Shandon. it be his maxim never to lose the support of a newspaper man, and in the course of that evening he go round and salute every literary gentleman present with a privy compliment specially address to he; inform this one how great an impression have be make in Downing Street by his last article, and tell that one how profoundly his good friend, the Duke of so-and-so, have be strike by the ability of the late number.
the evening come to a close, and in spite of all the precaution to the contrary, poor Shandon reel in his walk, and go home to his new lodging, with his faithful wife by his side, and the cabman on his box jeering at he. Wenham have a chariot of his own, which he put at Popjoy's seat; and the timid Miss Bunion see Mr. Wagg, who be her neighbour, about to depart, insist upon a seat in his carriage, much to that gentleman's discomfiture.
Pen and Warrington walk home together in the moonlight. "and now," Warrington say, "that you have see the man of letter, tell I, be I far wrong in say that there be thousand of people in this town, who donot write book, who be, to the full, as clever and intellectual as people who do?"
Pen be force to confess that the literary personage with whom he have become acquainted have not say much, in the course of the night's conversation, that be worthy to be remember or quote. in fact not one word about literature have be say during the whole course of the night:--and it may be whisper to those uninitiated people who be anxious to know the habit and make the acquaintance of man of letter, that there be no race of people who talk about book, or, perhaps, who read book, so little as literary man.
CHAPTER xxxvi
the Pall Mall Gazette
considerable success at first attend the new journal. it be generally state, that an influential political party support the paper; and great name be cite amongst the contributor to its column. be there any foundation for these rumour? we be not at liberty to say whether they be ill-found; but this much we may divulge, that an article upon foreign policy, which be generally attribute to a noble Lord, whose connexion with the Foreign Office be very well know, be in reality compose by Captain Shandon, in the parlour of the Bear and Staff public-house near Whitehall Stairs, whither the printer's boy have track he, and where a literary ally of his, Mr. Bludyer, have a temporary residence; and that a series of paper on finance question, which be universally suppose to be write by a great Statesman of the House of Commons, be in reality compose by Mr. George Warrington of the Upper Temple.
that there may have be some dealing between the Pall Mall Gazette and this influential party, be very possible, Percy Popjoy (whose father, Lord Falconet, be a member of the party) might be see not unfrequently ascend the stair to Warrington's chamber; and some information appear in the paper which it give a character, and could only be get from very peculiar source. several poem, feeble in thought, but loud and vigorous in expression, appear in the Pall Mall Gazette, with the signature of "P. P."; and it must be own that his novel be praise in the new journal in a very outrageous manner.
in the political department of the paper Mr. Pen do not take any share; but he be a most active literary contributor. the Pall Mall Gazette have its office, as we have hear, in Catherine Street, in the Strand, and hither Pen often come with his manuscript in his pocket, and with a great deal of bustle and pleasure; such as a man feel at the outset of his literary career, when to see himself in print be still a novel sensation, and he yet please himself to think that his writing be create some noise in the world.
here it be that Mr. Jack Finucane, the sub-editor, compile with paste and scissor the Journal of which he be supervisor. with an eagle eye he scan all the paragraph of all the newspaper which have anything to do with the world of fashion over which he preside. he donot let a death or a dinner-party of the aristocracy pass without have the event record in the column of his Journal; and from the most recondite provincial print, and distant Scotch and irish newspaper, he fish out astonishing paragraph and intelligence regard the upper class of society. it be a grand, nay, a touching sight, for a philosopher, to see Jack Finucane, Esquire, with a plate of meat from the cookshop and glass of porter from the public-house, for his meal, recount the feast of the great as if h have be present at they; and in tattered trouser and dingy shirt-sleeve, cheerfully describe and arrange the most brilliant fete of the world of fashion. the incongruity of Finucane's avocation, and his manner and appearance amuse his new friend Pen. since he leave his own native village, where his rank probably be not very, lofty Jack have seldom see any society but such as use the parlour of the tavern which he frequent, whereas from his writing you would have suppose that he din with ambassador, and that his common lounge be the bow-window of White's. error of description, it be true, occasionally slip from his pen; but the Ballinafad Sentinel, of which he be own correspondent, suffer by these, not the Pall Mall Gazette, in which Jack be not permit to write much, his London chief think that the scissor and the paste be well wield by he than the pen.
Pen take a great deal of pain with the writing of his review, and have a pretty fair share of desultory reading, acquire in the early year of his life an eager fancy and a keen sense of fun, his article please his chief and the public, and he be proud to think that he deserve the money which he earn. we may be sure that the Pall Mall Gazette be take in regularly at Fairoaks, and read with delight by the two lady there. it be receive at Clavering Park, too, where we know there be a young lady of great literary taste; and old Doctor Portman himself, to whom the widow send her paper after she have get her son's article by heart, signify his approval of Pen's production, say that the lad have spirit, taste, and fancy, and write, if not like a scholar, at any rate like a gentleman.
and what be the astonishment and delight of our friend Major Pendennis, on walk into one of his club, the Regent, where Wenham, Lord Falconet, and some other gentleman of good reputation and fashion be assemble, to hear they one day talk over a number of the Pall Mall Gazette, and of an article which appear in its column, make some bitter fun of the book recently publish by the wife of a celebrated member of the opposition party. the book in question be a Book of Travels in Spain and Italy, by the Countess of Muffborough, in which it be difficult to say which be the most wonderful, the French or the English, in which language her ladyship write indifferently, and upon the blunder of which the critic pounce with delightful mischief. the critic be no other than Pen: he jump and dance round about his subject with the great jocularity and high spirit: he show up the noble lady's fault with admirable mock gravity and decorum. there be not a word in the article which be not polite and gentlemanlike; and the unfortunate subject of the criticism be scarify and laugh at during the operation. Wenham's bilious countenance be pucker up with malign pleasure as he read the critique. Lady Muffborough have not ask he to her party during the last year. Lord Falconet giggle and laugh with all his heart; Lord Muffborough and he have be rival ever since they begin life; and these compliment Major Pendennis, who until now have scarcely pay any attention to some hint which his Fairoaks correspondence throw out of "dear Arthur's constant and severe literary occupation, which I fear may undermine the poor boy's health," and have think any notice of Mr. Pen and his newspaper connexion quite below his dignity as a Major and a gentleman.
but when the oracular Wenham praise the boy's production; when Lord Falconet, who have have the news from Percy Popjoy, approve of the genius of young Pen; when the great Lord Steyne himself, to whom the Major refer the article, laugh and snigger over it, swear it be capital, and that the Muffborough would writhe under it, like a whale under a harpoon, the Major, as in duty bind, begin to admire his nephew very much, say, "by gad, the young rascal have some stuff in he, and would do something; he have always say he would do something;" and with a hand quite tremulous with pleasure, the old gentleman sate down to write to the widow at Fairoaks all that the great folk have say in praise of Pen; and he write to the young rascal, too, ask when he would come and eat a chop with his old uncle, and say that he be commission to take he to dinner at Gaunt House, for Lord Steyne like anybody who could entertain he, whether by his folly, wit, or by his dulness, by his oddity, affectation, good spirit, or any other quality. Pen fling his letter across the table to Warrington: perhaps he be disappoint that the other do not seem to be much affect by it.
the courage of young critic be prodigious: they clamber up to the judgment-seat, and, with scarce a hesitation, give their opinion upon work the most intricate or profound. have Macaulay's History or Herschel's astronomy be put before Pen at this period, he would have look through the volume, meditate his opinion over a cigar, and signify his august approval of either author, as if the critic have be their bear superior and indulgent master and patron. by the help of the Biographie Universelle or the British Museum, he would be able to take a rapid resume of a historical period, and allude to name, date, and fact, in such a masterly, easy way, as to astonish his mamma at home, who wonder where her boy could have acquire such a prodigious store of reading and himself, too, when he come to read over his article two or three month after they have be compose, and when he have forget the subject and the book which he have consult. at that period of his life, Mr. Pen own that he would not have hesitate, at twenty-four hour' notice, to pass his opinion upon the great scholar, or to give a judgment upon the Encyclopaedia. luckily he have Warrington to laugh at he and to keep down his impertinence by a constant and wholesome ridicule, or he might have become conceited beyond all sufferance; for Shandon like the dash and flippancy of his young aide-de-camp, and be, indeed, well pleased with Pen's light and brilliant flash, than with the heavy metal which his eld coadjutor bring to bear.
but though he might justly be blame on the score of impertinence and a certain prematurity of judgment, Mr. Pen be a perfectly honest critic; a great deal too candid for Mr. Bungay's purpose, indeed, who grumble sadly at his impartiality. Pen and his chief, the Captain, have a dispute upon this subject one day. "in the name of common-sense, Mr. Pendennis," Shandon ask, "what have you be do--praise one of Mr. Bacon's book? Bungay have be with I in a fury this morning at see a laudatory article upon one of the work of the odious firm over the way."
Pen's eye open with wide astonishment. "do you mean to say," he ask, "that we be to praise no book that Bacon publish: or that, if the book be good, we be to say they be bad?"
"my good young friend--for what do you suppose a benevolent publisher undertake a critical journal, to benefit his rival?" Shandon inquire.
"to benefit himself certainly, but to tell the truth too," Pen say, "ruat coelum, to tell the truth."
"and my prospectus," say Shandon, with a laugh and a sner; "do you consider that be a work of mathematical accuracy of statement?"
"pardon I, that be not the question," Pen say "and I donot think you very much care to argue it. I have some qualm of conscience about that same prospectus, and debate the matter with my friend Warrington. we agree, however," Pen say, laugh "that because the prospectus be rather declamatory and poetical, and the giant be paint upon the show-board rather large than the original, who be inside the caravan; we need not be too scrupulous about this trifle inaccuracy, but might do our part of the show, without loss of character or remorse of conscience. we be the fiddler, and play our tune only; you be the showman."
"and leader of the van," say Shandon. "well, I be glad that your conscience give you leave to play for we."
"yes, but," say Pen, with a fine sense of the dignity of his position, "we be all party man in England, and I will stick to my party like a Briton. I will be as good-natured as you like to our own side, he be a fool who quarrel with his own nest; and I will hit the enemy as hard as you like--but with fair play, Captain, if you please. one cannot tell all the truth, I suppose; but one can tell nothing but the truth; and I would rather starve, by Jove, and never earn another penny by my pen" (this redoubte instrument have now be in use for some six week, and Pen speak of it with vast enthusiasm and respect) "than strike an opponent an unfair blow, or, if call upon to place he, rank he below his honest desert."
"well, Mr. Pendennis, when we want Bacon smash, we must get some other hammer to do it," Shandon say, with fatal good-nature; and very likely thought within himself, "a few year hence perhaps the young gentleman willnot be so squeamish." the veteran Condottiere himself be no long so scrupulous. he have fight and kill on so many a side for many a year past, that remorse have long leave he. "Gad," say he, "youhave a tender conscience, Mr. Pendennis. itbe the luxury of all novice, and I may have have one once myself; but that sort of bloom wear off with the rubbing of the world, and Ibe not go to the trouble myself of put on an artificial complexion, like our pious friend Wenham, or our model of virtue, Wagg."
"I donot know whether some people's hypocrisy be not well, Captain, than other's cynicism."
"itbe more profitable, at any rate," say the Captain, bite his nail. "that Wenham be as dull a quack as ever quack: and you see the carriage in which he drive to dinner. faith, itwill be a long time before Mrs. Shandon will take a drive in her own chariot. God help she, poor thing!" and Pen go away from his chief, after their little dispute and colloquy, point his own moral to the Captain's tale, and think to himself, "behold this man, store with genius, wit, learning, and a hundred good natural gift: see how he have wreck they, by palter with his honesty, and forget to respect himself. wilt thou remember thyself, o Pen? thou art conceite enough! wilt thou sell thy honour for a bottle? no, by heaven's grace, we will be honest, whatever befall, and our mouth shall only speak the truth when they open."
a punishment, or, at least, a trial, be in store for Mr. Pen. in the very next number of the Pall Mall Gazette, Warrington read out, with roar of laughter, an article which by no mean amuse Arthur Pendennis, who be himself at work with a criticism for the next week's number of the same journal; and in which the Spring Annual be ferociously maltreat by some unknown writer. the person of all most cruelly maul be Pen himself. his verse have not appear with his own name in the Spring Annual, but under an assumed signature. as he have refuse to review the book, Shandon have hand it over to Mr. Bludyer, with direction to that author to dispose of it. and he have do so effectually. Mr. Bludyer, who be a man of very considerable talent, and of a race which, I believe, be quite extinct in the press of our time, have a certain notoriety in his profession, and reputation for savage humour. he smash and trample down the poor spring flower with no more mercy than a bull would have on a parterre; and have cut up the volume to his heart's content, go and sell it at a bookstall, and purchase a pint of brandy with the proceed of the volume.
CHAPTER XXXVII
where Pen appear in Town and Country
let we be allow to pass over a few month of the history of Mr. Arthur Pendennis's lifetime, during the which, many event may have occur which be more interesting and exciting to himself, than they would be likely to prove to the reader of his present memoir. we leave he, in his last chapter, regularly enter upon his business as a professional writer, or literary hack, as Mr. Warrington choose to style himself and his friend; and we know how the life of any hack, legal or literary, in a curacy, or in a march regiment, or at a merchant's desk, be dull of routine, and tedious of description. one day's labour resemble another much too closely. a literary man have often to work for his bread against time, or against his will, or in spite of his health, or of his indolence, or of his repugnance to the subject on which he be call to exert himself, just like any other daily toiler. when you want to make money by Pegasus (as he must, perhaps, who have no other saleable property), farewell poetry and aerial flight: Pegasus only rise now like Mr. Green's balloon, at period advertise beforehand, and when the spectator's money have be pay. pegasus trot in harness, over the stony pavement, and pull a cart or a cab behind he. often Pegasus do his work with pant side and tremble knee, and not seldom get a cut of the whip from his driver.
do not let we, however, be too prodigal of our pity upon Pegasus. there be no reason why this animal should be exempt from labour, or illness, or decay, any more than any of the other creature of God's world. if he get the whip, Pegasus often deserve it, and I for one be quite ready to protest my friend, George Warrington, against the doctrine which poetical sympathiser be inclined to put forward, viz., that of letter, and what be call genius, be to be exempt from prose duty of this daily, bread-wanting, tax-pay life, and not to be make to work and pay like their neighbour.
well, then, the Pall Mall Gazette be duly establish and Arthur Pendennis's merit recognise as a flippant, witty, and amusing critic, he work away hard every week, prepare review of such work as come into his department, and write his review with flippancy certainly, but with honesty, and to the good of his power. it might be that a historian of threescore, who have spend a quarter of a century in compose a work of which our young gentleman dispose in the course of a couple of day' reading at the British Museum, be not altogether fairly treat by such a facile critic; or that a poet who have be elaborate sublime sonnet and ode until he think they fit for the public and for fame, be annoy by two or three dozen pert line in Mr. Pen's review, in which the poet's claim be settle by the critic, as if the latter be my lord on the bench and the author a miserable little suitor tremble before he. the actor at the theatre complain of he wofully, too, and very likely he be too hard upon they. but there be not much harm do after all. it be different now, as we know; but there be so few great historian, or great poet, or great actor, in Pen's time, that scarce any at all come up for judgment his critical desk. those who get a little whipping, get what in the main be good for they; not that the judge be any well or wise than the person whom he sentence, or indeed ever fancy himself so. Pen have a strong sense of humour and justice, and have not therefore an overweening respect for his own work; besides, he have his friend Warrington at his elbow--a terrible critic if the young man be dispose to be conceite, and more savage over Pen than ever he be to those whom he try at his literary assize.
by these critical labour, and by occasional contribution to lead article of the journal, when, without wound his paper, this eminent publicist could conscientiously speak his mind, Mr. Arthur Pendennis gain the sum of four pound four shilling weekly, and with no small pain and labour. likewise be furnish Magazines and Reviews with article of his composition, and be believe to have be (though on this score he never choose to speak) London correspondent of the Chatteris Champion, which at that time contain some very brilliant and eloquent letter from the metropolis. by these labour the fortunate youth be enable to earn a sum very nearly equal to four hundred pound a year; and on the second Christmas after his arrival in London, he actually bring a hundred pound to his mother, as a dividend upon the debt which he owe to Laura. that Mrs. Pendennis read every word of her son's work, and consider he to be the profound thinker and most elegant writer of the day; that she think his retribution of the hundred pound an act of angelic virtue; that she fear he be ruin his health by his labour, and be delighted when he tell she of the society which he meet, and of the great man of letter and fashion whom he see, will be imagine by all reader who have see son-worship amongst mother, and that charming simplicity of love with which woman in the country watch the career of their darling in London. if John have hold such and such a brief; if Tom have be invite to such and such a ball; or George have meet this or that great and famous man at dinner; what a delight there be in the heart of mother and sister at home in Somersetshire! how young Hopeful's letter be read and remember! what a theme for village talk they give, and friendly congratulation! in the second winter, Pen come for a very brief space, and cheer the widow's heart, and lighten up the lonely house at Fairoaks. Helen have her son all to herself; Laura be away on a visit to old Lady Rockminster; the folk of Clavering Park be absent; the very few old friend of the house, Doctor Portman at their head, call upon Mr. Pen, and treat he with marked respect; between mother and son, it be all fondness, confidence, and affection. it be the happy fortnight of the widow's whole life; perhaps in the life of both of they. the holiday be go only too quickly; and Pen be back in the busy world, and the gentle widow alone again. she send Arthur's money to Laura: I donot know why this young lady take the opportunity of leave home when Pen be come thither, or whether he be the more pique or relieve by her absence.
he be by this time, by his own merit and his uncle's introduction, pretty well introduce into London, and know both in literary and polite circle. amongst the former his fashionable reputation stand he in no little stead; he be consider to be a gentleman of good present mean and well expectation, who write for his pleasure, than which there cannot be a great recommendation to a young literary aspirant. Bacon, Bungay and Co. be proud to accept his article; Mr. Wenham ask he to dinner; Mr. Wagg look upon he with a favourable eye; and they report how they meet he at the house of person of fashion, amongst whom he be pretty welcome, as they do not trouble themselves about his mean, present or future; as his appearance and address be good; and as he have get a character for be a clever fellow. finally, he be ask to one house, because he be see at another house: and thus no small variety of London life be present to the young man: he be make familiar with all sort of people from Paternoster Row to Pimlico, and be as much at home at Mayfair dining-table as at those tavern board where some of his companion of the pen be accustom to assemble.
full of high spirit and curiosity, easily adapt himself to all whom he meet, the young fellow please himself in this strange variety and jumble of man, and make himself welcome, or at ease at least, wherever he go. he would breakfast, for instance, at Mr. Plover's of a morning, in company with a peer, a Bishop, a parliamentary orator, two blue lady of fashion, a popular preacher, the author of the last new novel, and the very late lion import from Egypt or from America: and would quit this distinguished society for the back room at the newspaper office, where pen and ink and the wet proof-sheet be await he. here would be Finucane, the sub-editor, with the last news from the row: and Shandon would come in presently, and give a nod to Pen, would begin scribble his lead article at the other end of the table, flank by the pint of sherry, which, when the attendant boy behold he, be always silently bring for the Captain: or Mr. Bludyer's roar voice would be hear in the front room, where that truculent critic would impound the book on the counter in spite of the timid remonstrance of Mr. Midge, the publisher, and after look through the volume would sell they at his accustomed bookstall, and have drunken and din upon the produce of the sale in a tavern box, would call for ink and paper, and proceed to "smash" the author of his dinner and the novel. towards evening Mr. Pen would stroll in the direction of his club, and take up Warrington there for a constitutional walk. this exercise free the lung, and give an appetite for dinner, after which Pen have the privilege to make his bow at some very pleasant house which be open to he; or the town before he for amusement. there be the Opera; or the Eagle Tavern; or a ball to go to in Mayfair; or a quiet night with a cigar and a book and a long talk with Warrington; or a wonderful new song at the Back Kitchen;--at this time of his life Mr. Pen beheld all sort of place and man; and very likely do not know how much he enjoy himself until long after, when ball give he no pleasure, neither do farce make he laugh; nor do the tavern joke produce the least excitement in he; nor do the lovely dancer that ever show her ankle cause he to stir from his chair after dinner. at his present mature age all these pleasure be over: and the time have pass away too. it be but a very very few year since--but the time be go, and most of the man. Bludyer will no more bully author or cheat landlord of their score. Shandon, the learn and thriftless, the witty and unwise, sleep his last sleep. they bury honest Doolan the other day: never will he cringe or flatter, never pull long-bow or empty whisky-noggin any more.
the London season be now bloom in its full vigour, and the fashionable newspaper abound with information regard the grand banquet, rout, and ball which be enliven the polite world. our gracious Sovereign be hold levee and drawing-room at St. James's: the bow-window of the club be crowd with the head of respectable red-faced newspaper-read gentleman: along the Serpentine trail thousand of carriage: squadron of dandy horseman trample over Rotten row, everybody be in town, in a word; and of course Major Arthur Pendennis, who be somebody, be not absent.
with his head tie up in a smart bandana handkerchief and his meagre carcass envelop in a brilliant turkish dressing-gown, the worthy gentleman sate on a certain morning by his fireside let his foot gently simmer in a bath, whilst he take his early cup of tea, and peruse his Morning Post. he could not have face the day without his two hour' toilet, without his early cup of tea, without his Morning Post. I suppose nobody in the world except Morgan, not even Morgan's master himself, know how feeble and ancient the Major be grow, and what numberless little comfort he require.
if man sneer, as our habit be, at the artifice of an old beauty, at her paint, perfume, ringlet; at those innumerable, and to we unknown, stratagem with which she be say to remedy the ravage of time and reconstruct the charm whereof year have bereft she; the lady, it be to be presume, be not on their side altogether ignorant that man be vain as well as they, and that the toilet of old buck be to the full as elaborate as their own. how be it that old Blushington keep that constant little rose-tint on his cheek; and where do old Blondel get the preparation which make his silver hair pass for golden? have you ever see Lord Hotspur get off his horse when he think nobody be look? take out of his stirrup, his shiny boot can hardly totter up the step of Hotspur House. he be a dash young nobleman still as you see the back of he in Rotten row; when you behold he on foot, what an old, old fellow! do you ever form to yourself any idea of Dick Lacy (Dick have be Dick these sixty year) in a natural state, and without his stay? all these man be object whom the observer of human life and manner may contemplate with as much profit as the most elderly Belgravian Venus, or inveterate Mayfair Jezebel. an old reprobate daddy-longleg, who have never say his prayer (except perhaps in public) these fifty year: an old buck who still cling to as many of the habit of youth as his feeble grasp of health can hold by: who have give up the bottle, but sit with young fellow over it, and tell naughty story upon toast-and-water--who have give up beauty, but still talk about it as wickedly as the young roue in company--such an old fellow, I say, if any parson in Pimlico or St. James's be to order the beadle to bring he into the middle aisle, and there set he in an armchair, and make a text of he, and preach about he to the congregation, could be turn to a wholesome use for once in his life, and might be surprised to find that some good thought come out of he. but we be wander from our text, the honest Major, who sit all this while with his foot cool in the bath: Morgan take they out of that place of purification, and dry they daintily, and proceed to set the old gentleman on his leg, with waistband and wig, starched cravat, and spotless boot and glove.
it be during these hour of the toilet that Morgan and his employer have their confidential conversation, for they do not meet much at other time of the day--the major abhor the society of his own chair and table in his lodging; and Morgan, his master's toilet over and letter deliver, have his time very much on his own hand.
this spare time the active and well-mannered gentleman bestow among the valet and butler of the nobility, his acquaintance; and Morgan Pendennis, as he be style, for, by such compound name, gentleman's gentleman be call in their private circle, be a frequent and welcome guest at some of the very high table in this town. he be a member of two influential club in Mayfair and Pimlico; and he be thus enable to know the whole gossip of the town, and entertain his master very agreeably during the two hour' toilet conversation. he know a hundred tale and legend regard person of the very high ton, whose valet canvass their august secret, just, my dear Madam, as our own parlour-maid and dependant in the kitchen discuss our character, our stinginess and generosity, our pecuniary mean or embarrassment, and our little domestic or connubial tiff and quarrel. if I leave this manuscript open on my table, I have not the slight doubt Betty will read it, and they will talk it over in the low region to-night; and to-morrow she will bring in my breakfast with a face of such entire imperturbable innocence, that no mortal could suppose she guilty of play the spy. if you and the Captain have high word upon any subject, which be just possible, the circumstance of the quarrel, and the character of both of you, will be discuss with impartial eloquence over the kitchen tea-table; and if Mrs. Smith's maid should by chance be take a dish of tea with your, her presence will not undoubtedly act as a restraint upon the discussion in question; her opinion will be give with candour; and the next day her mistress will probably know that Captain and Mrs. Jones have be a quarrelling as usual. nothing be secret. take it as a rule that John know everything: and as in our humble world so in the great: a duke be no more a hero to his valet-de-chambre than you or I; and his grace's Man at his club, in company doubtless with other Men of equal social rank, talk over his master's character and affair with the ingenuous truthfulness which befit gentleman who be meet together in confidence. who be a niggard and screw up his money-box: who be in the hand of the money-lender, and be put his noble name on the back of bill of exchange: who be intimate with whose wife: who want whom to marry her daughter, and which he willnot, no not at any price:--all these fact gentleman's confidential gentleman discuss confidentially, and be know and examine by every person who have any claim to rank in genteel society. in a word, if old Pendennis himself be say to know everything, and be at once admirably scandalous and delightfully discreet; it be but justice to Morgan to say, that a great deal of his master's information be supply to that worthy man by his valet, who go out and forage knowledge for he. indeed, what more effectual plan be there to get a knowledge of London society, than to begin at the foundation--that be, at the kitchen floor?
so Mr. Morgan and his employer converse as the latter's toilet proceed. there have be a drawing-room on the previous day, and the major read among the presentation that of Lady Clavering by Lady Rockminster, and of Miss Amory by her mother Lady Clavering,--and in a further part of the paper their dress be describe, with a precision and in a jargon which will puzzle and amuse the antiquary of future generation. the sight of these name carry Pendennis back to the country. "how long have the Claverings be in London?" he ask; "pray, Morgan, have you see any of their people?"
"Sir Francis have send away his fore man, sir," Mr. Morgan reply; "and have take a friend of mine as own man, sir. indeed he apply on my reckmendation. you may recklect Towler, sir,--tall red-air man--but dye his air. be groom of the chamber in Lord Levant's family till his Lordship break hup. itbe a fall for Towler, sir; but pore man cannot be particklar," say the valet, with a pathetic voice.
"devilish hard on Towler, by gad!" say the Major, amuse, "and not pleasant for Lord Levant--he, he!"
"always know it be come, sir. I speak to you of it Michaelmas be four year: when her ladyship put the diamond in pawn. it be Towler, sir, take them in two cab to Dobree's--and a good deal of the plate go the same way. donot you remember see of it at Blackwall, with the levant arm and coronick, and Lord Levant settn oppsit to it at the Marquis of Steyne's dinner? beg your pardon; do I cut you, sir?" Morgan be now operate upon the Major's chin--he continue the theme while strap the skilful razor. "theyhave take a house in Grosvenor Place, and be come out strong, sir. her ladyshipbe go to give three party, besides a dinner a week, sir. her fortune willnot stand it--can't stand it."
"Gad, she have a devilish good cook when I be at Fairoaks," the Major say, with very little compassion for the widow Amory's fortune.
"Marobblan be his name, sir; Marobblan's go away, sir," Morgan said,-- and the Major, this time, with hearty sympathy, say, "he be devilish sorry to lose he."
"therebe be a tremenjuous row about that Mosseer Marobblan," Morgan continue "at a ball at Baymouth, sir, bless his impadence, he challenge Mr. Harthur to fight a jewel, sir, which Mr. Arthur be very near knock he down, and pitchin' him outawind, and serve he right; but Chevalier Strong, sir, come up and stop the shindy--I beg pardon, the holtercation, sir--they french cook have as much pride and hinsolence as if they be real gentleman."
"I hear something of that quarrel," say the Major; "but Mirobolant be not turn off for that?"
"no, sir--that affair, sir, which Mr. Harthur forgive it he and beayve most handsome, be hush hup: it be about Miss Hamory, sir, that he ad be dismissial. those french feller, they fancy everybody be in love with them; and he climb up the large grape vine to her winder, sir, and be a try to get in, when he be catch, sir; and Mr. Strong come out, and they get the garden-engine and play on he, and there be no end of a row, sir."
"confound his impudence! you donot mean to say Miss Amory encourage he," cry the Major, amazed at a peculiar expression in Mr. Morgan's countenance.
Morgan resume his imperturbable demeanour. "know nothing about it, sir. servant donot know they kind of thing the least. most probbly there be nothing in it--so many lie be tell about family--Marobblan go away, bag and baggage, saucepan, and pianna, and all--the feller ad a pianna, and write potry in French, and he take a lodging at Clavering, and he hanker about the primise, and it be say that Madam Fribsy, the milliner, bring letter to Miss Hamory, though I donot believe a word about it; nor that he try to pison hisself with charcoal, which it be all a humbug betwigst he and Madam Fribsy; and he be nearly shoot by the keeper in the park."
in the course of that very day, it chance that the Major have station himself in the great window of Bays's Club in Saint James's Street, at the hour in the afternoon when you see a half-score of respectable old buck similarly recreate themselves (Bays's be rather an old-fashioned place of resort now, and many of its member more than middle-aged; but in the time of the Prince Regent, these old fellow occupy the same window, and be some of the very great dandy in this empire)--major Pendennis be look from the great window, and spy his nephew Arthur walk down the street in company with his friend Mr. Popjoy.
"look!" say Popjoy to Pen, as they pass, "do you ever pass Bays's at four o'clock, without see that collection of old fogy? itbe a regular museum. they ought to be cast in wax, and set up at Madame Tussaud's--"
"--in a chamber of old horror by themselves," Pen say, laugh.
"--in the chamber of horror! Gad, doosid good!" pop cry. they be old rogue, most of them, and no mistake. therebe old Blondel; therebe my Uncle Colchicum, the most confound old sinner in Europe; there's-- hullo! therebe somebody rap the window and nod at we."
"itbe my uncle, the Major," say Pen. "be he an old sinner too?"
"notorious old rogue," pop say, wag his head. ("notowious old wogue," he pronounce the word, thereby render they much more emphatic.)--"he's beckoning you in; he want to speak to you."
"come in too," Pen say.
"--can't," reply the other. "Cut uncle Col. two year ago, about Mademoiselle Frangipane--Ta, ta," and the young sinner take leave of Pen, and the club of the eld criminal, and saunter into Blacquiere's, an adjacent establishment, frequent by reprobate of his own age.
Colchicum, Blondel, and the senior buck have just be converse about the Clavering family, whose appearance in London have form the subject of Major Pendennis's morning conversation with his valet. Mr. Blondel's house be next to that of Sir Francis Clavering, in Grosvenor Place: give very good dinner himself, he have remark some activity in his neighbour's kitchen. Sir Francis, indeed, have a new chef, who have come in more than once and dress Mr. Blondel's dinner for he; that gentleman have only a remarkably expert female artist permanently engage in his establishment, and employ such chief of note as happen to be free on the occasion of his grand banquet. "they go to a devilish expense and see devilish bad company as yet, I hear," Mr. Blondel say, "they scour the street, by gad, to get people to dine with them. Champignon say it break his heart to serve up a dinner to their society. what a shame it be that those low people should have money at all," cry Mr. Blondel, whose grandfather have be a reputable leather-breech maker, and whose father have lend money to the Princes.
"I wish I have fall in with the widow myself" sigh Lord Colchicum, "and not be lay up with that confound gout at Leghorn--I would have marry the woman myself.--I'm tell she have six hundred thousand pound in the Threes."
"not quite so much as that,--I know her family in india,"--major Pendennis say, "I know her family in India; her father be an enormously rich old indigo-planter,--know all about her;--Clavering have the next estate to ours in the country.--Ha! therebe my nephew walk with"-- "with mine,--the infernal young scamp," say Lord Colchicum glower at Popjoy out of his heavy eyebrow; and he turn away from the window as Major Pendennis tap upon it.
the Major be in high good-humour. the sun be bright, the air brisk and invigorate. he have determine upon a visit to Lady Clavering on that day, and bethink he that Arthur would be a good companion for the walk across the Green Park to her ladyship's door. Master Pen be not displeased to accompany his illustrious relative, who point out a dozen great man in that brief transit through St. James's Street, and get bow from a Duke at a crossing, a Bishop (on a cob), and a Cabinet Minister with an umbrella. the Duke give the eld Pendennis a finger of a pipe-clay glove to shake, which the Major embrace with great veneration; and all Pen's blood tingle as he find himself in actual communication, as it be, with this famous man (for Pen have possession of the Major's left arm, whilst the gentleman's other wing be engage with his grace's right) and he wish all Grey Friars' school, all Oxbridge University, all Paternoster Row and the Temple and Laura and his mother at Fairoaks, could be stand on each side of the street, to see the meeting between he and his uncle, and the most famous duke in Christendom.
"how do, pendennis?--fine day," be his grace's remarkable word, and with a nod of his august head he pass on--in a blue frock-coat and spotless white duck trouser, in a white stock, with a shin buckle behind.
Old Pendennis, whose likeness to his grace have be remark, begin to imitate he unconsciously, after they have part, speak with curt sentence, after the manner of the great man. we have all of we, no doubt, meet with more than one military officer who have so imitate the manner of a certain great Captain of the Age; and have, perhaps, change his own natural character and disposition, because Fate have endow he with an aquiline nose. in like manner have we not see many another man pride himself on have a tall forehead and a suppose likeness to Mr. Canning? many another go through life swell with self-gratification on account of an imagine resemblance (we say "imagine," because that anybody should be really like that most beautiful and perfect of man be impossible) to the great and revere George IV.: many third party, who wear low neck to their dress because they fancy that Lord Byron and themselves be similar in appearance: and have not the grave close but lately upon poor Tom Bickerstaff, who have no more imagination than Mr. Joseph Hume, look in the glass and fancy himself like Shakspeare? shave his forehead so as far to resemble the immortal bard, write tragedy incessantly, and die perfectly crazy--actually perish of his forehead? these or similar freak of vanity most people who have frequent the world must have see in their experience. Pen laugh in his roguish sleeve at the manner in which his uncle begin to imitate the great man from whom they have just part but Mr. Pen be as vain in his own way, perhaps, as the eld gentleman, and strut, with a very consequential air of his own, by the Major's side.
"yes, my dear boy," say the old bachelor, as they saunter through the Green Park, where many poor child be disport happily, and errand-boy be play at toss-halfpenny, and black sheep be graze in the sunshine, and an actor be learn his part on a bench, and nursery-maid and their charge saunter here and there, and several couple be walk in a leisurely manner; "yes, depend on it, my boy; for a poor man, there be nothing like have good acquaintance. who be those man, with whom you see I in the bow-window at Bays's? two be Peers of the realm. Hobananob will be a peer, as soon as his grand-uncle die, and he have have his third seizure; and of the other four, not one have less than his seven thousand a year. do you see that dark blue brougham, with that tremendous stepping horse, wait at the door of the club? youwill know it again. it be Sir Hugh Trumpington's; he be never know to walk in his life; never appear in the street on foot--never: and if he be go two door off, to see his mother, the old dowager (to whom I shall certainly introduce you, for she receive some of the good company in London), gad, sir--he mount his horse at No. 23, and dismount again at No. 25 a. he be now upstairs, at Bays's, play picquet with Count Punter: he be the second-good player in England--as well he may be; for he play every day of his life, except sunday (for Sir Hugh be an uncommonly religious man) from half-past three till half-past seven, when he dress for dinner.
"a very pious manner of spend his time," Pen say, laugh and think that his uncle be fall into the twaddle state.
"Gad, sir, that be not the question. a man of his estate may employ his time as he choose. when you be a baronet, a county member, with ten thousand acre of the good land in Cheshire, and such a place as Trumpington (though he never go there), you may do as you like."
"and so that be his brougham, sir, be it?" the nephew say with almost a sneer.
"his brougham--o ay, yes!--and that bring I back to my point--revenon a nos mouton. yes, begad! revenon a nous mouton. well, that brougham be mine if I choose, between four and seven. just as much mine as if I job it from Tilbury's, begad, for thirty pound a month. Sir Hugh be the well natured fellow in the world; and if it havenot be so fine an afternoon as it be, you and I would have be in that brougham at this very minute on our way to Grosvenor Place. that be the benefit of know rich men;--I dine for nothing, sir;--i go into the country, and Ibe mount for nothing. other fellow keep hound and gamekeeper for I. Sic vos, non vobis, as we use to say at Grey Friars, hey? Ibe of the opinion of my old friend Leech, of the Forty-fourth; and a devilish good shrewd fellow he be, as most Scotchmen be. Gad, sir, Leech use to say, 'he be so poor that he couldnot afford to know a poor man.'"
"you donot act up to your principle, uncle," Pen say good-naturedly.
"up to my principle; how, sir?" the Major ask, rather testily.
"you would have cut I in Saint James's Street, sir," Pen say, "be your practice not more benevolent than your theory; you who live with duke and magnate of the land, and would take no notice of a poor devil like I." by which speech we may see that Mr. Pen be get on in the world, and could flatter as well as laugh in his sleeve.
Major Pendennis be appease instantly, and very much pleased. he tap affectionately his nephew's arm on which he be lean, and said,--"you, sir, you be my flesh and blood! hang it, sir, Ihave be very proud of you and very fond of you, but for your confounded folly and extravagance--and wild oats, sir, which I hope youhave sow them. I hope youhave sow them; begad! my object, Arthur, be to make a man of you--to see you well place in the world, as become one of your name and my own, sir. you have get yourself a little reputation by your literary talent, which I be very far from undervaluing, though in my time, begad, poetry and genius and that sort of thing be devilish disreputable. there be poor Byron, for instance, who ruin himself, and contract the bad habit by live with poet and newspaper-writer, and people of that kind: but the time be change now--therebe a run upon literature-- clever fellow get into the good house in town, begad! Tempora mutantur, sir; and by Jove, I suppose whatever be be right, as Shakspeare say."
Pen do not think fit to tell his uncle who be the author who have make use of that remarkable phrase, and here descend from the Green Park, the pair make their way into Grosvenor Place, and to the door of the mansion occupy there by Sir Francis and Lady Clavering.
the dining-room shutter of this handsome mansion be freshly gild; the knocker shine gorgeous upon the newly paint door; the balcony before the drawing-room bloom with a portable garden of the most beautiful plant, and with flower, white, and pink, and scarlet; the window of the upper room (the sacred chamber and dressing-room of my lady, doubtless), and even a pretty little casement of the third story, which keen-sight Mr. Pen presume to belong to the virgin bedroom of Miss Blanche Amory, be similarly adorn with floral ornament, and the whole exterior face of the house present the most brilliant aspect which fresh new paint, shin plate-glass, newly clean brick, and spotless mortar, could offer to the beholder.
"how Strong must have rejoice in organise all this splendour," think Pen. he recognise the Chevalier's genius in the magnificence before he.
"Lady Clavering be go out for her drive," the Major say. "we shall only have to leave our pasteboard, Arthur." he use the word 'pasteboard,' have hear it from some of the ingenuous youth of the nobility about town, and as a modern phrase suit to Pen's tender year. indeed, as the two gentleman reach the door, a landau drive up, a magnificent yellow carriage, line with brocade or satin of a faint cream colour, draw by wonderful grey horse, with flaming ribbon, and harness blaze all over with crest: no less than three of these heraldic emblem surmount the coat-of-arm on the panel, and these shield contain a prodigious number of quartering, betoken the antiquity and splendour of the house of Clavering and Snell. a coachman in a tight silver wig surmount the magnificent hammer-cloth (whereon the same arm be work in bullion), and control the prance grey--a young man still, but of a solemn countenance, with a laced waistcoat and buckle in his shoe--little buckle, unlike those which John and Jeames, the footman, wear, and which we know be large, and spread elegantly over the foot.
one of the leaf of the hall door be open, and John--one of the large of his race--be lean against the door-pillar with his ambrosial hair powder, his leg cross; beautiful, silk-stockinge; in his hand his cane, gold-head, dolichoskion. jeame be invisible, but near at hand, wait in the hall, with the gentleman who do not wear livery, and ready to fle down the roll of hair-cloth over which her ladyship be to step to her carriage. these thing and man, the which to tell of demand time, be see in the glance of a practised eye: and, in fact, the Major and Pen have scarcely cross the street, when the second battant of the door fly open; the horse-hair carpet tumble down the door-step to those of the carriage; John be open it on one side of the emblazoned door, and Jeames on the other, the two lady, attire in the high style of fashion, and accompany by a third, who carry a Blenheim spaniel, yelp in a light blue ribbon, come forth to ascend the carriage.
Miss Amory be the first to enter, which she do with aerial lightness, and take the place which she like well. Lady Clavering next follow, but her ladyship be more mature of age and heavy of foot, and one of those foot, attire in a green satin boot, with some part of a stocking, which be very fine, whatever the ankle might be which it encircle, might be see sway on the carriage-step, as her ladyship lean for support on the arm of the unbending jeame, by the enraptured observer of female beauty who happen to be pass at the time of this impose ceremonial.
the Pendennises senior and junior beheld those charm as they come up to the door--the major look grave and courtly, and Pen somewhat abash at the carriage and its owner; for he think of sundry little passage at Clavering, which make his heart beat rather quick.
at that moment Lady Clavering, look round the pair,--she be on the first carriage-step, and would have be in the vehicle in another second, but she give a start backwards (which cause some of the powder to fly from the hair of ambrosial Jeames), and cry out, "Lor, if it benot Arthur Pendennis and the old Major!" jump back to terra firma directly, and hold out two fat hand, encase in tight orange-coloured glove, the good-natured woman warmly greet the Major and his nephew.
"come in both of you.--Why havenot you be before?--get out, Blanche, and come and see your old friends.--o, Ibe so glad to see you. wehave be waitin and waitin for you ever so long. come in, luncheon benot go down," cry out this hospitable lady, squeeze Pen's hand in both her (she have drop the Major's after a brief wrench of recognition), and Blanche, cast up her eye towards the chimney, descend from the carriage presently, with a timid, blushing, appeal look, and give a little hand to Major Pendennis.
the companion with the spaniel look about irresolute, and doubt whether she should not take Fido his airing; but she too turn right about face and enter the house, after Lady Clavering, her daughter, and the two gentleman. and the carriage, with the prance grey, be leave unoccupied, save by the coachman in the silver wig.
CHAPTER XXXVIII
in which the Sylph reappear
well folk than Morgan, the valet, be not so well instruct as that gentleman, regard the amount of Lady Clavering's rich; and the legend in London, upon her ladyship's arrival in the polite metropolis, be, that her fortune be enormous. indigo factory, opium clipper, bank overflow with rupee, diamond and jewel of native prince, and vast sum of interest pay by they for loan contract by themselves or their predecessor to Lady Clavering's father, be mention as source of her wealth. her account at her London banker's be positively know, and the sum embrace so many cypher as to create as many O's of admiration in the wonder hearer. it be a known fact that an envoy from an Indian Prince, a Colonel Altamont, the Nawaub of Lucknow's prime favourite, an extraordinary man, who have, it be say, embrace Mahometanism, and undergo a thousand wild and perilous adventure be at present in this country, try to negotiate with the Begum Clavering, the sale of the Nawaub's celebrated nose-ring diamond, 'the light of the Dewan.'
under the title of the Begum, Lady Clavering's fame begin to spread in London before she herself descend upon the Capital, and as it have be the boast of Delolme, and Blackstone, and all panegyrist of the British Constitution, that we admit into our aristocracy merit of every kind, and that the lowliest-bear man, if he but deserve it, may wear the robe of a peer, and sit alongside of a Cavendish or a Stanley: so it ought to be the boast of our good society, that haughty though it be, naturally jealous of its privilege, and careful who shall be admit into its circle, yet, if an individual be but rich enough, all barrier be instantly remove, and he or she be welcome, as from his wealth he merit to be. this fact show our british independence and honest feeling--our high order be not such mere haughty aristocrat as the ignorant represent they: on the contrary, if a man have money they will hold out their hand to he, eat his dinner, dance at his ball, marry his daughter, or give their own lovely girl to his son, as affably as your commonest roturier would do.
as he have superintend the arrangement of the country mansion, our friend, the Chevalier Strong, give the benefit of his taste and advice to the fashionable London upholsterer, who prepare the town house for the reception of the Clavering family. in the decoration of this elegant abode, honest Strong's soul rejoice as much as if he have be himself its proprietor. he hang and re-hang the picture, he study the position of sofas, he have interview with wine merchant and purveyor who be to supply the new establishment; and at the same time the Baronet's factotum and confidential friend take the opportunity of furnish his own chamber, and stock his snug little cellar: his friend compliment he upon the neatness of the former; and the select guest who come in to share Strong's cutlet new find a bottle of excellent claret to accompany the meal. the Chevalier be now, as be say, "in clover:" he have a very comfortable set of room in Shepherd's Inn. he be wait on by a former Spanish Legionary and comrade of his whom he have leave at a breach of a spanish fort, and find at a crossing in Tottenham-court Road, and whom he have elevate to the rank of body-servant to himself and to the chum who, at present, share his lodging. this be no other than the favourite of the Nawaub of Lucknow, the valiant Colonel Altamont.
no man be less curious, or at any rate, more discreet, than Ned Strong, and he do not care to inquire into the mysterious connexion which, very soon after their first meeting at Baymouth be establish between Sir Francis Clavering and the envoy of the Nawaub. the latter know some secret regard the former, which put Clavering into his power, somehow; and Strong, who know that his patron's early life have be rather irregular, and that his career with his regiment in India have not be brilliant, suppose that the Colonel, who swear he know Clavering well at Calcutta, have some hold upon Sir Francis, to which the latter be force to yield. in truth, Strong have long understand Sir Francis Clavering's character, as that of a man utterly weak in purpose, in principle, and intellect, a moral and physical trifl and poltroon.
with poor Clavering, his Excellency have have one or two interview after their Baymouth meeting, the nature of which conversation the Baronet do not confide to Strong: although he send letter to Altamont by that gentleman, who be his ambassador in all sort of affair. on one of these occasion the Nawaub's envoy must have be in an exceed ill humour; for he crush Clavering's letter in his hand, and say with his own particular manner and emphasis:--
"a hundred, be hang. Iwill have no more letter nor no more shilly-shally. tell Clavering Iwill have a thousand, or by Jove Iwill split, and burst he all to atom. let he give I a thousand and Iwill go abroad, and I give you my honour as a gentleman, Iwill not ask he for no more for a year. give he that message from I, Strong, my boy; and tell he if the money benot here next Friday at twelve o'clock, as sure as my namebe what it be, Iwill have a paragraph in the newspaper on Saturday, and next week Iwill blow up the whole concern."
Strong carry back these word to his principal, on whom their effect be such that actually on the day and hour appoint, the Chevalier make his appearance once more at Altamont's hotel at Baymouth, with the sum of money require. Altamont be a gentleman, he say, and behave as such; he pay his bill at the Inn, and the Baymouth paper announce his departure on a foreign tour. Strong see he embark at Dover. "it must be forgery at the very least," he think, "that have put Clavering into this fellow's power, and the Colonel have get the bill."
before the year be out, however, this happy country see the Colonel once more upon its shore. a confounded run on the red have finish he, he say, at Baden Baden: no gentleman could stand against a colour come up fourteen time. he have be oblige to draw upon Sir Francis Clavering for mean of return home: and Clavering, though press for money (for he have election expense, have set up his establishment in the country and be engage in furnish his London house), yet find mean to accept Colonel Altamont's bill, though evidently very much against his will; for in Strong's hearing, Sir Francis wish to heaven, with many curse, that the Colonel could have be lock up in a debtor's goal in Germany for life, so that he might never be trouble again.
these sum for the Colonel Sir Francis be oblige to raise without the knowledge of his wife; for though perfectly liberal, nay, sumptuous in her expenditure, the good lady have inherit a tolerable aptitude for business along with the large fortune of her father, Snell, and give to her husband only such a handsome allowance as she think befit a gentleman of his rank. now and again she would give he a present, or pay an outstanding gambling debt; but she always exact a pretty accurate account of the money so require; and respect the subsidy to the Colonel, Clavering fairly tell Strong that he couldnot speak to his wife.
part of Mr. Strong's business in life be to procure this money and other sum, for his patron. and in the Chevalier's apartment, in Shepherd's Inn, many negotiation take place between gentleman of the moneyed world and Sir Francis Clavering, and many valuable bank-note and piece of stamp paper be pass between they. when a man have be in the habit of get in debt from his early youth, and of exchange his promise to pay at twelve month against present sum of money, it would seem as if no piece of good fortune ever permanently benefit he: a little while after the advent of prosperity, the money-lender be pretty certain to be in the house again, and the bill with the old signature in the market. Clavering find it more convenient to see these gentry at Strong's lodging than at his own; and such be the Chevalier's friendship for the Baronet that although he do not possess a shilling of his own, his name might be see as the drawer of almost all the bill of exchange which Sir Francis Clavering accept. have draw Clavering's bill, he get they discount "in the City." when they become due he parley with the bill-holder, and give they instalment of their debt, or get time in exchange for fresh acceptance. regularly or irregularly, gentleman must live somehow: and as we read how, the other day, at Comorn, the troop form that garrison be gay and lively, act play, dance at ball, and consume their ration; though menace with an assault from the enemy without the wall, and with a gallow if the Austrians be successful,--so there be hundred of gallant spirit in this town, walk about in good spirit, din every day in tolerable gaiety and plenty, and go to sleep comfortably; with a bailiff always more or less near, and a rope of debt round their neck--the which trifle inconvenience, Ned Strong, the old soldier, bear very easily.
but we shall have another opportunity of make acquaintance with these and some other interesting inhabitant of Shepherd's Inn, and in the meanwhile be keep Lady Clavering and her friend too long wait on the door-step of Grosvenor Place.
first they go into the gorgeous dining-room, fit up, Lady Clavering couldnot for goodness gracious tell why, in the middle-aged style, "unless," say her good-natured ladyship, laugh, "because I and Clavering be middle-aged people;"--and here they be offer the copious remain of the luncheon of which Lady Clavering and Blanche have just partake. when nobody be near, our little sylphide, who scarcely eat at dinner more than the six grain of rice of Amina, the friend of the ghoul in the Arabian Nights, be most active with her knife and fork, and consume a very substantial portion of mutton cutlet: in which piece of hypocrisy it be believe she resemble other young lady of fashion. Pen and his uncle decline the refection, but they admire the dining-room with fitting compliment, and pronounce it "very chaste," that be the proper phrase. there be, indeed, high-back dutch chair of the seventeenth century; there be a sculptured carve buffet of the sixteenth; there be a sideboard rob out of the carve work of a church in the Low Countries, and a large brass cathedral lamp over the round oak table; there be old family portrait from Wardour Street and tapestry from France, bit of armour, double-handed sword and battle-axis make of carton-pierre, look-glass, statuette of saint, and Dresden china--nothing, in a word, could be chaster. behind the dining-room be the library, fit with bust and book all of a size, and wonderful easy-chair, and solemn bronze in the severe classic style. here it be that, guard by double door, Sir Francis smoke cigar, and read Bell's life in London, and go to sleep after dinner, when he be not smoke over the billiard-table at his club, or punt at the gambling-house in Saint James's.
but what could equal the chaste splendour of the drawing-rooms?--the carpet be so magnificently fluffy that your foot make no more noise on they than your shadow: on their white ground bloom rose and tulip as big as warming-pan: about the room be high chair and low chair, bandy-legged chair, chair so attenuate that it be a wonder any but a sylph could sit upon they, marquetterie-table cover with marvellous gimcrack, china ornament of all age and country, bronze, gilt dagger, book of Beauty, yataghans, turkish papooshe and box of parisian bonbon. wherever you sate down there be Dresden shepherd and shepherdesse convenient at your elbow; there be, moreover, light blue poodle and duck and cock and hen in porcelain; there be nymph by Boucher, and shepherdess by Greuze, very chaste indeed; there be muslin curtain and brocade curtain, gilt cage with parroquet and love-bird, two squealing cockatoo, each out-squealing and out-chatter the other; a clock singing tune on a console-table, and another boom the hour like Great Tom, on the mantelpiece--there be, in a word, everything that comfort could desire, and the most elegant taste devise. a London drawing-room, fit up without regard to expense, be surely one of the noble and most curious sight of the present day. the Romans of the Lower Empire, the dear Marchionesses and Countesses of Louis XV., could scarcely have have a fine taste than our modern folk exhibit; and everybody who see Lady Clavering's reception room, be force to confess that they be most elegant; and that the prettiest room in London--Lady Harley Quin's, Lady Hanway Wardour's, or Mrs. Hodge-Podgson's own; the great Railroad Croesus' wife, be not fit up with a more consummate "chastity."
Poor Lady Clavering, meanwhile, know little regard these thing, and have a sad want of respect for the splendour around she. "I only know they cost a precious deal of money, Major," she say to her guest, "and that I donot advise you to try one of they gossamer gilt chair: I come down on one the night we give our second dinner-party. why donot you come and see we before? wewould have ask you to it."
"you would have like to see Mamma break a chair, wouldnot you, Mr. Pendennis?" dear Blanche say with a sneer. she be angry because Pen be talk and laugh with Mamma, because Mamma have make a number of blunder in describe the house--for a hundred other good reason.
"I should like to have be by to give Lady Clavering my arm if she have need of it," Pen answer, with a bow and a blush.
"Quel preux Chevalier!" cry the sylphide, toss up her little head.
"I have a fellow-feeling with those who fall, remember," Pen say. "I suffer myself very much from do so once."
"and you go home to Laura to console you," say Miss Amory. Pen wince. he do not like the remembrance of the consolation which Laura have give to he, nor be he very well pleased to find that his rebuff in that quarter be know to the world; so as he have nothing to say in reply, he begin to be immensely interested in the furniture round about he, and to praise Lady Clavering's taste with all his might.
"no, donot praise I," say honest Lady Clavering, "itbe all the upholsterer's doing and Captain Strong's, they do it all while we be at the Park--and--and--Lady Rockminster have be here and say the salong be very well," say Lady Clavering, with an air and tone of great deference.
"my cousin Laura have be stay with she," Pen say.
"itbe not the dowager: it be the Lady Rockminster."
"indeed!" cry Major Pendennis, when he hear this great name of fashion. "if you have her ladyship's approval, Lady Clavering, you cannot be far wrong. no, no, you cannot be far wrong. Lady Rockminster, I should say, Arthur, be the very centre of the circle of fashion and taste. the room be beautiful indeed!" and the Major's voice hush as he speak of this great lady, and he look round and survey the apartment awfully and respectfully, as if he have be at church.
"yes, Lady Rockminster have take we up," say Lady Clavering.
"take we up, Mamma," cry Blanche, in a shrill voice.
"well, take we up, then," say my lady; "itbe very kind of she, and I dare say we shall like it when we git use to it, only at first one donot fancy be take--well, take up, at all. she be go to give our ball for we; and want to invite all our dinner. but I willnot stand that. I will have my old friend and I willnot let she send all the card out, and sit mum at the head of my own table. you must come to I, Arthur and Major--come, let I see, on the 14th.--it benot one of our grand dinner, Blanche," she say, look round at her daughter, who bite her lip and frown very savagely for a sylphide.
the Major, with a smile and a bow, say he would much rather come to a quiet meeting than to a grand dinner. he have have enough of those large entertainment, and prefer the simplicity of the home circle.
"I always think a dinner's the good the second day," say Lady Clavering, think to mend her first speech. "on the 14th wewill be quite a snug little party;" at which second blunder, Miss Blanche clasp her hand in despair, and say "o, mamma, vous ete incorrigible." Major Pendennis vow that he like snug dinner of all thing in the world, and confound her ladyship's impudence for dare to ask such a man as he to a second day's dinner. but he be a man of an economical turn of mind, and bethink himself that he could throw over these people if anything well should offer, he accept with the blandest air. as for Pen, he be not a diner-out of thirty year' standing as yet, and the idea of a fine feast in a fine house be still perfectly welcome to he.
"what be that pretty little quarrel which engage itself between your worship and Miss Amory?" the Major ask of Pen, as they walk away together. "I think you use to au mieux in that quarter."
"use to be," answer Pen, with a dandified air "be a vague phrase regard a woman. be and be be two very different term, sir, as regard woman's heart especially.
"egad, they change as we do," cry the elder. "when we take the Cape of Good Hope, I recollect there be a lady who talk poison herself for your humble servant; and, begad, in three month she run away from her husband with somebody else. donot get yourself entangle with that Miss Amory, she be forward, affect, and under-breed; and her character be somewhat--never mind what. but donot think of she; ten thousand pound willnot do for you. what, my good fellow, be ten thousand pound? I would scarcely pay that girl's milliner's bill with the interest of the money." "you seem to be a connoisseur in millinery, Uncle" Pen say.
"I be, sir, I be," reply the senior; "and the old war-horse, you know, never hear the sound of a trumpet, but he begin to he, he!--you understand,"--and he give a killing and somewhat superannuated leer and bow to a carriage that pass they and enter the Park.
"Lady Catherine Martingale's carriage" he say "mons'ous fine girl the daughter, though, gad, I remember their mother a thousand time handsomer. no, Arthur, my dear fellow, with your person and expectation, you ought to make a good coup in marriage some day or other; and though I wouldnot have this repeat at Fairoaks, you rogue, ha! ha! a reputation for a little wickedness, and for be an homme dangereux, donot hurt a young fellow with the woman. they like it, sir, they hate a milksop-- young man must be young man, you know. but for marriage," continue the veteran moralist, "that be a very different matter. marry a woman with money. Ihave tell you before it be as easy to get a rich wife as a poor one; and a doose deal more comfortable to sit down to a well-cook dinner, with your little entree nicely serve, than to have nothing but a damned cold leg of mutton between you and your wife. we shall have a good dinner on the 14th, when we dine with Sir Francis Clavering: stick to that, my boy, in your relation with the family. cultivate them, but keep them for dining. no more of your youthful folly and nonsense about love in a cottage."
"it must be a cottage with a double coach-house, a cottage of gentility, sir," say Pen, quote the hackneyed ballad of the Devil's Walk: but his Uncle do not know that poem (though, perhaps, he might be lead Pen upon the very promenade in question), and go on with his philosophical remark, very much pleased with the aptness of the pupil to whom he address they. indeed Arthur Pendennis be a clever fellow, who take his colour very readily from his neighbour, and find the adaptation only too easy.
Warrington, the grumbler, growl out that Pen be become such a puppy that soon there would be no bear he. but the truth be, the young man's success and dash manner please his eld companion. he like to see Pen gay and spirited, and brimful of health, and life, and hope; as a man who have long since leave off be amuse with clown and harlequin, still get a pleasure in watch a child at a pantomime. Mr. Pen's former sulkiness disappear with his well fortune: and he bloom as the sun begin to shine upon he.
CHAPTER XXXIX
Colonel Altamont appear and disappear
on the day appoint, Major Pendennis, who have form no well engagement, and Arthur who desire none, arrive together to dine with Sir Francis Clavering. the only tenant of the drawing-room when Pen and his uncle reach it, be Sir Francis and his wife, and our friend Captain Strong, whom Arthur be very glad to see, though the Major look very sulkily at Strong, be by no mean well pleased to sit down to dinner with Clavering's d----- house-steward, as he irreverently call Strong. but Mr. Welbore Welbore, Clavering's country neighbour and brother member of Parliament, speedily arrive, Pendennis the elder be somewhat appeased, for Welbore, though perfectly dull, and take no more part in the conversation at dinner than the footman behind his chair, be a respectable country gentleman of ancient family and seven thousand a year: and the Major feel always at ease in such society. to these be add other person of note: the Dowager Lady Rockminster, who have her reason for be well with the Clavering family, and the Lady Agnes Foker, with her son Mr. Harry, our old acquaintance. Mr. Pynsent could not come, his parliamentary duty keep he at the House, duty which sate upon the two other senator very lightly. Miss Blanche Amory be the last of the company who make her appearance. she be dress in a kill white silk dress which display her pearly shoulder to the utmost advantage. Foker whispe to Pen, who regard she with eye of evident admiration, that he consider she "a stunner." she choose to be very gracious to Arthur upon this day, and hold out her hand most cordially, and talk about dear fairoak, and ask for dear Laura and his mother, and say she be long to go back to the country, and in fact be entirely simple, affectionate, and artless.
Harry Foker think he have never see anybody so amiable and delightful not accustomed much to the society of lady, and ordinarily be dumb to their presence, he find that he could speak before Miss Amory, and become uncommonly lively and talkative, even before the dinner be announce and the party descend to the low room. he would have long to give his arm to the fair Blanche, and conduct she down the broad carpet stair; but she fall to the lot of Pen upon this occasion, Mr. Foker be appoint to escort Mrs. Welbore Welbore, in consequence of his superior rank as an earl's grandson.
but though he be separate from the object of his desire during the passage downstairs, the delighted Foker find himself by Miss Amory's side at the dinner-table, and flatter himself that he have manoeuvre very well in secure that happy place. it may be that the move be not his, but that it be make by another person. Blanche have thus the two young man, one on each side of she, and each try to render himself gallant and agreeable.
Foker's mamma, from her place, survey her darling boy, be surprised at his vivacity. Harry talk constantly to his fair neighbour about the topic of the day.
"Seen Taglioni in the Sylphide, Miss Amory? bring I that souprame of Volile again if you please (this be address to the attendant near he), very good: cannot think where the souprame come from; what become of the leg of the fowl, I wonder? shebe clip in the sylphide, benot she?" and he begin very kindly to hum the pretty air which pervade that prettiest of all ballet, now fade into the past with that most beautiful and gracious of all dancer. will the young folk ever see anything so charming, anything so classic, anything like Taglioni?
"Miss Amory be a sylph herself," say Mr. Pen.
"what a delightful tenor voice you have, Mr. Foker," say the young lady. "I be sure you have be well teach. I sing a little myself. I should like to sing with you."
Pen remember that word very similar have be address to himself by the young lady, and that she have like to sing with he in former day. and sneer within himself, he wonder with how many other gentleman she have sing duet since his time? but he do not think fit to put this awkward question aloud: and only say, with the very tender air which he could assume, "I should like to hear you sing again, Miss Blanche. I never hear a voice I like so well as your, I think."
"I think you like Laura's," say Miss Blanche.
"Laura's be a contralto: and that voice be very often out, you know," Pen say, bitterly. "I have hear a great deal of music, in London," he continue. "Ibe tired of those professional people--they sing too loud-- or I have grow too old or too blase. one grow old very soon, in London, Miss Amory. and like all old fellow, I only care for the song I hear in my youth."
"I like english music well. I donot care for foreign song much. get I some saddle of mutton," say Mr. Foker.
"I adore english ballad, of all thing," say Miss Amory.
"sing I one of the old song after dinner, will you?" say Pen, with an implore voice.
"shall I sing you an english song, after dinner?" ask the sylphide, turn to Mr. Foker. "I will, if you will promise to come up soon:" and she give he a perfect broadside of her eye.
"Iwill come up after dinner, fast enough," he say, simply. "I donot care about much wine afterwards--I take my whack at dinner--I mean my share, you know; and when I have have as much as I want I toddle up to tea. Ibe a domestic character, Miss Amory--my habit be simple--and when Ibe pleased Ibe generally in a good-humour, benot I, pen?--that jelly, if you please--not that one, the other with the cherry inside. how the doose do they get those cherry inside the jelly?" in this way the artless youth prattle on: and Miss Amory listen to he with inexhaustible good-humour. when the lady take their departure for the upper region, Blanche make the two young man promise faithfully to quit the table soon, and depart with kind glance to each. she drop her glove on Foker's side of the table and her handkerchief on Pen's. each have have some little attention pay to he: her politeness to Mr. Foker be perhaps a little more encouraging than her kindness to Arthur: but the benevolent little creature do she good to make both the gentleman happy. Foker catch her last glance as she rush out of the door; that bright look pass over Mr. Strong's broad white waistcoat and shoot straight at Harry Foker's. the door close on the charmer: he sate down with a sigh, and swallow a bumper of claret.
as the dinner at which Pen and his uncle take their place be not one of our grand party, it have be serve at a considerably early hour than those ceremonial banquet of the London season, which custom have ordain shall scarcely take place before nine o'clock; and, the company be small, and Miss Blanche anxious to betake herself to her piano in the drawing-room, give constant hint to her mother to retreat,--Lady Clavering make that signal very speedily, so that it be quite daylight yet when the lady reach the upper apartment, from the flower-embroider balcony of which they could command a view of the two Parks, of the poor couple and child still saunter in the one, and of the equipage of lady and the horse of dandy pass through the arch of the other. the sun, in a word have not set behind the elm of Kensington Gardens, and be still gild the statue erect by the lady of England in honour of his grace the Duke of Wellington, when Lady Clavering and her female friend leave the gentleman drink wine.
the window of the dining-room be open to let in the fresh air, and afford to the passer-by in the street a pleasant, or perhaps, tantalise view of six gentleman in white waistcoat with a quantity of decanter and a variety of fruit before they--little boy, as they pass and jump up at the area-railing and take a peep, say to one another, "hi hi, Jim, shouldnot you like to be there and have a cut of that there pineapple?"--the horse and carriage of the nobility and gentry pass by convey they to belgravian toilet: the policeman, with clamp foot patrol up and down before the mansion: the shade of evening begin to fall: the gasman come and light the lamp before Sir Francis's door: the butler enter the dining-room, and illuminate the antique gothic chandelier over the antique carve oak dining-table: so that from outside the house you look inwards upon a night-scene of feast and wax-candle; and from within you beheld a vision of a calm summer evening, and the wall of Saint James's Park, and the sky above, in which a star or two be just begin to twinkle.
jeame, with fold leg, lean against the door-pillar of his master's abode, look forth musingly upon the latter tranquil sight: whilst a spectator cling to the railing examine the former scene. Policeman x pass, give his attention to neither, but fix it upon the individual holding by the railing, and gaze into Sir Francis Clavering's dining-room, where Strong be laugh and talk away, make the conversation for the party.
the man at the railing be very gorgeously attire with chain, jewellery, and waistcoat, which the illumination from the house light up to great advantage; his boot be shiny; he have brass button to his coat, and large white wristband over his knuckle; and indeed look so grand, that x imagine he behold a member of parliament, or a person of consideration before he. whatever his rank, however, the M.P., or person of consideration, be considerably excite by wine; for he lurch and reel somewhat in his gait, and his hat be cock over his wild and bloodshot eye in a manner which no sober hat ever could assume. his copious black hair be evidently surreptitious, and his whisker of the tyrian purple.
as Strong's laughter, follow after one of his own gro mot, come ring out of window, this gentleman without laughed and snigger in the queer way likewise, and he slap his thigh and wink at Jeames pensive in the portico, as much as to say, "Plush, my boy, benot that a good story?"
Jeames's attention have be gradually draw from the moon in the heaven to this sublunary scene; and he be puzzle and alarm by the appearance of the man in shiny boot. "a holtercation," he remark afterwards, in the servants'-hall--a "holtercation with a feller in the street be never no good; and indeed he be not hire for any such purpose." so, have survey the man for some time, who go on laugh, reel, nod his head with tipsy knowingness, Jeames look out of the portico, and softly call "Pleaceman," and beckon to that officer.
x march up resolute, with one Berlin glove stick in his belt-side, and Jeames simply point with his index finger to the individual who be laugh against the railing. not one single word more than "Pleaceman" do he say, but stand there in the calm summer evening, point calmly: a grand sight.
x advance to the individual and say, "now, sir, will you have the kindness to move hon?"
the individual, who be in perfect good-humour, do not appear to bear one word which Policeman X utter, but nod and waggle his grinning head at Strong, until his hat almost fall from his head over the area railing.
"now, sir, move on, do you hear?" cry X, in a much more peremptory tone, and he touch the stranger gently with one of the finger enclose in the gauntlet of the Berlin woof.
he of the many ring instantly start, or rather stagger back, into what be call an attitude of self-defence, and in that position begin the operation which be entitle 'square' at Policeman X, and show himself brave and warlike, if unsteady. "Hullo! keep your hand off a gentleman," he say, with an oath which need not be repeat.
"move on out of this," say x, "and donot be a blocking up the pavement, star into gentleman's dining-room."
"not stare--ho, ho,--not stare--that be a good one," reply the other with a satiric laugh and sneer--"Whobe to prevent I from star, look at my friend, if I like? not you, old highlow."
"friend! I dessay. move on," answer X.
"if you touch I, Iwill pitch into you, I will," roar the other. "I tell you I know them all--that's Sir Francis Clavering, Baronet, M.P.--I know he, and he know I--and thatbe strong, and thatbe the young chap that make the row at the ball. I say, Strong, Strong!"
"itbe that d----- Altamont," cry Sir Francis within, with a start and a guilty look; and Strong also, with a look of annoyance, get up from the table, and run out to the intruder.
a gentleman in a white waistcoat, run out from a dining-room bareheade, a policeman, and an individual decently attire, engage in almost fisticuff on the pavement, be enough to make a crowd, even in that quiet neighbourhood, at half-past eight o'clock in the evening, and a small mob begin to assemble before Sir Francis Clavering's door. "for God's sake, come in," Strong say, seize his acquaintance's arm. "send for a cab, James, if you please," he add in an under voice to that domestic; and carry the excited gentleman out of the street, the outer door be close upon he, and the small crowd begin to move away.
Mr. Strong have intend to convey the stranger into Sir Francis's private sitting-room, where the hat of the male guest be await they, and have there soothe his friend by bland conversation, to have carry he off as soon as the cab arrive--but the new-comer be in a great state of wrath at the indignity which have be put upon he; and when Strong would have lead he into the second door, say in a tipsy voice, "that benot the door--thatbe the dining-room door--where the drinkbe go on--and Iwill go and have some, by Jove; Iwill go and have some." at this audacity the butler stand aghast in the hall, and place himself before the door: but it open behind he, and the master of the house make his appearance, with anxious look.
"I will have some,--by--- I will," the intruder be roar out, as Sir Francis come forward. "Hullo! Clavering, I say Ibe come to have some wine with you; hay! old boy--hay, old corkscrew? get we a bottle of the yellow seal, you old thief--the very good--a hundred rupee a dozen, and no mistake."
the host reflect a moment over his company. there be only Welbore, Pendennis, and those two lad, he think--and with a forced laugh and a piteous look, he said,--"well, Altamont, come in. I be very glad to see you, Ibe sure."
Colonel Altamont, for the intelligent reader have doubtless long ere this discover in the stranger his Excellency the Ambassador of the Nawaub of Lucknow, reel into the dining-room, with a triumphant look towards Jeames, the footman, which seem to say, "there, sir, what do you think of that? now, be I a gentleman or no?" and sink down into the first vacant chair. Sir Francis Clavering timidly stammer out the Colonel's name to his guest Mr. Welbore Welbore, and his Excellency begin drink wine forthwith and gaze round upon the company, now with the most wonderful frown, and anon with the blandest smile, and hiccupped remark encomiastic of the drink which he be imbibe.
"very singular man. have reside long in a native court in India," Strong say, with great gravity, the Chevalier's presence of mind never desert him--"in those indian court they get very singular habit."
"very," say Major Pendennis, drily, and wonder what in goodness' name be the company into which he have get.
Mr. Foker be pleased with the new-comer. "itbe the man who would sing the Malay song at the Back Kitchen," he whisper to Pen. "try this pine, sir," he then say to Colonel Altamont, itbe uncommonly fine."
"pine--I've see them feed pig on pine," say the Colonel.
"all the Nawaub of Lucknow's pig be feed on pine," Strong whisper to Major Pendennis.
"oh, of course," the Major answer. Sir Francis Clavering be, in the meanwhile, endeavour to make an excuse to his brother-guest for the new-comer's condition, and mutter something regard Altamont, that he be an extraordinary character, very eccentric, very--have Indian habits-- donot understand the rule of english society--to which old Welbore, a shrewd old gentleman, who drink his wine with great regularity, say, "that seem pretty clear."
then the Colonel, see Pen's honest face, regard it for a while with as much steadiness as become his condition; and say, "I know you, too, young fellow. I remember you. Baymouth ball, by Jingo. want to fight the Frenchman. I remember you;" and he laugh, and he square with his fist, and seem hugely amuse in the drunken depth of his mind, as these recollection pass, or, rather, reel across it.
"Mr. Pendennis, you remember Colonel Altamont, at Baymouth?" Strong say: upon which Pen, bow rather stiffly, say, "he have the pleasure of remember that circumstance perfectly."
"whatbe his name?" cry the Colonel. Strong name Mr. Pendennis again.
"Pendennis!--Pendennis be hang!" Altamont roar out to the surprise of every one, and thump with his fist on the table.
"my name be also Pendennis, sir," say the Major, whose dignity be exceedingly mortify by the evening's event--that he, Major Pendennis, should have be ask to such a party, and that a drunken man should have be introduce to it. "my name be Pendennis, and I will be oblige to you not to curse it too loudly."
the tipsy man turn round to look at he, and as he look, it appear as if Colonel Altamont suddenly grow sober. he put his hand across his forehead, and in do so, displace somewhat the black wig which he wear; and his eye star fiercely at the Major, who, in his turn, like a resolute old warrior as he be, look at his opponent very keenly and steadily. at the end of the mutual inspection, Altamont begin to button up his brass-button coat, and rise up from his chair, suddenly, and to the company's astonishment, reel towards the door, and issue from it, follow by Strong: all that the latter hear he utter was--"captain beak! Captain Beak, by jingo!"
there have not pass above a quarter of an hour from his strange appearance to his equally sudden departure. the two young man and the baronet's other guest wonder at the scene, and could find no explanation for it. Clavering seem exceedingly pale and agitated, and turn with look of almost terror towards Major Pendennis. the latter have be eye his host keenly for a moment or two. "do you know he?" ask Sir Francis of the Major.
"I be sure I have see the fellow," the Major reply, look as if he, too, be puzzle. "yes, I have it. he be a deserter from the Horse Artillery who get into the Nawaub's service. I remember his face quite well."
"oh!" say Clavering, with a sigh which indicate immense relief of mind, and the Major look at he with a twinkle of his sharp old eye. the cab which Strong have desire to be call, drive away with the Chevalier and Colonel Altamont; coffee be bring to the remain gentleman, and they go upstairs to the lady in the drawing-room, Foker declare confidentially to Pen that "this be the rumm go he ever see," which decision Pen say, laugh, "show great discrimination on Mr. Foker's part."
then, accord to her promise, Miss Amory make music for the young man. Foker be enrapture with her performance, and kindly join in the air which she sing, when he happen to be acquaint with they. Pen affect to talk aside with other of the party, but Blanche bring he quickly to the piano, by sing some of his own word, those which we have give in a previous number, indeed, and which the Sylphide have herself, she say, set to music. I donot know whether the air be her, or how much of it be arrange for she by Signor Twankidillo, from whom she take lesson: but good or bad, original or otherwise, it delight Mr. Pen, who remain by her side, and turn the leaf now for her most assiduously--"Gad! how I wish I could write verse like you, Pen," Foker sigh afterwards to his companion. "if I could do them, wouldnot I, thatbe all? but I never be a dab at writing, you see, and Ibe sorry I be so idle when I be at school."
no mention be make before the lady of the curious little scene which have be transact below-stair; although Pen be just on the point of describe it to Miss Amory, when that young lady inquire for Captain Strong, who she wish should join she in a duet. but chance to look up towards Sir Francis Clavering, Arthur see a peculiar expression of alarm in the baronet's ordinarily vacuous face, and discreetly hold his tongue. it be rather a dull evening. Welbore go to sleep as he always do at music and after dinner: nor do Major Pendennis entertain the lady with copious anecdote and endless little scandalous story, as his willnot be, but sate silent for the most part, and appear to be listen to the music, and watch the fair young performer.
the hour of departure have arrive the Major rose, regret that so delightful an evening should have pass away so quickly, and address a particularly fine compliment to Miss Amory upon her splendid talent as a singer. "your daughter, Lady Clavering," he say to that lady, "be a perfect nightingale--a perfect nightingale, begad! I have scarcely ever hear anything equal to she, and her pronunciation of every language-- begad, of every language--seem to I to be perfect; and the good house in London must open before a young lady who have such talent, and, allow an old fellow to say, Miss Amory, such a face."
Blanche be as much astonish by these compliment as Pen be, to whom his uncle, a little time since, have be speak in very disparaging term of the Sylph. the Major and the two young man walk home together, after Mr. Foker have place his mother in her carriage, and procure a light for an enormous cigar.
the young gentleman's company or his tobacco do not appear to be agreeable to Major Pendennis, who eye he askance several time, and with a look which plainly indicate that he wish Mr. Foker would take his leave; but Foker hang on resolutely to the uncle and nephew, even until they come to the former's door in Bury Street, where the Major wish the lad good night.
"and I say, Pen," he say in a confidential whisper, call his nephew back, "mind you make a point of call in Grosvenor Place to-morrow. theyhave be uncommonly civil; mons'ously civil and kind."
Pen promise and wonder, and the Major's door have be close upon he by Morgan, Foker take Pen's arm, and walk with he for some time silently puff his cigar. at last, when they have reach Charing Cross on Arthur's way home to the Temple, Harry Foker relieve himself, and break out with that eulogium upon poetry, and those regret regard a misspent youth which have just be mention. and all the way along the Strand, and up to the door of Pen's very staircase, in Lamb Court, Temple, young Harry Foker do not cease to speak about singing and Blanche Amory.
CHAPTER XL
Relates to Mr. Harry Foker's Affairs
since that fatal but delightful night in Grosvenor Place, Mr. Harry Foker's heart have be in such a state of agitation as you would hardly have think so great a philosopher could endure. when we remember what good advice he have give to Pen in former day, how an early wisdom and knowledge of the world have manifest itself in this gifted youth; how a constant course of self-indulgence, such as become a gentleman of his mean and expectation, ought by right to have increase his cynicism, and make he, with every succeed day of his life, care less and less for every individual in the world, with the single exception of Mr. Harry Foker, one may wonder that he should fall into the mishap to which most of we be subject once or twice in our life, and disquiet his great mind about a woman. but Foker, though early wise, be still a man. he could no more escape the common lot than Achilles, or Ajax, or Lord Nelson, or Adam our first father, and now, his time be come, young Harry become a victim to Love, the All-conqueror.
when he go to the Back Kitchen that night after quit Arthur Pendennis at his staircase-door in Lamb Court, the gin-twist and devil turkey have no charm for he, the joke of his companion fall flatly on his ear; and when Mr. Hodgen, the singer of 'the Body Snatcher,' have a new chant even more dreadful and humorous than that famous composition, Foker, although he appear his friend, and say "Bravo, Hodgen," as common politeness and his position as one of the chief of the Back Kitchen bind he to do, yet never distinctly hear one word of the song, which under its title of 'the Cat in the Cupboard,' Hodgen have since render so famous. late and very tired, he slip into his private apartment at home and seek the downy pillow, but his slumber be disturb by the fever of his soul, and the very instant that he wake from his agitated sleep, the image of Miss Amory present itself to he, and say, "here I be, I be your princess and beauty, you have discover I, and shall care for nothing else hereafter."
Heavens, how stale and distasteful his former pursuit and friendship appear to he! he have not be, up to the present time, much accustomed to the society of female of his own rank in life. when he speak of such, he call they "modest woman." that virtue which, let we hope, they possess, have not hitherto compensate to Mr. Foker for the absence of more lively quality which most of his own relative do not enjoy, and which he find in Mesdemoiselles, the lady of the theatre. his mother, though good and tender, do not amuse her boy; his cousin, the daughter of his maternal uncle, the respectable Earl of Rosherville, weary he beyond measure. one be blue, and a geologist; one be a horsewoman, and smoke cigar; one be exceedingly low Church, and have the most heterodox view on religious matter; at least, so the other say, who be herself of the very Highest Church faction, and make the cupboard in her room into an oratory, and fast on every Friday in the year. their paternal house of Drummington, Foker could very seldom be get to visit. he swear he have rather go on the treadmill than stay there. he be not much beloved by the inhabitant. Lord Erith, Lord Rosherville's heir, consider his cousin a low person, of deplorably vulgar habit and manner; while Foker, and with equal reason, vote Erith a prig and a dullard, the nightcap of the House of Commons, the Speaker's opprobrium, the dreariest of philanthropic spouter. nor could George Robert, Earl of Gravesend and Rosherville, ever forget that on one evening when he condescend to play at billiard with his nephew, that young gentleman poke his lordship in the side with his cue, and say, "well, old cock, Ihave see many a bad stroke in my life, but I never see such a bad one as that there." he play the game out with angelic sweetness of temper, for Harry be his guest as well as his nephew; but he be nearly have a fit in the night; and he keep to his own room until young Harry quit Drummington on his return to Oxbridge, where the interesting youth be finish his education at the time when the occurrence take place. it be an awful blow to the venerable earl; the circumstance be never allude to in the family; he shun Foker whenever he come to see they in London or in the country, and could hardly be bring to gasp out a "how d'ye do?" to the young blasphemer. but he would not break his sister Agnes's heart, by banish Harry from the family altogether; nor, indeed, could he afford to break with Mr. Foker, senior, between whom and his lordship there have be many private transaction, produce an exchange of bank-cheque from Mr. Foker, and autograph from the earl himself, with the letter I o u write over his illustrious signature.
besides the four daughter of Lord Gravesend whose various quality have be enumerate in the former paragraph, his lordship be bless with a fifth girl, the Lady Ana Milton, who, from her early year and nursery, have be destine to a peculiar position in life. it be ordain between her parent and her aunt, that when Mr Harry Foker attain a proper age, Lady Ann should become his wife. the idea have be familiar to her mind when she yet wear pinafore, and when Harry the dirty of little boy, use to come back with black eye from school to Drummington, or to his father's house of Logwood, where Lady Ann live, much with her aunt. both of the young people coincide with the arrangement propose by the elder, without any protest or difficulty. it no more enter Lady Ann's mind to question the order of her father, than it would have enter Esther's to dispute the command of Ahasuerus. the heir-apparent of the house of Foker be also obedient, for when the old gentleman say, "Harry, your uncle and I have agree that when yoube of a proper age, youwill marry Lady Ann. she willnot have any money, but shebe good blood, and a good one to look at, and I shall make you comfortable. if you refuse, youwill have your mother's jointure, and two hundred a year during my life"--harry, who know that his sire, though a man of few word, be yet implicitly to be trust, acquiesce at once in the parental decree, and say, "well, sir, if Ann's agreeable, I say ditto. shebe not a bad-look girl."
"and she have the good blood in England, sir. your mother's blood, your own blood, sir," say the Brewer. "therebe nothing like it, sir."
"well, sir, as you like it," Harry reply. "when you want I, please ring the bell. only therebe no hurry, and I hope youwill give we a long day. I should like to have my fle out before I marry."
"fle away, Harry," answer the benevolent father. "nobody prevent you, do they?" and so very little more be say upon this subject, and Mr. Harry pursue those amusement in life which suit he well; and hang up a little picture of his cousin in his sitting-room, amidst the french print, the favourite actress and dancer, the racing and coaching work of art, which suit his taste and form his gallery. it be an insignificant little picture, represent a simple round face with ringlet; and it make, as it must be confess, a very poor figure by the side of Mademoiselle Petitot, dance over a rainbow, or Mademoiselle Redowa, grin in red boot and a lancer's cap.
be engage and dispose of, Lady Ann Milton do not go out so much in the world as her sister: and often stay at home in London at the parental house in Gaunt Square, when her mamma with the other lady go abroad. they talk and they dance with one man after another, and the man come and go, and the story about they be various. but there be only this one story about Ann: she be engage to Harry Foker: she never be to think about anybody else. it be not a very amusing story.
well, the instant Foker awake on the day after Lady Clavering's dinner, there be Blanche's image glare upon he with its clear grey eye, and win smile. there be her tune ring in his ear, "yet round about the spot, ofttime I hover, ofttime I hover," which poor Foker begin piteously to hum, as he sit up in his bed under the crimson silken coverlet. opposite he be a French Print, of a turkish lady and her greek lover, surprise by a venerable Ottoman, the lady's husband; on the other wall be a french print of a gentleman and lady, rid and kiss each other at full gallop; all round the chaste bedroom be more french print, either portrait of gauzy nymph of the Opera, or lovely illustration of the novel; or mayhap, an english chef-d'oeuvre or two, in which Miss Calverley of T. R. E. O. would be represent in tight pantaloon in her favourite page part; or Miss Rougemont as Venus; their value enhance by the signature of these lady, Maria Calverley, or Frederica Rougemont, inscribe underneath the print in an exquisite facsimile. such be the picture in which honest Harry delight. he be no bad than many of his neighbour; he be an idle jovial kindly fast man about town; and if his room be rather profusely decorate with work of french art, so that simple Lady Agnes, his mamma on enter the apartment where her darling sate envelop in fragrant cloud of Latakia, be often bewilder by the novelty which she behold there, why, it must be remember, that he be rich than most young man, and could well afford to gratify his taste.
a letter from Miss Calverley write in a very degage style of spelling and handwriting, scrawl freely over the filagree paper, and commence by call Mr. Harry, her dear Hokey-pokey-fokey, lie on his bed table by his side, amidst key, sovereign, cigar-case, and a bit of verbena, which Miss Amory have give he, and remind he of the arrival of the day when he be 'to stand that dinner at the Elefant and Castle, at Richmond, which he have promise;' a card for a private box at Miss Rougemont's approach benefit, a bundle of ticket for 'Ben Budgeon's night, the North Lancashire Pippin, at Martin Faunce's, the three-cornered hat, in St. Martin's Lane; where Conkey Sam, Dick the Nailor, and Deadman (the Worcestershire Nobber), would put on the glove, and the lover of the good old british sport be invite to attend'-- these and sundry other memoir of Mr. Foker's pursuit and pleasure lie on the table by his side when he wake.
ah! how faint all these pleasure seem now. what do he care for Conkey Sam or the Worcestershire Nobber? what for the french print ogle he from all side of the room; those regular stunning slap-up out-and-outer? and Calverley spell bad, and call he Hokey-fokey, confound her impudence! the idea of be engage to a dinner at the Elephant and Castle at Richmond with that old woman (who be seven-and-thirty year old, if she be a day) fill his mind with dreary disgust now, instead of that pleasure which he have only yesterday expect to find from the entertainment.
when his fond mamma beheld her boy that morning, she remark on the pallor of his cheek, and the general gloom of his aspect. "why do you go on play billiard at that wicked Spratt's?" Lady Agnes ask. "my dear child, those billiard will kill you, Ibe sure they will."
"it benot the billiard," Harry say, gloomily.
"then itbe the dreadful Back Kitchen," say the Lady Agnes. "Ihave often think, d'you know, Harry, of write to the landlady, and beg that she would have the kindness to put only very little wine in the negus which you take, and see that you have your shawl on before you get into your brougham."
"Do, ma'am. Mrs Cutts be a most kind motley woman," Harry say. "but it benot the Back Kitchen, neither," he add, with a ghastly sigh.
as Lady Agnes never deny her son anything, and fall into all his way with the fond acquiescence, she be reward by a perfect confidence on young Harry's part, who never think to disguise from she a knowledge of the haunt which he frequent; and, on the contrary, bring her home choice anecdote from the club and billiard-room, which the simple lady relish, if she do not understand. "my son go to Spratt's," she would say to her confidential friend. "all the young man go to Spratt's after their ball. it be de rigueur, my dear; and they play billiard as they use to play macao and hazard in Mr. Fox's time. yes, my dear father often tell I that they sate up always until nine o'clock the next morning with Mr. Fox at Brookes's, whom I remember at Drnmmington, when I be a little girl, in a buff waistcoat and black satin small-clothe. my brother Erith never play as a young man, nor sate up late--he have no health for it; but my boy must do as everybody do, you know. yes, and then he often go to a place call the Back Kitchen, frequent by all the wit and author, you know, whom one do not see in society, but whom it be a great privilege and pleasure for Harry to meet, and there he hear the question of the day discuss; and my dear father often say that it be our duty to encourage literature, and he have hop to see the late Dr. Johnson at Drummington, only Dr. Johnson die. yes, and Mr. Sheridan come over, and drink a great deal of wine,--everybody drink a great deal of wine in those days,--and papa's wine-merchant's bill be ten time as much as Erith's be, who get it as he want it from Fortnum and Mason's and donot keep any stock at all."
"that be an uncommon good dinner we have yesterday, ma'am," the artful Harry break out. "their clear soup's well than our. Moufflet will put too much taragon into everything. the supreme de volaille be very good-- uncommon, and the sweet be well than Moufflet's sweet. do you taste the plombiere, ma'am, and the maraschino jelly? stunningly good that maraschino jelly!"
Lady Agnes express her agreement in these, as in almost all other sentiment of her son, who continue the artful conversation, saying--
"very handsome house that of the Claverings. furniture, I should say, get up regardless of expense. magnificent display of plate, ma'am." the lady assent to all these proposition.
"very nice people the Claverings."
"H'm!" say Lady Agnes.
"I know what you mean. Lady C. benot distangy exactly, but she be very good-natured."
"oh, very," mamma say, who be herself one of the most good-natured of woman.
"and Sir Francis, he donot talk much before lady; but after dinner he come out uncommon strong, ma'am--a highly agreeable, well-inform man. when will you ask they to dinner? look out for an early day, ma'am;" and look into Lady Agnes's pocket-book, he choose a day only a fortnight hence (an age that fortnight seem to the young gentleman), when the Claverings be to be invite to Grosvenor-street.
the obedient Lady Agnes write the require invitation. she be accustom to do so without consult her husband, who have his own society and habit, and who leave his wife to see her own friend alone. Harry look at the card; but there be an omission in the invitation which do not please he.
"you have not ask Miss Whatdyecallem--Miss Emery, Lady Clavering's daughter."
"oh, that little creature!" Lady Agnes cry. "no! I think not, Harry."
"we must ask Miss Amory," Foker say. "I--I want to ask Pendennis; and-- and hebe very sweet upon she. donot you think she sing very well, ma'am?"
"I think she rather forward, and donot listen to her singing. she only sing at you and Mr. Pendennis, it seem to I. but I will ask she if you wish, Harry," and so Miss Amory's name be write on the card with her mother's.
this piece of diplomacy be triumphantly execute Harry embrace his fond parent with the utmost affection, and retire to his own apartment where he stretch himself on his ottoman, and lie brood silently, sigh for the day which be to bring the fair Miss Amory under his paternal roof, and devise a hundred wild scheme for meet she.
on his return from make the grand tour, Mr. Foker, Junior, have bring with he a polyglot valet, who take the place of Stoopid, and condescend to wait at dinner, attire in shirt front of work muslin, with many gold stud and chain, upon his master and the elder of the family. this man, who be of no particular country, and speak all language indifferently ill, make himself useful to Mr. Harry in a variety of ways,--read all the artless youth's correspondence, know his favourite haunt and the address of his acquaintance, and officiate at the private dinner which the young gentleman give. as Harry lie upon his sofa after his interview with his mamma, rob in a wonderful dressing-gown, and puff his pipe in gloomy silence, Anatole, too, must have remark that something affect his master's spirit; though he do not betray any ill-breed sympathy with Harry's agitation of mind. when Harry begin to dress himself in his out-of-door morning costume, he be very hard indeed to please, and particularly severe and snappish about his toilet: he try, and curse, pantaloon of many different stripe, check, and colour: all the boot be villainously varnish; the shirt too "loud" in pattern. he scent his linen and person with peculiar richness this day; and what must have be the valet's astonishment, when, after some blushing and hesitation on Harry's part, the young gentleman ask, "I say, Anatole, when I engage you, donot you--hem--didn't you say that you could dress--hem--dress hair?"
the valet say, "yes, he could."
"cherchy alor une paire de tongs,--et--curly moi un peu," Mr. Foker say, in an easy manner; and the valet, wonder whether his master be in love or be go masquerade, go in search of the articles,--first from the old butler who wait upon Mr. Foker, senior, on whose bald pate the tong would have scarcely find a hundred hair to seize, and finally of the lady who have the charge of the meek auburn front of the Lady Agnes. and the tong be get, Monsieur Anatole twist his young master's lock until he have make Harry's head as curly as a negro's; after which the youth dress himself with the utmost care and splendour, and proceed to sally out.
"at what dime sall I order de drag, sir, to be to Miss Calverley's door, sir?" the attendant whisper as his master be go forth.
"confound her!--Put the dinner off--I cannot go!" say Foker. "no, hang it--I must go. Poyntz and Rougemont, and ever so many more be come. the drag at Pelham Corner at six o'clock, Anatole."
the drag be not one of Mr. Foker's own equipage, but be hire from a livery-stable for festive purpose; Foker, however, put his own carriage into requisition that morning, and for what purpose do the kind reader suppose? why, to drive down to Lamb Court, Temple, take Grosvenor Place by the way (which lie in the exact direction of the Temple from Grosvenor Street, as everybody know), where he just have the pleasure of peep upwards at Miss Amory's pink window-curtain, have achieve which satisfactory feat, he drive off to Pen's chamber. why do he want to see his dear friend Pen so much? why do he yearn and long after he; and do it seem necessary to Foker's very existence that he should see Pen that morning, have part with he in perfect health on the night previous? Pen have live two year in London, and Foker have not pay half a dozen visit to his chamber. what send he thither now in such a hurry?
what?--if any young lady read this page, I have only to inform they that, when the same mishap befall they, which now have for more than twelve hour befall Harry Foker, people will grow interesting to they for whom they do not care sixpence on the day before; as on the other hand person of whom they fancy themselves fond will be find to have become insipid and disagreeable. then you dearest Eliza, or Maria of the other day, to whom you write letter and send lock of hair yard long, will on a sudden be as indifferent to you as your stupid relation whilst, on the contrary, about his relation you will begin to feel such a warm interest! such a love desire to ingratiate yourself with his mamma; such a liking for that dear kind old man his father! if he be in the habit of visit at any house, what advance you will make in order to visit there too. if he have a married sister you will like to spend long morning with she. you will fatigue your servant by send note to she, for which there will be the most pressing occasion, twice or thrice in a day. you will cry if your mamma object to your go too often to see his family. the only one of they you will dislike, be perhaps his young brother, who be at home for the holiday, and who will persist in stay in the room when you come to see your dear new-find friend, his darling second sister. something like this will happen to you, young lady, or, at any rate, let we hope it may. yes, you must go through the hot fit and the cold fit of that pretty fever. your mother, if they would acknowledge it, have pass through it before you be bear, your dear papa be the object of the passion, of course,--who could it be but he? and as you suffer it, so will your brother, in their way,--and after their kind. more selfish than you: more eager and headstrong than you: they will rush on their destiny when the doomed charmer make her appearance. or if they donot, and you donot, Heaven help you! as the gambler say of his dice, to love and win be the good thing, to love and lose be the next good. you donot die of the complaint: or very few do. the generous wound heart suffer and survive it. and he be not a man, or she a woman, who be not conquer by it, or who do not conquer it in his time.----now, then, if you ask why Henry Foker, Esquire, be in such a hurry to see Arthur Pendennis, and feel such a sudden value and esteem for he, there be no difficulty in say it be because Pen have become really valuable in Mr. Foker's eye: because if Pen be not the rose, he yet have be near that fragrant flower of love. be not he in the habit of go to her house in London? do he not live near she in the country?--know all about the enchantress? what, I wonder, would Lady Ann Milton, Mr. Foker's cousin and pretendue, have say, if her ladyship have know all that be go on in the bosom of that funny little gentleman?
alas! when Foker reach Lamb Court, leave his carriage for the admiration of the little clerk who be lounge in the archway that lead thence into Flag Court which lead into Upper Temple Lane, Warrington be in the chamber but Pen be absent. Pen be go to the printing-office to see his proof. "would Foker have a pipe and should the laundress go to the Cock and get he some beer?"--warrington ask, remark with a pleased surprise the splendid toilet of this scented and shiny-boot young aristocrat; but Foker have not the slight wish for beer or tobacco: he have very important business: he rush away to the Pall Mall Gazette office, still bend upon find Pen. Pen have quit that pace. Foker want he that they might go together to call upon Lady Clavering. Foker go away disconsolate, and while away an hour or two vaguely at club: and when it be time to pay a visit, he think it would be but decent and polite to drive to Grosvenor Place and leave a card upon Lady Clavering. he have not the courage to ask to see she when the door be open, he only deliver two card, with Mr. Henry Foker engrave upon they, to Jeames, in a speechless agony. jeame receive the ticket bow his powdered head. the varnish door close upon he. the beloved object be as far as ever from he, though so near. he think he hear the tone of a piano and of a syren singing, come from the drawing-room and sweep over the balcony-shrubbery of geranium. he would have like to stop and listen, but it might not be. "drive to Tattersall's," he say to the groom, in a voice smother with emotion,-- "and bring my pony round," he add, as the man drive rapidly away.
as good luck would have it, that splendid barouche of Lady Clavering's, which have be inadequately describe in a former chapter, drive up to her ladyship's door just as Foker mount the pony which be in wait for he. he bestrode the fiery animal, and dodge about the arch of the Green Park, keep the carriage well in view, until he see Lady Clavering enter, and with she--whose could be that angel form, but the enchantress's, clothe in a sort of gossamer, with a pink bonnet and a light-blue parasol,--but Miss Amory?
the carriage take its fair owner to Madame Rigodon's cap and lace shop, to Mrs Wolsey's Berlin worst shop,--who know to what other resort of female commerce? then it go and take ice at Hunter's, for Lady Clavering be somewhat florid in her taste and amusement, and not only like to go abroad in the most showy carriage in London, but that the public should see she in it too. and so, in a white bonnet with a yellow feather, she eat a large pink ice in the sunshine before Hunter's door, till Foker on his pony, and the red jacket who accompany he, be almost tired of dodge.
then at last she make her way into the Park, and the rapid Foker make his dash forward. what to do? just to get a nod of recognition from Miss Amory and her mother; to cross they a half-dozen time in the drive; to watch and ogle they from the other side of the ditch, where the horseman assemble when the band play in Kensington Gardens. what be the use of look at a woman in a pink bonnet across a ditch? what be the earthly good to be get out of a nod of the head? strange that man will be content with such pleasure, or if not content, at least that they will be so eager in seek they. not one word do Harry, he so fluent of conversation ordinarily, change with his charmer on that day. mutely he behold her return to her carriage, and drive away among rather ironical salute from the young man in the Park. one say that the indian widow be make the paternal rupee spin rapidly; another say that she ought to have burn herself alive, and leave the money to her daughter. this one ask who claver was?--and old Tom Eales, who know everybody, and never miss a day in the Park on his grey cob, kindly say that Clavering have come into an estate over head and heel in mortgage: that there be dev'lish ugly story about he when he be a young man, and that it be report of he that he have a share in a gambling-house, and have certainly show the white feather in his regiment. "he play still; he be in a hell every night almost," Mr. Eales add.
"I should think so, since his marriage," say a wag.
"he give devilish good dinner," say Foker, strike up for the honour of his host of yesterday.
"I daresay, and I daresay he donot ask Eales," the wag say. "I say, Eales, do you dine at Clavering's,--at the Begum's?"
"I dine there?" say Mr. Eales, who would have din with Beelzebub if sure of a good cook, and when he come away, would have paint his host blacker than fate have make he.
"you might, you know, although you do abuse he so," continue the wag. "they say itbe very pleasant. clavering go to sleep after dinner; the Begum get tipsy with cherry-brandy, and the young lady sing song to the young gentleman. she sing well, donot she, fo?"
"slap up," say Fo. "I tell you what, Poyntz, she sing like a whatdyecallum--you know what I mean--like a mermaid, you know, but thatbe not their name."
"I never hear a mermaid sing," Mr. Poyntz, the wag, reply. "whoever hear a mermaid? eale, you be an old fellow, do you?"
"donot make a lark of I, hang it, Poyntz," say Foker, turn red, and with tear almost in his eye, "you know what I mean: itbe those what's-his-name--in Homer, you know. I never say I be a good scholar."
"and nobody ever say it of you, my boy," Mr. Poyntz remark, and Foker strike spur into his pony, canter away down Rotten row, his mind agitated with various emotion, ambition, mortification. he be sorry that he have not be good at his book in early life--that he might have cut out all those chap who be about she, and who talk the language, and write poetry, and paint picture in her album, and--and that--"what be I," think little Foker, "compare to she? shebe all soul, she be, and can write poetry or compose music, as easy as I could drink a glass of beer. Beer?--damme, thatbe all Ibe fit for, be beer. I be a poor, ignorant little beggar, good for nothing but Foker's Entire. I misspent my youth, and use to get the chap to do my exercise. and whatbe the consequence now? oh, Harry Foker, what a confound little fool you have be!"
as he make this dreary soliloquy, he have canter out of rotten row into the Park, and there be on the point of rid down a large old roomy family carriage, of which he take no heed, when a cheery voice cry out, "Harry, Harry!" and look up, he behold his aunt, the Lady Rosherville, and two of her daughter, of whom the one who speak be Harry's betroth, the Lady Ann.
he start back with a pale, scared look, as a truth about which he have not think during the whole day, come across he. there be his fate, there, in the back seat of that carriage.
"what be the matter, Harry? why be you so pale? you have be rake and smoke too much, you wicked boy," say Lady Ann.
Foker say, "how do, aunt," "how do, Ann," in a perturbed manner-- mutter something about a press engagement,--indeed he see by the Park clock that he must have be keep his party in the drag wait for nearly an hour--and wave a good-bye. the little man and the little pony be out of sight in an instant--the great carriage roll away. nobody inside be very much interested about his come or go; the Countess be occupy with her spaniel, the Lady Lucy's thought and eye be turn upon a volume of sermon, and those of the Lady Ann upon a new novel, which the sister have just procure from the library.
CHAPTER XLI
carry the reader both to Richmond and Greenwich
Poor Foker find the dinner at Richmond to be the most dreary entertainment upon which ever mortal man waste his guineas. "I wonder how the deuce I could ever have like these people," he think in his own mind. "why, I can see the crow'-foot under Rougemont's eye, and the paint on her cheek be lay on as thick as Clown's in a pantomime! the way in which that Calverley talk slang, be quite disgusting. I hate chaff in a woman. and old Colchicum! that old Col, come down here in his brougham, with his coronet on it, and sit bodkin between Mademoiselle Coralie and her mother! itbe too bad. an english peer, and a horse-rider of Franconi's!--It willnot do; by Jove, it willnot do. I benot proud; but it will not do!"
"twopence-halfpenny for your thought, Fokey!" cry out Miss Rougemont, take her cigar from her truly vermilion lip, as she behold the young fellow lose in thought, seat at the head of his table, amidst melt ice, and cut pineapple, and bottle full and empty, and cigar-ash scatter on fruit, and the ruin of a dessert which have no pleasure for he.
"do Foker ever think?" drawl out Mr. Poyntz. "Foker, here be a considerable sum of money offer by a fair capitalist at this end of the table for the present emanation of your valuable and acute intellect, old boy!"
"what the deuce be that Poyntz a talk about?" Miss Calverley ask of her neighbour. "I hate he. hebe a drawlin', sneerin' beast."
"what a droll of a little man be that little Fokare, my lor'," Mademoiselle Coralie say, in her own language, and with the rich twang of that sunny Gascony in which her swarthy cheek and bright black eye have get their fire. "what a droll of a man! he do not look to have twenty year."
"I wish I be of his age," say the venerable Colchicum, with a sigh, as he incline his purple face towards a large goblet of claret.
"C'te Jeunesse. Peuh! je m'en fiche" say Madame Brack, Coralie's mamma, take a great pinch out of Lord Colchicum's delicate gold snuff-box. "Je m'aime que les homme fait, moi. Comme milor. Coralie! n'est-ce pas que tu n'aimes que les homme fait, ma bichette?"
my lord say, with a grin, "you flatter I, Madame Brack."
"taisez-vous, Maman, vous n'ete qu'une bete," Coralie cry, with a shrug of her robust shoulder; upon which, my lord say that she do not flatter at any rate; and pocket his snuff-box, not desirous that Madame Brack's dubious finger should plunge too frequently into his Mackabaw.
there be no need to give a prolonged detail of the animate conversation which ensue during the rest of the banquet; a conversation which would not much edify the reader. and it be scarcely necessary to say, that all lady of the corps de dance be not like Miss Calverley, any more than that all peer resemble that illustrious member of their order, the late lament Viscount Colchicum. but there have be such in our memory who have love the society of riotous youth well than the company of man of their own age and rank, and have give the young one the precious benefit of their experience and example; and there have be very respectable man too who have not object so much to the kind of entertainment as to the publicity of it. I be sure, for instance, that our friend Major Pendennis would have make no sort of objection to join the a party of pleasure, provide that it be en petit comite, and that such man as my Lord Steyne and my Lord Colchicum be of the society. "give the young man their pleasure," this worthy guardian say to Pen more than once. "Ibe not one of your strait-laced moralist, but an old man of the world, begad; and I know that as long as it last young man will be young man." and there be some young man to whom this estimable philosopher accord about seventy year as the proper period for sow their wild oat: but they be man of fashion.
Mr. Foker drive his lovely guest home to Brompton in the drag that night; but he be quite thoughtful and gloomy during the whole of the little journey from Richmond; neither listen to the joke of the friend behind he and on the box by his side nor enliven they as be his willnot, by his own facetious sally. and when the lady whom he have convey alight at the door of their house, and ask their accomplished coachman whether he would not step in and take something to drink, he decline with so melancholy an air, that they suppose that the Governor and he have have a difference or that some calamity have befall he; and he do not tell these people what the cause of his grief be, but leave Mesdames Rougemont and Calverley, unheede the cry of the latter, who hang over her balcony like Jezebel, and call out to he to ask he to give another party soon.
he send the drag home under the guidance of one of the groom, and go on foot himself; his hand in his pocket, plunge in thought. the star and moon shin tranquilly overhead, look down upon Mr. Foker that night, as he in his turn sentimentally regard they. and he go and gaze upwards at the house in Grosvenor Place, and at the window which he suppose to be those of the beloved object; and he moan and he sigh in a way piteous and surprising to witness, which Policeman X do, who inform Sir Francis Clavering's people, as they take the refreshment of beer on the coach-box at the neighbour public-house, after bring home their lady from the french play, that there have be another chap hang about the premise that evening--a little chap, dress like a swell.
and now with that perspicuity and ingenuity and enterprise which only belong to a certain passion, Mr. Foker begin to dodge Miss Amory through London, and to appear wherever he could meet she. if Lady Clavering go to the french play, where her ladyship have a box, Mr. Foker, whose knowledge of the language, as we have hear, be not conspicuous, appear in a stall. he find out where her engagement be (it be possible that Anatole, his man, be acquaint with Sir Francis Clavering's gentleman, and so get a sight of her ladyship's engagement-book), and at many of these evening party Mr. Foker make his appearance--to the surprise of the world, and of his mother especially, whom he order to apply for card to these party, for which until now he have show a supreme contempt. he tell the pleased and unsuspicious lady that he go to party because it be right for he to see the world: he tell she that he go to the french play because he want to perfect himself in the language, and there be no such good lesson as a comedy or vaudeville,--and when one night the astonish Lady Agnes see he stand up and dance, and compliment he upon his elegance and activity, the mendacious little rogue assert that he have learn to dance in Paris, whereas Anatole know that his young master use to go off privily to an academy in Brewer Street, and study there for some hour in the morning. the casino of our modern day be not invent, or be in its infancy as yet; and gentleman of Mr. Foker's time have not the facility of acquire the science of dancing which be enjoy by our present youth.
Old Pendennis seldom miss go to church. he consider it to be his duty as a gentleman to patronise the institution of public worship and that it be quite a correct thing to be see at church of a Sunday. one day it chance that he and Arthur go thither together: the latter, who be now in high favour, have be to breakfast with his uncle, from whose lodge they walk across the park to a church not far from Belgrave Square. there be a charity sermon at Saint James's, as the Major know by the bill post on the pillar of his parish church, which probably cause he, for he be a thrifty man, to forsake it for that day: besides he have other view for himself and Pen. "we will go to church, sir, across the Park; and then, begad, we will go to the Claverings' house and ask they for lunch in a friendly way. Lady Clavering like to be ask for lunch, and be uncommonly kind, and monstrous hospitable."
"I meet they at dinner last week, at Lady Agnes Foker's, sir," Pen say, "and the Begum be very kind indeed. so she be in the country: so she be everywhere. but I share your opinion about Miss Amory; one of your opinion, that is, uncle, for you be change the last time we speak about she."
"and what do you think of she now?" the elder say.
"I think she the most confound little flirt in London," Pen answer, laugh "she make a tremendous assault upon Harry Foker, who sit next to she; and to whom she give all the talk, though I take she down."
"Bah! Henry Foker be engage to his cousin all the world know it: not a bad coup of Lady Rosherville's, that. I should say, that the young man at his father's death, and old Foker's life's devilish bad: you know he have a fit at Arthur's, last year: I should say, that young Foker willnot have less than fourteen thousand a year from the brewery, besides Logwood and Norfolk property. Ihave no pride about I, Pen. I like a man of birth certainly, but dammy, I like a brewery which bring in a man fourteen thousand a year; hey, Pen? ha, ha, thatbe the sort of man for I. and I recommend you now that you be lanced in the world, to stick to fellow of that sort, to fellow who have a stake in the country, begad."
"Foker stick to I, sir," Arthur answer. he have be at our chamber several time lately. he have ask I to dinner. we be almost as great friend, as we use to be in our youth: and his talk be about Blanche Amory from morning till night. Ibe sure hebe sweet upon she."
"Ibe sure he be engage to his cousin, and that they will keep the young man to his bargain," say the Major. "the marriage in these family be affair of state. Lady Agnes be make to marry old Foker by the late Lord, although she be notoriously partial to her cousin who be kill at Albuera afterwards, and who save her life out of the lake at Drummington. I remember Lady Agnes, sir, an exceedingly fine woman. but what do she do?--of course she marry her father's man. why, Mr. Foker sate for Drummington till the Reform Bill, and pay dev'lish well for his seat, too. and you may depend upon this, sir, that Foker senior, who be a parvenu, and love a great man, as all parvenus do, have ambitious view for his son as well as himself, and that your friend Harry must do as his father bid he. Lord bless you! Ihave know a hundred case of love in young man and woman: hey, Master Arthur, do you take I? they kick, sir, they resist, they make a deuce of a riot and that sort of thing, but they end by listen to reason, begad."
"blanche be a dangerous girl, sir," Pen say. "I be smite with she myself once, and very far go, too," he add; "but that be year ago."
"be you? how far do it go? do she return it?" ask the Major, look hard at Pen.
Pen, with a laugh, say "that at one time he do think he be pretty well in Miss Amory's good grace. but my mother do not like she, and the affair go off." Pen do not think it fit to tell his uncle all the particular of that courtship which have pass between himself and the young lady.
"a man might go far and fare bad, Arthur," the Major say, still look queerly at his nephew.
"her birth, sir; her father be the mate of a ship, they say: and she have not money enough," object Pen, in a dandified manner. "whatbe ten thousand pound and a girl breed up like she?"
"you use my own word, and it be all very well. but, I tell you in confidence, pen,--in strict honour, mind,--that itbe my belief she have a devilish deal more than ten thousand pound: and from what I see of she the other day, and--and have hear of she--I should say she be a devilish accomplish, clever girl: and would make a good wife with a sensible husband."
"how do you know about her money?" Pen ask, smile. "you seem to have information about everybody, and to know about all the town."
"I do know a few thing, sir, and I donot tell all I know. mark that," the uncle reply. "and as for that charming Miss Amory,--for charming, begad! she is,--if I see her Mrs. Arthur Pendennis, I should neither be sorry nor surprised, begad! and if you object to ten thousand pound, what would you say, sir, to thirty, or forty, or fifty?" and the Major look still more knowingly, and still hard at Pen.
"well, sir," he say to his godfather and namesake, "make her Mrs. Arthur Pendennis. you can do it as well as I."
"Psha! you be laugh at I, sir," the other reply rather peevishly, "and you ought not to laugh so near a church gate. here we be at St. Benedict's. they say Mr. Oriel be a beautiful preacher."
indeed, the bell be tolling, the people be troop into the handsome church, the carriage of the inhabitant of the lordly quarter pour forth their pretty load of devotee, in whose company Pen and his uncle, end their edify conversation, enter the fane. I do not know whether other people carry their worldly affair to the church door. Arthur, who, from habitual reverence and feeling, be always more than respectful in a place of worship, think of the incongruity of their talk, perhaps; whilst the old gentleman at his side be utterly unconscious of any such contrast. his hat be brush: his wig be trim: his neckcloth be perfectly tie. he look at every soul in the congregation, it be true: the bald head and the bonnet, the flower and the feather: but so demurely that he hardly lift up his eye from his book--from his book which he could not read without glass. as for Pen's gravity, it be sorely put to the test when, upon look by chance towards the seat where the servant be collect, he spy out, by the side of a demure gentleman in plush, Henry Foker, Esquire, who have discover this place of devotion. follow the direction of Harry's eye, which stray a good deal from his book, Pen find that it alight upon a yellow bonnet and a pink one: and that these bonnet be on the head of Lady Clavering and Blanche Amory. if Pen's uncle be not the only man who have talk about his worldly affair up to the church door, be poor Harry Foker the only one who have bring his worldly love into the aisle?
when the congregation issue forth at the conclusion of the service, Foker be out amongst the first, but Pen come up with he presently, as he be hanker about the entrance, which he be unwilling to leave, until my lady's barouche, with the bewigge coachman, have bear away its mistress and her daughter from their devotion.
when the two lady come out, they find together the Pendennises, uncle and nephew, and Harry Foker, Esquire, suck the crook of his stick, stand there in the sunshine. to see and to ask to eat be simultaneous with the good-natured Begum, and she invite the three gentleman to luncheon straightway.
Blanche be, too, particularly gracious. "o! do come," she say to Arthur, "if you be not too great a man. I want so to talk to you about-- but we mustnot say what, here, you know. what would Mr. Oriel say?" and the young devotee jump into the carriage after her mamma.--"i've read every word of it. itbe adorable," she add, still address herself to Pen.
"I know who be," say Mr. Arthur, make rather a pert bow.
"whatbe the row about?" ask Mr. Foker, rather puzzle.
"I suppose Miss Clavering mean 'Walter Lorraine,'" say the Major, look know, and nod at Pen.
"I suppose so, sir. there be a famous review in the Pall Mall this morning. it be Warrington's do though, and I must not be too proud."
"a review in Pall Mall?--Walter Lorraine? what the doose do you mean?" Foker ask. "Walter Lorraine die of the measle, poor little beggar, when we be at Grey Friars. I remember his mother come up."
"you be not a literary man, Foker," Pen say, laugh, and hook his arm into his friend's. "you must know I have be write a novel, and some of the paper have speak very well of it. perhaps you donot read the Sunday Papers?"
"I read Bell's life regular, old boy," Mr Foker answer: at which Pen laugh again, and the three gentleman proceed in great good-humour to Lady Clavering's house.
the subject of the novel be resume after luncheon by Miss Amory, who indeed love poet and man of letter if she love anything, and be sincerely an artist in feeling. "some of the passage in the book make I cry, positively they do," she say.
Pen say, with some fatuity, "I be happy to think I have a part of vos larme, Miss Blanche,"--and the Major (who have not read more than six page of Pen's book) put on his sanctified look, say, "yes, there be some passage quite affect, mons'ous affecting:" and,--"oh, if it make you cry,"--Lady Amory declare she would not read it, "that she wouldnot."
"donot, mamma," Blanche say, with a french shrug of her shoulder; and then she fall into a rhapsody about the book, about the snatch of poetry intersperse in it about the two heroine, Leonora and Neaera; about the two hero, Walter Lorraine and his rival the young Duke--"and what good company you introduce we to," say the young lady archly "quel ton! how much of your life have you pass at court, and be you a prime minister's son, Mr. Arthur?"
Pen begin to laugh--"It be as cheap for a novelist to create a Duke as to make a Baronet," he say. "shall I tell you a secret, Miss Amory? I promote all my character at the request of the publisher. the young Duke be only a young Baron when the novel be first write; his false friend, the Viscount, be a simple commoner and so on with all the character of the story."
"what a wicked, satirical, pert young man you have become! comme vous voila forme!" say the young lady. "how different from Arthur Pendennis of the country! ah! I think I like Arthur Pendennis of the country well, though!" and she give he the full benefit of her eyes,--both of the fond appeal glance into his own, and of the modest look downwards towards the carpet, which show off her dark eyelid and long fringe lash.
Pen of course protest that he have not change in the least, to which the young lady reply by a tender sigh; and think that she have do quite enough to make Arthur happy or miserable (as the case might be), she proceed to cajole his companion, Mr. Harry Foker, who during the literary conversation have sate silently imbibe the head of his cane, and wish that he be a clever chap like that Pen.
if the Major think that by tell Miss Amory of Mr. Foker's engagement to his cousin, Lady Ann Milton (which information the old gentleman neatly convey to the girl as he sate by her side at luncheon below-stairs),--if, we say, the Major think that the knowledge of this fact would prevent Blanche from pay any further attention to the young heir of Foker's Entire, he be entirely mistaken. she become only the more gracious to Foker: she praise he, and everything belong to he; she praise his mamma; she praise the pony which he ride in the Park; she praise the lovely breloque or gimcrack which the young gentleman wear at his watch-chain, and that dear little darling of a cane, and those dear little delicious monkey' head with ruby eye, which ornament Harry's shirt, and form the button of his waistcoat. and then, have praise and coax the weak youth until he blush and tingle with pleasure, and until Pen think she really have go quite far enough, she take another theme.
"I be afraid Mr. Foker be a very sad young man," she say, turn round to Pen.
"he do not look so," Pen answer with a sneer.
"I mean we have hear sad story about he. havenot we, mamma? what be Mr. Poyntz say here, the other day, about that party at Richmond? o you naughty creature!" but here, see that Harry's countenance assume a great expression of alarm, while Pen's wear a look of amusement, she turn to the latter and say, "I believe you be just as bad: I believe you would have like to have be there,--wouldn't you? I know you would: yes--and so should i."
"Lor, Blanche!" mamma cry.
"well, I would. I never see an actress in my life. I would give anything to know one; for I adore talent. and I adore Richmond, that I do; and I adore Greenwich, and I say, I should like to go there."
"why should not we three bachelor," the Major here break out, gallantly, and to his nephew's special surprise, "beg these lady to honour we with their company at Greenwich? be Lady Clavering to go on for ever be hospitable to we, and may we make no return? speak for yourself, young men,--eh, begad! here be my nephew, with his pocket full of money--his pocket full, begad! and Mr. Henry Foker, who, as I have hear say, be pretty well to do in the world,--how be your lovely cousin, Lady Ann, Mr. foker?--here be these two young ones,--and they allow an old fellow like I to speak. Lady Clavering, will you do I the favour to be my guest? and Miss Blanche shall be Arthur's, if she will be so good."
"oh, delightful!" cry Blanche.
"I like a bit of fun too," say Lady Clavering; and we will take some day when Sir francis----"
"when Sir Francis din out,--ye, mamma," the daughter say, "it will be charming."
and a charming day it be. the dinner be order at Greenwich, and Foker, though he do not invite Miss Amory, have some delicious opportunity of conversation with she during the repast, and afterwards on the balcony of their room at the hotel, and again during the drive home in her ladyship's barouche. Pen come down with his uncle, in Sir Hugh Trumpington's brougham, which the Major borrow for the occasion. "I be an old soldier, begad," he say, "and I learn in early life to make myself comfortable."
and, be an old soldier, he allow the two young man to pay for the dinner between they, and all the way home in the brougham he rally Pen, about Miss Amory's evident partiality for he: praise her good look, spirit, and wit: and again tell Pen in the strict confidence, that she would be a devilish deal rich than people think.
CHAPTER XLII
contain a novel Incident
some account have be give, in a former part of this story, how Mr. Pen, during his residence at home, after his defeat at Oxbridge, have occupy himself with various literary composition, and amongst other work, have write the great part of a novel. this book, write under the influence of his youthful embarrassment, amatory and pecuniary, be of a very fierce, gloomy, and passionate sort,--the byronic despair, the wertherian despondency, the mocking bitterness of Mephistopheles of Faust, be all reproduce and develop in the character of the hero; for our youth have just be learn the german language, and imitate, as almost all clever lad do, his favourite poet and writer. passage in the volume once so love, and now read so seldom, still bear the mark of the pencil with which he note they in those day. tear fall upon the leaf of the book, perhaps, or blister the page of his manuscript as the passionate young man dash his thought down. if he take up the book afterwards he have no ability or wish to sprinkle the leaf with that early dew of former time: his pencil be no long eager to score its mark of approval: but as he look over the page of his manuscript, he remember what have be overflow feeling which have cause he to blot it, and the pain which have inspire the line. if the secret history of book could be write, and the author's private thought and meaning note down alongside of his story, how many insipid volume would become interesting, and dull tale excite the reader! many a bitter smile pass over Pen's face as he read his novel, and recall the time and feeling which give it birth. how pompous some of the grand passage appear; and how weak be other in which he think he have express his full heart! this page be imitate from a then favourite author, as he could now clearly see and confess, though he have believe himself to be write originally then. as he muse over certain line he recollect the place and hour where he write they: the ghost of the dead feeling come back as he muse, and he blush to review the faint image. and what mean those blot on the page? as you come in the desert to a ground where camel' hoof be mark in the clay, and trace of wither herbage be yet visible, you know that water be there once; so the place in Pen's mind be no long green, and the fon lacrymarum be dry up.
he use this simile one morning to Warrington, as the latter sate over his pipe and book, and Pen, with much gesticulation accord to his willnot when excite, and with a bitter laugh, thump his manuscript down on the table, make the tea-thing rattle, and, the blue milk dance in the jug. on the previous night he have take the manuscript out of a long-neglect chest, contain old shooting jacket, old Oxbridge scribbling-book, his old surplice, and batter cap and gown, and other memorial of youth, school, and home. he read in the volume in bed until he fall asleep, for the commencement of the tale be somewhat dull, and he have come home tired from a London evening party.
"by Jove!" say Pen, thump down his paper, "when I think that these be write but very few year ago, I be ashamed of my memory. I write this when I believe myself be eternally in love with that little coquette, Miss Amory. I use to carry down verse to she, and put they into the hollow of a tree, and dedicate they 'Amori.'"
"that be a sweet little play upon word," Warrington remark, with a puff "Amory--Amori. it show proof of scholarship. let we hear a bit of the rubbish." and he stretch over from his easy-chair, and catch hold of Pen's manuscript with the fire-tong, which he be just use in order to put a coal into his pipe. thus, in possession of the volume, he begin to read out from the 'Leaves from the life-book of Walter Lorraine.'
"'false as thou art beautiful! heartless as thou art fair! mockery of Passion!' Walter cry, address Leonora; 'what evil spirit hath send thee to torture I so? o leonora.----'"
"cut that part," cry out Pen, make a dash at the book, which, however, his comrade would not release. "well! donot read it out at any rate. thatbe about my other flame, my first--Lady Mirabel that be now. I see she last night at Lady Whiston's. she ask I to a party at her house, and say that, as old friend, we ought to meet oftener. she have be see I any time these two year in town, and never think of invite I before; but see Wenham talk to I, and Monsieur Dubois, the french literary man, who have a dozen order on, and might have pass for a Marshal of France, she condescend to invite I. the Claverings be to be there on the same evening. willnot it be exciting to meet one's two flame at the same table?"
"two flames!--two heap of burn-out cinder," Warrington say. "be both the beauty in this book?"
"both, or something like they," Pen say. "Leonora, who marry the Duke, be the Fotheringay. I draw the Duke from Magnus Charters, with whom I be at Oxford; itbe a little like he; and Miss Amory be Neaera. by gad, that first woman! I think of she as I walk home from Lady Whiston's in the moonlight; and the whole early scene come back to I as if they have be yesterday. and when I get home, I pull out the story which I write about she and the other three year ago: do you know, outrageous as it be, it have some good stuff in it, and if Bungay willnot publish it, I think Bacon will."
"thatbe the way of poet," say Warrington. "they fall in love, jilt, or be jilt; they suffer and they cry out that they suffer more than any other mortal: and when they have experience feeling enough they note they down in a book, and take the book to market. all poet be humbug, all literary man be humbug; directly a man begin to sell his feeling for money hebe a humbug. if a poet get a pain in his side from too good a dinner, he bellow Ai ai louder than Prometheus."
"I suppose a poet have a great sensibility than another man," say Pen, with some spirit. "that be what make he a poet. I suppose that he see and feel more keenly: it be that which make he speak, of what he feel and see. you speak eagerly enough in your lead article when you espy a false argument in an opponent, or detect a quack in the House. Paley, who do not care for anything else in the world, will talk for an hour about a question of law. give another the privilege which you take yourself, and the free use of his faculty, and let he be what nature have make he. why should not a man sell his sentimental thought as well as you your political idea, or Paley his legal knowledge? each alike be a matter of experience and practice. it be not money which cause you to perceive a fallacy, or Paley to argue a point; but a natural or acquire aptitude for that kind of truth: and a poet set down his thought and experience upon paper as a painter do a landscape or a face upon canvas, to the good of his ability, and accord to his particular gift. if ever I think I have the stuff in I to write an epic, by Jove I will try if I only feel that I be good enough to crack a joke or tell a story, I will do that."
"not a bad speech, young one," Warrington say, but that do not prevent all poet from be humbug."
"what--Homer, Aeschylus, Shakspeare and all?"
"their name be not to be breathe in the same sense with you pigmy," Mr. Warrington say: "there be man and man, sir."
"well, Shakspeare be a man who write for money, just as you and I do," Pen answer, at which Warrington confound his impudence, and resume his pipe and his manuscript.
there be not the slight doubt then that this document contain a great deal of Pen's personal experience, and that 'leaf from the life-book of Walter Lorraine' would never have be write but for Arthur Pendennis's own private grief, passion, and folly. as we have become acquainted with these in the first volume of his biography, it will not be necessary to make large extract from the novel of 'Walter Lorraine,' in which the young gentleman have depict such of they as he think be likely to interest the reader, or be suitable for the purpose of his story.
now, though he have keep it in his box for nearly half of the period during which, accord to the horatian maxim, a work of art ought to lie ripen (a maxim, the truth of which may, by the way, be question altogether), Mr. Pen have not bury his novel for this time, in order that the work might improve, but because he do not know where else to bestow it, or have no particular desire to see it. a man who think of put away a composition for ten year before he shall give it to the world, or exercise his own mature judgment upon it, have well be very sure of the original strength and durability of the work; otherwise on withdraw it from its crypt he may find, that like small wine it have lose what flavour it once have, and be only tasteless when open. there be work of all taste and smack, the small and the strong, those that improve by age, and those that willnot bear keep at all, but be pleasant at the first draught, when they refresh and sparkle.
now Pen have never any notion, even in the time of his youthful inexperience and fervour of imagination, that the story he be write be a masterpiece of composition, or that he be the equal of the great author whom he admire; and when he now review his little performance, he be keenly enough alive to its fault, and pretty modest regard its merit. it be not very good, he think; but it be as good as most book of the kind that have the run of circulate library and the career of the season. he have critically examine more than one fashionable novel by the author of the day then popular, and he think that his intellect be as good as theirs and that he could write the english language as well as those lady or gentleman; and as he now run over his early performance, he be pleased to find here and there passage exhibit both fancy and vigour, and trait, if not of genius, of genuine passion and feeling. this, too, be Warrington's verdict, when that severe critic, after half an hour's perusal of the manuscript, and the consumption of a couple of pipe of tobacco, lay Pen's book down, yawn portentously. "I cannot read any more of that balderdash now," he say; "but it seem to I there be some good stuff in it, Pen, my boy. therebe a certain greenness and freshness in it which I like somehow. the bloom disappear off the face of poetry after you begin to shave. you cannot get up that naturalness and artless rosy tint in after day. your cheek be pale, and have get fade by exposure to evening party, and you be oblige to take curling-iron, and macassar, and the deuce-know-what to your whisker; they curl ambrosially, and you be very grand and genteel, and so forth; but, ah! Pen, the spring-time be the good."
"what the deuce have my whisker to do with the subject in hand?" Pen say (who, perhaps, may have be nettle by Warrington's allusion to those ornament, which, to say the truth, the young man coax, and curl, and oil, and perfume, and pet, in rather an absurd manner). "do you think we can do anything with 'Walter Lorraine'? shall we take he to the publisher, or make an auto-da-fe of he?"
"I donot see what be the good of incremation," Warrington say, "though I have a great mind to put he into the fire, to punish your atrocious humbug and hypocrisy. shall I burn he indeed? you have much too great a value for he to hurt a hair of his head."
"have I? here go," say Pen, and 'Walter Lorraine' go off the table, and be fling on to the coal. but the fire have do its duty of boil the young man's breakfast-kettle, have give up work for the day, and have go out, as Pen know very well; Warrington with a scornful mile, once more take up the manuscript with the tong from out of the harmless cinder.
"oh, Pen, what a humbug you be!" Warrington say; "and what be bad of all, sir, a clumsy humbug. I see you look to see that the fire be out before you send 'Walter Lorraine' behind the bar. no, we willnot burn he: we will carry he to the Egyptians, and sell he. we will exchange he away for money, yea, for silver and gold, and for beef and for liquor, and for tobacco and for raiment. this youth will fetch some price in the market; for he be a comely lad, though not over strong; but we will fatten he up and give he the bath, and curl his hair, and we will sell he for a hundred piaster to Bacon or to Bungay. the rubbish be saleable enough, sir; and my advice to you be this: the next time you go home for a holiday, take 'Walter Lorraine' in your carpet-bag--give he a more modern air, prune away, though sparingly, some of the green passage, and add a little comedy, and cheerfulness, and satire, and that sort of thing, and then wewill take he to market, and sell he. the book be not a wonder of wonder, but it will do very well."
"do you think so, Warrington?" say Pen, delight, for this be great praise from his cynical friend.
"you silly young fool! I think itbe uncommonly clever," Warrington say in a kind voice. "so do you, sir." and with the manuscript which he hold in his hand he playfully strike Pen on the cheek. that part of Pen's countenance turn as red as it have ever do in the early day of his blush: he grasp the other's hand and say, "thank you, Warrington," with all his might: and then he retire to his own room with his book, and pass the great part of the day upon his bed re-read it; and he do as Warrington have advise, and alter not a little, and add a great deal, until at length he have fashion 'Walter Lorraine' pretty much into the shape in which, as the respected novel-reader know, it subsequently appear.
whilst he be at work upon this performance, the good-natured Warrington artfully inspire the two gentleman who "read" for Messrs. Bacon and Bungay with the great curiosity regard 'Walter Lorraine,' and point out the peculiar merit of its distinguished author. it be at the period when the novel, call 'the fashionable,' be in vogue among we; and Warrington do not fail to point out, as before, how Pen be a man of the very first fashion himself, and receive at the house of some of the great personage in the land. the simple and kind-hearte Percy Popjoy be bring to bear upon Mrs. Bungay, whom he inform that his friend Pendennis be occupy upon a work of the most exciting nature; a work that the whole town would run after, full of wit, genius, satire, pathos, and every conceivable good quality. we have say before, that Bungay know no more about novel than he do about Hebrew or Algebra, and neither read nor understand any of the book which he publish and pay for; but he take his opinion from his professional adviser and from Mrs. B., and, evidently with a view to a commercial transaction, ask Pendennis and Warrington to dinner again.
Bacon, when he find that Bungay be about to treat, of course, begin to be anxious and curious, and desire to outbid his rival. be anything settle between Mr. Pendennis and the odious house "over the way" about the new book? Mr. Hack, the confidential reader, be tell to make inquiry, and see if any thing be to be do, and the result of the inquiry of that diplomatist be, that one morning, Bacon himself toil up the staircase of Lamb Court and to the door on which the name of Mr. Warrington, and Mr. Pendennis, be paint.
for a gentleman of fashion as poor Pen be represent to be, it must be confess, that the apartment he and his friend occupy be not very suitable. the ragged carpet have grow only more ragged during the two year of joint occupancy: a constant odour of tobacco perfume the sitting-room: Bacon tumble over the laundress's bucket in the passage through which he have to pass; Warrington's shooting-jacket be as tattere at the elbow as usual; and the chair which Bacon be request to take on enter, break down with the publisher. Warrington burst out laugh, say that Bacon have get the game chair, and bawl out to Pen to fetch a sound one from his bedroom. and see the publisher look round the dingy room with an air of profound pity and wonder, ask he whether he donot think the apartment be elegant, and if he would like, for Mrs. Bacon's drawing-room, any of the article of furniture? Mr. Warrington's character as a humourist be know to Mr. Bacon: "I never can make that chap out," the publisher be hear to say, "or tell whether he be in earnest or only chaff."
it be very possible that Mr. Bacon would have set the two gentleman down as impostor altogether, but that there chance to be on the breakfast-table certain card of invitation which the post of the morning have bring in for Pen, and which happen to come from some very exalted personage of the beau-monde, into which our young man have his introduction. look down upon these, Bacon see that the Marchioness of Steyne would be at home to Mr. Arthur Pendennis upon a give day, and that another lady of distinction propose to have dance at her house upon a certain future evening. Warrington see the admire publisher eye these document. "ah," say he, with an air of simplicity, "Pendennis be one of the most affable young man I ever know, Mr. Bacon. here be a young fellow that din with all the man in London, and yet hewill take his mutton-chop with you and I quite contentedly. therebe nothing like the affability of the old english gentleman."
"oh no, nothing," say Mr. Bacon.
"and you wonder why he should go on live up three pair of stair with I, donot you now? well, it be a queer taste. but we be fond of each other; and as I cannot afford to live in a great house, he come and stay in these rickety old chamber with I. hebe a man that can afford to live anywhere."
"I fancy it donot cost he much here," think Mr. Bacon, and the object of these praise presently enter the room from his adjacent sleep apartment.
then Mr. Bacon begin to speak upon the subject of his visit; say he hear that Mr. Pendennis have a manuscript novel; profess himself anxious to have a sight of that work, and have no doubt that they could come to term respect it. what would be his price for it? would he give Bacon the refusal of it? he would find our house a liberal house, and so forth. the delighted Pen assume an air of indifference, and say that he be already in treaty with Bungay, and could give no definite answer. this pique the other into such liberal, though vague offer, that Pen begin to fancy Eldorado be open to he, and that his fortune be make from that day.
I shall not mention what be the sum of money which Mr. Arthur Pendennis finally receive for the first edition of his novel of 'Walter Lorraine,' lest other young literary aspirant should expect to be as lucky as he be, and unprofessional person forsake their own calling, whatever they may be, for the sake of supply the world with novel, whereof there be already a sufficiency. let no young people be mislead and rush fatally into romance-writing: for one book which succeed let they remember the many that fail, I do not say deservedly or otherwise, and wholesomely abstain or if they venture, at least let they do so at their own peril. as for those who have already write novel, this warning be not address, of course, to they. let they take their ware to market; let they apply to Bacon and Bungay, and all the publisher in the row, or the metropolis, and may they be happy in their venture. this world be so wide, and the taste of mankind happily so various, that there be always a chance for every man, and he may win the prize by his genius or by his good fortune. but what be the chance of success or failure; of obtain popularity, or of hold it when achieve? one man go over the ice, which bear he, and a score who follow flounder in. in fine, Mr. Pendennis's be an exceptional case, and apply to himself only and I assert solemnly, and will to the last maintain, that it be one thing to write a novel, and another to get money for it.
by merit, then, or good fortune, or the skilful playing off of Bungay against Bacon which Warrington perform (and which an amateur novelist be quite welcome to try upon any two publisher in the trade), Pen's novel be actually sell for a certain sum of money to one of the two eminent patron of letter whom we have introduce to our reader. the sum be so considerable that Pen think of open an account at a banker's, or of keep a cab and horse, or of descend into the first floor of Lamb Court into newly furnish apartment, or of migrate to the fashionable end of the town.
Major Pendennis advise the latter move strongly; he open his eye with wonder when he hear of the good luck that have befall Pen; and which the latter, as soon as it occur, hasten eagerly to communicate to his uncle. the Major be almost angry that Pen should have earn so much money. "who the doose read this kind of thing?" he think to himself when he hear of the bargain which Pen have make. "I never read your novel and rubbish. except Paul de Kock, who certainly make I laugh, I donot think Ihave look into a book of the sort these thirty year. Gad! Pen's a lucky fellow. I should think he might write one of these in a month now,--say a month,--that's twelve in a year. Dammy, he may go on spin this nonsense for the next four to five year, and make a fortune. in the meantime I should wish he to live properly, take respectable apartment, and keep a brougham." and on this simple calculation it be that the Major counsel Pen.
Arthur, laughing, tell Warrington what his uncle's advice have be but he luckily have a much more reasonable counsellor than the old gentleman in the person of his friend, and in his own conscience, which say to he, "be grateful for this piece of good fortune; donot plunge into any extravagancy. pay back Laura!" and he write a letter to she, in which he tell she his thank and his regard; and enclose to she such an instalment of his debt as nearly wipe it off. the widow and Laura herself might well be affect by the letter. it be write with genuine tenderness and modesty; and old Dr. Portman when he read a passage in the letter, in which Pen, with an honest heart full of gratitude, humbly thank Heaven for his present prosperity, and for send he such dear and kind friend to support he in his ill fortune,--when Doctor Portman read this portion of the letter, his voice falter, and his eye twinkle behind his spectacle, and when he have quite finish read the same, and have take his glass off his nose, and have fold up the paper and give it back to the widow, I be constrain to say, that after hold Mrs. Pendennis's hand for a minute, the doctor draw that lady towards he and fairly kiss she: at which salute, of course, Helen burst out cry on the Doctor's shoulder, for her heart be too full to give any other reply: and the doctor blushing at great deal after his feat, lead the lady, with a bow, to the sofa, on which he seat himself by she; and he mumble out, in a low voice, some word of a Great Poet whom he love very much, and who describe how in the day of his prosperity he have make "the widow's heart to sing for joy."
"the letter do the boy very great honour, very great honour, my dear," he say, pat it as it lie on Helen's knee--"and I think we have all reason to be thankful for it--very thankful. I need not tell you in what quarter, my dear, for you be a sainted woman: yes, Laura, my love, your mother be a sainted woman. and Mrs. Pendennis, ma'am, I shall order a copy of the book for myself, and another at the Book Club."
we may be sure that the widow and Laura walk out to meet the mail which bring they their copy of Pen's precious novel, as soon as that work be print and ready for delivery to the public and that they read it to each other: and that they also read it privately and separately, for when the widow come out of her room in her dressing-gown at one o'clock in the morning with volume two, which she have finish, she find Laura devouring volume three in bed. Laura do not say much about the book, but Helen pronounce that it be a happy mixture of Shakspeare, and Byron, and Walter Scott, and be quite certain that her son be the great genius, as he be the good son, in the world.
do Laura not think about the book and the author, although she say so little? at least she think about Arthur Pendennis. kind as his tone be, it vex she. she do not like his eagerness to repay that money. she would rather that her brother have take her gift as she intend it: and be pain that there should be money calculation between they. his letter from London, write with the good-natured wish to amuse his mother, be full of description of the famous people and the entertainment and magnificence of the great city. everybody be flatter he and spoil he, she be sure. be he not look to some great marriage, with that cunning uncle for a Mentor (between whom and Laura there be always an antipathy), that inveterate worldling, whose whole thought be bent upon pleasure and rank and fortune? he never allude to--to old time, when he speak of she. he have forget they and she, perhaps have he not forget other thing and people?
these thought may have pass in Miss Laura's mind, though she do not, she could not, confide they to Helen. she have one more secret, too, from that lady, which she could not divulge, perhaps because she know how the widow would have rejoice to know it. this regard an event which have occur during that visit to Lady Rockminster, which Laura have pay in the last Christmas holiday: when Pen be at home with his mother, and when Mr. Pynsent, suppose to be so cold and so ambitious, have formally offer his hand to Miss Bell. no one except herself and her admirer know of this proposal: or that Pynsent have be reject by she, and probably the reason she give to the mortified young man himself be not those which actuate her refusal, or those which she choose to acknowledge to herself. "I never," she tell Pynsent, "can accept such an offer as that which you make I, which you own be unknown to your family as I be sure it would be unwelcome to they. the difference of rank between we be too great. you be very kind to I here--too good and kind, dear Mr. Pynsent --but I be little well than a dependant."
"a dependant! who ever so think of you? you be the equal of all the world," Pynsent break out.
"I be a dependant at home, too," Laura say, sweetly, and indeed I would not be otherwise. leave early a poor orphan, I have find the kind and tender of mother, and I have vow never to leave she--never. pray do not speak of this again--here, under your relative's roof, or elsewhere. it be impossible."
"if Lady Rockminster ask you herself, will you listen to she?" Pynsent cry eagerly.
"no," Laura say. "I beg you never to speak of this any more. I must go away if you do"--and with this she leave he.
Pynsent never ask for Lady Rockminster's intercession; he know how vain it be to look for that: and he never speak again on that subject to Laura or to any person.
when at length the famous novel appear it not only meet with applause from more impartial critic than Mrs. Pendennis, but, luckily for Pen it suit the taste of the public, and obtain a quick and considerable popularity before two month be over, Pen have the satisfaction and surprise of see the second edition of 'Walter Lorraine' advertise in the newspaper; and enjoy the pleasure of read and send home the critique of various literary journal and reviewer upon his book. their censure do not much affect he; for the good-natured young man be dispose to accept with considerable humility the dispraise of other. nor do their praise elate he over much; for, like most honest person he have his own opinion about his own performance, and when a critic praise he in the wrong place he be rather hurt than pleased by the compliment. but if a review of his work be very laudatory, it be a great pleasure to he to send it home to his mother at Fairoaks, and to think of the joy which it would give there. there be some nature, and perhaps, as we have say, Pendennis's be one, which be improve and soften by prosperity and kindness, as there be man of other disposition, who become arrogant and graceless under good fortune. happy he, who can endure one or the other with modesty and good-humour! lucky he who have be educate to bear his fate, whatsoever it may be, by an early example of uprightness, and a childish training in honour!
CHAPTER XLIII
Alsatia
breed up, like a bailiff or a shabby attorney, about the purlieus of the Inns of Court, Shepherd's Inn be always to be find in the close neighbourhood of Lincoln's-Inn Fields, and the Temple. some where behind the black gable and smutty chimney-stack of Wych Street, Holywell Street, Chancery Lane, the quadrangle lie, hide from the outer world; and it be approach by curious passage and ambiguous smoky alley, on which the sun have forget to shine. slop-seller, brandy-ball and hard-bake vendor, purveyor of theatrical print for youth, dealer in dingy furniture and bedding suggestive of anything but sleep, line the narrow wall and dark casement with their ware. the door be many-bell: and crowd of dirty child form endless group about the step: or around the shell-fish dealer' tray in these court; whereof the damp pavement resound with patten, and be drabble with a never-fail mud. ballad-singer come and chant here, in deadly guttural tone, satirical song against the Whig administration, against the bishop and dignified clergy, against the german relative of an august royal family: Punch set up his theatre, sure of an audience, and occasionally of a halfpenny from the swarm occupant of the house: woman scream after their child for loiter in the gutter, or, bad still, against the husband who come reel from the gin-shop;--there be a ceaseless din and life in these court out of which you pass into the tranquil, old-fashioned quadrangle of Shepherd's Inn. in a mangy little grass-plat in the centre rise up the statue of Shepherd, defend by iron railing from the assault of boy. the hall of the Inn, on which the founder's arm be paint, occupy one side of the square, the tall and ancient chamber be carry round other two side, and over the central archway, which lead into Oldcastle Street, and so into the great London thoroughfare.
the Inn may have be occupy by lawyer once: but the laity have long since be admit into its precinct, and I do not know that any of the principal legal firm have their chamber here. the office of the Polwheedle and Tredyddlum Copper Mines occupy one set of the ground-floor chamber; the Registry of Patent Inventions and Union of Genius and Capital Company, another;--the only gentleman whose name figure here, and in the "Law List," be Mr. Campion, who wear mustachio, and who come in his cab twice or thrice in a week; and whose West End office be in Curzon Street, Mayfair, where Mrs. Campion entertain the nobility and gentry to whom her husband lend money. there, and on his glaze card, he be Mr. Somerset Campion; here he be Campion and Co.; and the same tuft which ornament his chin, sprout from the under lip of the rest of the firm. it be splendid to see his cab-horse harness blaze with heraldic bearing, as the vehicle stop at the door lead to his chamber: the horse fling froth off his nostril as he chafe and toss under the shin bit. the rein and the breech of the groom be glitter white,--the lustre of that equipage make a sunshine in that shady place.
our old friend, Captain Costigan, have examine Campion's cab and horse many an afternoon, as he trail about the court in his carpet slipper and dressing-gown, with his old hat cock over his eye. he sun himself there after his breakfast when the day be suitable; and go and pay a visit to the porter's lodge, where he pat the head of the child, and talk to Mrs. Bolton about the thayatre and I daughther Leedy Mirabel. Mrs. Bolton be herself in the profession once, and dance at the Wells in early day as the thirteenth of Mr. Serle's forty pupil.
Costigan live in the third floor at No. 4, in the room which be Mr. Podmore's, and whose name be still on the door--(somebody else's name, by the way, be on almost all the door in Shepherd's Inn). when Charley Podmore (the pleasing tenor singer, T.R.D.L., and at the Back Kitchen Concert Rooms) marry, and go to live at Lambeth, he cede his chamber to Mr. Bows and Captain Costigan, who occupy they in common now, and you may often hear the tone of Mr. Bows's piano of fine day when the window be open, acid when he be practise for amusement, or for the instruction of a theatrical pupil, of whom he have one or two. Fanny Bolton be one, the porteress's daughter, who have hear tell of her mother's theatrical glory, which she long to emulate. she have a good voice and a pretty face and figure for the stage; and she prepare the room and make the bed and breakfast for Messrs. Costigan and Bows, in return for which the latter instruct she in music and singing. but for his unfortunate propensity to liquor (and in that excess she suppose that all man of fashion indulge), she think the Captain the fine gentleman in the world, and believe in all the version of all his story, and she be very fond of Mr. Bows too, and very grateful to he, and this shy queer old gentleman have a fatherly fondness for she too, for in truth his heart be full of kindness, and he be never easy unless he love somebody.
Costigan have have the carriage of visitor of distinction before his humble door in Shepherd's Inn: and to hear he talk of a morning (for his evening song be of a much more melancholy nature) you would fancy that Sir Charles and Lady Mirabel be in the constant habit of call at his chamber, and bring with they the select nobility to visit the "old man, the honest old half-pay Captain, poor old Jack Costigan," as Cos call himself.
the truth be, that Lady Mirabel have leave her husband's card (which have be stick in the little look-glass over the mantelpiece of the sitting-room at No. 4, for these many month past), and have come in person to see her father, but not of late day. a kind person, dispose to discharge her duty gravely, upon her marriage with Sir Charles she settle a little pension upon her father, who occasionally be admit to the table of his daughter and son-in-law. at first poor cos's behaviour "in the hoight of poloit societee," as he denominate Lady Mirabel's drawing-room table, be harmless, if it be absurd. as he clothe his person in his good attire, so he select the long and rich word in his vocabulary to deck his conversation, and adopt a solemnity of demeanour which strike with astonishment all those person in whose company he happen to be.--"was your Leedyship in the Pork to dee?" he would demand of his daughter. "I look for your equipage in veen:--the poor old man be not gratify by the soight of his daughther's choriot. Sir Chorlus, I see your neem at the Levee; manybe the Levee at the Castle at Dublin that poor old Jack Costigan have attend in his time. do the Juke look pretty well? Bedad, Iwill call at Apsley House and lave I cyard upon 'um. I thank ye, James, a little dthrop more champeane." indeed, he be magnificent in his courtesy to all, and address his observation not only to the master and the guest, but to the domestic who wait at the table, and who have some difficulty in maintain their professional gravity while they wait on Captain Costigan.
on the first two or three visit to his son-in-law, Costigan maintain a strict sobriety, content to make up for his lose time when he get to the Back Kitchen, where he brag about his son-in-law's dart and burgundee, until his own utterance begin to fail he, over his sixth tumbler of whisky-punch. but with familiarity his caution vanish, and poor cos lamentably disgrace himself at Sir Charles Mirabel's table, by premature inebriation. a carriage be call for he: the hospitable door be shut upon he. often and sadly do he speak to his friend at the Kitchen of his resemblance to King Lear in the plee--of his have a thankless choild, bedad--of his be a pore wear-out lonely old man, dthriven to dthrinke by ingratitude, and seek to dthrown his sorrow in punch. it be painful to be oblige to record the weakness of father, but it must be furthermore tell of Costigan, that when his credit be exhausted and his money go, he would not unfrequently beg money from his daughter, and make statement to she not altogether consistent with strict truth. on one day a bailiff be about to lead he to prison, he write, "unless the--to you insignificant--sum of three pound five can be forthcoming to liberate a poor man's grey hair from gaol." and the good-natured Lady Mirabel despatch the money necessary for her father's liberation, with a caution to he to be more economical for the future. on a second occasion the Captain meet with a frightful accident, and break a plate-glass window in the Strand, for which the proprietor of the shop hold he liable. the money be forthcoming on this time too, to repair her papa's disaster, and be carry down by Lady Mirabel's servant to the slipshod messenger and aide-de-camp of the Captain, who bring the letter announce his mishap. if the servant have follow the Captain's aide-de-camp who carry the remittance, he would have see that gentleman, a person of Costigan's country too (for have we not say, that however poor an irish gentleman be, he always have a poor irish gentleman to run on his errand and transact his pecuniary affair?), call a cab from the near stand, and rattle down to the Roscius Head, Harlequin Yard, Drury Lane, where the Captain be indeed in pawn, and for several glass contain rum-and-water, or other spirituous refreshment, of which he and his staff have partake. on a third melancholy occasion he write that he be attack by illness, and want money to pay the physician whom he be compel to call in; and this time Lady Mirabel, alarmed about her father's safety, and perhaps reproach herself that she have of late lose sight of her father, call for her carriage and drive to Shepherd's Inn, at the gate of which she alight, whence she find the way to her father's chamber, "no. 4, third floor, name of Podmore over the door," the porteress say, with many curtsy, point towards the door of the house, into which the affectionate daughter enter and mount the dingy stair. alas! the door, surmount by the name of Podmore, be open to she by poor cos in his shirt-sleeve, and prepare with the gridiron to receive the mutton-chop which Mrs. Bolton have go to purchase.
also, it be not pleasant for Sir Charles Mirabel to have letter constantly address to he at Brookes's, with the information that Captain Costigan be in the hall, wait for an answer; or when he go to play his rubber at the Travellers', to be oblige to shoot out of his brougham and run up the step rapidly, lest his father-in-law should seize upon he; and to think that while he read his paper or play his whist, the Captain be walk on the opposite side of Pall Mall, with that dreadful cocked hat, and the eye beneath it fix steadily upon the window of the club. Sir Charles be a weak man; he be old, and have many infirmity: he cry about his father-in-law to his wife, whom he adore with senile infatuation: he say he must go abroad,--he must go and live in the country--he should die or have another fit if he see that man again--he know he should. and it be only by pay a second visit to Captain Costigan, and represent to he, that if he plague Sir Charles by letter or address he in the street, or make any further application for loan, his allowance would be withdraw altogether, that Lady Mirabel be enable to keep she papa in order, and to restore tranquillity to her husband. and on occasion of this visit, she sternly rebuke bow for not keep a well watch over the captain; desire that he should not be allow to drink in that shameful way; and that the people at the horrid tavern which he frequent should be tell, upon no account to give he credit. "Papa's conduct be bring I to the grave," she say (though she look perfectly healthy), "and you, as an old man, Mr. Bows, and one that pretend to have a regard for we, ought to be ashamed of abet he in it." those be the thank which honest bow get for his friendship and his life's devotion. and I do not suppose that the old philosopher be much bad off than many other man, or have great reason to grumble.
on the second floor of the next house to Bows's, in Shepherd's Inn, at No. 3, live two other acquaintance of our: Colonel Altamont, agent to the Nawaub of Lucknow, and Captain Chevalier Edward Strong. no name at all be over their door. the Captain do not choose to let all the world know where he live and his card bear the address of a Jermyn Street hotel; and as for the Ambassador Plenipotentiary of the indian potentate, he be not an envoy accredit to the Courts of St. James's or Leadenhall Street but be here on a confidential mission quite independent of the East India Company or the Board of Control. "in fact," Strong say, "Colonel Altamont's object be financial, and to effectuate a sale of some of the principal diamond and ruby of the Lucknow crown, his wish be not to report himself at the India House or in Cannon row, but rather to negotiate with private capitalist--with whom he have have important transaction both in this country and on the continent."
we have say that these anonymous chamber of Strong's have be very comfortably furnish since the arrival of Sir Francis Clavering in London, and the Chevalier might boast with reason to the friend who visit he, that few retire captain be more snugly quarter than he, in his crib in Shepherd's Inn. there be three room below: the office where Strong transact his business--whatever that might be--and where still remain the desk and railing of the depart official who have precede he, and the Chevalier's own bedroom and sitting-room; and a private stair lead out of the office to two upper apartment, the one occupy by Colonel Altamont, and the other serve as the kitchen of the establishment, and the bedroom of Mr. Grady, the attendant. these room be on a level with the apartment of our friend Bows and Costigan next door at No. 4; and by reach over the communicating lead, Grady could command the mignonette-box which bloom in Bows's window.
from Grady's kitchen casement often come odour still more fragrant. the three old soldier who form the garrison of no. 3 be all skilled in the culinary art. Grady be great at an irish stew; the Colonel be famous for pillaus and curry; and as for Strong he could cook anything. he make french dish and spanish dish, stew, fricassee, and omelette, to perfection; nor be there any man in England more hospitable than he when his purse be full or his credit be good. at those happy period, he could give a friend, as he say, a good dinner, a good glass of wine, and a good song afterwards; and poor cos often hear with envy the roar of Strong's chorus, and the musical clinking of the glass, as he sate in his own room, so far removed and yet so near to those festivity. it be not expedient to invite Mr. Costigan always: his practice of inebriation be lamentable; and he bore Strong's guest with his story when sober, and with his maudlin tear when drunk.
a strange and motley set they be, these friend of the Chevalier; and though Major Pendennis would not much have relish their company, Arthur and Warrington like it not a little, and Pen think it as amusing as the society of the fine gentleman in the fine house which he have the honour to frequent. there be a history about every man of the set: they seem all to have have their tide of luck and bad fortune. Most of they have wonderful scheme and speculation in their pocket, and plenty for make rapid and extraordinary fortune. Jack Holt have be in Don Carlos's army, when Ned Strong have fight on the other side; and be now organise a little scheme for smuggle tobacco into London, which must bring thirty thousand a year to any man who would advance fifteen hundred, just to bribe the last officer of the Excise who hold out, and have wind of the scheme. Tom Diver, who have be in the mexican navy, know of a specie-ship which have be sink in the first year of the war, with three hundred and eighty thousand dollar on board, and a hundred and eighty thousand pound in bar and doubloon. "give I eighteen hundred pound," Tom say, "and Ibe off tomorrow. I take out four man, and a diving-bell with I; and I return in ten month to take my seat in Parliament, by Jove! and to buy back my family estate." Keightley, the manager of the Tredyddlum and Polwheedle Copper Mines (which be as yet under water), besides sing as good a second as any professional man, and besides the Tredyddlum Office, have a Smyrna Sponge Company, and a little quicksilver operation in view, which would set he straight with the world yet. Filby have be everything a corporal of dragoon, a field-preacher, and missionary-agent for convert the Irish; an actor at a Greenwich fair-booth, in front of which his father's attorney find he when the old gentleman die and leave he that famous property, from which he get no rent now, and of which nobody exactly know the situation. add to these be Sir Francis Clavering, Bart., who like their society, though he do not much add to its amusement by his convivial power. but he be make much of by the company now, on account of his wealth and position in the world. he tell his little story and sing his little song or two with great affability; and he have have his own history, too, before his accession to good fortune; and have see the inside of more prison than one, and write his name on many a stamp paper.
when Altamont first return from Paris, and after he have communicate with Sir Francis Clavering from the hotel at which he have take up his quarter (and which he have reach in a very denude state, consider the wealth of diamond and ruby with which this honest man be entrust), Strong be send to his patron by the Baronet; pay his little bill at the inn, and invite he to come and sleep for a night or two at the chamber, where he subsequently take up his residence. to negotiate with this man be very well, but to have such a person settle in his room, and to be constantly burthen with such society, do not suit the Chevalier's taste much; and he grumble not a little to his principal.
"I wish you would put this bear into somebody else's cage," he say to Clavering. "the fellow's no gentleman. I donot like walk with he. he dress himself like a nigger on a holiday. I take he to the play the other night; and, by Jove, sir, he abuse the actor who be do the part of villain in the play, and swear at he so, that the people in the box want to turn he out. the after-piece be the 'Brigand,' where Wallack come in wounded, you know, and die. when he die, Altamont begin to cry like a child, and say it be a d----d shame, and cry and swear so, that there be another row, and everybody laugh. then I have to take he away, because he want to take his coat off to one fellow who laugh at he; and bellow to he to stand up like a man.--who be he? where the deuce do he come from? you have well tell I the whole story. Frank; you must one day. you and he have rob a church together, thatbe my belief. you have well get it off your mind at once, Clavering, and tell I what this Altamont be, and what hold he have over you."
"hang he! I wish he be dead!" be the Baronet's only reply; and his countenance become so gloomy, that Strong do not think fit to question his patron any far at that time; but resolve, if need be, to try and discover for himself what be the secret tie between Altamont and Clavering.
CHAPTER XLIV
in which the Colonel narrate some of his adventure
early in the forenoon of the day after the dinner in Grosvenor Place, at which Colonel Altamont have choose to appear, the Colonel emerge from his chamber in the upper story at Shepherd's Inn, and enter into Strong's sitting-room, where the Chevalier sate in his easy-chair with the newspaper and his cigar. he be a man who make his tent comfortable wherever he pitch it, and long before Altamont's arrival, have do justice to a copious breakfast of fried egg and broiled rasher, which Mr. Grady have prepare secundum artem. good-humour and talkative, he prefer any company rather than none; and though he have not the least like for his fellow-lodger, and would not have grieve to hear that the accident have befall he which Sir Francis Clavering desire so fervently, yet keep on fair term with he. he have see Altamont to bed with great friendliness on the night previous, and take away his candle for fear of accident; and find a spirit-bottle empty, upon which he have count for his nocturnal refreshment, have drink a glass of water with perfect contentment over his pipe, before he turn into his own crib and to sleep. that enjoyment never fail he: he have always an easy temper, a faultless digestion, and a rosy cheek; and whether he be go into action the next morning or to prison (and both have be his lot), in the camp or the Fleet, the worthy Captain snore healthfully through the night, and wake with a good heart and appetite, for the struggle or difficulty or pleasure of the day.
the first act of Colonel Altamont be to bellow to Grady for a pint of pale ale, the which he first pour into a pewter flagon, whence he transfer it to his own lip. he put down the tankard empty, draw a great breath, wipe his mouth in his dressing-gown (the difference of the colour of his beard from his dye whisker have long strike Captain Strong, who have see too that his hair be fair under his black wig, but make no remark upon these circumstances)--the Colonel draw a great breath, and profess himself immensely refresh by his draught. "nothing like that beer," he remark, "when the copper be hot. many a day Ihave drink a dozen of Bass at Calcutta, and--and----"
"and at Lucknow, I suppose," Strong say with a laugh. "I get the beer for you on purpose: know youwould want it after last night." and the Colonel begin to talk about his adventure of the precede evening.
"I cannot help myself," the Colonel say, beat his head with his big hand. "Ibe a madman when I get the liquor on board I; and benot fit to be trust with a spirit-bottle. when I once begin I cannot stop till Ihave empty it; and when Ihave swallow it, Lord know what I say or what I donot say. I din at home here quite quiet. Grady give I just my two tumbler, and I intend to pass the evening at the Black and Red as sober as a parson. why do you leave that confound sample-bottle of holland out of the cupboard, strong? Grady must go out too, and leave I the kettle a-boiling for tea. it be of no use, I couldnot keep away from it. wash it all down, sir, by Jove. and itbe my belief I have some more, too, afterwards at that infernal little thief' den."
"what, be you there too?" Strong ask, "and before you come to Grosvenor Place? that be begin betime."
"early hour to be drunk and clear out before nine o'clock, eh? but so it be. yes, like a great big fool, I must go there; and find the fellow dining, Blackland and young Moss, and two or three more of the thief. if wehave go to Rouge et Noir, I must have win. but we donot try the black and red. no, hang them, they know'd Iwould have beat them at that--I must have beat them--I cannot help beat them, I tell you. but they be too cunnin for I. that rascal Blackland get the bone out, and we play hazard on the dining-table. and I drop all the money I have from you in the morning, be hang to my luck. it be that that set I wild, and I suppose I must have be very hot about the head, for I go off think to get some more money from Clavering, I recollect; and then--and then I donot much remember what happen till I wake this morning, and hear old bow at no. 4 play on his pianner."
Strong muse for a while as he light his cigar with a coal, "I should like to know how you always draw money from Clavering, Colonel," he say.
the Colonel burst out with a laugh--"ha, ha! he owe it I," he say.
"I donot know that thatbe a reason with Frank for pay," Strong answer. "he owe plenty besides you."
"well, he give it I because he be so fond of I," the other say with the same grinning sneer. "he love I like a brother; you know he do, Captain.--No?--He don't?--Well, perhaps he donot; and if you ask I no question, perhaps Iwill tell you no lie, Captain Strong--put that in your pipe and smoke it, my boy." "but Iwill give up that confound brandy-bottle," the Colonel continue, after a pause. "I must give it up, or itwill be the ruin of I."
"it make you say queer thing," say the Captain, look Altamont hard in the face. "remember what you say last night, at Clavering's table."
"say? what do I say?" ask the other hastily. "do I split anything? Dammy, Strong, do I split anything?"
"ask I no question, and I will tell you no lie," the Chevalier reply on his part. strong thought of the word Mr. Altamont have use, and his abrupt departure from the Baronet's dining-table and house as soon as he recognise Major Pendennis, or Captain Beak, as he call the Major. but Strong resolve to seek an explanation of these word otherwise than from Colonel Altamont, and do not choose to recall they to the other's memory. "no," he say then, "you donot split as you call it, Colonel; it be only a trap of mine to see if I could make you speak; but you donot say a word that anybody could comprehend--you be too far go for that."
so much the well, Altamont think; and heave a great sigh, as if relieve. Strong remark the emotion, but take no notice, and the other be in a communicative mood, go on speak.
"yes, I own to my fault," continue the Colonel. "there be some thing I cannot, do what I will, resist: a bottle of brandy, a box of dice, and a beautiful woman. no man of pluck and spirit, no man as be worth his salt ever could, as I know of. therebe hardly p'raps a country in the world in which they three benot get I into trouble."
"indeed?" say Strong.
"yes, from the age of fifteen, when I run away from home, and go cabin-boy on board an Indiaman, till now, when Ibe fifty year old, pretty nigh, they woman have always be my ruin. why, it be one of them, and with such black eye and jewel on her neck, and Battens and ermine like a duchess, I tell you--it be one of them at Paris that sweep off the good part of the thousand pound as I go off with. donot I ever tell you of it? well, I donot mind. at first I be very cautious and have such a lot of money keep it close and live like a gentleman--Colonel Altamont, Meurice's hotel, and that sort of thing--never play, except at the public table, and win more than I lose. well, sir, there be a chap that I see at the hotel and the Palace Royal too, a regular swell fellow, with white kid glove and a tuft to his chin, Bloundell-Bloundell his name be, as I make acquaintance with somehow, and he ask I to dinner, and take I to Madame the Countess de Foljambe's soiree--such a woman, strong!--such an eye! such a hand at the pianner. Lor bless you, shewould sit down and sing to you, and gaze at you, until she warble your soul out of your body a'most. she ask I to go to her evening party every toosday; and donot I take opera-box and give her dinner at the restauranteur's, thatbe all? but I have a run of luck at the table, and it be not in the dinner and opera-box that poor Clavering's money go. no, be hang to it, it be sweep off in another way. one night, at the Countess's, there be several of we at supper--Mr. Bloundell-Bloundell, the honourable Deuceace, the Marky de la Tour de Force--all tip-top nob, sir, and the height of fashion, when we have supper, and champagne you may be sure in plenty, and then some of that confound brandy. I would have it--I would it go on at it--the Countess mix the tumbler of punch for I, and we have card as well as grog after supper, and I play and drank until I donot know what I do. I be like I be last night. I be take away and put to bed somehow, and never wake until the next day, to a roar headache, and to see my servant, who say the Honourable Deuceace want to see I, and be wait in the sitting-room. 'how be you, Colonel?' say he, a come into my bedroom. 'how long do you stay last night after I go away? the play be get too high for I, and Iwould lose enough to you for one night.'"
"'to I,' say I, 'howbe that, my dear feller? (for though he be an Earl's son, we be as familiar as you and I). howbe that, my dear feller?' say I, and he tell I, that he have borrow thirty louis of I at vingt-et-un, that he give I an I.O.U. for it the night before, which I put into my pocket-book before he leave the room. I take out my card-case--it be the Countess as work it for I--and there be the I.O.U. sure enough, and he pay I thirty louis in gold down upon the table at my bedside. so I say he be a gentleman, and ask he if he would like to take anything, when my servant should get it for he; but the Honourable Deuceace donot drink of a morning, and he go away to some business which he say he have.
"presently therebe another ring at my outer door; and this time itbe Bloundell-Bloundell and the Marky that come in. 'Bong jour, Marky,' say I. 'good morning--no headache?' say he. so I say I have one; and how I must have be uncommon queer the night afore; but they both declare I donot show no sign of have have too much, but take my liquor as grave as a judge.
"'so,' say the Marky, 'deuceace have be with you; we meet he in the Palais Royal as we be come from breakfast. have he settle with you? get it while you can: hebe a slippery card; and as he win three pony of Bloundell, I recommend you to get your money while he have some.'
"'he have pay I,' say I; 'but I know no more than the dead that he owe I anything, and donot remember a bit about lend he thirty louis.'
"the Marky and Bloundell look and smile at each other at this; and Bloundell say, 'Colonel, you be a queer feller. no man could have suppose, from your manner, that you have taste anything strong than tea all night, and yet you forget thing in the morning. Come, come,-- tell that to the marine, my friend,--we willnot have it at any price.'
"'en efet,' say the Marky, twiddle his little black mustachio in the chimney-glass, and make a lunge or two as he use to do at the fencing-school. (he be a wonder at the fencing-school, and Ihave see he knock down the image fourteen time run, at Lepage's.) 'let we speak of affair. Colonel, you understand that affair of honour be well settle at once: perhaps it willnot be inconvenient to you to arrange our little matter of last night.'
"'what little matter?' say I. 'do you owe I any money, Marky?'
"'bah!' say he; 'do not let we have any more jesting. I have your note of hand for three hundred and forty louis. La voia!' say he, take out a paper from his pocket-book.
"'and mine for two hundred and ten,' say Bloundell-Bloundell, and he pull out his bit of paper.
"I be in such a rage of wonder at this, that I spring out of bed, and wrap my dressing-gown round I. 'be you come here to make a fool of I?' say I. 'I donot owe you two hundred, or two thousand, or two louis; and I willnot pay you a farthing. do you suppose you can catch I with your note of hand? I laugh at them and at you; and I believe you to be a couple----.'
"'a couple of what?' say Mr. Bloundell. 'you, of course, be aware that we be a couple of man of honour, Colonel Altamont, and not come here to trifle or to listen to abuse from you. you will either pay we or we will expose you as a cheat, and chastise you as a cheat, too,' say Bloundell.
"'Oui, parbleu,' say the Marky,--but I donot mind he, for I could have throw the little fellow out of the window; but it be different with Bloundell,--he be a large man, that weigh three stone more than I, and stand six inch high, and I think he could have do for I.
"'Monsieur will pay, or Monsieur will give I the reason why. I believe yoube little well than a polisson, Colonel altamont,'--that be the phrase he use--Altamont say with a grin--and I get plenty more of this language from the two fellow, and be in the thick of the row with they, when another of our party come in. this be a friend of mine--a gent I have meet at Boulogne, and have take to the Countess's myself. and as he havenot play at all on the previous night, and have actually warn I against Bloundell and the other, I tell the story to he, and so do the other two.
"'I be very sorry,' say he. 'you would go on play: the Countess entreat you to discontinue. these gentleman offer repeatedly to stop. it be you that insist on the large stake, not they.' in fact he charge dead against I: and when the two other go away, he tell I how the Marky would shoot I as sure as my name be--be what it be. 'I leave the Countess crying, too,' say he. 'she hat these two man; she have warn you repeatedly against they'( which she actually have do, and often tell I never to play with they), 'and now, Colonel, I have leave she in hysteric almost, lest there should be any quarrel between you, and that confound Marky should put a bullet through your head. its my belief,' say my friend, 'that that woman be distractedly in love with you.'
"'do you think so?' say I; upon which my friend tell I how she have actually go down on her knee to he and 'save Colonel Altamont!'
"as soon as I be dress, I go and call upon that lovely woman. she give a shriek and pretty near faint when she see I. she call I Ferdinand,--I'm blest if she donot."
"I think your name be Jack," say Strong, with a laugh; at which the Colonel blush very much behind his dye whisker.
"a man may have more name than one, maynot he, strong?" Altamont ask. "when Ibe with a lady, I like to take a good one. she call I by my christian name. she cry fit to break your heart. I cannot stand see a woman cry--never could--not whilst Ibe fond of she. she say she could bear not to think of my lose so much money in her house. wouldnot I take her diamond and necklace, and pay part?
"I swear I wouldnot touch a farthing's worth of her jewellery, which perhaps I do not think be worth a great deal,--but what can a woman do more than give you she all? thatbe the sort I like, and I know therebe plenty of them. and I tell she to be easy about the money, for I would not pay one single farthing.
"'then theywill shoot you,' say she; 'theywill kill my ferdinand.'"
"theywill kill my Jack wouldnot have sound well in French," Strong say, laugh.
"never mind about name," say the other, sulkily; "a man of honour may take any name he choose, I suppose."
"well, go on with your story," say Strong. "she say they would kill you."
"'no,' say I, 'they willnot: for I will not let that scamp of a Marquis send I out of the world; and if he lay a hand on I, Iwill brain he, Marquis as he be.'
"at this the Countess shrink back from I as if I have say something very shocking. 'do I understand Colonel Altamont aright?' say she: 'and that a british officer refuse to meet any person who provoke he to the field of honour?'
"'Field of honour be hang, Countess,' say I. 'you would not have I be a target for that little scoundrel's pistol practice.'
"'Colonel Altamont,' say the Countess, 'I think you be a man of honour--I think, I--but no matter. good-bye, sir.'--and she be sweep out of the room, her voice regular choke in her pocket-handkerchief.
"'countess!' say I, rush after she and seize her hand.
"'leave I, Monsieur le Colonel,' say she, shake I off, 'my father be a General of the Grand Army. a soldier should know how to pay all his debt of honour.'
"what could I do? everybody be against I. Caroline say I have lose the money: though I donot remember a syllable about the business. I have take Deuceace's money too; but then it be because he offer it to I you know, and thatbe a different thing. every one of these chap be a man of fashion and honour; and the Marky and the Countess of the first family in France. and, by Jove, sir, rather than offend she, I pay the money up five hundred and sixty gold napoleon, by Jove: besides three hundred which I lose when I have my revenge.
"and I cannot tell you at this minute whether I be do or not," conclude the Colonel, musing. "sometimes I think I be: but then Caroline be so fond of I. that woman would never have see I do: never, Ibe sure she wouldnot: at least, if she would, Ibe deceive in woman."
any further revelation of his past life which Altamont might have be dispose to confide to his honest comrade the Chevalier, be interrupt by a knocking at the outer door of their chamber; which, when open by Grady the servant, admit no less a person than Sir Francis Clavering into the presence of the two worthy.
"the Governor, by Jove," cry Strong, regard the arrival of his patron with surprise. "whatbe bring you here?" growl Altamont, look sternly from under his heavy eyebrow at the Baronet. "itbe no good, I warrant." and indeed, good very seldom bring Sir Francis Clavering into that or any other place.
whenever he come into Shepherd's inn it be money that bring the unlucky baronet into those precinct; and there be commonly a gentleman of the money-deal world in wait for he at Strong's chamber, or at Campion's below; and a question of bill to negotiate or to renew. Claverng be a man who have never look his debt fairly in the face, familiar as he have be with they all his life; as long as he could renew a bill, his mind be easy regard it; and he would sign almost anything for to-morrow, provide to-day could be leave unmoleste. he be a man whom scarcely any amount of fortune could have benefit permanently, and who be make to be ruin to cheat small tradesman, to be the victim of astuter sharper: to be niggardly and reckless, and as destitute of honesty as the people who cheat he, and a dupe, chiefly because he be too mean to be a successful knave. he have tell more lie in his time, and undergone more baseness of stratagem in order to stave off a small debt, or to swindle a poor creditor, than would have suffice to make a fortune for a braver rogue. he be abject and a shuffler in the very height of his prosperity. have he be a Crown Prince--he could not have be more weak, useless, dissolute or ungrateful. he could not move through life except lean on the arm of somebody: and yet he never have an agent but he mistrust he; and mar any plan which might be arrange for his benefit, and secretly act against the people whom he employ. Strong know Clavering and judge he quite correctly. it be not as friend that this pair meet: but the Chevalier work for his principal, as he would when in the army have pursue a harass march, or undergone his part in the danger and privation of a siege; because it be his duty, and because he have agree to it. "what be it he want?" think the officer of the Shepherd's Inn garrison when the Baronet come among they.
his pale face express extreme anger and irritation. "so sir," he say, address Altamont, "youhave be at your old trick."
"which of 'um?" ask Altamont, with a sneer.
"you have be at the Rouge et Noir: you be there last night," cry the Baronet.
"how do you know,--were you there?" the other say. "I be at the Club but it benot on the colour I played,--ask the Captain,--I've be tell he of it. it be with the bone. it be at hazard, Sir Francis, upon my word and honour it be;" and he look at the Baronet with a know humorous mock humility, which only seem to make the other more angry.
"what the deuce do I care, sir, how a man like you lose his money, and whether it be at hazard or roulette?" scream the Baronet, with a multiplicity of oath, and at the top of his voice. "what I will not have, sir, be that you should use my name, or couple it with yours.--damn he, Strong, why donot you keep he in well order? I tell you he have go and use my name again, sir,--drawn a bill upon I, and lose the money on the table--I cannot stand it--I willnot stand it. flesh and blood willnot bear it--do you know how much I have pay for you, sir?"
"this be only a very little 'un, Sir Francis--only fifteen pound, Captain Strong, they wouldnot stand another: and it oughtnot to anger you, Governor. why, itbe so trifle I do not even mention it to Strong,--did I now, Captain? I protest it have quite slip my memory, and all on account of that confound liquor I take."
"Liquor or no liquor, sir, it be no business of mine. I donot care what you drink, or where you drink it--only it shallnot be in my house. and I will not have you break into my house of a night, and a fellow like you intrude himself on my company: how dare you show yourself in Grosvenor Place last night, sir,--and--and what do you suppose my friend must think of I when they see a man of your sort walk into my dining-room uninvited, and drunk, and call for liquor as if you be the master of the house?"
"theywill think you know some very queer sort of people, I dare say," Altamont say with impenetrable good-humour. "look here, Baronet, I apologise; on my honour I do, and benot an apology enough between two gentleman? it be a strong measure I own, walk into your cuddy, and call for drink as if I be the Captain: but I have have too much before, you see, thatbe why I want some more; nothing can be more simple--and it be because they wouldnot give I no more money upon your name at the Black and Red, that I think I would come down and speak to you about it. to refuse I be nothing: but to refuse a bill draw on you that have be such a friend to the shop, and be a baronet and a member of parliament, and a gentleman and no mistake--Damme, its ungrateful."
"by heaven, if ever you do it again--if ever you dare show to yourself in my house; or give my name at a gambling-house or at any other house, by Jove--at any other house--or give any reference at all to I, or speak to I in the street, by God, or anywhere else until I speak to you--I disclaim you altogether--I willnot give you another shilling."
"Governor, donot be provoke," Altamont say surlily. "donot talk to I about dare to do this thing or t'other, or when my dander be up itbe the very thing to urge I on. I oughtnot to have come last night, I know I oughtnot: but I tell you I be drunk, and that ought to be sufficient between gentleman and gentleman."
"you a gentleman! dammy, sir," say the Baronet, "how dare a fellow like you to call himself a gentleman?"
"I benot a baronet, I know," growl the other; and Ihave forget how to be a gentleman almost now, but--but I be one, once, and my father be one, and Iwill not have this sort of talk from you, Sir F. Clavering, thatbe flat. I want to go abroad again. why donot you come down with the money, and let I go? why the devil be you to be roll in rich, and I to have none? why should have a house and a table cover with plate, and I be in a garret here in this beggarly Shepherd's Inn? webe partner, benot we? Iwould as good a right to be rich as you have, havenot I? tell the story to Strong here, if you like; and ask he to be umpire between we. I donot mind let my secret out to a man that willnot split. look here, Strong--perhaps you guess the story already--the fact be, I and the governor----"
"d---, hold your tongue," shriek out the Baronet in a fury. "you shall have the money as soon as I can get it. I benot make of money. Ibe so pressed and badger, I donot know where to turn. I shall go mad; by Jove, I shall. I wish I be dead, for Ibe the most miserable brute alive. I say, Mr. Altamont, donot mind I. when Ibe out of health--and Ibe devilish bilious this morning--hang I, I abuse everybody, and donot know what I say. excuse I if Ihave offend you. I--i'll try and get that little business do. strong shall try. upon my word he shall. and I say, Strong, my boy, I want to speak to you. come into the office for a minute."
almost all Clavering's assault end in this ignominious way, and in a shameful retreat. altamont sneer after the Baronet as he leave the room, and enter into the office, to talk privately with his factotum.
"what be the matter now?" the latter ask of he. "itbe the old story, I suppose."
"d--- it, yes," the Baronet say. "I drop two hundred in ready money at the Little Coventry last night, and give a cheque for three hundred more. on her ladyship's banker, too, for to-morrow; and I must meet it, for therewill be the deuce to pay else. the last time she pay my play-debt, I swear I would not touch a dice-box again, and shewill keep her word, strong, and dissolve partnership, if I go on. I wish I have three hundred a year, and be away. at a german watering-place you can do devilish well with three hundred a year. but my habit be so d----- reckless: I wish I be in the Serpentine. I wish I be dead, by Gad I wish I be. I wish I have never touch those confound bone. I have such a run of luck last night, with five for the main, and seven to five all night, until those ruffian want to pay I with Altamont's bill upon I. the luck turn from that minute. never hold the box again for three main, and come away clear out, leave that infernal cheque behind I. how shall I pay it? Blackland willnot hold it over. Hulker and Bullock will write about it directly to her ladyship. by Jove, Ned, Ibe the most miserable brute in all England."
it be necessary for Ned to devise some plan to console the Baronet under this pressure of grief; and no doubt he find the mean of procure a loan for his patron, for he be closet at Mr. Campion's office that day for some time. Altamont have once more a guinea or two in his pocket, with a promise of a further settlement; and the Baronet have no need to wish himself dead for the next two or three month at least. and Strong, put together what he have learn from the Colonel and Sir Francis, begin to form in his own mind a pretty accurate opinion as to the nature of the tie which bind the two man together.
CHAPTER XLV
a chapter of conversation
every day, after the entertainment at Grosvenor Place and Greenwich, of which we have see Major Pendennis partake, the worthy gentleman's friendship and cordiality for the Clavering family seem to increase. his call be frequent; his attention to the lady of the house unremitting. an old man about town, he have the good fortune to be receive in many house, at which a lady of Lady Clavering's distinction ought to be see. would her ladyship not like to be present at the grand entertainment at Gaunt House? there be to be a very pretty breakfast ball at Viscount Marrowfat's, at Fulham. everybody be to be there (include august personage of the high rank), and there be to be a Watteau quadrille, in which Miss Amory would surely look charming. to these and other amusement the obsequious old gentleman kindly offer to conduct Lady Clavering, and be also ready to make himself useful to the Baronet in any way agreeable to the latter.
in spite of his present station and fortune, the world persist in look rather coldly upon Clavering, and strange suspicious rumour follow he about. he be blackball at two club in succession. in the House of Commons, he only converse with a few of the most disreputable member of that famous body, have a happy knack of choose bad society, and adapt himself naturally to it, as other people do to the company of their better. the name all the senator with whom Clavering consort, would be invidious. we may mention only a few. there be Captain Raff, the honourable member for Epsom, who retire after the last Goodwood race, have accept, as Mr. Hotspur, the whip of the party, say, a mission to the Levant; there be Hustingson, the patriotic member for Islington, whose voice be never hear now denunciate corruption, since his appointment to the Governorship of Coventry Island; there be Bob Freeny, of the Booterstown Freenys, who be a dead shot, and of whom we therefore wish to speak with every respect; and of all these gentleman, with whom in the course of his professional duty Mr. Hotspur have to confer, there be none for whom he have a more thorough contempt and dislike than for Sir Francis Clavering, the representative of an ancient race, who have sit for their own borough of Clavering time out of mind in the House. "if that man be want for a division," Hotspur say, "ten to one he be to be find in a hell. he be educate in the Fleet, and he have not hear the end of newgate yet, take my word for it. hewill muddle away the Begum's fortune at thimble-rig, be catch pick pocket, and finish on board the hulk." and if the high-bear Hotspur, with such an opinion of Clavering, could yet from professional reason be civil to he, why should not Major Pendennis also have reason of his own for be attentive to this unlucky gentleman?
"he have a very good cellar and a very good cook," the Major say; "as long as he be silent he be not offensive, and he very seldom speak. if he choose to frequent gambling-table, and lose his money to blackleg, what matter to I? donot look too curiously into any man's affair, Pen, my boy; every fellow have some cupboard in his house, begad, which he would not like you and I to peep into. why should we try, when the rest of the house be open to we? and a devilish good house, too, as you and I know. and if the man of the family be not all one could wish, the woman be excellent. the Begum be not over-refine, but as kind a woman as ever live, and devilish clever too; and as for the little Blanche, you know my opinion about she, you rogue; you know my belief be that she be sweet on you, and would have you for the asking. but you be grow such a great man, that I suppose you willnot be content under a Duke's daughter-- Hey, sir? I recommend you to ask one of they, and try."
perhaps Pen be somewhat intoxicate by his success in the world; and it may also have enter into the young man's mind (his uncle's perpetual hint serve not a little to encourage the notion) that Miss Amory be tolerably well disposed to renew the little flirtation which have be carry on in the early day of both of they, by the bank of the rural Brawl. but he be little disposed to marriage, he say, at that moment, and, adopt some of his uncle's worldly tone, speak rather contemptuously of the institution, and in favour of a bachelor life.
"you be very happy, sir," say he, "and you get on very well alone, and so do I. with a wife at my side, I should lose my place in society; and I donot, for my part, much fancy retire into the country with a Mrs. Pendennis; or take my wife into lodging to be wait upon by the servant-of-all-work. the period of my little illusion be over. you cure I of my first love who, certainly be a fool, and would have have a fool for her husband, and a very sulky discontent husband too if she have take I. we young fellow live fast, sir; and I feel as old at five-and-twenty as many of the old fo--the old bachelor--whom I see in the bow-window at Bays's. donot look offend, I only mean that I be blase about love matter, and that I could no more fan myself into a flame for Miss Amory now, than I could adore Lady Mirabel over again. I wish I could; I rather like old Mirabel for his infatuation about she, and think his passion be the most respectable part of his life."
"Sir Charles Mirabel be always a theatrical man, sir," the Major say, annoy that his nephew should speak flippantly of any person of Sir Charles's rank and station. "he have be occupy with theatrical since his early day. he act at Carlton House when he be Page to the Prince; he have be mix up with that sort of thing: he could afford to marry whom he choose; and Lady Mirabel be a most respectable woman, receive everywhere--everywhere, mind. the Duchess of Connaught receive she, Lady Rockminster receive she--it donot become young fellow to speak lightly of people in that station. therebe not a more respectable woman in England than Lady Mirabel:--and the old fogy, as you call they, at Bays's, be some of the first gentleman in England, of whom you youngster have well learn a little manner, and a little breeding, and a little modesty." and the Major begin to think that Pen be grow exceedingly pert and conceited, and that the world make a great deal too much of he.
the Major's anger amuse Pen. he study his uncle's peculiarity with a constant relish, and be always in a good humour with his worldly old mentor. "I be a youngster of fifteen year' standing, sir," he say, adroitly, "and if you think that we be disrespectful, you should see those of the present generation. a protege of yours come to breakfast with I the other day. you tell I to ask he, and I do it to please you. we have a day's sight together, and din at the club, and go to the play. he say the wine at the Polyanthus be not so good as Ellis's wine at Richmond, smoke Warrington's cavendish after breakfast, and when I give he a sovereign as a farewell token, say he have plenty of they, but would take it to show he benot proud."
"do he?--did you ask young Clavering?" cry the Major, appease at once--"fine boy, rather wild, but a fine boy--parent like that sort of attention, and you cannot do well than pay it to our worthy friend of Grosvenor Place. and so you take he to the play and tip he? that be right, sir, that be right:" with which mentor quit Telemachus, think that the young man be not so very bad, and that he should make something of that fellow yet.
as Blaster Clavering grow into year and stature, he become too strong for the authority of his fond parent and governess; and rather govern they than permit himself to be lead by their order. with his papa he be silent and sulky, seldom make his appearance, however, in the neighbourhood of that gentleman; with his mamma be roar and fight when any contest between they arise as to the gratification of his appetite, or other wish of his heart; and in his dispute with his governess over his book, he kick that quiet creature's shin so fiercely, that she be entirely overmaster and subdue by he. and he would have so treat his sister Blanche, too, and do on one or two occasion attempt to prevail over she; but she show an immense resolution and spirit on her part, and box his ear so soundly, that he forbore from molest Miss Amory, as he do the governess and his mamma, and his mamma's maid.
at length, when the family come to London, Sir Francis give forth his opinion, that "the little beggar have well be send to school." accordingly the young son and heir of the house of Clavering be despatch to the Rev. Otto Rose's establishment at Twickenham, where young nobleman and gentleman be receive preparatory to their introduction to the great english public school.
it be not our intention to follow Master Clavering in his scholastic career; the path to the Temple of Learning be make more easy to he than they be to some of we of early generation. he advance towards that fane in a carriage-and-four, so to speak, and might halt and take refreshment almost whenever he please. he wear varnish boot from the early period of youth, and have cambric handkerchief and lemon-colour kid glove, of the small size ever manufacture by Privat. they dress regularly at Mr. Rose's to come down to dinner; the young gentleman have shawl dressing-gown, fire in their bedroom, horse and carriage exercise occasionally, and oil for their hair. corporal punishment be altogether dispense with by the Principal, who think that moral discipline be entirely sufficient to lead youth; and the boy be so rapidly advanced in many branch of learn, that they acquire the art of drink spirit and smoking cigar, even before they be old enough to enter a public school. Young Frank Clavering steal his father's Havannahs, and convey they to school, or smoke they in the stable, at a surprisingly early period of life, and at ten year old drink his champagne almost as stoutly as any whiskered cornet of dragoon could do.
when this interesting youth come home for his vacation Major Pendennis be as laboriously civil and gracious to he as he be to the rest of the family; although the boy have rather a contempt for old Wigsby, as the Major be denominate, mimic he behind his back, as the polite Major bow and smirk with Lady Clavering or Miss Amory; and draw rude caricature, such as be design by ingenious youth, in which the Major's wig, his nose, his tie, etc., be represent with artless exaggeration. untire in his effort to be agreeable, the Major wish that Pen, too, should take particular notice of this child; incite Arthur to invite he to his chamber, to give he a dinner at the club, to take he to Madame Tussaud's, the Tower, the play, and so forth, and to tip he, as the phrase be, at the end of the day's pleastre. Arthur, who be good-natured and fond of child, go through all these ceremony one day; have the boy to breakfast at the Temple, where he make the most contemptuous remark regard the furniture, the crockery, and the tattered state of Warrington's dressing-gown; and smoke a short pipe, and recount the history of a fight between Tuffy and Long Biggings, at Rose's, greatly to the edification of the two gentleman his host.
as the Major rightly predict, Lady Clavering be very grateful for Arthur's attention to the boy; more grateful than the lad himself, who take attention as a matter of course, and very likely have more sovereign in his pocket than poor Pen, who generously give he one of his own slender stock of those coin.
the Major, with the sharp eye with which nature endow he, and with the glass of age and experience, watch this boy, and survey his position in the family without seem to be rudely curious about their affair. but, as a country neighbour, one who have many family obligation to the Claverings, an old man of the world, he take occasion to find out what Lady Clavering's mean be, how her capital be dispose, and what the boy be to inherit. and set himself to work,--for what purpose will appear, no doubt, ulteriorly,--he soon have get a pretty accurate knowledge of Lady Clavering's affair and fortune, and of the prospect of her daughter and son. the daughter be to have but a slender provision; the bulk of the property be, as before have be say, to go to the son,--his father do not care for he or anybody else,--his mother be dotingly fond of he as the child of her latter days,--his sister dislike he. such may be state in round number, to be the result of the information which Major Pendennis get. "ah! my dear madam," he would say, pat the head of the boy, "this boy may wear a baron's coronet on his head on some future coronation, if matter be but manage rightly, and if Sir Francis Clavering would but play his card well,"
at this the widow Amory heave a deep sigh. "he play only much of his card, Major, Ibe afraid," she say. the Major own that he know as much; do not disguise that he have hear of Sir Francis Clavering's unfortunate propensity to play; pity Lady Clavering sincerely; but speak with such genuine sentiment and sense, that her ladyship, glad to find a person of experience to whom she could confide her grief and her condition, talk about they pretty unreservedly to major Pendennis, and be eager to have his advice and consolation. major Pendennis become the Begum's confidante and house-friend, and as a mother, a wife, and a capitalist, she consult he.
he give she to understand (show at the same time a great deal of respectful sympathy) that he be acquaint with some of the circumstance of her first unfortunate marriage, and with even the person of her late husband, whom he remember in Calcutta--when she be live in seclusion with her father. the poor lady, with tear of shame more than of grief in her eye, tell her version of her story. go back a child to India after two year at a european school, she have meet Amory, and foolishly marry he. "oh, you donot know how miserable that man, make I," she say, "or what a life I pass betwixt he and my father. before I see he I have never see a man except my father's clerk and native servant. you know we donot go into society in India on account of----" ("I know," say Major Pendennis, with a bow) "I be a wild romantic child, my head be full of novel which Iwould read at school--I listen to his wild story and adventure, for he be a daring fellow, and I think he talk beautifully of those calm night on the passage out, when he use to----. well, I marry he, and I be wretched from that day--wretche with my father, whose character you know, Major Pendennis, and I willnot speak of: but he benot a good man, sir,--neither to my poor mother, nor to I, except that he leave I his money,--nor to no one else that I ever hear of: and he donot do many kind action in his lifetime, Ibe afraid. and as for Amory, he be almost bad; he be a spendthrift when my father be close: he drink dreadfully, and be furious when in that way. he benot in any way a good or a faithful husband to I, Major Pendennis, and if hehave die in the gaol before this trial, instead of afterwards he would have save I a deal of shame and of unhappiness since, sir." Lady Clavering add: "for perhaps I should not have marry at all if I have not be so anxious to change his horrid name, and I have not be happy in my second husband, as I suppose you know, sir. ah, Major Pendennis, Ihave get money to be sure, and Ibe a lady, and people fancy Ibe very happy, but I benot. we all have our care, and grief, and trouble: and manybe the day that I sit down to one of my grand dinner with an aching heart, and many a night do I lay awake on my fine bed a great deal more unhappy than the maid that make for it. Ibe not a happy woman, Major, for all the world say; and envy the Begum her diamond, and carriage, and the great company that come to my house. Ibe not happy in my husband; Ibe not in my daughter. she benot a good girl like that dear Laura Bell at Fairoaks. shebe cost I many a tear though you donot see them; and she sneer at her mother because I havenot have learn and that. how should I? I be bring up amongst native till I be twelve, and go back to India when I be fourteen. ah, Major, I should have be a good woman if I have have a good husband. and now I must go upstairs and wipe my eye, for theybe red with cryin. and Lady Rockminster's a comin, and webe goin to ave a drive in the Park. and when Lady Rockminster make her appearance, there be not a trace of tear or vexation on Lady Clavering's face, but she be full of spirit, and bounce out with her blunder and talk, and murder the king's English with the utmost liveliness and good-humour.
"Begad, she be not such a bad woman!" the Major thought within himself. "she be not refine, certainly, and call 'Apollo' 'Apoller;' but she have some heart, and I like that sort of thing, and a devilish deal of money, too. three star in India Stock to her name, begad! which that young cub be to have--be he?" and he think how he should like to see a little of the money transfer to Miss Blanche, and, well still, one of those star shin in the name of Mr. Arthur Pendennis.
still bent upon pursue his scheme, whatsoever they might be, the old negotiator take the privilege of his intimacy and age, to talk in a kindly and fatherly manner to Miss Blanche, when he find occasion to see she alone. he come in so frequently at luncheon-time, and become so familiar with the lady, that they do not even hesitate to quarrel before he; and Lady Clavering, whose tongue be loud, and temper brusque, have many a battle with the Sylphide in the family friend's presence. Blanche's wit seldom fail to have the mastery in these encounter, and the keen barb of her arrow drive her adversary discomfit away. "I be an old fellow," the Major say; "I have nothing to do in life. I have my eye open. I keep good counsel. I be the friend of both of you; and if you choose to quarrel before I, why, I shallnot tell any one. but you be two good people, and I intend to make it up between you. I have between lot of people--husband and wife, father and son, daughter and mamma, before this. I like it; Ihave nothing else to do."
one day, then, the old diplomatist enter Lady Clavering's drawing-room, just as the latter quit it, evidently in a high state of indignation, and run past he up the stair to her own apartment. "she couldnot speak to he now," she say; "she be a great deal too angry with that--that-- that little, wicked"--anger choke the rest of the word, or prevent their utterance until Lady Clavering have pass out of hearing.
"my dear, good Miss Amory," the Major say, enter the drawing-room, "I see what be happen. you and mamma have be disagree. mother and daughter disagree in the good family. it be but last week that I heal up a quarrel between Lady Clapperton and her daughter Lady Claudia. Lady Lear and her eld daughter have not speak for fourteen year. Kinder and more worthy people than these I never know in the whole course of my life; for everybody but each other admirable. but they cannot live together: they oughtnot to live together: and I wish, my dear creature, with all my soul, that I could see you with an establishment of your own--for there be no woman in London who could conduct one better-- with your own establishment, make your own home happy."
"I be not very happy in this one," say the sylphide; "and the stupidity of mamma be enough to provoke a saint."
"precisely so; you be not suit to one another. your mother commit one fault in early life--or be it Nature, my dear, in your case?--she ought not to have educate you. you ought not to have be breed up to become the refined and intellectual be you be, surround, as I own you be, by those who have not your genius or your refinement. your place would be to lead in the most brilliant circle, not to follow, and take a second place in any society. I have watch you, Miss Amory: you be ambitious; and your proper sphere be command. you ought to shine; and you never can in this house, I know it. I hope I shall see you in another and a happy one, some day, and the mistress of it."
the Sylphide shrug her lily shoulder with a look of scorn. "where be the Prince, and where be the palace, Major Pendennis?" she say. "I be ready. but there be no romance in the world now, no real affection."
"no, indeed," say the Major, with the most sentimental and simple air which he could muster.
"not that I know anything about it," say Blanche, cast her eye down "except what I have read in novel."
"of course not," Major Pendennis cry; "how should you, my dear young lady? and novel benot true, as you remark admirably, and there be no romance leave in the world. Begad, I wish I be a young fellow like my nephew."
"and what," continue Miss Amory, musing, "what be the man whom we see about at the ball every night--dancing guardsman, penniless treasury clerk--booby! if I have my brother's fortune, I might have such an establishment as you promise I--but with my name, and with my little mean, what be I to look to! a country parson, or a barrister in a street near Russell Square, or a captain in a dragoon regiment, who will take lodging for I, and come home from the mess tipsy and smell of smoke like Sir Francis Clavering. that be how we girl be destine to end life. o Major Pendennis, I be sick of London, and of ball, and of young dandy with their chin-tip, and of the insolent great lady who know we one day and cut we the next--and of the world altogether. I should like to leave it and to go into a convent, that I should. I shall never find anybody to understand I. and I live here as much alone in my family and in the world, as if I be in a cell lock up for ever. I wish there be Sisters of Charity here, and that I could be one and catch the plague, and die of it--I wish to quit the world. I be not very old: but I be tired, I have suffer so much--I've be so disillusionate--I'm weary, Ibe weary--o that the Angel of Death would come and beckon I away!"
this speech may be interpret as follow. a few night since a great lady, Lady Flamingo, have cut Miss Amory and Lady Clavering. she be quite mad because she could not get an invitation to Lady Drum's ball: it be the end of the season and nobody have propose to she: she have make no sensation at all, she who be so much cleverer than any girl of the year, and of the young lady form her special circle. Dora who have but five thousand pound, Flora who have nothing, and Leonora who have red hair, be go to be marry, and nobody have come for Blanche Amory!
"you judge wisely about the world, and about your position, my dear Miss Blanche," the Major say. "the Prince donot marry nowadays, as you say: unless the Princess have a doosid deal of money in the fund, or be a lady of his own rank.--the young folk of the great family marry into the great family: if they havenot fortune they have each other's shoulder, to push on in the world, which be pretty nearly as good.--A girl with your fortune can scarcely hope for a great match: but a girl with your genius and your admirable tact and fine manner, with a clever husband by her side, may make any place for herself in the world.--we be grow doosid republican. talent rank with birth and wealth now, begad: and a clever man with a clever wife, may take any place they please."
Miss Amory do not of course in the least understand what Major Pendennis meant.--perhaps she think over circumstance in her mind and ask herself, could he be a negotiator for a former suitor of her, and could he mean Pen? no, it be impossible--he have be civil, but nothing more. --so she say laugh, "who be the clever man, and when will you bring he to I, Major Pendennis? I be die to see he."
at this moment a servant throw open the door, and announce Mr. Henry Foker: at which name, and at the appearance of our friend, both the lady and the gentleman burst out laugh.
"that be not the man," Major Pendennis say. "he be engage to his cousin, Lord Gravesend's daughter.--good-bye, my dear Miss Amory."
* * * * *
be Pen grow worldly, and should a man not get the experience of the world and lie it to his account? "he feel, for his part," as he say, "that he be grow very old very soon." "how this town form and change we," he say once to Warrington. each have come in from his night's amusement; and Pen be smoke his pipe, and recounting, as his habit be, to his friend the observation and adventure of the evening just past. "how I be change," he say, "from the simpleton boy at Fairoaks, who be fit to break his heart about his first love! Lady Mirabel have a reception to-night, and be as grave and collect as if she have be bear a duchess, and have never see a trap-door in her life. she give I the honour of a conversation, and patronise I about 'Walter Lorraine,' quite kindly."
"what condescension!" break in Warrington.
"benot it?" Pen say, simply--at which the other burst out laugh accord to his willnot. "be it possible," he say, "that anybody should think of patronise the eminent author of 'Walter Lorraine?'"
"you laugh at both of we," Pen say, blush a little--"i be come to that myself. she tell I that she have not read the book (as indeed I believe she never read a book in her life), but that Lady Rockminster have, and that the Duchess of Connaught pronounce it to be very clever. in that case, I say, I should die happy, for that to please those two lady be in fact the great aim of my existence, and have their approbation, of course I need look for no other. Lady Mirabel look at I solemnly out of her fine eye, and say, 'oh, indeed,' as if she understand I, and then she ask I whether I go to the Duchess's Thursdays, and when I say no, hop she should see I there, and that I must try and get there, everybody go there--everybody who be in society: and then we talk of the new ambassador from timbuctoo, and how he be well than the old one; and how Lady Mary Billington be go to marry a clergyman quite below she in rank; and how Lord and Lady Ringdove have fall out three month after their marriage about Tom Pouter of the Blues, Lady Ringdove's cousin--and so forth. from the gravity of that woman you would have fancy she have be bear in a palace, and live all the season of her life in Belgrave Square."
"and you, I suppose you take your part in the conversation pretty well, as the descendant of the Earl your father, and the heir of Fairoaks Castle?" Warrington say. "yes, I remember reading of the festivity which occur when you come of age. the Countess give a brilliant tea soiree to the neighbouring nobility; and the tenantry be regale in the kitchen with a leg of mutton and a quart of ale. the remain of the banquet be distribute amongst the poor of the village, and the entrance to the park be illuminate until old John put the candle out on retire to rest at his usual hour."
"my mother be not a countess," say Pen, "though she have very good blood in her vein too--but commoner as she be, I have never meet a peeress who be more than her peer, Mr. George; and if you will come to Fairoaks Castle you shall judge for yourself of she and of my cousin too. they be not so witty as the London woman, but they certainly be as well breed. the thought of woman in the country be turn to other object than those which occupy your London lady. in the country a woman have her household and her poor, her long calm day and long calm evening."
"devilish long," Warrington say, "and a great deal too calm; Ihave try them."
"the monotony of that existence must be to a certain degree melancholy-- like the tune of a long ballad; and its harmony grave and gentle, sad and tender: it would be unendurable else. the loneliness of woman in the country make they of necessity soft and sentimental. lead a life of calm duty, constant routine, mystic reverie,--a sort of nun at large-- too much gaiety or laughter would jar upon their almost sacred quiet, and would be as out of place there as in a church."
"where you go to sleep over the sermon," Warrington say.
"you be a profess misogynist, and hate the sex because, I suspect, you know very little about they," Mr. Pen continue, with an air of considerable self-complacency. "if you dislike the woman in the country for be too slow, surely the London woman ought to be fast enough for you. the pace of London life be enormous: how do people last at it, I wonder,--male and female? take a woman of the world: follow she course through the season; one ask how she can survive it? or if she tumble into a sleep at the end of August, and lie torpid until the spring? she go into the world every night, and sit watch her marriageable daughter dance till long after dawn. she have a nursery of little one, very likely, at home, to whom she administer example and affection; have an eye likewise to bread-and-milk, catechism, music and French, and roast leg of mutton at one o'clock; she have to call upon lady of her own station, either domestically or in her public character, in which she sit upon Charity Committees, or Ball Committees, or Emigration Committees, or Queen's College Committees, and discharge I donot know what more duty of british stateswomanship. she very likely keep a poor-visit list; have conversation with the clergyman about soup or flannel, or proper religious teaching for the parish; and (if she live in certain district) probably attend early church. she have the newspaper to read, and, at least, must know what her husband's party be about, so as to be able to talk to her neighbour at dinner; and it be a fact that she read every new book that come out; for she can talk, and very smartly and well, about they all, and you see they all upon her drawing-room table. she have the care of her household besides--to make both end meet; to make the girl' milliner's bill appear not too dreadful to the father and paymaster of the family; to snip off, in secret, a little extra article of expenditure here and there, and convey it, in the shape of a bank-note, to the boy at college or at sea; to check the encroachment of tradesman and housekeeper' financial fallacy; to keep upper and low servant from jangle with one another, and the household in order. add to this, that she have a secret taste for some art or science, model in clay, make experiment in chemistry, or play in private on the violoncello,--and I say, without exaggeration, many London lady be do this,--and you have a character before you such as our ancestor never hear of, and such as belong entirely to our era and period of civilisation. ye god! how rapidly we live and grow! in nine month, Mr. Paxton grow you a pineapple as large as a portmanteau, whereas a little one, no big than a dutch cheese, take three year to attain his majority in old time; and as the race of pineapple so be the race of man. Hoiaper--whatbe the Greek for a pineapple, Warrington?"
"stop, for mercy's sake, stop with the English and before you come to the Greek," Warrington cry out, laugh. "I never hear you make such a long speech, or be aware that you have penetrate so deeply into the female mystery. who teach you all this, and into whose boudoir and nursery have you be peep, whilst I be smoke my pipe, and read my book, lie on my straw bed?"
"you be on the bank; old boy, content to watch the wave toss in the wind, and the struggle of other at sea," Pen say. "I be in the stream now, and by Jove I like it. how rapidly we go down it, hey? strong and feeble, old and young--the metal pitcher and the earthen pitcher--the pretty little china boat swim gaily till the big bruised brazen one bump he and send he down--eh, vogue la galere!--you see a man sink in the race, and say good-bye to he--look, he have only dive under the other fellow's leg, and come up shake his pole, and strike out ever so far ahead. eh, vogue la galere, I say. itbe good sport, warrington-- not win merely, but play."
"well, go in and win, young 'un. Iwill sit and mark the game," Warrington say, survey the ardent young fellow with an almost fatherly pleasure. "a generous fellow play for the play, a sordid one for the stake; an old fogy sit by and smoke the pipe of tranquillity, while Jack and Tom be pummel each other in the ring."
"why donot you come in, George, and have a turn with the glove? you be big enough and strong enough," Pen say. "dear old boy, you be worth ten of I."
"you be not quite as tall as Goliath, certainly," the other answer, with a laugh that be rough and yet tender. "as for I, I be disabled. I have a fatal hit in early life. I will tell you about it some day. you may, too, meet with your master. donot be too eager, or too confident, or too worldly, my boy."
be Pendennis become worldly, or only see the worldly, or both? and be a man very wrong for be after all only a man? which be the most reasonable, and do his duty well: he who stand aloof from the struggle of life, calmly contemplating, or he who descend to the ground, and take his part in the contest? "that philosopher," Pen say, "have hold a great place amongst the leader of the world, and enjoy to the full what it have to give of rank and rich, renown and pleasure, who come, weary-hearted, out of it, and say that all be vanity and vexation of spirit. many a teacher of those whom we reverence, and who step out of his carriage up to his carved cathedral place, shake his lawn ruffle over the velvet cushion, and cry out, that the whole struggle be an accursed one, and the work of the world be evil. many a conscience-stricken mystic fly from it altogether, and shut himself out from it within convent wall (real or spiritual), whence he can only look up to the sky, and contemplate the heaven out of which there be no rest, and no good.
"but the earth, where our foot be, be the work of the same power as the immeasurable blue yonder, in which the future lie into which we would peer. who order toil as the condition of life, order weariness, order sickness, ordered poverty, failure, success--to this man a foremost place, to the other a nameless struggle with the crowd--to that a shameful fall, or paralysed limb, or sudden accident--to each some work upon the ground he stand on, until he be lay beneath it." while they be talk, the dawn come shin through the window of the room, and Pen throw they open to receive the fresh morning air. "look, George," say he; "look and see the sun rise: he see the labourer on his way a-field; the work-girl ply her poor needle; the lawyer at his desk, perhaps; the beauty smile asleep upon her pillow of down; or the jade reveller reel to bed; or the fevere patient tossing on it; or the doctor watch by it, over the throe of the mother for the child that be to be bear into the world;--to be bear and to take his part in the suffering and struggle, the tear and laughter, the crime, remorse, love, folly, sorrow, rest."
CHAPTER XLVII
Miss Amory's Partners
the noble Henry Foker, of whom we have lose sight for a few page, have be in the meanwhile occupy, as we might suppose a man of his constancy would be, in the pursuit and indulgence of his all-absorb passion of love.
I wish that a few of my youthful reader who be inclined to that amusement would take the trouble to calculate the time which be spend in the pursuit, when they would find it to be one of the most costly occupation in which a man can possibly indulge. what donot you sacrifice to it, indeed, young gentleman and young lady of ill-regulate mind? many hour of your precious sleep in the first place, in which you lie toss and think about the adore object, whence you come down late to breakfast, when noon be advance and all the family be long since away to its daily occupation. then when you at length get to these occupation you pay no attention to they, and engage in they with no ardour--all your thought and power of mind be fix elsewhere. then the day's work be slur over, you neglect your friend and relative, your natural companion and usual associate in life, that you may go and have a glance at the dear personage, or a look up at her window, or a peep at her carriage in the Park. then at night the artless blandishment of home bore you; mamma's conversation pall upon you; the dish which that good soul prepare for the dinner of her favourite be send away untasted,--the whole meal of life, indeed, except one particular plat, have no relish. life, business, family tie, home, all thing useful and dear once, become intolerable, and you be never easy except when you be in pursuit of your flame.
such I believe to be not unfrequently the state of mind amongst ill-regulate young gentleman, and such indeed be Mr. H. Foker's condition, who, have be breed up to indulge in every propensity towards which he be incline, abandon himself to this one with his usual selfish enthusiasm. nor because he have give his friend Arthur Pendennis a great deal of good advice on a former occasion, need man of the world wonder that Mr. Foker become passion's slave in his turn. who among we have not give a plenty of the very good advice to his friend? who have not preach, and who have practise? to be sure, you, madam, be perhaps a perfect being, and never have a wrong thought in the whole course of your frigid and irreproachable existence: or sir, you be a great deal too strong-minded to allow any foolish passion to interfere with your equanimity in chamber or your attendance on 'Change; you be so strong that you donot want any sympathy. we donot give you any, then; we keep ours for the humble and weak, that struggle and stumble and get up again, and so march with the rest of mortal. what need have you of a hand who never fall? your serene virtue be never shade by passion, or ruffle by temptation, or darken by remorse; compassion would be impertinence for such an angel: but then with such a one companionship become intolerable; you be, from the elevation of your very virtue and high attribute, of necessity lonely; we cannot reach up and talk familiarly with such potentatess good-bye, then; our way lie with humble folk, and not with serene highness like you; and we give notice that there be no perfect character in this history, except, perhaps, one little one, and that one be not perfect either, for she never know to this day that she be perfect, and with a deplorable misapprehension and perverseness of humility, believe herself to be as great a sinner as need be.
this young person do not happen to be in London at the present period of our story, and it be by no mean for the like of she that Mr. Henry Foker's mind be agitated. but what matter a few failing? need we be angel, male or female, in order to be worship as such? let we admire the diversity of the taste of mankind; and the old, the ugly, the stupid and most pompous, the silly and most vapid, the great criminal, tyrant booby, Bluebeard, Catherine Hayes, George Barnwell, amongst we, we need never despair. I have read of the passion of a transport pickpocket for a female convict (each of they advanced in age, be repulsive in person, ignorant, quarrelsome, and give to drink), that be as magnificent as the love of Cleopatra and Antony, or Lancelot and Guinever. the passion which Count Borulawski, the polish dwarf, inspire in the bosom of the most beautiful Baroness at the Court of Dresden, be a matter with which we be all of we acquaint: the flame which burn in the heart of young Cornet Tozer but the other day, and cause he to run off and espouse Mrs. Battersby, who be old enough to be his mamma,--all these instance be tell in the page of history or the newspaper column. be we to be ashamed or pleased to think that our heart be form so that the big and highest-place Ajax among we may some day find himself prostrate before the patten of his kitchen-maid; as that there be no poverty or shame or crime, which will not be support, hug even with delight, and cherish more closely than virtue would be, by the perverse fidelity and admirable constant folly of a woman?
so then Henry Foker, Esquire, long after his love, and curse the fate which separate he from she. when Lord Gravesend's family retire to the country (his lordship leave his proxy with the venerable Lord Bagwig), Harry still remain linger on in London, certainly not much to the sorrow of Lady Ann, to whom he be affiance, and who do not in the least miss he. wherever Miss Clavering go, this infatuate young fellow continue to follow she; and be aware that his engagement to his cousin be know in the world, he be force to make a mystery of his passion, and confine it to his own breast, so that it be so pent in there and press down, that it be a wonder he do not explode some day with the stormy secret, and perish collapse after the outburst.
there have be a grand entertainment at Gaunt House on one beautiful evening in June, and the next day's journal contain almost two column of the name of the most closely print nobility and gentry who have be honour with invitation to the ball. among the guest be Sir Francis and Lady Clavering and Miss Amory, for whom the indefatigable Major Pendennis have procure an invitation, and our two young friend Arthur and Harry. each exert himself, and dance a great deal with Miss Blanche. as for the worthy Major, he assume the charge of Lady Clavering, and take care to introduce she to that department of the mansion where her ladyship specially distinguished herself, namely, the refreshment-room, where, amongst picture of Titian and Giorgione, and regal portrait of Vandyke and Reynolds, and enormous salver of gold and silver, and pyramid of large flower, and constellation of wax candle --in a manner perfectly regardless of expense, in a word--a supper be go on all night. of how many cream, jelly, salad, peach, white soup, grape, pate, galantine, cup of tea, champagne, and so forth, Lady Clavering partook, it do not become we to say. how much the Major suffer as he follow the honest woman about, call to the solemn male attendant and lovely servant-maid, and administer to Lady Clavering's various want with admirable patience, nobody knows;--he never confess. he never allow his agony to appear on his countenance in the least; but with a constant kindness bring plate after plate to the Begum.
Mr. Wagg count up all the dish of which Lady Clavering partook as long as he could count (but as he partook very freely himself of champagne during the evening, his power of calculation be not to be trust at the close of the entertainment), and he recommend Mr. Honeyman, Lady Steyne's medical man, to look carefully after the Begum, and to call and get news of her ladyship the next day.
Sir Francis Clavering make his appearance, and skulk for a while about the magnificent room; but the company and the splendour which he meet there be not to the Baronet's taste, and after toss off a tumbler of wine or two at the buffet, he quit Gaunt House for the neighbourhood of Jermyn Street, where his friend Loder, Punter, little Moss Abramns, and Captain Skewball be assemble at the familiar green table. in the rattle of the box, and of their agreeable conversation, Sir Francis's spirit rise to their accustomed point of feeble hilarity.
Mr. Pynsent, who have ask Miss Amory to dance, come up on one occasion to claim her hand, but scowl of recognition have already pass between he and Mr. Arthur Pendennis in the dancing-room, Arthur suddenly rise up and claim Miss Amory as his partner for the present dance, on which Mr. Pynsent, bite his lip and scowl yet more savagely, withdraw with a profound bow, say that he give up his claim. there be some man who be always fall in one's way in life. Pynsent and Pen have this view of each other; and each regard other accordingly.
"what a confound conceited provincial fool that be!" think the one. "because he have write a twopenny novel, his absurd head be turn, and a kicking would take his conceit out of he."
"what an impertinent idiot that man be!" remark the other to his partner. "his soul be in Downing Street; his neckcloth be foolscap; his hair be sand; his leg be ruler; his vital be tape and sealing-wax; he be a prig in his cradle; and never laugh since he be bear, except three time at the same joke of his chief. I have the same liking for that man, Miss Amory, I have for that cold boil veal." upon which Blanche of course remark, that Mr. Pendennis be wicked, mechant, perfectly abominable, and wonder what he would say when her back be turn.
"say!--say that you have the most beautiful figure, and the slim waist in the world, Blanche--Miss Amory, I mean. I beg your pardon. another turn; this music would make an alderman dance."
"and you have leave off tumble when you waltz now?" Blanche ask, archly look up at her partner's face.
"one fall and one get up again in life, Blanche; you know I use to call you so in old time, and it be the prettiest name in the world. besides, I have practise since then."
"and with a great number of partner, Ibe afraid," Blanche say, with a little sham sigh, and a shrug of the shoulder. and so in truth Mr. Pen have practise a good deal in this life; and have undoubtedly arrive at be able to dance well.
if Pendennis be impertinent in his talk, Foker, on the other hand, so bland and communicative on most occasion, be entirely mum and melancholy when he dance with Miss Amory. to clasp her slender waist be a rapture, to whirl round the room with she be a delirium; but to speak to she, what could he say that be worthy of she? what pearl of conversation could he bring that be fit for the acceptance of such a queen of love and wit as Blanche? it be she who make the talk when she be in the company of this love-stricken partner. it be she who ask he bow that dear little pony be, and look at he and thank he with such a tender kindness and regret, and refuse the dear little pony with such a delicate sigh when he offer it. "I have nobody to ride with in London," she say. "Mamma be timid, and her figure be not pretty on horseback. Sir Francis never go out with I. he love I like--like a stepdaughter. oh, how delightful it must be to have a father--a father, Mr. Foker!"
"oh, uncommon," say Mr. Harry, who enjoy that blessing very calmly, upon which, and forget the sentimental air which she have just before assume, Blanche's grey eye gaze at Foker with such an arch twinkle that both of they burst out laugh, and Harry enrapture and at his ease begin to entertain she with a variety of innocent prattle--good kind simple Foker talk, flavour with many expression by no mean to be discover in dictionary, and relate to the personal history of himself or horse, or other thing dear and important to he, or to person in the ballroom then pass before they, and about whose appearance or character Mr. Harry speak with artless freedom, and a considerable dash of humour.
and it be Blanche who, when the conversation flag, and the youth's modesty come rush back and overpower he, know how to reanimate her companion: ask he question about Logwood, and whether it be a pretty place? whether he be a hunt man, and whether he like woman to hunt? (in which case she be prepared to say that she adore hunting)--but Mr. Foker express his opinion against sporting female, and point out Lady Bullfinch, who happen to pass by, as a horse-godmother, whom he have see at cover with a cigar in her face, Blanche too express her detestation of the sport of the field, and say it would make her shudder to think of a dear sweet little fox be kill, on which Foker laugh and waltz with renew vigour and grace.
and at the end of the waltz,--the last waltz they have on that night,-- Blanche ask he about Drummington, and whether it be a fine house. his cousin, she have hear, be very accomplish: Lord Erith she have meet, and which of his cousin be his favourite? be it not Lady Ann? yes, she be sure it be she; sure by his look and his blush. she be tired of dancing; it be get very late; she must go to mamma;--and, without another word, she spring away from Harry Foker's arm, and seize upon Pen's, who be swagger about the dancing-room, and again say, "Mamma, mamma!--take I to mamma, dear, Mr. Pendennis!" transfix Harry with a parthian shot, as she flee from he.
my Lord Steyne, with garter and ribbon, with a bald head and shin eye, and a collar of red whisker round his face, always look grand upon an occasion of state; and make a great effect upon Lady Clavering, when he introduce himself to she at the request of the obsequious Major Pendennis. with his own white and royal hand, he hand to her ladyship a glass of wine, say he have hear of her charming daughter, and beg to be present to she; and, at this very juncture, Mr. Arthur Pendennis come up with the young lady on his arm.
the peer make a profound bow, and Blanche the deep curtesy that ever be see. his lordship give Mr. Arthur Pendennis his hand to shake; say he have read his book, which be very wicked and clever; ask Miss Blanche if she have read it,--at which Pen blush and wince. why, Blanche be one of the heroine of the novel. Blanche, in black ringlet and a little alter, be the Neaera of 'Walter Lorraine.'
Blanche have read it: the language of the eye express her admiration and rapture at the performance. this little play be achieve, the Marquis of Steyne make other two profound bow to Lady Clavering and her daughter, and pass on to some other of his guest at the splendid entertainment.
Mamma and daughter be loud in their expression of admiration of the noble Marquis so soon as his broad back be turn upon they. "he say they make a very nice couple," whisper major Pendennis to Lady Clavering. do he now, really? Mamma think they would; Mamma be so flustered with the honour which have just be show to she, and with other intoxicate event of the evening, that her good-humour know no bound. she laugh, she wink, and nod knowingly at Pen; she tap he on the arm with her fan; she tap Blanche; she tap the major;-- her contentment be boundless, and her method of show her joy equally expansive.
as the party go down the great staircase of Gaunt House, the morning have rise stark and clear over the black tree of the square; the sky be ting with pink; and the cheek of some of the people at the ball, --ah, how ghastly they look! that admirable and devoted Major above all,--who have be for hour by Lady Clavering's side, minister to she and feed her body with everything that be nice, and her ear with everything that be sweet and flattering,--oh! what an object he be! the ring round his eye be of the colour of bistre; those orb themselves be like the plover' egg whereof Lady Clavering and Blanche have each taste; the wrinkle in his old face be furrow in deep gash; and a silver stubble, like an elderly morning dew be glitter on his chin, and alongside the dye whisker now limp and out of curl.
there he stand, with admirable patience, endure, uncomplainingly, a silent agony; know that people could see the state of his face (for could he not himself perceive the condition of other, male and female, of his own age?)--longing to go to rest for hour past; aware that supper disagree with he, and yet have eat a little so as to keep his friend, Lady Clavering, in good-humour; with twinge of rheumatism in the back and knee; with weary foot burn in his varnished boots,--so tired, oh, so tired and longing for bed! if a man, struggle with hardship and bravely overcome it, be an object of admiration for the god, that power in whose chapel the old Major be a faithful worshipper must have look upwards approvingly upon the constancy of Pendennis's martyrdom. there be sufferer in that cause as in the other: the negro in the service of Mumbo Jumbo tattoo and drill themselves with burn skewer with great fortitude; and we read that the priest in the service of Baal gash themselves and bleed freely. you who can smash the idol, do so with a good courage; but do not be too fierce with the idolaters,-- they worship the good thing they know.
the Pendennises, the elder and the young, wait with Lady Clavering and her daughter until her ladyship's carriage be announce, when the elder's martyrdom may be say to have come to an end, for the good-natured Begum insist upon leave he at his door in Bury Street; so he take the back seat of the carriage after a feeble bow or two, and speech of thank, polite to the last, and resolute in do his duty. the Begum wave her dumpy little hand by way of farewell to Arthur and Foker, and Blanche smile languidly out upon the young man, think whether she look very wan and green under her rose-colour hood, and whether it be the mirror at Gaunt House, or the fatigue and fever of her own eye, which make her fancy herself so pale.
Arthur, perhaps, see quite well how yellow Blanche look, but do not attribute that peculiarity of her complexion to the effect of the look-glass, or to any error in his sight or her own. our young man of the world could use his eye very keenly, and could see Blanche's face pretty much as nature have make it. but for poor Foker it have a radiance which dazzle and blind he: he could see no more fault in it than in the sun, which be now flare over the house-top.
amongst other wicked London habit which Pen have acquire, the moralist will remark that he have get to keep very bad hour; and often be go to bed at the time when sober country-people be think of leave it. man get use to one hour as to another. editor of newspaper, Covent Garden market-people, night cabman and coffee-seller, chimney-sweep, and gentleman and lady of fashion who frequent ball, be often quite lively at three or four o'clock of a morning, when ordinary mortal be snore. we have show in the last chapter how Pen be in a brisk condition of mind at this period, incline to smoke his cigar at ease, and to speak freely.
Foker and Pen walk away from Gaunt House, then, indulge in both the above amusement: or rather Pen talk, and Foker look as if he want to say something. Pen be sarcastic and dandified when he have be in the company of great folk; he could not help imitate some of their air and tone, and have a most lively imagination, mistook himself for a person of importance very easily. he rattle away, and attack this person and that; sneer at Lady John Turnbull's bad French, which her ladyship will introduce into all conversation in spite of the sneer of everybody; at Mrs. Slack Roper's extraordinary costume and sham jewel; at the old dandy and the young ones;--at whom donot he sneer and laugh?
"you fire at everybody, Pen--you're grow awful, that you be," Foker say. "now youhave pull about Blondel's yellow wig, and Colchicum's black one, why donot you have a shy at a brown one, hay? you know whose I mean. it get into Lady Clavering's carriage."
"under my uncle's hat? my uncle be a martyr, Foker, my boy. my uncle have be do excruciating duty all night. he like to go to bed rather early. he have a dreadful headache if he sit up and touch supper. he always have the gout if he walk or stand much at a ball. he have be sit up, and stand up, and sup. he have go home to the gout and the headache, and for my sake. shall I make fun of the old boy? no, not for Venice!"
"how do you mean that he have be do it for your sake?" Foker ask, look rather alarmed.
"boy! canst thou keep a secret if I impart it to thee?" Pen cry out, in high spirit. "art thou of good counsel? wilt thou swear? wilt thou be mum, or wilt thou preach? wilt thou be silent and hear, or wilt thou speak and die?" and as he speak, fling himself into an absurd theatrical attitude, the man in the cabstand in Piccadilly wonder and grin at the antic of the two young swell.
"what the doose be you drive at?" Foker ask, look very much agitated.
Pen, however, do not remark this agitation much, but continue in the same bantering and excited vein. "Henry, friend of my youth," he say, "and witness of my early folly, though dull at thy book, yet thou art not altogether deprive of sense,--nay, blush not, Henrico, thou hast a good portion of that, and of courage and kindness too, at the service of thy friend. be I in a strait of poverty, I would come to my Foker's purse. be I in grief, I would discharge my grief upon his sympathise bosom----"
"Gammon, Pen--go on," Foker say.
"I would, Henrico, upon thy stud, and upon thy cambric work by the hand of beauty, to adorn the breast of valour! know then, friend of my boyhood's day, that Arthur Pendennis of the Upper Temple, student-at-law, feel that he be grow lonely and old Care be furrow his temple, and Baldness be busy with his crown. shall we stop and have a drop of coffee at this stall, it look very hot and nice? look how that cabman be blow at his saucer. no, you willnot? Aristocrat! I resume my tale. I be get on in life. I have get devilish little money. I want some. I be think of get some, and settle in life. Ibe think of settle. Ibe think of marry, old boy. Ibe think of become a moral man; a steady port and sherry character: with a good reputation in my quarti, and a moderate establishment of two maid and a man--with an occasional brougham to drive out Mrs. Pendennis, and a house near the Parks for the accommodation of the child. ha! what sayest thou? answer thy friend, thou worthy child of beer. speak, I adjure thee by all thy vat.
"but you benot get any money, Pen," say the other, still look alarmed.
"I benot? no, but she ave. I tell thee there be gold in store for I--not what you call money, nurse in the lap of luxury, and cradle on grain, and drink in wealth from a thousand mash-tub. what do you know about money? what be poverty to you, be splendour to the hardy son of the humble apothecary. you cannot live without an establishment, and your house in town and country. a snug little house somewhere off Belgravia, a brougham for my wife, a decent cook, and a fair bottle of wine for my friend at home sometimes; these simple necessary suffice for I, my Foker." and here Pendennis begin to look more serious. without banter far, Pen continue, "Ihave rather serious thought of settle and marrying. no man can get on in the world without some money at his back. you must have a certain stake to begin with, before you can go in and play the great game. who know that Ibe not go to try, old fellow? bad man than I have win at it. and as I have not get enough capital from my father, I must get some by my wife--thatbe all."
they be walk down Grosvenor Street, as they talk, or rather as Pen talk, in the selfish fulness of his heart; and Mr. Pen must have be too much occupy with his own affair to remark the concern and agitation of his neighbour, for he continue: "we be no long child, you know, you and I, Harry. Bah! the time of our romance have pass away. we donot marry for passion, but for prudence and for establishment. what do you take your cousin for? because she be a nice girl, and an Earl's daughter, and the old folk wish it, and that sort of thing."
"and you, Pendennis," ask Foker, "you benot very fond of the girl-- yoube go to marry?"
Pen shrug his shoulder. "Comme can," say he; "I like she well enough. shebe pretty enough; shebe clever enough. I think shewill do very well. and she have get money enough--thatbe the great point. Psha! you know who she be, donot you? I think you be sweet on her yourself one night when we din with her mamma. itbe little amory."
"I--I think so," Foker say; "and have she accept you!"
"not quite," Arthur reply, with a confident smile, which seem to say, I have but to ask, and she come to I that instant.
"oh, not quite," say Foker; and he break out with such a dreadful laugh, that Pen, for the first time, turn his thought from himself towards his companion, and be strike by the other's ghastly pale face.
"my dear fellow, Fo! whatbe the matter? yoube ill," Pen say, in a tone of real concern.
"you think it be the champagne at Gaunt House, donot you? it benot that. come in; let I talk to you for a minute. Iwill tell you what it be. d--- it, let I tell somebody," Foker say.
they be at Mr. Foker's door by this time, and, open it, Harry walk with his friend into his apartment, which be situate in the back part of the house, and behind the family dining-room where the eld Foker receive his guest, surround by picture of himself, his wife, his infant son on a donkey, and the late Earl of Gravesend in his robe as a Peer. Foker and Pen pass by this chamber, now close with death-like shutter, and enter into the young man's own quarter. Dusky stream of sunbeam be play into that room, and light up poor Harry's gallery of dancing-girl and opera nymph with flickering illumination.
"look here! I cannot help tell you, Pen," he say. ever since the night we din there, Ibe so fond of that girl, that I think I shall die if I donot get she. I feel as if I should go mad sometimes. I cannot stand it, Pen. I couldnot bear to hear you talk about she, just now, about marry she only because shebe money. ah, Pen! that benot the question in marry. Iwould bet anything it benot. talk about money and such a girl as that, it's--it's--what-d'ye-call-'em--you know what I mean--I benot good at talk--sacrilege, then. if shewould have I, Iwould take and sweep a crossing, that I would!"
"poor fo! I donot think that would tempt she," Pen say, eye his friend with a great deal of real good-nature and pity. "she be not a girl for love and a cottage."
"she ought to be a duchess, I know that very well, and I know she wouldnot take I unless I could make she a great place in the world--for I benot good for anything myself much--I benot clever and that sort of thing," Foker say sadly. "if I have all the diamond that all the duchess and marchioness have on to-night, wouldnot I put them in her lap? but whatbe the use of talk? Ibe book for another race. itbe that kill I, Pen. I cannot get out of it; though I die, I cannot get out of it. and though my cousinbe a nice girl, and I like she very well, and that, yet I havenot see this one when our governor settle that matter between we. and when you talk, just now, about she do very well, and about she have money enough for both of you, I think to myself it benot money or mere like a girl, that ought to be enough to make a fellow marry. he may marry, and find he like somebody else well. all the money in the world willnot make you happy then. look at I; Ihave plenty of money, or shall have out of the mash-tub, as you call them. my Governor think hewould make it all right for I in settle my marriage with my cousin. I tell you it willnot do; and when Lady Ann have get her husband, it willnot be happy for either of we, and shewill have the most miserable beggar in town."
"poor old fellow!" Pen say, with rather a cheap magnanimity, "I wish I could help you. I have no idea of this, and that you be so wild about the girl. do you think she would have you without your money? no. do you think your father would agree to break off your engagement with your cousin? you know he very well, and that he would cast you off rather than do so."
the unhappy Foker only groan a reply, fling himself prostrate on a sofa, face forwards, his head in his hand.
"as for my affair," Pen go on, "my dear fellow, if I have think matter be so critical with you, at least I would not have pain you by choose you as my confidant. and my business be not serious, at least not as yet. I have not speak a word about it to Miss Amory. very likely she would not have I if I ask she. only I have have a great deal of talk about it with my uncle, who say that the match might be an eligible one for I. Ibe ambitious and Ibe poor. and it appear Lady Clavering will give she a good deal of money, and Sir Francis might be get to never mind the rest. nothing be settle, Harry. they be go out of town directly. I promise you I willnot ask she before she go. therebe no hurry: therebe time for everybody. but, suppose you get she, Foker. remember what you say about marriage just now, and the misery of a man who donot care for his wife; and what sort of a wife would you have who donot care for her husband?"
"but she would care for I," say Foker, from his sofa--"that be, I think she would. last night only, as we be dance, she said----"
"what do she say?" Pen cry, start up in great wrath. but he see his own meaning more clearly than Foker, and break off with a laugh--"Well, never mind what she say, Harry. Miss Amory be a clever girl, and say number of civil thing--to you--to I, perhaps--and who the deuce know to whom besides? nothing's settle, old boy. at least, my heart willnot break if I donot get she. win she if you can, and I wish you joy of she. good-bye! donot think about what I say to you. I be excited, and confoundedly thirsty in those hot room, and donot, I suppose, put enough Seltzer-water into the champagne. good night! Iwill keep your counsel too. 'Mum' be the word between we; and 'let there be a fair fight, and let the good man win,' as Peter Crawley say."
so say, Mr. Arthur Pendennis, give a very queer and rather dangerous look at his companion, shake he by the hand, with something of that sort of cordiality which befit his just repeat simile of the boxing-match, and which Mr. Bendigo display when he shake hand with Mr. Gaunt before they fight each other for the champion's belt and two hundred pound a side. Foker return his friend's salute with an implore look, and a piteous squeeze of the hand, sink back on his cushion again, and Pen, put on his hat, stride forth into the air, and almost over the body of the matutinal housemaid, who be rub the step at the door.
"and so he want she too, do be?" think Pen as he march along--and note within himself with a fatal keenness of perception and almost an infernal mischief, that the very pain and torture which that honest heart of Foker's be suffer give a zest and an impetus to his own pursuit of Blanche: if pursuit might be call which have be no pursuit as yet, but mere sport and idle dallying. "she say something to he, do she? perhaps she give he the fellow flower to this;" and he take out of his coat and twiddle in his thumb and finger a poor little shrivelled crumpled bud that have fade and blacken with the heat and flare of the night--"i wonder to how many more she have give her artless token of affection--the little flirt"--and he fling his into the gutter, where the water may have refresh it, and where any amateur of rosebud may have pick it up. and then bethink he that the day be quite bright, and that the passer-by by might be star at his beard and white neckcloth, our modest young gentleman take a cab and drive to the Temple.
ah! be this the boy that pray at his mother's knee but a few year since, and for whom very likely at this hour of morning she be pray? be this jade and selfish worldle the lad who, a short while back, be ready to fling away his worldly all, his hope, his ambition, his chance of life, for his love? this be the man you be proud of, old Pendennis. you boast of have form he: and of have reason he out of his absurd romance and folly--and groan in your bed over your pain and rheumatism, satisfy yourself still by think, that, at last, that lad will do something to better himself in life, and that the Pendennises will take a good place in the world. and be he the only one, who in his progress through this dark life go wilfully or fatally astray, whilst the natural truth and love which should illumine he grow dim in the poison air, and suffice to light he no more?
when Pen be go away, poor Harry Foker get up from the sofa, and take out from his waistcoat--the splendidly button, but the gorgeously embroider, the work of his mamma--a little white rosebud, he draw from his dressing-case, also the maternal present, a pair of scissor, with which he nip carefully the stalk of the flower, and place it in a glass of water opposite his bed, he seek refuge there from care and bitter remembrance.
it be to be presume that Miss Blanche Amory have more than one rise in her bouquet, and why should not the kind young creature give out of her superfluity, and make as many partner as possible happy?
CHAPTER XLVII
Monseigneur s'amuse
the exertion of that last night at Gaunt House have prove almost too much for Major Pendennis; and as soon as he could move his weary old body with safety, he transport himself groan to Buxton, and seek relief in the healing water of that place. Parliament break up. Sir Francis Clavering and family leave town, and the affair which we have just mention to the reader be not advanced, in the brief interval of a few day or week which have occur between this and the last chapter. the town be, however, empty since then.
the season be now come to a conclusion: Pen's neighbour, the lawyer, be go upon circuit: and his more fashionable friend have take their passport for the continent, or have flee for health or excitement to the Scotch moor. Scarce a man be to be see in the bow-window of the Clubs, or on the solitary Pall Mall pavement. the red jacket have disappear from before the Palace-gate: the tradesman of St. James's be abroad take their pleasure: the tailor have grow mustachio and be go up the rhine: the bootmaker be at Ems or Baden, blush when they meet their customer at those place of recreation, or punt beside their creditor at the gambling-table: the clergyman of St. James's only preach to half a congregation, in which there be not a single sinner of distinction: the band in Kensington Gardens have shut up their instrument of brass and trumpet of silver: only two or three old fly and chaise crawl by the bank of the Serpentine; and Clarence Bulbul, who be retain in town by his arduous duty as a Treasury clerk, when he take his afternoon ride in Rotten row, compare its loneliness to the vastness of the arabian desert and himself to a Bedouin wend his way through that dusty solitude. Warrington stow away a quantity of cavendish tobacco in his carpet-bag, and betook himself, as his custom be in the vacation, to his brother's house in Norfolk. Pen be leave alone in chamber for a while, for this man of fashion could not quit the metropolis when he choose always: and be at present detain by the affair of his newspaper, the Pall Mall Gazette, of, which he act as the editor and charge d'affaires during the temporary absence of the chief, Captain Shandon, who be with his family at the salutary watering-place of Boulogne-sur-Mer.
although, as we have see, Mr. Pen have pronounce himself for year past to be a man perfectly blase and weary of life, yet the truth be that he be an exceedingly healthy young fellow still: with a fine appetite, which he satisfy with the great relish and satisfaction at least once a day; and a constant desire for society, which show he to be anything but misanthropical. if he could not get a good dinner he sate down to a bad one with perfect contentment; if he could not procure the company of witty or great or beautiful person, he put up with any society that come to hand; and be perfectly satisfied in a tavern-parlour or on board a Greenwich steamboat, or in a jaunt to Hampstead with Mr. Finucane, his colleague at the Pall Mall Gazette; or in a visit to the summer theatre across the river; or to the Royal Gardens of Vauxhall, where he be on term of friendship with the great Simpson, and where he shake the principal comic singer of the lovely equestrian of the arena by the hand. and while he could watch the grimace or the grace of these with a satiric humour that be not deprive of sympathy, he could look on with an eye of kindness at the looker-on too; at the roystere youth bent upon enjoyment, and here take it: at the honest parent, with their delighted child laugh and clap their hand at the show: at the poor outcast, whose laughter be less innocent though perhaps louder, and who bring their shame and their youth here, to dance and be merry till the dawn at least; and to get bread and drown care. of this sympathy with all condition of man Arthur often boast: say he be pleased to possess it: and that he hop thus to the last he should retain it. as another man have an ardour for art or music, or natural science, Mr. Pen say that anthropology be his favourite pursuit; and have his eye always eagerly open to its infinite variety and beauty: contemplate with an unfailing delight all specimen of it in all place to which he resort, whether it be the coquetting of a wrinkle dowager in a ballroom, or a high-breed young beauty blushing in her prime there; whether it be a hulking guardsman coax a servant-girl in the Park--or innocent little Tommy that be feed the duck whilst the nurse listen. and indeed a man whose heart be pretty clean, can indulge in this pursuit with an enjoyment that never cease, and be only perhaps the more keen because it be secret and have a touch of sadness in it: because he be of his mood and humour lonely, and apart although not alone.
yes, Pen use to brag and talk in his impetuous way to Warrington. "I be in love so fiercely in my youth, that I have burn out that flame for ever, I think, and if ever I marry, it will be a marriage of reason that I will make, with a well-breed, good-temper, good-look person who have a little money, and so forth, that will cushion our carriage in its course through life. as for romance, it be all do; I have spend that out, and be old before my time--I'm proud of it."
"Stuff!" growl the other, "you fancy you be get bald the other day, and brag about it as you do about everything. but you begin to use the bear's-grease pot directly the hairdresser tell you; and be scented like a barber ever since."
"you be diogene," the other answer, "and you want every man to live in a tub like yourself. violet smell well than stale tobacco, you grizzly old cynic." but Mr. Pen be blush whilst he make this reply to his unromantical friend, and indeed care a great deal more about himself still than such a philosopher perhaps should have do. indeed, consider that he be careless about the world, Mr. Pen ornament his person with no small pain in order to make himself agreeable to it, and for a weary pilgrim as he be, wear very tight boot and bright varnish.
it be in this dull season of the year, then, of a shin Friday night in autumn, that Mr. Pendennis, have complete at his newspaper office a brilliant lead article--such as Captain Shandon himself might have write, have the Captain be in good-humour, and incline to work, which he never would do except under compulsion--that Mr. Arthur Pendennis have write his article, and review it approvingly as it lie before he in its wet proof-sheet at the office of the paper, bethink he that he would cross the water, and regale himself with the firework and other amusement of Vauxhall. so he affably put in his pocket the order which admit "Editor of Pall Mall Gazette and friend" to that place of recreation, and pay with the coin of the realm a sufficient sum to enable he to cross Waterloo Bridge. the walk thence to the Gardens be pleasant, the star be shin in the sky above, look down upon the royal property, whence the rocket and roman candle have not yet ascend to outshine the star.
before you enter the enchant ground, where twenty thousand additional lamp be burn every night as usual, most of we have pass through the black and dreary passage and wicket which hide the splendour of Vauxhall from uninitiated man. in the wall of this passage be two hole strongly illuminate, in the midst of which you see two gentleman at desk, where they will take either your money as a private individual, or your order of admission if you be provide with that passport to the Gardens. Pen go to exhibit his ticket at the last-name orifice, where, however, a gentleman and two lady be already in parley before he.
the gentleman, whose hat be very much on one side, and who wear a short and shabby cloak in an excessively smart manner, be cry out in a voice which Pen at once recognise.
"Bedad, sir, if ye doubt I honour, will ye obleege I by stippe out of that box, and----"
"Lor, Capting!" cry the eld lady.
"donot bother I," say the man in the box.
and ask Mr. Hodgen himself, whobe in the gyardens, to let these leedie pass. donot be froightene, I dear madam, Ibe not go to quarl with this gintleman, at anyreet before leedie. will ye go, sir, and desoire Mr. Hodgen (whose orther I keem in with, and hebe I most intemate friend, and I know hebe goan to sing the 'Body Snatcher' here to-noight), with Captain Costigan's compliment, to stip out and let in the leedies-- for meself, sir, Ihave see Vauxhall, and I scawrun any interfayrance on moi account: but for these leedie, one of they have never be there, and of should think ye'd harly take advantage of I misfartune in lose the ticket, to deproive she of her pleasure."
"it benot no use, Captain. I cannot go about your business," the check-taker say; on which the Captain swear an oath, and the eld lady say, "Lor, ow provokin!"
as for the young one, she look up at the Captain and say, "never mind, Captain Costigan, Ibe sure I donot want to go at all. come away, mamma." and with this, although she do not want to go at all, her feeling overcome she, and she begin to cry.
"I poor child!" the Captain say. "can ye see that, sir, and will ye not let this innocent creature in?"
"it benot my business," cry the doorkeeper, peevishly, out of the illuminate box. and at this minute Arthur come up, and recognise Costigan, say, "donot you know I, Captain? Pendennis!" and he take off his hat and make a bow to the two lady. "I dear boy! I dear friend!" cry the Captain, extend towards Pendennis the grasp of friendship; and he rapidly explain to the other what he call "a most unluckee conthratong." he have an order for Vauxhall, admit two, from Mr. Hodgen, then within the Gardens, and singing (as he do at the Back Kitchen and the nobility's concert, the 'Body Snatcher,' the 'death of General Wolfe,' the 'Banner of Blood,' and other favourite melody); and, have this order for the admission of two person, he think that it would admit three, and have come accordingly to the Gardens with his friend. but, on his way, Captain Costigan have lose the paper of admission--it be not forthcoming at all; and the leedie must go back again, to the great disappointment of one of they, as Pendennis see.
Arthur have a great deal of good-nature for everybody, and sympathise with the misfortune of all sort of people: how could he refuse his sympathy in such a case as this? he have see the innocent face as it look up to the Captain, the appealing look of the girl, the piteous quiver of the mouth, and the final outburst of tear. if it have be his last guinea in the world, he must have pay it to have give the poor little thing pleasure. she turn the sad implore eye away directly they light upon a stranger, and begin to wipe they with her handkerchief. Arthur look very handsome and kind as he stand before the woman, with his hat off, blushing, bowing, generous, a gentleman. "who be they?" he ask of himself. he think he have see the eld lady before.
"if I can be of any service to you, Captain Costigan," the young man say, "I hope you will command I; be there any difficulty about take these lady into the garden? will you kindly make use of my purse? And-- and I have a ticket myself which will admit two--I hope, ma'am, you will permit I?"
the first impulse of the Prince of Fairoaks be to pay for the whole party, and to make away with his newspaper order as poor Costigan have do with his own ticket. but his instinct, and the appearance of the two woman, tell he that they would be well pleased if he do not give himself the air of a grand seigneur, and he hand his purse to Costigan, and laughingly pull out his ticket with one hand, as he offer the other to the elder of the lady--lady be not the word-- they have bonnet and shawl, and collar and ribbon, and the young show a pretty little foot and boot under her modest grey gown, but his Highness of Fairoaks be courteous to every person who wear a petticoat whatever its texture be, and the humbler the wearer, only the more stately and polite in his demeanour.
"Fanny, take the gentleman's arm," the elder say; "since you will be so very kind--i've see you often come in at our gate, sir, and go in to Captain Strong's at no. 3."
Fanny make a little curtsey, and put her hand under Arthur's arm. it have on a shabby little glove, but it be pretty and small. she be not a child, but she be scarcely a woman as yet; her tear have dry up, and her cheek mantle with youthful blush, and her eye glisten with pleasure and gratitude, as she look up into Arthur's kind face.
Arthur, in a protect way, put his other hand upon the little one rest on his arm. "Fannybe a very pretty little name," he say, "and so you know I, do you?"
"we keep the lodge, sir, at Shepherd's Inn," Fanny say with a curtsey; "and Ihave never be at Vauxhall, sir, and Papa donot like I to go-- and--and--o--o--law, how beautiful!" she shrink back as she speak, start with wonder and delight as she see the Royal Gardens blaze before she with a hundred million of lamp, with a splendour such as the fine fairy tale, the fine pantomime she have ever witness at the theatre, have never realise. Pen be pleased with her pleasure, and press to his side the little hand which clung so kindly to he. "what would I not give for a little of this pleasure?" say the blase young man.
"your purse, Pendennis, I dear boy," say the Captain's voice behind he. "will ye count it? itbe all roight--no--ye thrust in old Jack Costigan (he thrust I, ye see, madam). Ye've be I preserver, Pen (Ihave know um since choildhood, Mrs. Bolton; hebe the proproietor of Fairoaks Castle, and manybe the cooper of clart Ihave dthrunk there with the first nobilitee of his neetive countee),--mr. Pendennis, ye've be I preserver, and of thank ye; I daughtther will thank ye;--Mr. Simpson, your humble servant sir."
if Pen be magnificent in his courtesy to the lady, what be his splendour in comparison to Captain Costigan's bow here and there, and cry bravo to the singer?
a man, descend like Costigan, from a long line of hibernian king, chieftain, and other magnate and sheriff of the county, have of course too much dignity and self-respect to walk arrum-in-arrum (as the Captain phrase it) with a lady who occasionally sweep his room out, and cook his mutton-chop. in the course of their journey from Shepherd's Inn to Vauxhall Gardens, Captain Costigan have walk by the side of the two lady, in a patronising and affable manner point out to they the edifice worthy of note, and discoorsing, accord to his willnot, about other city and country which he have visit, and the people of rank and fashion with whom he have the honour of an acquaintance. nor could it be expect, nor, indeed, do Mrs. Bolton expect, that, arrive in the Royal property, and strongly illuminate by the flare of the twenty thousand additional lamp, the Captain could relax from his dignity, and give an arm to a lady who be, in fact, little well than a housekeeper or charwoman.
but Pen, on his part, have no such scruple. Miss Fanny Bolton do not make his bed nor sweep his chamber; and he do not choose to let go his pretty little partner. as for Fanny, her colour heighten, and her bright eye shine the brighter with pleasure, as she lean for protection on the arm of such a fine gentleman as Mr. Pen. and she look at number of other lady in the place, and at score of other gentleman under whose protection they be walk here and there; and she think that her gentleman be handsomer and grander-look than any other gent in the place. of course there be votary of pleasure of all rank there--rakish young surgeon, fast young clerk and commercialist, occasional dandy of the Guard regiment, and the rest. Old Lord Colchicum be there in attendance upon Mademoiselle Caracoline, who have be rid in the ring; and who talk her native French very loud, and use idiomatic expression of exceed strength as she walk about, lean on the arm of his lordship.
Colchicum be in attendance upon Mademoiselle Carandine, little Tom Tufthunt be in attendance upon Lord Colchicum; and rather pleased, too, with his position. when Don Juan scalle the wall, therebe never a want of a Leporello to hold the ladder. Tom Tufthunt be quite happy to act as friend to the elderly viscount, and to carve the fowl, and to make the salad at supper. when Pen and his young lady meet the Viscount's party, that noble poor only give Arthur a pass leer of recognition as his lordship's eye pass from Pen's face under the bonnet of Pen's companion. but Tom Tufthunt wag his head very good-naturedly at Mr. Arthur, and say, "how be you, old boy?" and look extremely know at the godfather of this history.
"that be the great rider at Astley's; I have see she there," Miss Bolton say, look after Mademoiselle Caracoline; "and who be that old man? be it not the gentleman in the ring!"
"that be Lord Viscount Colchicum, Miss Fanny," say Pen with an air of protection. he mean no harm; he be pleased to patronise the young girl, and he be not displeased that she should be so pretty, and that she should be hang upon his arm, and that yonder elderly Don Juan should have see she there.
Fanny be very pretty; her eye be dark and brilliant, her tooth be like little pearl; her mouth be almost as red as Mademoiselle Caracoline's when the latter have put on her vermilion. and what a difference there be between the one's voice and the other's, between the girl's laugh and the woman's! it be only very lately, indeed, that Fanny, when look in the little glass over the Bows-Costigan mantelpiece as she be dust it have begin to suspect that she be a beauty. but a year ago, she be a clumsy, gawky girl, at whom her father sneer, and of whom the girl at the day-school (Miss Minifer's, Newcastle Street, Strand; Miss M., the young sister, take the lead business at the Norwich circuit in 182--; and she herself have play for two season with some credit T. R. E. O., T. R. S. W., until she fall down a trap-door and break her leg); the girl at Fanny's school, we say, take no account of she, and think she a dowdy little creature as long as she remain under Miss Minifer's instruction. and it be unremarked and almost unseen in the porter's dark lodge of Shepherd's Inn, that this little flower bloom into beauty.
so this young person hang upon Mr. Pen's arm, and they pace the garden together, Empty as London be, there be still some two million of people leave linger about it, and amongst they, one or two of the acquaintance of Mr. Arthur Pendennis.
amongst they, silent and alone, pale, with his hand in his pocket, and a rueful nod of the head to Arthur as they meet, pass Henry Foker, Esq. Young Henry be try to ease his mind by move from place to place, and from excitement to excitement. but he think about Blanche as he saunter in the dark walk; he think about Blanche as he look at the device of the lamp. he consult the fortune-teller about she, and be disappoint when that gipsy tell he that he be in love with a dark lady who would make he happy; and at the concert, though Mr. Momus sing his most stunning comic song, and ask his most astonishing riddle, never do a kind smile come to visit Foker's lip. in fact, he never hear Mr. Momus at all.
Pen and Miss Bolton be hard by listen to the same concert, and the latter remark, and Pen laugh at Mr. Fokei's woebegone face.
Fanny ask what it be that make that odd-look little man so dismal? "I think he be cross in love!" Pen, say. "benot that enough to make any man dismal, Fanny?" and he look down at she, splendidly protect she, like Egmont at Clara in Goethe's play, or Leicester at Amy in Scott's novel.
"cross in love be he? poor gentleman," say Fanny with a sigh, and her eye turn round towards he with no little kindness and pity--but Harry do not see the beautiful dark eye.
"how dy do, Mr. Pendennis!"--a voice break in here--it be that of a young man in a large white coat with a red neckcloth, over which a dingy shirt-collar be turn so as to exhibit a dubious neck--with a large pin of bullion or other metal, and an imaginative waistcoat with exceedingly fanciful glass button, and trouser that cry with a loud voice, "come look at I and see how cheap and tawdry I be; my master, what a dirty buck!" and a little stick in one pocket of his coat, and a lady in pink satin on the other arm--"How dy do--forget I, I dare say? huxter,-- Clavering."
"how do you do, Mr. Huxter," the Prince of Fairoaks say in his most princely manner--"I hope you be very well."
"pretty bobbish, thanky."--And Mr. Huxter wag his head. "I say, Pendennis, youhave be come it uncommon strong since we have the row at Wapshot's, donot you remember. great author, hay? go about with the swell. see your name in the Morning Post. I suppose yoube too much of a swell to come and have a bit of supper with an old friend?--charterhouse Lane to-morrow night,--some devilish good fellow from Bartholomew's, and some stunning gin-punch. herebe my card." and with this Mr. Huxter release his hand from the pocket where his cane be, and pull off the top of his card-case with his tooth produce thence a visit ticket, which he hand to Pen.
"you be exceedingly kind, I be sure," say Pen: "but I regret that I have an engagement which will take I out of town to-morrow night." and the Marquis of Fairoaks, wonder that such a creature as this could have the audacity to give he a card, put Mr. Huxter's card into his waistcoat pocket with a lofty courtesy. possibly Mr. Samuel Huxter be not aware that there be any great social difference between Mr. Arthur Pendennis and himself. Mr. Huxter's father be a surgeon and apothecary at Clavering just as Mr. Pendennis's papa have be a surgeon and apothecary at Bath. but the impudence of some man be beyond all calculation.
"well, old fellow, never mind," say Mr. Huxter, who, always frank and familiar, be from vinous excitement even more affable than usual. "if ever you be pass, look up our place, Ibe mostly at home Saturdays; and therebe generally a cheese cupboard. Ta, ta.--therebe the bell for the firework ring. come along, Mary." and he set off run with the rest of the crowd in the direction of the firework.
so do Pen presently, when this agreeable youth be out of sight, begin to run with his little companion; Mrs. Bolton follow after they, with Captain Costigan at her side. but the Captain be too majestic and dignified in his movement to run for friend or enemy, and he pursue his course with the usual jaunty swagger which distinguish his step, so that he and his companion be speedily distance by Pen and Miss Fanny.
perhaps Arthur forgot, or perhaps he do not choose to remember, that the eld couple have no money in their pocket, as have be prove by their adventure at the entrance of the Gardens; howbeit, Pen pay a couple of shilling for himself and his partner, and with she hang close on his arm, scale the staircase which lead to the firework gallery. the Captain and mamma might have follow they if they like, but Arthur and Fanny be too busy to look back. People be push and squeeze there beside and behind they. one eager individual rush by Fanny, and elbow she so, that she fall back with a little cry, upon which, of course, Arthur catch she adroitly in his arm, and, just for protection, keep she so defended, until they mount the stair, and take their place.
Poor Foker sate alone on one of the high bench, his face illuminate by the firework, or in their absence by the moon. Arthur see he, and laugh, but do not occupy himself about his friend much. he be engage with Fanny. how she wonder! how happy she be! how she cry O, O, O, as the rocket soar into the air, and shower down in azure, and emerald, and vermilion! as these wonder blaze and disappear before she, the little girl thrill and tremble with delight at Arthur's side --her hand be under his arm still, he feel it press he as she look up delighted.
"how beautiful they be, sir!" she cry.
"donot call I sir, Fanny," Arthur say.
a quick blush rush up into the girl's face. "what shall I call you?" she say, in a low voice, sweet and tremulous. "what would you wish I to say, sir?"
"again, Fanny! well, I forget; it be good so, my dear," Pendennis say, very kindly and gently. "I may call you Fanny?"
"oh yes!" she say, and the little hand press his arm once more very eagerly, and the girl clung to he so that he could feel her heart beat on his shoulder.
"I may call you Fanny, because you be a young girl, and a good girl, Fanny, and I be an old gentleman. but you mustnot call I anything but sir, or Mr. Pendennis, if you like; for we live in very different station, Fanny; and donot think I speak unkindly; and--and why do you take your hand away, Fanny? be you afraid of I? do you think I would hurt you? not for all the world, my dear little girl. and--and look how beautiful the moon and star be, and how calmly they shine when the rocket have go out, and the noisy wheel have do hiss and blaze. when I come here to-night I do not think I should have have such a pretty little companion to sit by my side, and see these fine firework. you must know I live by myself, and work very hard. I write in book and newspaper, Fanny; and I quite tired out, and be expect to sit alone all night; and--don't cry, my dear, dear, little girl." here Pen break out, rapidly put an end to the calm oration which he have begin to deliver; for the sight of a woman's tear always put his nerve in a quiver, and he begin forthwith to coax she and soothe she, and to utter a hundred and twenty little ejaculation of pity and sympathy, which need not be repeat here, because they would be absurd in print. so would a mother's talk to a child be absurd in print; so would a lover's to his bride. that sweet artless poetry bear no translation; and be too subtle for grammarian' clumsy definition. you have but the same four letter to describe the salute which you perform on your grandmother's forehead, and that which you bestow on the sacred cheek of your mistress; but the same four letter, and not one of they a labial. do we mean to hint that r. Arthur Pendennis make any use of the monosyllable in question? not so. in the first place, it be dark: the firework be over, and nobody could see he; secondly, he be not a man to have this kind of secret, and tell it; thirdly and lastly, let the honest fellow who have kiss a pretty girl, say what would have be his own conduct in such a delicate juncture?
well, the truth be, that however you may suspect he, and whatever you would have do under the circumstance, or Mr. Pen would have like to do, he behave honestly, and like a man. "I will not play with this little girl's heart," he say within himself, "and forget my own or her honour. she seem to have a great deal of dangerous and rather contagious sensibility, and I be very glad the firework be over, and that I can take she back to her mother. come along, Fanny; mind the step, and lean on I. donot stumble, you heedless little thing; this be the way, and there be your mamma at the door."
and there, indeed, Mrs. Bolton be, unquiet in spirit, and grasp her umbrella. she seize Fanny with maternal fierceness and eagerness, and utter some rapid abuse to the girl in an undertone. the expression in Captain Costigan's eye--stand behind the matron and wink at Pendennis from under his hat--be, I be bind to say, indefinably humorous.
it be so much so, that Pen could not refrain from burst into a laugh. "you should have take my arm, Mrs. Bolton," he say, offer it. "I be very glad to bring Miss Fanny back quite safe to you. we think you would have follow we up into the gallery. we enjoy the firework, donot we?"
"oh yes!" say Miss Fanny, with rather a demure look.
"and the bouquet be magnificent," say Pen. "and it be ten hour since I have anything to eat, lady; and I wish you would permit I to invite you to supper."
"Dad," say Costigan, "Iwould loike a snack to; only I forgawt I purse, or I should have invoite these leedie to a collection."
Mrs. Bolton with considerable asperity say, she ad an eadache, and would much rather go ome.
"a lobster salad be the good thing in the world for a headache," Pen say gallantly, "and a glass of wine Ibe sure will do you good. come, Mrs. Bolton, be kind to I and oblige I. I shallnot have the heart to sup without you, and upon my word I have have no dinner. give I your arm: give I the umbrella. Costigan, Ibe sure youwill take care of Miss Fanny; and I shall think Mrs. Bolton angry with I, unless she will favour I with her society. and we will all sup quietly, and go back in a cab together."
the cab, the lobster salad, the frank and good-humour look of Pendennis, as he smilingly invite the worthy matron, subdue her suspicion and her anger. since he would be so obliging, she think she could take a little bit of lobster, and so they all march away to a box; and Costigan call for a waither with such a loud and belligerent voice, as cause one of those official instantly to run to he.
the carte be examine on the wall, and Fanny be ask to choose her favourite dish; upon which the young creature say she be fond of lobster, too, but also own to a partiality for raspberry tart. this delicacy be provide by Pen, and a bottle of the most frisky champagne be moreover order for the delight of the lady. little Fanny drink this;--what other sweet intoxication have she not drunk in the course of the night?
when the supper, which be very brisk and gay, be over, and Captain Costigan and Mrs. Bolton have partake of some of the rack-punch that be so fragrant at Vauxhall, the bill be call and discharge by Pen with great generosity,--"loike a foin young english gentleman of th' olden toime, be Jove," Costigan enthusiastically remark. and as, when they go out of the box, he step forward and give Mrs. Bolton his arm, Fanny fall to Pen's lot, and the young people walk away in high good-humour together, in the wake of their senior.
the champagne and the rack-punch, though take in moderation by all person, except perhaps poor cos, who lurch ever so little in his gait, have set they in high spirit and good-humour, so that Fanny begin to skip and move her brisk little foot in time to the band, which be play waltz and galop for the dancer. as they come up to the dancing, the music and Fanny's foot seem to go quick together--she seem to spring, as if naturally, from the ground, and as if she require repression to keep she there.
"shouldnot you like a turn?" say the Prince of Fairoaks. "what fun it would be! Mrs. Bolton, ma'am, do let I take she once round." upon which Mr. Costigan say, "Off wid you!" and Mrs. Bolton not refuse (indeed, she be an old war-horse, and would have like, at the trumpet's sound, to have enter the arena herself), Fanny's shawl be off she back in a minute, and she and Arthur be whirl round in a waltz in the midst of a great deal of queer, but exceedingly joyful company.
Pen have no mishap this time with little Fanny, as he have with Miss Blanche in old days,--at least, there be no mishap of his making. the pair dance away with great agility and contentment,--first a waltz, then a galop, then a waltz again, until, in the second waltz, they be bump by another couple who have join the terpsichorean choir. this be Mr. Huxter and his pink satin young friend, of whom we have already have a glimpse.
Mr. Huxter very probably have be also partake of supper, for he be even more excited now than at the time when he have previously claim Pen's acquaintance; and, have run against Arthur and his partner, and nearly knock they down, this amiable gentleman of course begin to abuse the people whom he have injure, and break out into a volley of slang against the unoffending couple. "now then, stoopid! donot keep the ground if you cannot dance, old Slow Coach!" the young surgeon roar out (use, at the same time, other expression far more emphatic), and be join in his abuse by the shrill language and laughter of his partner; to the interruption of the ball, the terror of poor little fanny, and the immense indignation of Pen.
Arthur be furious; and not so angry at the quarrel as at the shame attend it. a battle with a fellow like that! a row in a public garden, and with a porter's daughter on his arm! what a position for Arthur Pendennis! he draw poor little Fanny hastily away from the dancer to her mother, and wish that lady, and Costigan, and poor Fanny underground, rather than there, in his companionship, and under his protection.
when Huxter commence his attack, that free-speak young gentleman have not see who be his opponent; and directly he be aware that it be Arthur whom he have insult, he begin to make apology. "hold your stoopid tongue, Mary," he say to his partner. "itbe an old friend and crony at home. I beg pardon, Pendennis; benot aware it be you, old boy." Mr. Huxter have be one of the boy of the Clavering School, who have be present at a combat which have be mention in the early part of this story, when young Pen knock down the big champion of the academy, and Huxter know that it be dangerous to quarrel with Arthur.
his apology be as odious to the other as his abuse have be. Pen stop his tipsy remonstrance, by tell he to hold his tongue, and desire he not to use his (Pendennis's) name in that place or any other; and he walk out of the garden with a titter behind he from the crowd, every one of whom he would have like to massacre for have be witness to the degrade broil. he walk out of the garden, quite forget poor little Fanny, who come tremble behind he with her mother and the stately Costigan.
he be bring back to himself by a word from the Captain, who touch he on the shoulder just as they be pass the inner gate.
"therebe no ray-admittance except ye pay again," the Captain say. "hadnot I well go back and take the fellow your message?" Pen burst out laugh. "take he a message! do you think I would fight with such a fellow as that?" he ask.
"no, no! donot, donot?" cry out little Fanny. "how can you be so wicked, Captain Costigan?" the Captain mutter something about honour, and wink knowingly at Pen, but Arthur say gallantly, "no, Fanny, donot be frightened. it be my fault to have dance in such a place,--I beg your padon to have ask you to dance there." and he give she his arm once more, and call a cab, and put his three friend into it.
he be about to pay the driver, and to take another carriage for himself, when little Fanny, still alarmed, put she little hand out, and catch he by the coat, and implore he and besought he to come in.
"will nothing satisfy you," say Pen, in great good-humour, "that I be not go back to fight he? well, I will come home with you. drive to Shepherd's Inn, cab." the cab drive to its destination. Arthur be immensely pleased by the girl's solicitude about he: her tender terror quite make he forget his previous annoyance.
Pen put the lady into their lodge, have shake hand kindly with both of they; and the Captain again whisper to he that he would see um in the morning if he be inclined, and take his message to that "scounthrel." but the Captain be in his usual condition when he make the proposal; and Pen be perfectly sure that neither he nor Mr. Huxter, when they awake, would remember anything about the dispute.
CHAPTYER xlviii
a Visit of Politeness
Costigan never rouse Pen from his slumber; there be no hostile message from Mr. Huxter to disturb he; and when Pen wake, it be with a brisker and more lively feeling than ordinarily attend that moment in the day of the tired and blase London man. a City man wake up to care and consol, and the thought of 'Change and the counting-house take possession of he as soon as sleep fly from under his night-cap; a lawyer rouse himself with the early morning to think of the case that will take he all his day to work upon, and the inevitable attorney to whom he have promise his paper ere night. which of we have not his anxiety instantly present when his eye be open, to it and to the world, after his night's sleep? kind strengthener that enable we to face the day's task with renewed heart! beautiful ordinance of Providence that create rest as it award labour!
Mr. Pendennis's labour, or rather his disposition, be of that sort that his daily occupation do not much interest he, for the excitement of literary composition pretty soon subside with the hire labourer, and the delight of see one's-self in print only extend to the first two or three appearance in the magazine or newspaper page. Pegasus put into harness, and oblige to run a stage every day, be as prosaic as any other hack, and willnot work without his whip or his feed of corn. so, indeed, Mr. Arthur perform his work at the Pall Mall Gazette (and since his success as a novelist with an increase salary), but without the least enthusiasm, do his good or pretty nearly, and sometimes write ill and sometimes well. he be a literary hack, naturally fast in pace, and brilliant in action.
neither do society, or that portion which he see, excite or amuse he over much. in spite of his brag and boast to the contrary, he be too young as yet for woman's society, which probably can only be have in perfection when a man have cease to think about his own person, and have give up all design of be a conqueror of lady; he be too young to be admit as an equal amongst man who have make their mark in the world, and of whose conversation he could scarcely as yet expect to be more than a listener. and he be too old for the man of pleasure of his own age; too much a man of pleasure for the man of business; destinie in a word to be a good deal alone. fate award this lot of solitude to many a man; and many like it from taste, as many without difficulty bear it. Pendennis, in reality, suffer it very equanimously; but in word, and accord to his willnot, grumble over it not a little.
"what a nice little artless creature that be," Mr. Pen think at the very instant of wake after the Vauxhall affair; "what a pretty natural manner she have; how much pleasanter than the minauderie of the young lady in the ballroom" (and here he recall to himself some instance of what he could not help see be the artful simplicity of Miss Blanche, and some of the stupid grace of other young lady in the polite world); "who could have think that such a pretty rose could grow in a porter's lodge, or bloom in that dismal old flower-pot of a Shepherd's Inn? so she learn to sing from old bow? if her singing voice be as sweet as her speak voice, it must be pretty. I like those low voilee voice. 'what would you like I to call you?' indeed, poor little fanny! it go to my heart to adopt the grand air with she and tell she to call I, 'Sir.' but wewill have no nonsense of that sort--no Faust and Margaret business for I. that old bow! so he teach she to sing, do he? hebe a dear old fellow, old bow: a gentleman in those old clothe: a philosopher, and with a kind heart, too. how good he be to I in the Fotheringay business. he, too, have have his grief and his sorrow. I must cultivate old bow. a man ought to see people of all sort. I be get tired of genteel society. besides, therebe nobody in town. yes, Iwill go and see bow, and Costigan too; what a rich character! begad, Iwill study he, and put he into a book." in this way our young anthropologist talk with himself, and as Saturday be the holiday of the week, the Pall Mall Gazette make its appearance upon that day, and the contributor to that journal have no further call upon their brain or ink-bottle, Mr. Pendennis determine he would take advantage of his leisure, and pay a visit to Shepherd's Inn--of course to see old bow.
the truth be, that if Arthur have be the most determined roue and artful Lovelace who ever set about deceive a young girl, he could hardly have adopt well mean for fascinating and overcome poor little Fanny Bolton than those which he have employ on the previous night. his dandified protect air, his conceit, generosity, and good-humour, the very sense of good and honesty which have enable he to check the tremulous advance of the young creature, and not to take advantage of that little flutter sensibility,--his fault and his virtue at once contribute to make her admire he; and if we could peep into Fanny's bed (which she share in a cupboard, along with those two little sister to whom we have see Mr. Costigan administer gingerbread and apple), we should find the poor little maid toss upon her mattress, to the great disturbance of its other two occupant, and think over all the delight and event of that delightful, eventful night, and all the word, look, and action of Arthur, its splendid hero. many novel have Fanny read, in secret and at home, in three volume and in number. Periodical literature have not reach the height which it have attain subsequently, and the girl of Fanny's generation be not enable to purchase sixteen page of excitement for a penny, rich with history of crime, murder, oppress virtue, and the heartless seduction of the aristocracy; but she have have the benefit of the circulate library which, in conjunction with her school and a small brandy-ball and millinery business, Miss Minifer kept,--and Arthur appear to she at once as the type and realisation of all the hero of all those darling greasy volume which the young girl have devour. Mr. Pen, we have see, be rather a dandy about shirt and haberdashery in general. Fanny have look with delight at the fineness of his linen, at the brilliancy of his shirt-stud, at his elegant cambric pocket-handkerchief and white glove, and at the jetty brightness of his charming boot. the Prince have appear and subjugate the poor little handmaid. his image traverse constantly her restless slumber; the tone of his voice, the blue light of his eye, the generous look, half love, half pity,--the manly protect smile, the frank, win laughter,--all these be repeat in the girl's fond memory. she feel still his arm encircle she, and see he smile so grand as he fill up that delicious glass of champagne. and then she think of the girl, her friend, who use to sneer at her --of Emma Baker, who be so proud, forsooth, because she be engage to a cheesemonger, in a white apron, near Clare Market; and of Betsy Rodgers, who make such a to-do about her young man--an attorney's clerk, indeed, that go about with a bag!
so that, at about two o'clock in the afternoon--the Bolton family have conclude their dinner (and Mr. B., who besides his place of porter of the Inn, be in the employ of Messrs. Tressler, the eminent undertaker of the Strand, be absent in the country with the Countess of Estrich's hearse), when a gentleman in a white hat and white trouser make his appearance under the Inn archway, and stop at the porter's wicket, Fanny be not in the least surprised, only delightful, only happy, and blush beyond all measure. she know it could be no other than he. she know hewould come. there he be; there be his Royal Highness beam upon she from the gate. she call to her mother, who be busy in the upper apartment, "Mamma, mamma," and run to the wicket at once, and open it, push aside the other child. how she blush as she give her hand to he! how affably he take off his white hat as he come in; the child star up at he! he ask Mrs. Bolton if she have sleep well, after the fatigue of the night, and hop she have no headache; and he say that as he be go that way, he could not pass the door without ask news of his little partner.
Mrs. Bolton be perhaps rather shy and suspicious about these advance; but Mr. Pen's good-humour be inexhaustible, he could not see that he be unwelcome. he look about the premise for a seat, and none be disengage, for a dish-cover be on one, a workbox on the other, and so forth, he take one of the child's chair, and perch himself upon that uncomfortable eminence. at this, the child begin laugh, the child Fanny louder than all--at least, she be more amused than any of they, and amazed at his Royal Highness's condescension. he to sit down in that chair--that little child's chair!--many and many a time after, she regard it: havenot we almost all, such furniture in our room, that our fancy people with dear figure, that our memory fill with sweet smile face, which may never look on we more?
so Pen sate down and talk away with great volubility to Mrs. Bolton. he ask about the undertaking business, and how many mute go down with Lady Estrich's remain; and about the Inn, and who live there. he seem very much interested about Mr. Campion's cab and horse, and have meet that gentleman in society. he think he should like share in the Polwheedle and Tredyddlum; do Mrs. Bolton do for those chamber? be there any chamber to let in the Inn? it be well than the Temple: he should like to come to live in Shepherd's Inn. as for Captain Strong, and--Colonel Altamont--be his name? he be deeply interested in they too. the Captain be an old friend at home. he have din with he at chamber here, before the Colonel come to live with he. what sort of man be the Colonel? benot he a stout man, with a large quantity of jewellery, and a wig and large black whisker--very black (here Pen be immensely waggish, and cause hysteric giggle of delight from the ladies)--very black indeed; in fact, blue black; that be to say, a rich greenish purple? that be the man; he have meet he, too, at Sir fr---- in Society.
"oh, we know," say the lady, "Sir F---- be Sir F. Clavering hebe often here: two or three time a week with the Captain. my little boy have be out for bill-stamp for he. o Lor! I beg pardon, I shouldnot have mention no secret," Mrs. Bolton blurt out, be talk perfectly into good-nature by this time. "but we know you to be a gentleman, Mr. Pendennis, for Ibe sure you have show that you can beayve as such. havenot Mr. Pendennis, Fanny?"
Fanny love her mother for that speech. she cast up her dark eye to the low ceiling and say, "oh, that he have, Ibe sure, Ma," with a voice full of feeling.
Pen be rather curious about the bill-stamp, and concern the transaction in Strong's chamber. and he ask, when Altamont come and join the Chevalier, whether he too be out for bill-stamp, who he be, whether he see many people, and so forth. these question, put with considerable adroitness by Pen who be interested about Sir Francis Clavering's doing from private motif of his own, be artlessly answer by Mrs. Bolton, and to the utmost of her knowledge and ability, which, in truth, be not very great.
these question answer, and Pen be at a loss for more, luckily recollect his privilege as a member of the Press, and ask the lady whether they would like any order for the play? the play be their delight, as it be almost always the delight of every theatrical person. when Bolton be away professionally (it appear that of late the porter of Shepherd's Inn have take a serious turn, drink a good deal, and otherwise make himself unpleasant to the lady of his family), they would like of all thing to slip out and go to the theatre--little Barney, their son, keep the lodge; and Mr. Pendennis's most generous and most genteel compliment of order be receive with boundless gratitude by both mother and daughter.
Fanny clap her hand with pleasure: her face beam with it. she look and nod, and laugh at har mamma, who nod and laugh in her turn. Mrs. Bolton be not superannuate for pleasure yet, or by any mean too old for admiration, she think. and very likely Mr. Pendennis, in his conversation with she, have insinuate some compliment, or shape his talk so as to please she. at first against Pen, and suspicious of he, she be his partisan now, and almost as enthusiastic about he as her daughter. when two woman get together to like a man, they help each other on--each push the other forward--and the second, out of sheer sympathy, become as eager as the principal:--at least, so it be say by philosopher who have examine this science.
so the offer of the play-ticket, and other pleasantry; put all party into perfect good-humour, except for one brief moment, when one of the young child, hear the name of 'Astley's' pronounce, come forward and state that she should like very much to go, too; on which, Fanny say, "donot bother!" rather sharply; and Mamma say, "Git-long, Betsy-Jane, do now, and play in the court:" so that the two little one, namely, Betsy-Jane and Ameliar--Ann, go away in their little innocent pinafore, and disport in the courtyard on the smooth gravel, round about the statue of Shepherd the Great.
and here, as they be play, they very possibly communicate with an old friend of theirs and dweller in the Inn; for while Pen be make himself agreeable to the lady at the lodge, who be laugh delighted at his sally, an old gentleman pass under the archway from the Inn-square, and come and look in at the door of the lodge.
he make a very blank and rueful face when he see Mr. Arthur seat upon a table, like Macheath in the play, in easy discourse with Mrs. Bolton and her daughter.
"what! Mr. Bows? how d'you do, bow?" cry out Pen, in a cheery, loud voice. "I be come to see you, and be ask your address of these lady."
"you be come to see I, be you, sir?" bow say, and come in with a sad face, and shake hand with Arthur. "plague on that old man!" somebody think in the room: and so, perhaps, some one else besides she.
CHAPTER XLIX
in Shepherd's Inn
our friend Pen say "how d'ye do, Mr. Bows," in a loud cheery voice on perceive that gentleman, and salute he in a dashing off-hand manner, yet you could have see a blush upon Arthur's face (answer by Fanny, whose cheek straightway throw out a similar flutter red signal); and after Bows and Arthur have shake hand, and the former have ironically accept the other's assertion that he be about to pay Mr. Costigan's chamber a visit, there be a gloomy and rather guilty silence in the company, which Pen presently try to dispel by make a great rattle noise. the silence of course depart at Mr. Arthur's noise, but the gloom remain and deepen, as the darkness do in a vault if you light up a single taper in it. Pendennis try to describe, in a jocular manner, the transaction of the previous night, and attempt to give an imitation of Costigan vainly expostulate with the check-taker at Vauxhall. it be not a good imitation. what stranger can imitate that perfection? nobody laugh. Mrs. Bolton do not in the least understand what part Mr. Pendennis be perform, and whether it be the check-taker or the Captain he be take off. Fanny wear an alarmed face, and try a timid giggle; old Mr. Bows look as glum as when he fiddle in the orchestra, or play a difficult piece upon the old piano at the Back Kitchen. Pen feel that his story be a failure; his voice sink and dwindle away dismally at the end of it--flicker, and go out; and it be all dark again. you could hear the ticket-porter, who loll about Shepherd's Inn, as he pass on the flag under the archway: the clink of his boot-heel be note by everybody.
"you be come to see I, sir," Mr. Bows say. "willnot you have the kindness to walk up to my chamber with I? you do they a great honour, I be sure. they be rather high up; but----"
"oh! I live in a garret myself, and Shepherd's Inn be twice as cheerful as Lamb Court," Mr. Pendennis break in.
"I know that you have third-floor apartment," Mr. Bows say; "and be go to say--you will please not take my remark as discourteous--that the air up three pair of stair be wholesomer for gentleman, than the air of a porter's lodge."
"Sir!" say Pen, whose candle flame up again in his wrath, and who be disposed to be as quarrelsome as man be when they be in the wrong. "will you permit I to choose my society without----?
"you be so polite as to say that you be about to honour my umble domicile with a visit," Mr. Bows say, with his sad voice. "shall I show you the way? Mr. Pendennis and I be old friend, Mrs. Bolton--very old acquaintance; and at the early dawn of his life we cross each other."
the old man point towards the door with a trembling finger, and a hat in the other hand, and in an attitude slightly theatrical; so be his word when he speak somewhat artificial, and choose from the vocabulary which he have hear all his life from the paint lip of the orator before the stage-lamp. but he be not act or masquerade, as Pen know very well, though he be disposed to pooh-pooh the old fellow's melodramatic air. "come along, sir," he say, "as you be so very pressing. Mrs. Bolton, I wish you a good day. good-bye, Miss Fanny; I shall always think of our night at Vauxhall with pleasure; and be sure I will remember the theatre ticket." and he take her hand, press it, be press by it, and be go.
"what a nice young man, to be sure!" cry Mrs. Bolton.
"d'you think so, ma?" say Fanny.
"I be a-thinkin who he be like. when I be at the Wells with Mrs. Serle," Mrs. Bolton continue, look through the window-curtain after Pen, as he go up the court with bow, "there be a young gentleman from the city, that use to come in a tilbry, in a white at, the very image of he, only his whisker be black, and Mr. P.'s be red."
"Law, ma! they be a most beautiful hawburn," Fanny say.
"he use to come for Emly Budd, who dance Columbine in 'Arleykin Ornpipe, or the Battle of Navarino,' when Miss De la Bosky be take ill-- a pretty dancer, and a fine stage figure of a woman--and he be a great sugar-baker in the city, with a country ouse at Omerton; and he use to drive she in the tilbry down Goswell Street Road; and one day they drive and be marry at St. Bartholomew's Church, Smithfield, where they ad their band read quite private; and she now keep her carriage, and I sor her name in the paper as patroness of the Manshing-House Ball for the Washywomen's asylum. and look at Lady Mirabel--capte Costigan's daughter--she be profeshnl, as all very well know." thus, and more to this purpose, Mrs. Bolton speak, now peep through the window-curtain, now clean the mug and plate, and consign they to their place in the corner cupboard; and finish her speech as she and Fanny shake out and fold up the dinner-cloth between they, and restore it to its drawer in the table.
although Costigan have once before be make pretty accurately to understand what Pen's pecuniary mean and expectation be, I suppose cos have forget the information acquire at Chatteris year ago, or have be induce by his natural enthusiasm to exaggerate his friend's income. he have describe Fairoaks Park in the most glowing term to Mrs. Bolton, on the precede evening, as he be walk about with she during Pen's little escapade with Fanny, have dilate upon the enormous wealth of Pen's famous uncle, the Major, and show an intimate acquaintance with Arthur's funded and land property. very likely Mrs. Bolton, in her wisdom, have speculate upon these matter during the night; and have have vision of Fanny drive in her carriage, like Mrs. Bolton's old comrade, the dancer of Sadler's Wells.
in the last operation of table-cloth folding, these two foolish woman, of necessity, come close together; and as Fanny take the cloth and give it the last fold, her mother put her finger under the young girl's chin, and kiss she. again the red signal fly out, and flutter on Fanny's cheek. what do it mean? it be not alarm this time. it be pleasure which cause the poor little fanny to blush so. poor little fanny! what? be love sin? that it be so pleasant at the beginning, and so bitter at the end?
after the embrace, Mrs. Bolton think proper to say that she be a-goin out upon business, and that Fanny must keep the lodge; which Fanny, after a very faint objection indeed, consent to do. so Mrs. Bolton take her bonnet and market-basket, and depart; and the instant she be go, Fanny go and sae by the window which command Bows's door, and never once take her eye away from that quarter of Shepherd's Inn.
Betsy-Jane and Ameliar-Ann be buzz in one corner of the place, and make believe to read out of a picture-book, which one of they hold topsy-turvy. it be a grave and dreadful tract, of Mr. Bolton's collection. Fanny do not hear her sister prattle over it. she notice nothing but Bows's door.
at last she give a little shake, and her eye light up. he have come out. he would pass the door again. but her poor little countenance fall in an instant more. Pendennis, indeed, come out; but bow follow after he. they pass under the archway together. he only take off his hat, and bow as he look in. he do not stop to speak.
in three or four minute--Fanny do not know how long, but she look furiously at he when he come into the lodge--bow return alone, and enter into the porter's room.
"wherebe your Ma, dear?" he say to Fanny.
"I donot know," Fanny say, with an angry toss. "I donot follow Ma's step wherever she go, I suppose, Mr. Bows."
"be I my mother's keeper?" bow say, with his usual melancholy bitterness. "come here, Betsy-Jane and Amelia-Ann; Ihave bring a cake for the one who can read her letter well, and a cake for the other who can read they the next good."
when the young lady have undergo the examination through which bow put they, they be reward with their gingerbread medal, and go off to discuss they in the court. meanwhile Fanny take out some work, and pretend to busy herself with it, her mind be in great excitement and anger, as she ply her needle. bow sate so that he could command the entrance from the lodge to the street. but the person whom, perhaps, he expect to see, never make his appearance again. and Mrs. Bolton come in from market, and find Mr. Bows in place of the person whom she have expect to see. the reader perhaps can guess what be his name?
the interview between bow and his guest, when those two mount to the apartment occupy by the former in common with the descendant of the milesian king, be not particularly satisfactory to either party. Pen be sulky. if bow have anything on his mind, he do not care to deliver himself of his thought in the presence of Captain Costigan, who remain in the apartment during the whole of Pen's visit; have quit his bedchamber, indeed, but a very few minute before the arrival of that gentleman. we have witness the deshahille of Major Pendennis: will any man wish to be valet-de-chambre to our other hero, Costigan? it would seem that the Captain, before issue from his bedroom, scent himself with otto-of-whisky. a rich odour of that delicious perfume breathe from out he, as he hold out the grasp of cordiality to his visitor. the hand which perform that grasp shake wofully: it be a wonder how it could hold the razor with which the poor gentleman daily operate on his chin.
bow's room be as neat, on the other hand, as his comrade's be disorderly. his humble wardrobe hang behind a curtain. his book and manuscript music be trimly arrange upon shelf. a lithographed portrait of Miss Fotheringay, as Mrs. Haller, with the actress's sprawl signature at the corner, hang faithfully over the old gentleman's bed. Lady Mirabel write much well than Miss Fotheringay have be able to do. her ladyship have labour assiduously to acquire the art of penmanship since her marriage; and, in a common note of invitation or acceptance, acquit herself very genteelly. bow love the old handwriting well, though; the fair artist's early manner. he have but one speciman of the new style, a note in reply to a song compose and dedicate to Lady Mirabel, by her most humble servant Robert Bows; and which document be treasure in his desk amongst his other state paper. he be teach Fanny Bolton now to sing and to write, as he have teach Emily in former day. it be the nature of the man to attach himself to something. when Emily be tear from he he take a substitute: as a man look out for a crutch when he lose a leg; or lash himself to a raft when he have suffer shipwreck. latude have give his heart to a woman, no doubt, before he grow to be so fond of a mouse in the Bastille. there be people who in their youth have feel and inspire an heroic passion, and end by be happy in the caress, or agitate by the illness of a poodle. but it be hard upon bow, and grate to his feeling as a man and a sentimentalist, that he should find Pen again upon his track, and in pursuit of this little Fanny.
meanwhile, Costigan have not the least idea but that his company be perfectly welcome to Messrs. Pendennis and Bows, and that the visit of the former be intend for himself. he express himself greatly pleased with that mark of poloightness and promise, in his own mind, that he would repay that obligation at least--which be not the only debt which the Captain owe in life--by several visit to his young friend. he entertain he affably with news of the day, or rather of ten day previous; for Pen, in his quality of Journalist, remember to have see some of the Captain's opinion in the Sporting and Theatrical Newspaper, which be Costigan's oracle. he state that Sir Charles and Lady Mirabel be go to Baden-Baden, and be most press in their invitation that he should join they there. Pen reply with great gravity, that he have hear that Baden be very pleasant, and the Grand Duke exceedingly hospitable to English. Costigan answer, that the law of hospitalitee bekeam a Grand Juke; that he sariously would think about visit he; and make some remark upon the splendid festivity at Dublin Castle, when his Excellency the Earl of Portansherry hold the Viceraygal Coort there, and of which he, Costigan, have be a humble but pleased spectator. and Pen--as he hear these oft-tell well-remember legends-- recollect the time when he have give a sort of credence to they, and have a certain respect for the Captain. emily and first love, and the little room at Chatteris, and the kind talk with bow on the bridge, come back to he. he feel quite kindly disposed towards his two old friend; and cordially shake the hand of both of they when he rise to go away.
he have quite forget about little Fanny Bolton whilst the Captain be talk, and Pen himself be absorb in other selfish meditation. he only remember she again as bow come hobble down the stair after he, bend evidently upon follow he out of Shepherd's Inn.
Mr. Bows's precaution be not a lucky one. the wrath of Mr. Arthur Pendennis rise at the poor old fellow's feeble persecution. confound he, what do he mean by dog I? think Pen. and he burst out laugh when he be in the Strand and by himself, as he think of the elder's stratagem. it be not an honest laugh, Arthur Pendennis. perhaps the thought strike Arthur himself, and he blush at his own sense of humour.
he go off to endeavour to banish the thought which occupy he, whatever those thought might be, and try various place of amusement with but indifferent success. he struggle up the high stair of the Panorama; but when he have arrive, pant at the height of the eminence, Care have come up with he, and be bear he company. he go to the Club, and write a long letter home, exceedingly witty and sarcastic, and in which, if he do not say a single word about Vauxhall and Fanny Bolton, it be because he think that subject, however interesting to himself, would not be very interesting to his mother and Laura. nor could the novel or the library table fix his attention, nor the grave and respectable Jawkins (the only man in town), who wish to engage he in conversation; nor any of the amusement which he try, after fly from Jawkins. he pass a Comic Theatre on his way home, and see 'Stunning Farce,' 'Roars of Laughter,' 'Good Old English Fun and Frolic,' placard in vermilion letter on the gate. he go into the pit, and see the lovely Mrs. Leary, as usual, in a man's attire; and that eminent buffo actor, Tom Horseman, dress as a woman. Horseman's travesty seem to he a horrid and hideous degradation; Mrs. Leary's glance and ankle have not the least effect. he laugh again, and bitterly, to himself, as he think of the effect which she have produce upon he, on the first night of his arrival in London, a short time--what a long long time ago!
CHAPTER L
or near the Temple Garden
Fashion have long desert the green and pretty Temple Garden, which in Shakespeare make York and Lancaster to pluck the innocent white and red rose which become the badge of their bloody war; and the learn and pleasant writer of the Handbook of London tell we that "the commonest and hardy kind of rose have long cease to put forth a bud" in that smoky air. not many of the present occupier of the building round about the quarter know or care, very likely, whether or not rose grow there, or pass the old gate, except on their way to chamber. the attorney' clerk donot carry flower in their bag, or posy under their arm, as they run to the counsel's chamber--the few lawyer who take constitutional walk think very little about York and Lancaster, especially since the railroad business be over. only antiquarian and literary amateur care to look at the garden with much interest, and fancy good Sir Roger de Coverley and Mr. Spectator with his short face pace up and down the road; or dear Oliver Goldsmith in the summer-house, perhaps meditate about the next 'Citizen of the world,' or the new suit that Mr. Filby, the tailor, be fashion for he, or the dunning letter that Mr. Newbery have send. tread heavily on the gravel, and roll majestically along in a snuff-colour suit, and a wig that sadly want the barber's powder and iron, one see the great Doctor step up to he (his Scotch lackey follow at the lexicographer's heel, a little the bad for port wine that they have be take at the Mitre), and Mr. Johnson ask Mr. Goldsmith to come home and take a dish of tea with Miss Williams. kind faith of Fancy! Sir Roger and Mr. Spectator be as real to we now as the two doctor and the boozy and faithful Scotchman. the poetical figure live in our memory just as much as the real personages,--and as Mr. Arthur Pendennis be of a romantic and literary turn, by no mean addict to the legal pursuit common in the neighbourhood of the place, we may presume that he be cherish some such poetical reflection as these, when, upon the evening after the event record in the last chapter, the young gentleman choose the Temple Gardens as a place for exercise and meditation.
on the Sunday evening the Temple be commonly calm. the chamber be for the most part vacant: the great lawyer be give grand dinner-party at their house in the belgravian or tyburnian district; the agreeable young barrister be absent, attend those party, and pay their respect to Mr. Kewsy's excellent claret, or Mr. Justice Ermine's accomplished daughter the uninvited be partake of the economic joint and the modest half-pint of wine at the Club, entertain themselves, and the rest of the company in the Club-room, with Circuit joke and point of wit and law. nobody be in chamber at all, except poor Mr. Cockle, who be ill, and whose laundress be make he gruel; or Mr. Toodle, who be an amateur of the flute, and whom you may hear pip solitary from his chamber in the second floor; or young Tiger, the student, from whose open window come a great gush of cigar smoke, and at whose door be a quantity of dish and cover, bear the insignia of Dicks' or the Cock. but stop! Whither do Fancy lead we? it be vacation time; and with the exception of Pendennis, nobody be in Chambers at all.
perhaps it be solitude, then, which drive Pen into the garden; for although he have never before pass the gate, and have look rather carelessly at the pretty flower-bed, and the group of pleased citizen saunter over the trim lawn and the broad gravel-walk by the river, on this evening it happen, as we have say, that the young gentleman, who have din alone at a tavern in the neighbourhood of the Temple, take a fancy, as he be return home to his chamber, to take a little walk in the garden, and enjoy the fresh evening air, and the sight of the shin Thames. after walk for a brief space, and look at the many peaceful and happy group round about he, he grow tired of the exercise, and betook himself to one of the summer-house which flank either end of the main walk, and there modestly seat himself. what be his cogitation? the evening be delightfully bright and calm; the sky be cloudless; the chimney on the opposite bank be not smoke; the wharfs warehouse look rosy in the sunshine, and as clear as if they, too, have wash for the holiday. the steamer rush rapidly up and down the stream, laden with holiday passenger. the bell of the multitudinous city church be ring to evening prayer--such peaceful Sabbath evening as this Pen may have remember in his early day, as he pace, with his arm round his mother's waist, on the terrace before the lawn at home. the sun be light up the little Brawl, too, as well as the broad thame, and sink downward majestically behind the Clavering elm, and the tower of the familiar village church. be it thought of these, or the sunset merely, that cause the blush in the young man's face? he beat time on the bench, to the chorus of the bell without; flick the dust off his shin boot with his pocket-handkerchief, and start up, stamp with his foot and say, "no, by Jove, Iwill go home." and with this resolution, which indicate that some struggle as to the propriety of remain where he be, or of quit the garden, have be go on in his mind, he step out of the summer-house.
he nearly knock down two little child, who do not indeed reach much high than his knee, and be trot along the gravel-walk, with their long blue shadow slant towards the east.
one cry out "oh!" the other begin to laugh; and with a knowing little infantile chuckle, say, "Missa Pendennis!" and Arthur, look down, see his two little friend of the day before, Mesdemoiselles Ameliar-Ann and Betsy-Jane. he blush more than ever at see they, and seize the one whom he have nearly upset, jump she up into the air, and kiss she: at which sudden assault Ameliar-Ann begin to cry in great alarm.
this cry bring up instantly two lady in clean collar and new ribbon, and grand shawl, namely: Mrs. Bolton in a rich scarlet Caledonian Cashmere, and a black silk dress, and Miss F. Bolton with a yellow scarf and a sweet sprig muslin, and a parasol--quite the lady. Fanny do not say one single word: though; her eye flash a welcome, and shine as bright--as bright as the most blazing window in Paper Buildings. but Mrs. Bolton, after admonish Betsy-Jane, say, "Lor sir --how very odd that we should meet you year! I ope you ave your ealth well, sir.--ain't it odd, Fanny, that we should meet Mr. Pendennis?" what do you mean by sniggering, Mesdames? when young Croesus have be stay at a country-house, have you never, by any singular coincidence, be walk with your fanny in the shrubbery? have you and your Fanny never happen to be listen to the band of the Heavies at Brighton, when young De Boots and Captain Padmore come clink down the pier? have you and your darling Frances never chance to be visit old widow Wheezy at the cottage on the common, when the young curate have step in with a tract adapt to the rheumatism? do you suppose that, if singular coincidence occur at the Hall, they donot also happen at the Lodge?
it be a coincidence, no doubt: that be all. in the course of the conversation on the day previous, Mr. Pendennis have merely say, in the simple way imaginable, and in reply to a question of Miss Bolton, that although some of the court be gloomy, part of the Temple be very cheerful and agreeable, especially the chamber look on the river and around the garden, and that the garden be a very pleasant walk on Sunday evening and frequent by a great number of people--and here, by the mere chance, all our acquaintance meet together, just like so many people in genteel life. what could be more artless, good-nature, or natural?
Pen look very grave, pompous, and dandify. he be unusually smart and brilliant in his costume. his white duck trouser and white hat, his neckcloth of many colour, his light waistcoat, gold chain, and shirt-stud, give he the air of a prince of the blood at least. how his splendour become his figure! be anybody ever like he? some one thought. he blush--how his blush become he! the same individual say to herself. the child, on see he the day before, have be so strike with he, that after he have go away they have be play at he. and Ameliar-Ann, stick her little chubby finger into the arm-hole of her pinafore, as Pen be willnot to do with his waistcoat, have say, "now, Bessy-Jane, Iwill be Missa Pendennis." Fanny have laugh till she cry, and smother her sister with kiss for that feat. how happy, too, she be to see Arthur embrace the child!
if Arthur be red, Fanny, on the contrary, be very worn and pale. Arthur remark it, and ask kindly why she look so fatigued.
"I be awake all night," say Fanny, and begin to blush a little.
"I put out her candle, and hordere she to go to sleep and leave off readin," interpose the fond mother.
"you be read! and what be it that interested you so?" ask Pen, amuse.
"oh, itbe so beautiful!" say Fanny.
"what?"
"'Walter Lorraine,'" Fanny sigh out. "how I do hate that Neaera-- Neaera--I donot know the pronunciation. and I love Leonora, and Walter, oh, how dear he be!"
how have Fanny discover the novel of 'Walter Lorraine,' and that Pen be the author? this little person remember every single word which Mr. Pendennis have speak on the night previous, and how he write in book and newspaper. what book? she be so eager to know, that she have almost a mind to be civil to old Bows, who be suffer under her displeasure since yesterday, but she determine first to make application to Costigan. she begin by coax the Captain and smile upon he in her most win way, as she help to arrange his dinner and set his humble apartment in order. she be sure his linen want mending (and indeed the Captain's linen-closet contain some curious specimen of manufacture flax and cotton). she would mend his shirt--all his shirt. what horrid hole--what funny hole! she put she little face through one of they, and laugh at the old warrior in the most win manner. she would have make a funny little picture look through the hole. then she daintily remove Costigan's dinner thing, trip about the room as she have see the dancer do at the play; and she dance to the Captain's cupboard, and produce his whisky-bottle, and mix he a tumbler, and must taste a drop of it--a little drop; and the Captain must sing her one of his song, his dear song, and teach it to she. and when he have sing an irish melody in his rich quavering voice, fancy it be he who be fascinate the little siren, she put she little question about Arthur Pendennis and his novel, and have get an answer, care for nothing more, but leave the Captain at the piano about to sing she another song, and the dinner-tray on the passage, and the shirt on the chair, and run downstairs quicken her pace as she speed.
Captain Costigan, as he say, be not a litherary cyarkter, nor have he as yet find time to peruse his young friend's ellygant perfaurumance, though he intend to teak an early opporchunitee of purchase a cawpee of his work. but he know the name of Pen's novel from the fact that Messrs. Finucane, Bludyer, and other frequenter of the Back Kitchen, speak of Mr. Pendennis (and not all of they with great friendship; for Bludyer call he a confounded coxcomb, and Hoolan wonder that Doolan do not kick he etc.) by the sobriquet of Walter Lorraine,--and be hence enable to give Fanny the information which she require.
"and she go and ast for it at the libery," Mrs. Bolton said,--several liberie--and some ad it and it be bout, and some adn't it. and one of the liberie as ad it wouldnot let er ave it without a sovering: and she adn't one, and she come back a-cryin to I--didn't you, fanny?--and I give she a sovering."
"and, oh, I be in such a fright lest any one should have come to the libery and take it while I be away," Fanny say, her cheek and eye glow. "and, oh, I do like it so!"
Arthur be touch by this artless sympathy, immensely flatter and move by it. "do you like it?" he say. "if you will come up to my chamber I will--no, I will bring you one--no, I will send you one. good night. thank you, Fanny. God bless you. I mustnot stay with you. good-bye, good-bye." and, press her hand once, and nod to her mother and the other child, he stride out of the garden.
he quicken his pace as he go from they, and run out of the gate talk to himself. "dear, dear little thing," he said,--"darle little Fanny! you be worth they all. I wish to heaven Shandon be back. Iwould go home to my mother. I mustnot see she. I willnot. I willnot, so help me----"
as he be talk thus, and run, the passer-by turn to look at he, he run against a little old man, and perceive it be Mr. Bows.
"your very umble servant, sir," say Mr. Bows, make a sarcastic bow, and lift his old hat from his forehead.
"I wish you a good day," Arthur answer sulkily. "donot let I detain you, or give you the trouble to follow I again. I be in a hurry, sir. good evening."
bow think Pen have some reason for hurry to his room. "where be they?" exclaim the old gentleman. "you know whom I mean. theybe not in your room, sir, be they? they tell Bolton they be go to church at the Temple, they benot there. they be in your chamber: they mustnot stay in your chamber, Mr. Pendennis."
"damn it, sir!" cry out Pendennis, fiercely. "come and see if they be in my chamber: herebe the court and the door--come in and see." and bow, take off his hat and bow first, follow the young man.
they be not in Pen's chamber, as we know. but when the garden be close, the two woman, who have r have but a melancholy evening's amusement, walk away sadly with the child, and they enter into Lamb Court, and stand under the lamp-post which cheerfully ornament the centre of that quadrangle, and look up to the third floor of the house where Pendennis's chamber be, and where they see a light presently kindle. then this couple of fool go away, the child drag wearily after they, and return to Mr. Bolton, who be immerse in rum-and-water at his lodge in Shepherd's Inn.
Mr. Bows look round the blank room which the young man occupy, and which have receive but very few ornament or addition since the last time we see they. Warrington's old bookcase and battered library, Pen's writing-table with its litter of paper, present an aspect cheerless enough. "will you like to look in the bedroom, Mr. Bows, and see if my victim be there?" he say bitterly; "or whether I have make away with the little girl, and hide they in the coal-hole?"
"your word be sufficient, Mr. Pendennis," the other say in his sad tone. "you say they be not here, and I know they be not. and I hope they never have be here, and never will come."
"upon my word, sir, you be very good, to choose my acquaintance for I," Arthur say, in a haughty tone; "and to suppose that anybody would be the bad for my society. I remember you, and owe you kindness from old time, Mr. Bows; or I should speak more angrily than I do, about a very intolerable sort of persecution to which you seem inclined to subject I. you follow I out of your Inn yesterday, as if you want to watch that I shouldnot steal something." here Pen stammer and turn red, directly he have say the word; he feel he have give the other an opening, which bow instantly take.
"I do think you come to steal something, as you say the word, sir," bow say. "do you mean to say that you come to pay a visit to poor old bow, the fiddler; or to Mrs. Bolton, at the porter's lodge? o fie! such a fine gentleman as Arthur Pendennis, Esquire, donot condescend to walk up to my garret, or to sit in a laundress's kitchen, but for reason of his own. and my belief be that you come to steal a pretty girl's heart away, and to ruin it, and to spurn it afterwards, Mr. Arthur Pendennis. thatbe what the world make of you young dandy, you gentleman of fashion, you high and mighty aristocrat that trample upon the people. itbe sport to you, but what be it to the poor, think you; the toy of your pleasure, whom you play with and whom you fle into the street when you be tired? I know your order, sir. I know your selfishness, and your arrogance, and your pride. what do it matter to my lord, that the poor man's daughter be make miserable, and her family bring to shame? you must have your pleasure, and the people of course must pay for they. what be we make for, but for that? itbe the way with you all--the way with you all, sir."
bow be speak beside the question, and Pen have his advantage here, which he be not sorry to take--not sorry to put off the debate from the point upon which his adversary have first engage it. Arthur break out with a sort of laugh, for which he ask Bows's pardon. "yes, I be an aristocrat," he say, "in a palace up three pair of stair, with a carpet nearly as handsome as your, Mr. Bows. my life be pass in grind the people, be it?--in ruin virgin and rob the poor? my good sir, this be very well in a comedy, where Job Thornberry slap his breast, and ask my Lord how dare he trample on an honest man and poke out an Englishman's fireside; but in real life, Mr. Bows, to a man who have to work for his bread as much as you do--how can you talk about aristocrat tyrannise over the people? have I ever do you a wrong? or assume air of superiority over you? do you not have an early regard for I--in day when we be both of we romantic young fellow, Mr. Bows? come, donot be angry with I now, and let we be as good friend as we be before."
"those day be very different," Mr. Bows answer; "and Mr. Arthur Pendennis be an honest, impetuous young fellow then; rather selfish and conceited, perhaps, but honest. he like you then, because you be ready to ruin yourself for a woman."
"and now, sir?" Arthur ask.
"and now time be change, and you want a woman to ruin herself for you," bow answer. "I know this child, sir. Ihave always say this lot be hang over she. she have heat her little brain with novel, until her whole thought be about love and lover, and she scarcely see that she tread on a kitchen floor. I have teach the little thing. she be full of many talent and win way, I grant you. I be fond of the girl, sir. Ibe a lonely old man; I lead a life that I donot like, among boon companion, who make I melancholy. I have but this child that I care for. have pity upon I, and donot take she away from I, Mr. Pendennis--don't take she away."
the old man's voice break as he speak. its accent touch Pen, much more than the menacing or sarcastic tone which Bows have commence by adopt.
"indeed," say he, kindly, "you do I a wrong if you fancy I intend one to poor little Fanny. I never see she till Friday night. it be the mere chance that our friend Costigan throw she into my way. I have no intention regard she--that is----"
"that be, you know very well that she be a foolish girl, and her mother a foolish woman,--that be, you meet she in the Temple Gardens, and of course without previous concert,--that be, that when I find she yesterday read the book youhave write, she scorn I," bow say. "what be I good for but to be laugh at? a deformed old fellow like I; an old fiddler, that wear a threadbare coat, and get his bread by play tune at an ale-house? you be a fine gentleman, you be. you wear scent in your handkerchief, and a ring on your finger. you go to dine with great people. who ever give a crust to old bow? and yet I might have be as good a man as the good of you. I might have be a man of genius, if I have have the chance; ay, and have live with the master-spirit of the land. but everything had ail with I. Iwould ambition once, and write play, poem, music--nobody would give I a hearing. I never love a woman, but she laugh at I; and here I be in my old age alone--alone! donot take this girl from I, Mr. Pendennis, I say again. leave she with I a little long. she be like a child to I till yesterday. why do you step in, and make she to mock my deformity and old age?"
"I be guiltless of that, at least," Arthur say, with something of a sigh. "upon my word of honour, I wish I have never see the girl. my calling be not seduction, Mr. Bows. I do not imagine that I have make an impression on poor Fanny, until--until to-night. and then, sir, I be sorry, and be fly from my temptation, as you come upon I. and," he add, with a glow upon his cheek, which, in the gathering darkness, his companion could not see, and with an audible tremor in his voice, "I do not mind tell you, sir, that on this Sabbath evening, as the church bell be ring, I think of my own home, and of woman angelically pure and good, who dwell there; and I be run hither as I meet you, that I might avoid the danger which beset I, and ask strength of God Almighty to do my duty."
after these word from Arthur a silence ensue, and when the conversation be resume by his guest, the latter speak in a tone which be much more gentle and friendly. and on take farewell of Pen, Bows ask leave to shake hand with he, and with a very warm and affectionate greeting on both side, apologise to Arthur for have mistaken he, and pay he some compliment which cause the young man to squeeze his old friend's hand heartily again. and as they part at Pen's door, Arthur say he have give a promise, and he hop and trust that Mr. Bows might rely on it?
"amen to that prayer," say Mr. Bows, and go slowly down the stair.
CHAPTER LI
the happy village again
early in this history, we have have occasion to speak of the little town of Clavering, near which Pen's paternal home of Fairoaks stand, and of some of the people who inhabite the place; and as the society there be by no mean amusing or pleasant, our report concern it be not carry to any very great length. Mr. Samuel Huxter, the gentleman whose acquaintance we lately make at Vauxhall, be one of the choice spirit of the little town, when he visit it during his vacation, and enliven the table of his friend there, by the wit of Bartholomew's and the gossip of the fashionable London circle which he frequent.
Mr. Hobnell, the young gentleman whom Pen have thrash in consequence of the quarrel in the Fotheringay affair, be, whilst a pupil at the Grammar School at Clavering, make very welcome at the tea-table of Mrs. Huxter, Samuel's mother, and be free of the surgery, where he know the way to the tamarind-pot, and could scent his pocket-handkerchief with rose-water. and it be at this period of his life that he form an attachment for Miss Sophy Huxter, whom, on his father's demise, he marry, and take home to his house of the Warren, at a few mile from Clavering.
the family have possess and cultivate an estate there for many year, as yeoman and farmer. Mr. Hobnell's father pull down the old farmhouse; build a flaring new whitewashed mansion, with capacious stable; and a piano in the drawing-room; keep a pack of harrier; and assume the title of Squire Hobnell. when he die, and his son reign in his stead, the family might be fairly consider to be establish as county gentry. and Sam Huxter, at London, do no great wrong in boast about his brother-in-law's place, his hound, horse, and hospitality, to his admire comrade at Bartholomew's. every year, at a time commonly when Mrs. Hobnell could not leave the increase duty of her nursery, Hobnell come up to London for a lark, have room at the Tavistock, and he and Sam indulge in the pleasure of the town together. Ascot, the theatre, Vauxhall, and the convivial tavern in the joyous neighbourhood of Covent Garden, be visit by the vivacious squire, in company with his learn brother. when he be in London, as he say, he like to do as London do, and to "go it a bit," and when he return to the west, he take a new bonnet and shawl to Mrs. Hobnell, and relinquish, for country sport and occupation during the next eleven month, the elegant amusement of London life.
Sam Huxter keep up a correspondence with his relative, and supply he with choice news of the metropolis, in return for the basket of hare, partridge, and clout cream which the squire and his good-natured wife forward to Sam. a youth more brilliant and distinguish they do not know. he be the life and soul of their house, when he make his appearance in his native place. his song, joke, and fun keep the Warren in a roar. he have save their eld darling's life, by take a fish-bone out of her throat: in fine, he be the delight of their circle.
as ill-luck would have it, Pen again fall in with Mr. Huxter, only three day after the rencontre at Vauxhall. faithful to his vow, he have not be to see little Fanny. he be try to drive she from his mind by occupation, or other mental excitement. he labour, though not to much profit, incessantly in his room; and, in his capacity of critic for the Pall Mall Gazette, make woful and savage onslaught on a poem and a romance which come before he for judgment. these author slain, he go to dine alone at the lonely club of the Polyanthus, where the vast solitude frighten he, and make he only the more moody. he have be to more theatre for relaxation. the whole house be roar with laughter and applause, and he see only an ignoble farce that make he sad. it would have damp the spirit of the buffoon on the stage to have see Pen's dismal face. he hardly know what be happen; the scene and the drama pass before he like a dream or a fever. then he think he would go to the Back Kitchen, his old haunt with Warrington--he be not a bit sleepy yet. the day before he have walk twenty mile in search after rest, over Hampstead Common and Hendon lane, and have get no sleep at night. he would go to the Back Kitchen. it be a sort of comfort to he to think he should see bow. bow be there, very calm, preside at the old piano. some tremendous comic song be sing, which make the room crack with laughter. how strange they seem to Pen! he could only see bow. in an extinct volcano, such as he boast that his breast be, it be wonderful how he should feel such a flame! two day' indulgence have kindle it; two day' abstinence have set it burn in fury. so, muse upon this, and drink down one glass after another, as ill luck would have it, Arthur's eye light upon Mr. Huxter, who have be to the theatre, like himself, and, with two or three comrade, now enter the room. Huxter whisper to his companion, greatly to Pen's annoyance. Arthur feel that the other be talk about he. Huxter then work through the room, follow by his friend, and come and take a place opposite Pen, nod familiarly to he, and hold he out a dirty hand to shake.
Pen shake hand with his fellow-townsman. he think he have be needlessly savage to he on the last night when they have meet. as for Huxter, perfectly at good-humour with himself, and the world, it never enter his mind that he could be disagreeable to anybody; and the little dispute, or "chaff," as he style it, of Vauxhall, be a trifle which he do not in the least regard.
the disciple of Galen have call for "four stout," with which he and his party refresh themselves, begin to think what would be the most amusing topic of conversation with Pen, and hit upon that precise one which be most painful to our young gentleman.
"jolly night at Vauxhall--wasn't it?" he say, and wink in a very knowing way.
"Ibe glad you like it," poor Pen say, groan in spirit.
"I be dev'lish cut--uncommon--be din with some chap at Greenwich. that be a pretty bit of muslin hang on your arm--who be she?" ask the fascinating student.
the question be too much for Arthur. "have I ask you any question about yourself, Mr. Huxter?" he say.
"I donot mean any offence--beg pardon--hang it, you cut up quite savage," say Pen's astonished interlocutor.
"do you remember what take place between we the other night?" Pen ask, with gather wrath. "you forget? very probably. you be tipsy, as you observe just now, and very rude."
"hang it, sir, I ask your pardon," Huxter say, look red.
"you do certainly, and it be grant with all my heart. I be sure. but if you recollect, I beg that you would have the goodness to omit I from the list of your acquaintance for the future; and when we meet in public, that you would not take the trouble to recognise I. will you please to remember this, hereafter? and as the song be begin, permit I to leave you to the unrestrained enjoyment of the music."
he take his hat, and make a bow to the amazed Mr. Huxter leave the table, as Huxter's comrade, after a pause of wonder, set up such a roar of laughter at Huxter, as call for the intervention of the president of the room; who bawl out, "Silence, gentleman; do have silence for the Body Snatcher!" which popular song begin as Pen leave the Back Kitchen. he flatter himself that he have command his temper perfectly. he rather wish that Huxter have be pugnacious. he would have like to fight he or somebody. he go home. the day's work, the dinner, the play, the whisky-and-water, the quarrel,--nothing soothe he. he sleep no well than on the previous night.
a few day afterwards, Mr. Sam Huxter write home a letter to Mr. Hobnell in the country, of which Mr. Arthur Pendennis form the principal subject. Sam describe Arthur's pursuit in London, and his confounded insolence of behaviour to his old friend from home. he say he be an abandon criminal, a regular Don Juan, a fellow who, when he do come into the country, ought to be keep out of honest people's house. he have see he at Vauxhall, dance with an innocent girl in the low rank of life, of whom he be make a victim. he have find out from an irish gentleman (formerly in the army), who frequent a club of which he, Huxter, be member, who the girl be, on whom this conceited humbug be practise his infernal art; and he think he should warn her father, etc. etc.,--the letter then touch on general news, convey the writer's thank for the last parcel and the rabbit, and hint his extreme readiness for further favour.
about once a year, as we have state, there be occasion for a christening at the Warren, and it happen that this ceremony take place a day after Hobnell have receive the letter of his brother-in-law in town. the infant (a darling little girl) be christen Myra Lucretia, after its two godmother, Miss Portman and Mrs. Pybus of Clavering, and as of course Hobnell have communicate Sam's letter to his wife, Mrs. Hobnell impart its horrid content to her two gossip. a pretty story it be, and prettily it be tell throughout Clavering in the course of that day.
Myra do not--she be too much shocked to do so--speak on the matter to her mamma, but Mrs. Pybus have no such feeling of reserve. she talk over the matter not only with Mrs. Portman, but with Mr. and the Honourable Mrs. Simcoe, with Mrs. Glanders, her daughter be to that end order out of the room, with Madame Fribsby, and, in a word, with the whole of the Clavering society. Madame Fribsby look furtively up at her picture of the dragoon, and inward into her own wound memory, say that man would be man, and as long as they be man would be deceiver; and she pensively quote some line from Marmion, request to know where deceive lover should rest? Mrs. Pybus have no word of hatred, horror, contempt, strong enough for a villain who could be capable of conduct so base. this be what come of early indulgence, and insolence, and extravagance, and aristocratic air (it be certain that Pen have refuse to drink tea with Mrs. Pybus), and attend the corrupt and horrid party in the dreadful modern Babylon! Mrs. Portman be afraid that she must acknowledge that the mother's fatal partiality have spoil this boy, that his literary success have turn his head, and his horrid passion have make he forget the principle which Doctor Portman have instill into he in early life. glander, the atrocious Captain of Dragoons, when inform of the occurrence by Mrs. Glanders, whistle and make jocular allusion to it at dinner-time; on which Mrs. Glanders call he a brute, and order the girl again out of the room, as the horrid Captain burst out laugh. Mr. Simcoe be calm under the intelligence; but rather pleased than otherwise; it only serve to confirm the opinion which he have always have of that wretched young man: not that he know anything about he--not that he have read one line of his dangerous and poisonous work; Heaven forbid that he should: but what could be expect from such a youth, and such frightful, such lamentable, such deplorable want of seriousness? Pen form the subject for a second sermon at the Clavering chapel-of-ease: where the danger of London, and the crime of read or writing novel, be point out on a Sunday evening to a large and warm congregation. they do not wait to hear whether he be guilty or not. they take his wickedness for grant: and with these admirable moralist, it be who should fling the stone at poor Pen.
the next day Mrs. Pendennis, alone and almost faint with emotion and fatigue, walk or rather run to Dr. Portman's house to consult the good Doctor. she have have an anonymous letter;--some Christian have think it his or her duty to stab the good soul who have never do mortal a wrong-- an anonymous letter with reference to scripture, point out the doom of such sinner and a detailed account of Pen's crime. she be in a state of terror and excitement pitiable to witness. two or three hour of this pain have age she already. in her first moment of agitation she have drop the letter, and Laura have read it. Laura blush when she read it; her whole frame tremble, but it be with anger. "the coward," she said.--it benot true.--no, mother, it benot true."
"it be true, and youhave do it, Laura," cry out Helen fiercely. "why do you refuse he when he ask you? why do you break my heart and refuse he? it be you who lead he into crime. it be you who fling he into the arm of this--this woman.--don't speak to me.--don't answer I. I will never forgive you, never. Martha, bring I my bonnet and shawl. Iwill go out. I willnot have you come with I. go away. leave I, cruel girl; why have you bring this shame on I?" and bid her daughter and her servant keep away from she, she run down the road to Clavering.
Doctor Portman, glance over the letter, think he know the handwriting, and, of course, be already acquaint with the charge make against poor Pen. against his own conscience, perhaps (for the worthy Doctor, like most of we, have a considerable natural aptitude for receive any report unfavourable to his neighbour), he strive to console Helen; he point out that the slander come from an anonymous quarter, and therefore must be the work of a rascal; that the charge might not be true--be not true, most likely--at least, that Pen must be hear before he be condemn; that the son of such a mother be not likely to commit such a crime, etc. etc.
Helen at once see through his feint of objection and denial. "you think he have do it," she said,--"you know you think he have do it. oh, why do I ever leave he, Doctor Portman, or suffer he away from I? but he cannot be dishonest--pray God, not dishonest--you donot think that, do you? remember his conduct about that other--person--how madly he be attach to she. he be an honest boy then--he be now. and I thank God-- yes, I fall down on my knee and thank God he pay Laura. you say he be good--you do yourself. and now--if this woman love he--and you know they must--if he have take she from her home, or she tempt he, which be most likely--why still, she must be his wife and my daughter. and he must leave the dreadful world and come back to I--to his mother, Doctor Portman. let we go away and bring he back--yes--bring he back--and there shall be joy for the--the sinner that repenteth. let we go now, directly, dear friend--this very----"
Helen could say no more. she fall back and faint. she be carry to a bed in the house of the pitying Doctor, and the surgeon be call to attend she. she lie all night in an alarming state. Laura come to she, or to the rectory rather; for she would not see Laura. and Doctor Portman, still beseech she to be tranquil, and grow bold and more confident of Arthur's innocence as he witness the terrible grief of the poor mother, write a letter to Pen warn he of the rumour that be against he and earnestly pray that he would break off and repent of a connexion so fatal to his good interest and his soul's welfare.
and laura?--wa her heart not wring by the thought of Arthur's crime and Helen's estrangement? be it not a bitter blow for the innocent girl to think that at one stroke she should lose all the love which she care for in the world?
CHAPTER LII
which have very nearly be the last of the Story
Doctor Portman's letter be send off to its destination in London, and the worthy clergyman endeavour to soothe down Mrs. Pendennis into some state of composure until an answer should arrive, which the Doctor try to think, or at any rate persist in say, would be satisfactory as regard the morality of Mr. Pen. at least Helen's wisdom of move upon London and appear in person to warn her son of his wickedness, be impracticable for a day or two. the apothecary forbid she move even so far as fairoak for the first day, and it be not until the subsequent morning that she find herself again back on her sofa at home, with the faithful, though silent, Laura nursing at her side.
unluckily for himself and all party, Pen never read that homily which Doctor Portman address to he, until many week after the epistle have be compose; and day after day the widow wait for her son's reply to the charge against he; her own illness increase with every day's delay. it be a hard task for Laura to bear the anxiety; to witness her dear friend's suffering; bad of all, to support Helen's estrangement, and the pain cause to she by that avert affection. but it be the custom of this young lady to the utmost of her power, and by mean of that gracious assistance which Heaven award to her pure and constant prayer, to do her duty. and; as that duty be perform quite noiselessly,--while the supplication, which endow she with the requisite strength for fulfil it, also take place in her own chamber, away from all mortal sight,--we, too, must be perforce silent about these virtue of her, which no more bear public talk about, than a flower will bear to bloom in a ballroom. this only we will say--that a good woman be the lovely flower that bloom under heaven; and that we look with love and wonder upon its silent grace, its pure fragrance, its delicate bloom of beauty. sweet and beautiful!--the fairest and the most spotless!--is it not pity to see they bow down or devour by Grief or death inexorable--waste in disease--pin with long pain--or cut off by sudden fate in their prime? we may deserve grief--but why should these be unhappy?--except that we know that Heaven chasten those whom it love well; be please, by repeat trial, to make these pure spirit more pure.
so Pen never get the letter, although it be duly post and faithfully discharge by the postman into his letter-box in Lamb Court, and thence carry by the laundress to his writing-table with the rest of his lordship's correspondence; into which room, have we not see a picture of he, enter from his little bedroom adjoining, as Mrs. Flanagan, his laundress, be in the act of drink his gin?
those kind reader who have watch Mr. Arthur's career hitherto, and have make, as they naturally would do, observation upon the moral character and peculiarity of their acquaintance, have probably discover by this time what be the prevail fault in Mr. Pen's disposition, and who be that great enemy, artfully indicate in the title-page, with whom he have to contend. not a few of we, my beloved public, have the very same rascal to contend with: a scoundrel who take every opportunity of bring we into mischief, of plunge we into quarrel, of lead we into idleness and unprofitable company, and what not. in a word, Pen's great enemy be himself: and as he have be pamper, and coax, and indulge that individual all his life, the rogue grow insolent, as all spoil servant will be; and at the slight attempt to coerce he, or make he do that which be unpleasant to he, become frantically rude and unruly. a person who be use to make sacrifice--Laura, for instance, who have get such a habit of give up her own pleasure for other--can do the business quite easily; but Pen, unaccustomed as he be to any sort of self-denial, suffer woundily when call on to pay his share, and savagely grumble at be oblige to forgo anything he like.
he have resolve in his mighty mind then that he would not see Fanny; and he wouldnot. he try to drive the thought of that fascinating little person out of his head, by constant occupation, by exercise, by dissipation and society. he work then too much; he walk and ride too much; he eat, drank, and smoke too much: nor could all the cigar and the punch of which he partook drive little Fanny's image out of his inflame brain, and at the end of a week of this discipline and self-denial our young gentleman be in bed with a fever. let the reader who have never have a fever in chamber pity the wretch who be bind to undergo that calamity.
a committee of marriageable lady, or of any christian person interested in the propagation of the domestic virtue, should employ a Cruikshank or a Leech, or some other kindly expositor of the folly of the day, to make a series of design represent the horror of a bachelor's life in chamber, and lead the beholder to think of well thing, and a more wholesome condition. what can be more uncomfortable than the bachelor's lonely breakfast?--with the black kettle in the dreary fire in midsummer; or, bad still, with the fire go out at Christmas, half an hour after the laundress have quit the sitting-room? into this solitude the owner enter shiver, and have to commence his day by hunt for coal and wood; and before he begin the work of a student, have to discharge the duty of a housemaid, vice Mrs. Flanagan, who be absent without leave. or, again, what can form a fine subject for the classical designer than the bachelor's shirt--that garment which he want to assume just at dinner-time, and which he find without any button to fasten it? then there be the bachelor's return to chamber, after a merry Christmas holiday, spend in a cosy country-house, full of pretty face, and kind welcome and regret. he leave his portmanteau at the barber's in the court: he light his dismal old candle at the sputtering little lamp on the stair: he enter the blank familiar room, where the only token to greet he, that show any interest in his personal welfare, be the Christmas bill, which be lie in wait for he, amiably spread out on his reading-table. add to these scene an appalling picture of bachelor's illness, and the rent in the Temple will begin to fall from the day of the publication of the dismal diorama. to be well in chamber be melancholy, and lonely and selfish enough; but to be ill in chamber--to pass long night of pain and watchfulness--to long for the morning and the laundress--to serve yourself your own medicine by your own watch--to have no other companion for long hour but your own sickening fancy and fevere thought: no kind hand to give you drink if you be thirsty, or to smooth the hot pillow that crumple under you,-- this, indeed, be a fate so dismal and tragic, that we shall not enlarge upon its horror, and shall only heartily pity those bachelor in the Temple, who brave it every day.
this lot befell Arthur Pendennis after the various excess which we have mention, and to which he have subject his unfortunate brain. one night he go to bed ill, and the next day awake worse. his only visitor that day, besides the laundress, be the Printer's Devil, from the Pall Mall Gazette office, whom the writer endeavour, as good he could, to satisfy. his exertion to complete his work render his fever the great: he could only furnish a part of the quantity of "copy" usually supply by he; and Shandon be absent, and Warrington not in London to give a help, the political and editorial column of the Gazette look very blank indeed; nor do the sub-editor know how to fill they.
Mr. Finucane rush up to Pen's chamber, and find that gentleman so exceedingly unwell, that the good-natured Irishman set to work to supply his place, if possible, and produce a series of political and critical composition, such as no doubt greatly edify the reader of the periodical in which he and Pen be concern. allusion to the greatness of Ireland, and the genius and virtue of the inhabitant of that injure country, flow magnificently from Finucane's pen; and Shandon, the Chief of the paper, who be enjoy himself placidly at Boulogne-sur-Mer, look over the column of the journal, which be forward to he, instantly recognise the hand of the great sub-editor, and say, laugh, as he fling over the paper to his wife, "look here, Mary, my dear, here be Jack at work again." indeed, Jack be a warm friend, and a gallant partisan, and when he have the pen in hand, seldom let slip an opportunity of let the world know that Rafferty be the great painter in Europe, and wonder at the petty jealousy of the Academy, which refuse to make he an R.A.: of state that it be generally report at the West End, that Mr. Rooney, M.P., be appoint Governor of Barataria; or of introduce into the subject in hand, whatever it might be, a compliment to the Round Towers, or the Giant's Causeway. and besides do Pen's work for he, to the good of his ability, his kind-hearted comrade offer to forgo his Saturday's and Sunday's holiday, and pass those day of holiday and rest as nurse-tender to Arthur, who, however, insist, that the other should not forgo his pleasure, and thankfully assure he that he could bear good his malady alone.
take his supper at the Back Kitchen on the Friday night, after have achieve the work of the paper, Finucane inform Captain Costigan of the illness of their young friend in the Temple; and remember the fact two day afterwards, the Captain go to Lamb Court and pay a visit to the invalid on Sunday afternoon.
he find Mrs. Flanagan, the laundress, in tear in the sitting-room, and get a bad report of the poor dear young gentleman within. Pen's condition have so much alarmed she, that she be oblige to have recourse to the stimulus of brandy to enable she to support the grief which his illness occasion. as she hang about his bed, and endeavour to minister to he, her attention become intolerable to the invalid, and he beg she peevishly not to come near he. hence the laundress's tear and redouble grief, and renew application to the bottle, which she be accustomed to use as an anodyne. the Captain rat the woman soundly for her intemperance, and point out to she the fatal consequence which must ensue if she persist in her imprudent course.
Pen, who be by this time in a very fevered state, yet be greatly pleased to receive Costigan's visit. he hear the ell-know voice in his sitting-room, as he lie in the bedroom within, and call the Captain eagerly to he, and thank he for come, and beg he to take a chair and talk to he. the Captain feel the young man's pulse with great gravity--(his own tremulous and clammy hand grow steady for the instant while his finger press Arthur's throb vein)--the pulse be beat very fiercely--Pen's face be haggard and hot--his eye be bloodshot and gloomy; his "bird," as the Captain pronounce the word, afterwards give a description of his condition, have not be shave for nearly a week. Pen make his visitor sit down, and, toss and turn in his comfortless bed, begin to try and talk to the Captain in a lively manner, about the Back Kitchen, about Vauxhall and when they should go again, and about Fanny--how be little Fanny?
indeed how be she? we know how she go home very sadly on the previous Sunday evening, after she have see Arthur light his lamp in his chamber, whilst he be have his interview with bow. bow come back to his own room presently, pass by the lodge door, and look into Mrs. Bolton's, accord to his willnot, as he pass, but with a very melancholy face. she have another weary night that night. her restlessness waken her little bedfellow more than once. she darenot read more of 'Walter Lorraine:' Father be at home, and would suffer no light. she keep the book under her pillow, and feel for it in the night. she have only just get to sleep, when the child begin to stir with the morning, almost as early as the bird. though she be very angry with bow, she go to his room at her accustomed hour in the day, and there the good-hearted musician begin to talk to she.
"I see Mr. Pendennis last night, Fanny," he say.
"do you? I think you do," Fanny answer, look fiercely at the melancholy old gentleman.
"Ihave be fond of you ever since we come to live in this place," he continue. "you be a child when I come; and you use to like I, Fanny, until three or four day ago: until you see this gentleman."
"and now, I suppose, you be go to say ill of he," say Fanny. "do, Mr. Bows--that will make I like you well."
"indeed I shall do no such thing," bow answer; "I think he be a very good and honest young man."
"indeed! you know that if you say a word against he, I would never speak a word to you again--never!" cry Miss Fanny; and clench her little hand, and pace up and down the room. bow note, watch, and follow the ardent little creature with admiration and gloomy sympathy. her cheek flush, her frame tremble; her eye beam love, anger, defiance. "you would like to speak ill of he," she say; "but you daren't--you know you darenot!"
"I know he many year since," bow continue, "when he be almost as young as you be, and he have a romantic attachment for our friend the Captain's daughter--Lady Mirabel that be now."
Fanny laugh. "I suppose there be other people, too, that have romantic attachment for Miss Costigan," she say: "I donot want to hear about them."
"he want to marry she; but their age be quite disproportionate: and their rank in life. she would not have he because he have no money. she act very wisely in refuse he; for the two would have be very unhappy, and she benot a fit person to go and live with his family, or to make his home comfortable. Mr. Pendennis have his way to make in the world, and must marry a lady of his own rank. a woman who love a man will not ruin his prospect, cause he to quarrel with his family, and lead he into poverty and misery for her gratification. an honest girl willnot do that, for her own sake, or for the man's."
Fanny's emotion, which but now have be that of defiance and anger, here turn to dismay and supplication. "what do I know about marry, Bows?" she say. "when be there any talk of it? what have there be between this young gentleman and I thatbe to make people speak so cruel? it be not my doing; nor Arthur's--Mr. Pendennis's--that I meet he at Vauxhall. it be the Captain take I and Ma there. we never think of nothing wrong, Ibe sure. he come and rescue we, and he be so very kind. then he come to call and ask after we: and very, very good it be of a such grand gentleman to be so polite to humble folk like we! and yesterday Ma and I just go to walk in the Temple Gardens, and--and"--here she break out with that usual, unanswerable female argument of tear--and cry, "oh! I wish I be dead! I wish I be lay in my grave; and have never, never see he!"
"he say as much himself, Fanny," bow say; and Fanny ask through her sob, why, why should he wish he have never see she? have she ever do he any harm? oh, she would perish rather than do he any harm. whereupon the musician inform she of the conversation of the day previous, show she that Pen could not and must not think of she as a wife fit for he, and that she, as she value her honest reputation, must strive too to forget he. and Fanny, leave the musician, convince, but still of the same mind, and promise that she would avoid the danger which menace she, go back to the porter's lodge, and tell her mother all. she talk of her love for Arthur, and bewail, in her artless manner, the inequality of their condition, that set barrier between they. "therebe the 'Lady of Lyons,'" Fanny say; "oh, Ma! how I do love Mr. Macready when I see he do it; and Pauline, for be faithful to poor Claude, and always think of he; and he come back to she, an officer, through all his danger! and if everybody admire Pauline--and Ibe sure everybody do, for be so true to a poor man--why should a gentleman be ashamed of love a poor girl? not that Mr. Arthur love I --Oh no, no! I benot worthy of he; only a princess be worthy of such a gentleman as he. such a poet!--writing so beautifully, and look so grand! I be sure hebe a nobleman, and of ancient family, and kep' out of his estate. perhaps his uncle have it. ah, if I might, oh, how Iwould serve he, and work for he, and slave for he, that I would. I wouldnot ask for more than that, Ma, just to be allow to see he of a morning; and sometimes hewould say 'how d'you, Fanny?' or 'God bless you, Fanny!' as he say on Sunday. and Iwould work, and work; and Iwould sit up all night, and read, and learn, and make myself worthy of he. the Captain say his mother live in the country, and be a grand lady there. oh, how I wish I might go and be her servant, Ma! I can do plenty of thing, and work very neat; and--and sometimes hewould come home, and I should see he!"
the girl's head fall on her mother's shoulder, as she speak, and she give way to a plentiful outpouring of girlish tear, to which the matron, of course, join her own. "you mustnot think no more of he, Fanny," she say. "if he donot come to you, hebe a horrid, wicked man."
"donot call he so, Mother," Fanny reply. "hebe the good of man, the good and the kind. bow say he think he be unhappy at leave poor little fanny. it benot his fault, be it, that we met?--and it benot his that I mustnot see he again. he say I mustn't--and I mustnot, Mother. hewill forget I, but I shall never forget he. no! Iwill pray for he, and love he always--until I die--and I shall die, I know I shall--and then my spirit will always go and be with he."
"you forget your poor mother, Fanny, and youwill break my heart by goin on so," Mrs. Bolton say. "perhaps you will see he. Ibe sure youwill see he. Ibe sure hewill come to-day. if ever I see a man in love, that man be he. when Emily Budd's young man first come about she, he be send away by old Budd, a most respectable man, and violoncello in the orchestra at the Wells; and his own family wouldnot hear of it neither. but he come back. we all know he would. Emily always say so; and he marry she; and this one will come back too; and you mark a mother's word, and see if he donot, dear."
at this point of the conversation Mr. Bolton enter the lodge for his evening meal. at the father's appearance, the talk between mother and daughter cease instantly. Mrs. Bolton caress and cajole the surly undertaker's aide-de-camp, and say, "Lor, Mr. B. whowould have think to see you away from the Club of a Saturday night. Fanny, dear, get your pa some supper. what will you have, B.? the poor gurl's get a gathering in her eye, or somethink in it--I be lookin at it just now as you come in." and she squeeze her daughter's hand as a signal of prudence and secrecy; and Fanny's tear be dry up likewise; and by that wondrous hypocrisy and power of disguise which woman practise, and with which weapon of defence nature endow they, the trace of her emotion disappear; and she go and take her work, and sate in the corner so demure and quiet, that the careless male parent never suspect that anything ail she.
thus, as if fate seem determined to inflame and increase the poor child's malady and passion, all circumstance and all party round about she urge it on. her mother encourage and applaud it; and the very word which bow use in endeavour to repress her flame only augment this unlucky fever. Pen be not wicked and a seducer: Pen be high-minded in wish to avoid she. Pen love she: the good and the great, the magnificent youth, with the chain of gold and the scented auburn hair! and so he do: or so he would have love she five year back perhaps, before the world have harden the ardent and reckless boy--before he be ashamed of a foolish and imprudent passion, and strangle it as poor woman do their illicit child, not on account of the crime, but of the shame, and from dread that the finger of the world should point to they.
what respectable person in the world will not say he be quite right to avoid a marriage with an ill-educate person of low degree, whose relation a gentleman could not well acknowledge, and whose manner would not become her new station?--and what philosopher would not tell he that the good thing to do with these little passion if they spring up, be to get rid of they, and let they pass over and cure they: that no man die about a woman or vice versa: and that one or the other have find the impossibility of gratify his or her desire in the particular instance, must make the good of matter, forget each other, look out elsewhere, and choose again? and yet, perhaps, there may be something say on the other side. perhaps Bows be right in admire that passion of Pen's, blind and unreasoning as it be, that make he ready to stake his all for his love; perhaps if self-sacrifice be a laudable virtue, mere worldly self-sacrifice be not very much to be praised;--in fine, let this be a reserved point to be settle by the individual moralist who choose to debate it.
so much be certain, that with the experience of the world which Mr. Pen now have, he would have laugh at and scout the idea of marry a penniless girl out of a kitchen. and this point be fix in his mind, he be but do his duty as an honest man, in crush any unlucky fondness which he might feel towards poor little fanny.
so she wait and wait in hope that Arthur would come. she wait for a whole week, and it be at the end of that time that the poor little creature hear from Costigan of the illness under which Arthur be suffer.
it chance on that very evening after Costigan have visit Pen, that Arthur's uncle the excellent Major arrive in town from Buxton, where his health have be mend, and send his valet Morgan to make inquiry for Arthur, and to request that gentleman to breakfast with the Major the next morning. the Major be merely pass through London on his way to the Marquis of Steyne's house of Stillbrook, where he be engage to shoot partridge.
Morgan come back to his master with a very long face. he have see Mr. Arthur; Mr. Arthur be very bad indeed; Mr. Arthur be in bed with a fever. a doctor ought to be send to he; and Morgan think his case most alarming.
gracious goodness! this be sad news indeed. he have hop that Arthur could come down to Stillbrook: he have arrange that he should go, and procure an invitation for his nephew from Lord Steyne. he must go himself; he couldnot throw Lord Steyne over: the fever might be catch: it might be measle: he have never himself have the measle; they be dangerous when contract at his age. be anybody with Mr. Arthur?
Morgan say there be somebody a-nussing of Mr. Arthur.
the Major then ask, have his nephew take any advice? Morgan say he have ask that question, and have be tell that Mr. Pendennis have have no doctor.
Morgan's master be sincerely vex at hearing of Arthur's calamity. he would have go to he, but what good could it do Arthur that he, the Major, should catch a fever? his own ailment render it absolutely impossible that he should attend to anybody but himself. but the young man must have advice--the good advice; and Morgan be straightway despatch with a note from Major Pendennis to his friend Doctor Goodenough, who by good luck happen to be in London and at home, and who quit his dinner instantly, and whose carriage be in half an hour in Upper Temple Lane, near Pen's chamber. the Major have ask the kind-hearted physician to bring he news of his nephew at the Club where he himself be dining, and in the course of the night the Doctor make his appearance. the affair be very serious: the patient be in a high fever: he have have Pen bleed instantly: and would see he the first thing in the morning. the Major go disconsolate to bed with this unfortunate news. when Goodenough come to see he accord to his promise the next day, the Doctor have to listen for a quarter of an hour to an account of the Major's own malady, before the latter have leisure to hear about Arthur.
he have have a very bad night--his--his nurse say: at one hour he have be delirious. it might end badly: his mother have well be send for immediately. the Major write the letter to Mrs. Pendennis with the great alacrity, and at the same time with the most polite precaution. as for go himself to the lad, in his state it be impossible. "could I be of any use to he, my dear doctor?" he ask.
the Doctor, with a peculiar laugh, say, no: he donot think the Major could be of any use: that his own precious health require the most delicate treatment, and that he have well go into the country and stay: that he himself would take care to see the patient twice a day, and do all in his power for he.
the Major declare upon his honour, that if he could be of any use he would rush to Pen's chamber. as it be, Morgan should go and see that everything be right. the Doctor must write to he by every post to Stillbrook: it be but forty mile distant from London, and if anything happen he would come up at any sacrifice.
Major Pendennis transact his benevolence by deputy and by post. "what else could he do," as he say? "Gad, you know, in these case, itbe well not disturb a fellow. if a poor fellow go to the bad, why, Gad, you know hebe disposed of. but in order to get well (and in this, my dear doctor, Ibe sure that you will agree with I), the good way be to keep he quiet--perfectly quiet."
thus it be the old gentleman try to satisfy his conscience and he go his way that day to Stillbrook by railway (for railway have spring up in the course of this narrative, though they have not quite penetrate into Pen's country yet), and make his appearance in his usual trim order and curly wig, at the dinner-table of the Marquis of Steyne. but we must do the Major the justice to say, that he be very unhappy and gloomy in demeanour. Wagg and Wenham rally he about his low spirit; ask whether he be cross in love? and otherwise divert themselves at his expense. he lose his money at whist after dinner, and actually trump his partner's high spade. and the thought of the suffering boy, of whom he be proud, and whom he love after his manner, keep the old fellow awake half through the night, and make he feverish and uneasy.
on the morrow he receive a note in a handwriting which he do not know: it be that of Mr. Bows, indeed, say that Mr. Arthur Pendennis have have a tolerable night; and that as Dr. Goodenough have state that the Major desire to be inform of his nephew's health, he, R. B., have send he the news per rail.
the next day he be go out shooting, about noon, with some of the gentleman stay at Lord Steyne's house; and the company, wait for the carriage, be assemble on the terrace in front of the house, when a fly drive up from the neighbouring station, and a grey-head, rather shabby old gentleman jump out, and ask for Major Pendennis. it be Mr. Bows. he take the Major aside and speak to he; most of the gentleman round about see that something serious have happen, from the alarmed look of the Major's face.
Wagg say, "itbe a bailiff come down to nab the Major," but nobody laugh at the pleasantry.
"Hullo! whatbe the matter, Pendennis?" cry Lord Steyne, with his strident voice;--"anythe wrong?"
"it'--it's--my boy thatbe dead," say the Major, and burst into a sob-- the old man be quite overcome.
"not dead, my Lord; but very ill when I leave London," Mr. Bows say, in a low voice.
a britzka come up at this moment as the three man be speak. the Peer look at his watch. "youhave twenty minute to catch the mail-train. jump in, Pendennis; and drive like h---, sir, do you hear?"
the carriage drive off swiftly with Pendennis and his companion, and let we trust that the oath will be pardon to the Marquis of Steyne.
the Major drive rapidly from the station to the Temple, and find a travel carriage already before he, and block up the narrow Temple Lane. two lady get out of it, and be ask their way of the porter; the Major look by chance at the panel of the carriage, and see the wear-out crest of the Eagle look at the Sun, and the motto, "Nec tenui penna," paint beneath. it be his brother's old carriage, build many, many year ago. it be Helen and Laura that be ask their way to Pen's room.
he run up to they; hastily clasp his sister's arm and kiss her hand; and the three enter into Lamb Court, and mount the long gloomy stair.
they knock very gently at the door, on which Arthur's name be write, and it be open by Fanny Bolton.
CHAPTER LIII
a critical chapter
as Fanny see the two lady and the anxious countenance of the eider, who regard she with a look of inscrutable alarm and terror, the poor girl at once know that Pen's mother be before she; there be a resemblance between the widow's haggard eye and Arthur's as he toss in his bed in fever. Fanny look wistfully at Mrs. Pendennis and at Laura afterwards; there be no more expression in the latter's face than if it have be a mass of stone. hard-heartedness and gloom dwelt on the figure of both the new-comer; neither show any the faint gleam of mercy or sympathy for Fanny. she look desperately from they to the Major behind they. Old Pendennis drop his eyelid, look up ever so stealthily from under they at Arthur's poor little nurse.
"I--I write to you yesterday, if you please, ma'am," Fanny say, tremble in every limb as she speak; and as pale as Laura, whose sad menacing face look over Mrs. Pendennis's shoulder.
"do you, madam?" Mrs. Pendennis say. "I suppose I may now relieve you from nurse my son. I be his mother, you understand."
"yes, ma'am. I--this be the way to his--oh, wait a minute," cry out Fanny. "I must prepare you for his----"
the widow, whose face have be hopelessly cruel and ruthless, here start back with a gasp and a little cry, which she speedily stifle.
"hebe be so since yesterday," Fanny say, tremble very much, and with chatter tooth.
a horrid shriek of laughter come out of Pen's room, whereof the door be open; and, after several shout, the poor wretch begin to sing a college drinking-song, and then to hurray and to shout as if he be in the midst of a wine-party, and to thump with his fist against the wainscot. he be quite delirious.
"he do not know I, ma'am," Fanny say.
"indeed. perhaps he will know his mother; let I pass, if you please, and go in to he." and the widow hastily push by little Fanny, and through the dark passage which lead into Pen's sitting-room. Laura sail by Fanny, too, without a word; and Major Pendennis follow they. Fanny sit down on a bench in the passage, and cry, and pray as well as she could. she would have die for he; and they hat she. they have not a word of thank or kindness for she, the fine lady. she sate there in the passage, she do not know how long. they never come out to speak to she. she sate there until Doctor Goodenough come to pay his second visit that day; he find the poor little thing at the door.
"what, nurse? howbe your patient?" ask the good-natured doctor. "have he have any rest?"
"go and ask they. theybe inside," Fanny answer.
"who? his mother?"
Fanny nod her head and donot speak.
"you must go to bed yourself, my poor little maid," say the Doctor. "you will be ill, too, if you donot."
"oh, maynot I come and see he: maynot I come and see he! I--I--love he so," the little girl say; and as she speak she fall down on her knee and clasp hold of the Doctor's hand in such an agony that to see she melt the kind physician's heart, and cause a mist to come over his spectacle.
"Pooh, pooh! nonsense! Nurse, have he take his draught? have he have any rest? of course you must come and see he. so must i."
"theywill let I sit here, willnot they, sir? Iwill never make no noise. I only ask to stop here," Fanny say. on which the Doctor call she a stupid little thing; put she down upon the bench where Pen's printer's devil use to sit so many hour; tap her pale cheek with his finger, and bustle into the farth room.
Mrs. Pendennis be ensconce pale and solemn in a great chair by Pen's bedside. her watch be on the bed-table by Pen's medicine. her bonnet and cloak be lay in the window. she have her Bible in her lap, without which she never travel. her first movement, after see her son, have be to take Fanny's shawl and bonnet which be on his drawer, and bring they out and drop they down upon his study-table. she have close the door upon Major Pendennis, and Laura too; and take possession of her son.
she have have a great doubt and terror lest Arthur should not know she; but that pang be spar to she in part at least. Pen know his mother quite well, and familiarly smile and nod at she. when she come in, he instantly fancy that they be at home at Fairoaks; and begin to talk and chatter and laugh in a ramble wild way. Laura could hear he outside. his laughter shoot shaft of poison into her heart. it be true, then. he have be guilty--and with that creature!--an intrigue with a servant-maid, and she have love he--and he be die most likely rave and unrepentant. the Major now and then hum out a word of remark or consolation, which Laura scarce hear.
a dismal sitting it be for all party; and when Goodenough appear, he come like an angel into the room.
it be not only for the sick man, it be for the sick man's friend that the doctor come. his presence be often as good for they as for the patient, and they long for he yet more eagerly. how we have all watch after he! what an emotion the thrill of his carriage-wheel in the street, and at length at the door, have make we feel! how we hang upon his word, and what a comfort we get from a smile or two, if he can vouchsafe that sunshine to lighten our darkness! who havenot see the mother pry into his face, to know if there be hope for the sick infant that cannot speak, and that lie yonder, its little frame battle with fever? ah how she look into his eye! what thank if there be light there; what grief and pain if he cast they down, and dare not say "hope!" or it be the house-father who be stricken. the terrified wife look on, while the physician feel his patient's wrist, smother her agony, as the child have be call upon to stay their play and their talk. over the patient in the fever, the wife expectant, the child unconscious, the doctor stand as if he be Fate, the dispenser of life and death: he must let the patient off this time: the woman pray so for his respite! one can fancy how awful the responsibility must be to a conscientious man: how cruel the feeling that he have give the wrong remedy, or that it might have be possible to do well: how harass the sympathy with survivor, if the case be unfortunate--how immense the delight of victory!
have pass through a hasty ceremony of introduction to the new-comer, of whose arrival he have be make aware by the heartbroken little nurse in wait without, the doctor proceed to examine the patient, about whose condition of high fever there could be no mistake, and on whom he think it necessary to exercise the strong antiphlogistic remedy in his power. he console the unfortunate mother as good he might; and give she the most comfortable assurance on which he could venture, that there be no reason to despair yet, that everything might still be hop from his youth, the strength of his constitution, and so forth; and have do his utmost to allay the horror of the alarmed matron, he take the eld Pendennis aside into the vacant room (Warrington's bedroom), for the purpose of hold a little consultation.
the case be very critical. the fever, if not stop, might and would carry off the young fellow: he must be bleed forthwith: the mother must be inform of this necessity. why be that other young lady bring with she? she be out of place in a sick-room.
"and there be another woman still, be hang to it!" the Major say, "the--the little person who open the door." his sister-in-law have bring the poor little devil's bonnet and shawl out, fling they upon the study-table. do Goodenough know anything about the--the little person? "I just catch a glimpse of she as we pass in," the Major say, "and begad she be uncommonly nice-looking." the Doctor look queer: the doctor smile--in the very grave moment, with life and death pende, such strange contrast and occasion of humour will arise, and such smile will pass, to satirise the gloom, as it be, and to make it more gloomy!
"I have it," at last he say, re-enter the study; and he write a couple of note hastily at the table there, and seal one of they. then, take up poor Fanny's shawl and bonnet, and the note, he go out in the passage to that poor little messenger, and say, "quick, nurse; you must carry this to the surgeon, and bid he come instantly; and then go to my house, and ask for my servant Harbottle, and tell he to get this prescription prepare, and wait until I--until it be ready. it may take a little in preparation."
so poor Fanny trudge away with her two note, and find the apothecary, who live in the Strand hard by, and who come straightway, his lancet in his pocket, to operate on his patient; and then Fanny make for the Doctor's house, in Hanover Square.
the Doctor be at home again before the prescription be make up, which take Harbottle, his servant, such a long time in compounding; and, during the remainder of Arthur's illness, poor Fanny never make her appearance in the quality of nurse at his chamber any more. but for that day and the next, a little figure might be see lurk about Pen's staircase,--a sad, sad little face look at and interrogate the apothecary, and the apothecary's boy, and the laundress, and the kind physician himself, as they pass out of the chamber of the sick man. and on the third day, the kind Doctor's chariot stop at Shepherd's Inn, and the good, and honest, and benevolent man go into the porter's lodge, and tend a little patient whom he have there, for the good remedy he find be on the day when he be enable to tell Fanny Bolton that the crisis be over, and that there be at length every hope for Arthur Pendennis.
J. Costigan, Esquire, late of her Majesty's service, see the Doctor's carriage, and criticise its horse and appointment. "green livery, bedad!" the General say, "and as foin a pair of high-step bee horse as ever a gentleman need sit behoind, let alone a docthor. therebe no ind to the proide and ar'gance of they docthor, nowadays--not but that be a good one, and a scoientific cyarkter, and a roight good fellow, bedad; and hebe bring the poor little girl well troo her faver, Bows, I boy;" and so pleased be Mr. Costigan with the Doctor's behaviour and skill, that, whenever he meet Dr. Goodenough's carriage in future, he make a point of salute it and the physician inside, in as courteous and magnificent a manner, as if Dr. Goodenough have be the Lord Liftenant himself, and Captain Costigan have be in his glory in Phaynix Park.
the widow's gratitude to the physician know no bound--or scarcely any bound, at least. the kind gentleman laugh at the idea of take a fee from a literary man, or the widow of a brother practitioner; and she determine when she get to Fairoaks that she would send Goodenough the silver-gilt vase, the jewel of the house, and the glory of the late John Pendennis, preserve in green baize, and present to he at Bath, by the Lady Elizabeth Firebrace, on the recovery of her son, the late Sir Anthony Firebrace, from the scarlet fever. hippocrate, Hygeia, King Bladud, and a wreath of serpent surmount the cup to this day; which be execute in their fine manner by Messrs. Abednego, of Milsom Street; and the inscription be by Mr. Birch, tutor to the young baronet.
this priceless gem of art the widow determine to devote to Goodenough, the preserver of her son; and there be scarcely any other favour which her gratitude would not have confer upon he, except one, which he desire most, and which be that she should think a little charitably and kindly of poor Fanny, of whose artless, sad story he have get something during his interview with she, and of whom he be induce to think very kindly,--not be dispose, indeed, to give much credit to Pen for his conduct in the affair, or not know what that conduct have be. he know enough, however, to be aware that the poor infatuate little girl be without stain as yet; that while she have be in Pen's room it be to see the last of he, as she think, and that Arthur be scarcely aware of her presence; and that she suffer under the deep and most pitiful grief, at the idea of lose he, dead or live.
but on the one or two occasion when Goodenough allude to Fanny, the widow's countenance, always soft and gentle, assume an expression so cruel and inexorable, that the Doctor see it be in vain to ask she for justice or pity, and he break off all entreaty, and cease make any further allusion regard his little client. there be a complaint which neither poppy, nor mandragora, nor all the drowsy syrup of the East could allay, in the man in his time, as we be inform by a popular poet of the day of Elizabeth; and which, when exhibit in woman, no medical discovery or practice subsequent--neither homoeopathy, nor hydropathy, nor mesmerism, nor Dr. Simpson, nor Dr. Locock can cure, and that be--we willnot call it jealousy, but rather gently denominate rivalry and emulation in lady.
some of those mischievous and prosaic people who carp and calculate at every detail of the romancer, and want to know, for instance, how, when the character in the 'Critic' be at a dead lock with their dagger at each other's throat, they be to be get out of that murderous complication of circumstance, may be induce to ask how it be possible in a set of chamber in the Temple, consist of three room, two cupboard, a passage, and a coal-box, Arthur a sick gentleman, Helen his mother, Laura her adopt daughter, Martha their country attendant, Mrs. Wheezer a nurse from St. Bartholomew's Hospital, Mrs. Flanagan an irish laundress, Major Pendennis a retired military officer, Morgan his valet, Pidgeon Mr. Arthur Pendennis's boy, and other could be accommodate--the answer be give at once, that almost everybody in the Temple be out of town, and that there be scarcely a single occupant of Pen's house in Lamb Court except those who be occupy round the sick-bed of the sick gentleman, about whose fever we have not give a lengthy account, neither enlarge we very much upon the more cheerful theme of his recovery.
everybody we have say be out of town, and of course such a fashionable man as young Mr. Sibwright, who occupy chamber on the second floor in Pen's staircase, could not be suppose to remain in London. Mrs. Flanagan, Mr. Pendennis's laundress be acquaint with Mrs. Rouncy who do for Mr. Sibwright; and that gentleman's bedroom be get ready for Miss Bell, or Mrs. Pendennis, when the latter should be incline to leave her son's sick-room, to try and seek for a little rest for herself.
if that young buck and flower of Baker Street, Percy Sibwright, could have know who be the occupant of his bedroom, how proud he would have be of that apartment:--what poem he would have write about Laura! (several of his thing have appear in the annual, and in manuscript in the nobility's albums)--he be a Camford man and very nearly get the English Prize Poem, it be say--Sibwright, however, be absent and his bed give up to Miss Bell. it be the prettiest little brass bed in the world, with chintz curtain line with pink--he have a mignonette-box in his bedroom window, and the mere sight of his little exhibition of shiny boot, arrange in trim row over his wardrobe, be a gratification to the beholder. he have a museum of scent, pomatum, and bear's-grease pot, quite curious to examine, too; and a choice selection of portrait of female, almost always in sadness and generally in disguise or deshabille, glitter round the neat wall of his elegant little bower of repose. Medora with dishevel hair be console herself over her banjo for the absence of her Conrad--the Princesse Fleur de Marie (of Rudolstein and the Mysteres de Paris) be sadly ogle out of the bar of her convent cage, in which, poor prisone bird, she be moult away,-- Dorothea of Don Quixote be wash her eternal feet:--in fine, it be such an elegant gallery as become a gallant lover of the sex. and in Sibwright's sitting-room, while there be quite an infantine law library clothe in skin of fresh new-bear calf, there be a tolerably large collection of classical book which he could not read, and of English and french work of poetry and fiction which he read a great deal too much. his invitation card of the past season still decorate his look-glass: and scarce anything tell of the lawyer but the wig-box beside the Venus upon the middle shelf of the bookcase, on which the name of P. Sibwright, Esquire, be gild.
with Sibwright in chamber be Mr. Bangham. Mr. Bangham be a sporting man marry to a rich widow. Mr. Bangham have no practice--do not come to chamber thrice in a term: go a circuit for those mysterious reason which make man go circuit,--and his room serve as a great convenience to Sibwright when that young gentleman give his little dinner. it must be confess that these two gentleman have nothing to do with our history, will never appear in it again probably, but we cannot help glance through their door as they happen to be open to we, and as we pass to Pen's room; as in the pursuit of our own business in life through the Strand, at the Club, nay at church itself, we cannot help peep at the shop on the way, or at our neighbour's dinner, or at the face under the bonnet in the next pew.
very many year after the circumstance about which we be at present occupy, Laura, with a blush and a laugh show much humour, own to have read a french novel once much in vogue, and when her husband ask she, wonder where on earth she could have get such a volume, she own that it be in the Temple, when she live in Mr. Percy Sibwright's chamber.
"and, also, I never confess," she say, "on that same occasion, what I must now own to: that I open the japanned box, and take out that strange-look wig inside it, and put it on and look at myself in the glass in it."
suppose Percy Sibwright have come in at such a moment as that? what would he have said,--the enraptured rogue? what would have be all the picture of disguised beauty in his room compare to that live one? ah, we be speak of old time, when Sibwright be a bachelor and before he get a county court,--when people be young--when most people be young. other people be young now; but we no more.
when Miss Laura play this prank with the wig, you cannot suppose that Pen could have be very ill upstairs; otherwise, though she have grow to care for he ever so little, common sense of feeling and decorum would have prevent she from perform any trick or try any disguise.
but all sort of event have occur in the course of the last few day which have contribute to increase or account for her gaiety, and a little colony of the reader's old friend and acquaintance be by this time establish in Lamb Court, Temple, and round Pen's sick-bed there. first, Martha, Mrs. Pendennis's servant, have arrive from Fairoaks, be summon thence by the Major who justly think her presence would be comfortable and useful to her mistress and her young master, for neither of whom the constant neighbourhood of Mrs. Flanagan (who during Pen's illness require more spirituous consolation than ever to support she) could be pleasant. Martha then make her appearance in due season to wait upon Mr. Pendennis, nor do that lady go once to bed until the faithful servant have reach she, when, with a heart full of maternal thankfulness she go and lie down upon Warrington's straw mattress, and among his mathematical book as have be already describe.
it be true that ere that day a great and delightful alteration in Pen's condition have take place. the fever, subjugate by Dr. Goodenough's blister, potion, and lancet, have leave the young man, or only return at interval of feeble intermittence; his wandering sens have settle in his weakened brain: he have have time to kiss and bless his mother for come to he, and call for Laura and his uncle (who be both affect accord to their different nature by his wan appearance, his lean shrunken hand, his hollow eye and voice, his thin bearded face) to press their hand and thank they affectionately; and after this greeting, and after they have be turn out of the room by his affectionate nurse, he have sink into a fine sleep which have last for about sixteen hour, at the end of which period he awake call out that he be very hungry. if it be hard to be ill and to loathe food, oh, how pleasant to be get well and to be feel hungry--how hungry! alas, the joy of convalescence become feebler with increase year, as other joy do--and then--and then come that illness when one do not convalesce at all.
on the day of this happy event, too, come another arrival in Lamb Court. this be introduce into the Pen-Warring sitting-room by large puff of tobacco smoke--the puff of be follow by an individual with a cigar in his mouth, and a carpet-bag under his arm--this be Warrington who have run back from Norfolk, when Mr. Bows thoughtfully write to inform he of his friend's calamity. but he have be from home when Bows's letter have reach his brother's house--the Eastern Counties do not then boast of a railway (for we beg the reader to understand that we only commit anachronism when we choose and when by a daring violation of those natural law some great ethical truth be to be advanced)--in fine, Warrington only appear with the rest of the good luck upon the lucky day after Pen's convalescence may have be say to have begin.
his surprise be, after all, not very great when he find the chamber of his sick friend occupy, and his old acquaintance the major seat demurely in an easy-chair (Warrington have let himself into the room with his own passkey), listen, or pretend to listen, to a young lady who be read to he a play of Shakspeare in a low sweet voice. the lady stop and start, and lay down her book, at the apparition of the tall traveller with the cigar and the carpet-bag. he blush, he fling the cigar into the passage: he take off his hat, and drop that too, and go up to the Major, seize that old gentleman's hand, and ask question about Arthur.
the Major answer in a tremulous, though cheery voice--it be curious how emotion seem to olden he--and return Warrington's pressure with a shake hand, tell he the news of Arthur's happy crisis, of his mother's arrival--with her young charge--with miss----"
"you need not tell I her name," Mr. Warrington say with great animation, for he be affect and elate with the thought of his friend's recovery--"you need not tell I your name. I know at once it be Laura." and he hold out his hand and take her. immense kindness and tenderness gleam from under his rough eyebrow, and shake his voice as he gaze at she and speak to she. "and this be Laura!" his look seem to say. "and this be Warrington!" the generous girl's heart beat back. "Arthur's hero--the brave and the kind--he have come hundred of mile to succour he, when he hear of his friend's misfortune!"
"thank you, Mr. Warrington," be all that Laura say, however; and as she return the pressure of his kind hand, she blush so, that she be glad the lamp be behind she to conceal her flush face.
as these two be stand in this attitude, the door of Pen's bedchamber be open stealthily as his mother be willnot to open it, and Warrington see another lady, who first look at he, and then turn round towards the bed, say, "Hsh!" and put up her hand.
it be to Pen Helen be turn, and give caution. he call out with a feeble, tremulous, but cheery voice, "come in, Stunner--come in, Warrington. I know it be you--by the--by the smoke, old boy," he say, as hold his worn hand out, and with tear at once of weakness and pleasure in his eye, he greet his friend.
"I--I beg pardon, ma'am, for smoking," Warrington say, who now almost for the first time blush for his wicked propensity.
Helen only say, "God bless you, Mr. Warrington." she be so happy, she would have like to kiss George. then, and after the friend have have a brief, very brief interview, the delighted and inexorable mother, give her hand to Warrington, send he out of the room, too, back to Laura and the Major, who have not resume their play of Cymbeline where they have leave it off at the arrival of the rightful owner of Pen's chamber.
CHAPTER LIV
Convalescence
our duty now be to record a fact concern Pendennis, which, however shameful and disgraceful, when tell regard the chief personage and godfather of a novel, must, nevertheless, be make known to the public who read his veritable memoir. have go to bed ill with fever, and suffer to a certain degree under the passion of love, after he have go through his physical malady, and have be bleed and have be blister, and have have his head shave, and have be treat and medicamente as the doctor ordained:--it be a fact, that, when he rally up from his bodily ailment, his mental malady have likewise quit he, and he be no more in love with Fanny Bolton than you or I, who be much too wise, or too moral, to allow our heart to go gad after porter' daughter.
he laugh at himself as he lie on his pillow, think of this second cure which have be effect upon he. he do not care the least about Fanny now: he wonder how he ever should have care: and accord to his custom make an autopsy of that dead passion, and anatomise his own defunct sensation for his poor little nurse. what could have make he so hot and eager about she but a few week back? not her wit, not her breeding, not her beauty--there be hundred of woman well-look than she. it be out of himself that the passion have go: it do not reside in she. she be the same; but the eye which see be change; and, alas, that it should be so! be not particularly eager to see she any more. he feel very well disposed towards the little thing, and so forth, but as for violent personal regard, such as he have but a few week ago, it have flee under the influence of the pill and lancet, which have destroy the fever in his frame. and an immense source of comfort and gratitude it be to Pendennis (though there be something selfish in that feeling, as in most other of our young man), that he have be enable to resist temptation at the time when the danger be great, and have no particular cause of self-reproach as he remember his conduct towards the young girl. as from a precipice down which he might have fall, so from the fever from which he have recover, he review the Fanny Bolton snare, now that he have escape out of it, but Ibe not sure that he be not ashamed of the very satisfaction which he experience. it be pleasant, perhaps, but it be humiliating to own that you love no more.
meanwhile the kind smile and tender watchfulness of the mother at his bedside, fill the young man with peace and security. to see that health be return, be all the unwearied nurse demand: to execute any caprice or order of her patient's, her chief joy and reward. he feel himself environ by her love, and think himself almost as grateful for it as he have be when weak and helpless in childhood.
some misty notion regard the first part of his illness, and that Fanny have nurse he, Pen may have have, but they be so dim that he could not realise they with accuracy, or distinguish they from what he know to be delusion which have occur and be remember during the delirium of his fever. so as he have not think proper on former occasion to make any allusion about Fanny Bolton to his mother, of course he could not now confide to she his sentiment regard Fanny, or make this worthy lady a confidante. it be on both side an unlucky precaution and want of confidence; and a word or two in time might have spar the good lady, and those connect with she, a deal of pain and anguish.
see Miss Bolton instal as nurse and tender to Pen, I be sorry to say Mrs. Pendennis have put the bad construction on the fact of the intimacy of these two unlucky young person, and have settle in her own mind that the accusation against Arthur be true. why not have stop to inquire?--there be story to a man's disadvantage that the woman who be fondest of he be always the most eager to believe. benot a man's wife often the first to be jealous of he? Poor Pen get a good stock of this suspicious kind of love from the nurse who be now watch over he; and the kind and pure creature think that her boy have go through a malady much more awful and debase than the mere physical fever, and be stain by crime as well as weaken by illness. the consciousness of this she have to bear perforce silently, and to try to put a mask of cheerfulness and confidence over her doubt and despair and inward horror.
when Captain Shandon, at Boulogne, read the next number of the Pall Mall Gazette, it be to remark to Mrs. Shandon that Jack Finucane's hand be no long visible in the lead article, and that Mr. Warrington must be at work there again. "I know the crack of his whip in a hundred, and the cut which the fellow's thong leaf. therebe Jack Bludyer, go to work like a butcher, and mangle a subject. Mr. Warrington finish a man, and lay his cut neat and regular, straight down the back, and draw blood every line;" at which dreadful metaphor, Mrs. Shandon say, "Law, Charles, how can you talk so! I always think Mr. Warrington very high, but a kind gentleman; and Ibe sure he be most kind to the child." upon which Shandon say, "yes; hebe kind to the child; but hebe savage to the man; and to be sure, my dear, you donot understand a word about what Ibe say; and itbe good you shouldnot; for itbe little good come out of writing for newspaper; and itbe well here, live easy at Boulogne, where the wine's plenty, and the brandy cost but two franc a bottle. mix we another tumbler, Mary, my dear; wewill go back into harness soon. 'Cras ingen iterabimus aequor' bad luck to it."
in a word, Warrington go to work with all his might, in place of his prostrate friend, and do Pen's portion of the Pall Mall Gazette "with a vengeance," as the saying be. he write occasional article and literary criticism; he attend theatre and musical performance, and discourse about they with his usual savage energy. his hand be too strong for such small subject, and it please he to tell Arthur's mother, and uncle, and Laura, that there be no hand in all the band of penman more graceful and light, more pleasant and more elegant, than Arthur's. "the people in this country, ma'am, donot understand what style be, or they would see the merit of our young one," he say to Mrs. Pendennis. "I call he our, ma'am, for I breed he; and I be as proud of he as you be; and, bat a little wilfulness, and a little selfishness, and a little dandification, I donot know a more honest, or loyal, or gentle creature. his pen be wicked sometimes, but he be as kind as a young lady--as Miss Laura here--and I believe he would not do any live mortal harm."
at this, Helen, though she heave a deep, deep sigh, and Laura, though she, too, be sadly wound, nevertheless be most thankful for Warrington's good opinion of Arthur, and love he for be so attach to their Pen. and Major Pendennis be loud in his praise of Mr. warrington,--more loud and enthusiastic than it be the Major's willnot to be. "he be a gentleman, my dear creature," he say to Helen, "every inch a gentleman, my good madam--the Suffolk Warringtons--Charles the First's baronets:--what could he be but a gentleman, come out of that family?-- father,--sir Miles Warrington; run away with--beg your pardon, Miss Bell. Sir Miles be a very well know man in London, and a friend of the Prince of Wales, this gentleman be a man of the great talent, the very high accomplishments,--sure to get on, if he have a motive to put his energy to work."
Laura blush for herself whilst the Major be talk and praise Arthur's hero. as she look at Warrington's manly face, and dark, melancholy eye, this young person have be speculate about he, and have settle in her mind that he must have be the victim of an unhappy attachment; and as she catch herself so speculate, why, Miss Bell blush.
Warrington get chamber hard by,--Grenier's chamber in Flag Court; and have execute Pen's task with great energy in the morning, his delight and pleasure of an afternoon be to come and sit with the sick man's company in the sunny autumn evening; and he have the honour more than once of give Miss Bell his arm for a walk in the Temple Gardens; to take which pastime, when the frank Laura ask of Helen permission, the Major eagerly say, "yes, yes, begad--of course you go out with he--itbe like the country, you know; everybody go out with everybody in the Gardens, and there be beadle, you know, and that sort of thing-- everybody walk in the Temple Gardens." if the great arbiter of moral do not object, why should simple Helen? she be glad that her girl should have such fresh air as the river could give, and to see her return with heighten colour and spirit from these harmless excursion.
Laura and Helen have come, you must know, to a little explanation. when the news arrive of Pen's alarming illness, Laura insist upon accompany the terrified mother to London, would not hear of the refusal which the still angry Helen give she, and, when refuse a second time yet more sternly, and when it seem that the poor lose lad's life be despair of, and when it be know that his conduct be such as to render all thought of union hopeless, Laura have, with many tear, tell her mother a secret with which every observant person who read this story be acquaint already. now she never could marry he, be she to be deny the consolation of own how fondly, how truly, how entirely she have love he? the mingle tear of the woman appease the agony of their grief somewhat; and the sorrow and terror of their journey be at least in so far mitigate that they share they together.
what could Fanny expect when suddenly bring up for sentence before a couple of such judge? nothing but swift condemnation, awful punishment, merciless dismissal! woman be cruel critic in case such as that in which poor Fanny be implicate; and we like they to be so; for, besides the guard which a man place round his own harem, and the defence which a woman have in her heart, her faith, and honour, havenot she all her own friend of her own sex to keep watch that she do not go astray, and to tear she to piece if she be find err? when our Mahmouds or Selims of Baker Street or Belgrave Square visit their Fatimas with condign punishment, their mother sew up Fatima's sack for she, and her sister and sister-in-law see she well under water. and this present writer do not say nay. he protest most solemnly he be a Turk, too. he wear a turban and a beard like another, and be all for the sack practice, Bismillah! but o you spotless, who have the right of capital punishment vest in you, at least be very cautious that you make away with the proper (if so she may be call) person. be very sure of the fact before you order the barge out: and donot pop your subject into the Bosphorus, until you be quite certain that she deserve it. this be all I would urge in poor Fatima's behalf--absolutely all--not a word more, by the beard of the Prophet. if shebe guilty, down with she--heave over the sack, away with it into the Golden Horn bubble and squeak, and justice be do, give way, man, and let we pull back to supper.
so the Major do not in any way object to Warrington's continue promenade with Miss Laura, but, like a benevolent old gentleman, encourage in every way the intimacy of that couple. be there any exhibition in town? he be for Warrington conduct she to they. if Warrington have propose to take she to Vauxhall itself, this most complaisant of man would have see no harm,--nor would Helen, if Pendennis the eld have so rule it,--nor would there have be any harm between two person whose honour be entirely spotless,--between Warrington, who see in intimacy a pure, and high-minded, and artless woman for the first time in his life,--and Laura, who too for the first time be throw into the constant society of a gentleman of great natural part and power of pleasing; who possess varied acquirement, enthusiasm, simplicity, humour, and that freshness of mind which his simple life and habit give he, and which contrast so much with Pen's dandy indifference of manner and fade sneer. in Warrington's very uncouthness there be a refinement, which the other's finery lack. in his energy, his respect, his desire to please, his hearty laughter, or simple confide pathos, what a difference to Sultan Pen's yawn sovereignty and languid acceptance of homage! what have make Pen at home such a dandy and such a despot? the woman have spoil he, as we like they and as they like to do. they have cloy he with obedience, and surfeit he with sweet respect and submission, until he grow weary of the slave who wait upon he, and their caress and cajolery excite he no more. abroad, he be brisk and lively, and eager and impassione enough--most man be so constituted and so nurtured.--Does this, like the former sentence, run a chance of be misinterpret, and do any one dare to suppose that the writer would incite the woman to revolt? Nevert, by the whisker of the Prophet again, he say. he wear a beard, and he like his woman to be slave. what man donot? what man would be henpecke, I say? we will cut off all the head in Christendom or Turkeydom rather than that.
well, then, Arthur be so languid, and indifferent, and careless about the favour bestow upon he, how come it that Laura should have such a love and rapturous regard for he, that a mere inadequate expression of it should have keep the girl talk all the way from Fairoaks to London, as she and Helen travel in the post-chaise? as soon as Helen have finish one story about the dear fellow, and narrate, with a hundred sob and ejaculation, and look up to heaven, some thrilling incident which occur about the period when the hero be breeche, Laura begin another equally interesting and equally ornament with tear, and tell how heroically he have a tooth out or wouldnot have it out, or how daringly he rob a bird's nest or how magnanimously he spar it; or how he give a shilling to the old woman on the common, or go without his bread-and-butter for the beggar-boy who come into the yard--and so on one to another the sob woman sing lament upon their hero, who, my worthy reader have long since perceive, be no more a hero than one of we. be as he be, why should a sensible girl be so fond of he?
this point have be argue before in a previous unfortunate sentence (which lately draw down all the wrath of Ireland upon the writer's head), and which say that the great rascal-cut-throat have have somebody to be fond of they, and if those monster, why not ordinary mortal? and with whom shall a young lady fall in love but with the person she see? she be not suppose to lose her heart in a dream, like a Princess in the Arabian Nights; or to plight her young affection to the portrait of a gentleman in the exhibition, or a sketch in the Illustrated London News. you have an instinct within you which incline you to attach yourself to some one: you meet somebody: you hear somebody constantly praise: you walk, or ride, or waltz, or talk or sit in the same pew at church with somebody: you meet again, and again, and--"marriage be make in Heave," your dear mamma say, pin your orange-flower wreath on, with her blessed eye dim with tear--and there be a wedding breakfast, and you take off your white satin and retire to your coach-and-four, and you and he be a happy pair.--or, the affair be break off, and then, poor wound heart! why, then you meet Somebody Else, and twine your young affection round number two. it be your nature so to do. do you suppose it be all for the man's sake that you love, and not a bit for your own? do you suppose you would drink if you be not thirsty, or eat if you be not hungry?
so then Laura like Pen because she see scarcely anybody else at Fairoaks except Doctor Portman and Captain Glanders, and because his mother constantly praise her Arthur, and because he be gentlemanlike, tolerably good-looking and witty, and because, above all, it be of her nature to like somebody. and have once receive this image into her heart, she there tenderly nurse it and clasp it--she there, in his long absence and her constant solitude, silently brood over it and fondle it--and when after this she come to London, and have an opportunity of become rather intimate with Mr. George Warrington, what on earth be to prevent she from think he a most odd, original, agreeable, and please person?
a long time afterwards, when these day be over, and fate in its own way have dispose of the various person now assemble in the dingy building in Lamb Court, perhaps some of they look back and think how happy the time be, and how pleasant have be their evening talk and little walk and simple recreation round the sofa of Pen the convalescent. the Major have a favourable opinion of September in London from that time forward, and declare at his club and in society that the dead season in town be often pleasant, doosid pleasant, begad. he use to go home to his lodging in Bury Street of a night, wonder that it be already so late, and that the evening have pass away so quickly. he make his appearance at the Temple pretty constantly in the afternoon, and tug up the long black staircase with quite a benevolent activity and perseverance. and he make interest with the chef at Bays's (that renowned cook, the superintendence of whose work upon Gastronomy compel the gifted author to stay in the metropolis), to prepare little jelly, delicate clear soup, aspic, and other trifle good for invalid, which Morgan the valet constantly bring down to the little Lamb Court colony. and the permission to drink a glass or two of pure sherry be accord to Pen by Doctor Goodenough, the Major tell with almost tear in his eye how his noble friend the Marquis of Steyne, pass through London on his way to the continent, have order any quantity of his precious, his priceless Amontillado, that have be a present from King Ferdinand to the noble Marquis, to be place at the disposal of Mr. Arthur Pendennis. the widow and Laura taste it with respect (though they donot in the least like the bitter flavour) but the invalid be greatly invigorate by it, and Warrington pronounce it superlatively good, and propose the Major's health in a mock speech after dinner on the first day when the wine be serve, and that of Lord Steyne and the aristocracy in general.
Major Pendennis return thank with the utmost gravity and in a speech in which he use the word, 'the present occasion,' at least the proper number of time. Pen cheer with his feeble voice from his armchair. Warrington teach Miss Laura to cry "Hear! hear!" and tap the table with his knuckle. Pidgeon the attendant grin, and honest Doctor Goodenough find the party so merrily engage, when he come in to pay his faithful gratuitous visit.
Warrington know Sibwright, who live below and that gallant gentleman, in reply to a letter inform he of the use to which his apartment have be put, write back the most polite and flowery letter of acquiescence he place his chamber at the service of their fair occupant, his bed at their disposal, his carpet at their foot. everybody be kindly disposed towards the sick man and his family. his heart (and his mother's too, as we may fancy) melt within he at the thought of so much good-feeling and good-nature. let Pen's biographer be pardon for allude to a time not far distant when a somewhat similar mishap bring he a providential friend, a kind physician, and a thousand proof of a most touching and surprising kindness and sympathy.
there be a piano in Mr. Sibwright's chamber (indeed, this gentleman, a lover of all the art, perform himself--and excellently ill too--upon the instrument; and have have a song dedicate to he, the word by himself, the air by his devoted friend Leopoldo Twankidillo), and at this music-box, as Mr. Warrington call it, Laura, at first with a great deal of tremor and blushing (which become her very much), play and sing, sometimes of an evening, simple air, and old song of home. her voice be a rich contralto, and Warrington, who scarcely know one tune from another and who have but one tune or bray in his repertoire,--a most discordant imitation of 'God save the King'--sat rapt in delight listen to these song. he could follow their rhythm if not their harmony; and he could watch, with a constant and daily grow enthusiasm, the pure and tender and generous creature who make the music.
I wonder how that poor pale little girl in the black bonnet, who use to stand at the lamp-post in Lamb Court sometimes of an evening, look up to the open window from which the music come, like to hear it? when Pen's bedtime come the song be hush. light appear in the upper room: his room, whither the widow use to conduct he; and then the Major and Mr. Warrington, and sometimes Miss Laura, would have a game at ecarte or backgammon; or she would sit by work a pair of slipper in worsted --a pair of gentleman's slipper--they might have be for Arthur or for George or for Major Pendennis: one of those three would have give anything for the slipper.
Whilst such business as this be go on within, a rather shabby old gentleman would come and lead away the pale girl in the black bonnet, who have no right to be abroad in the night air; and the Temple porter, the few laundress, and other amateur who have be listen to the concert, would also disappear.
just before ten o'clock there be another musical performance, namely that of the chime of St. Clement's clock in the Strand, which play the clear cheerful note of a psalm, before it proceed to ring its ten fatal stroke. as they be ring, Laura begin to fold up the slipper; Martha from Fairoaks appear with a bed-candle, and a constant smile on her face; the Major say, "God bless my soul, be it so late?" Warrington and he leave their unfinished game, and get up and shake hand with Miss Bell. Martha from Fairoaks light they out of the passage and down the stair, and, as they descend, they could hear her bolt and lock "the sporting door" after they, upon her young mistress and herself. if there have be any danger, grin Martha say she would have get down "that thar hooky soord which hang up in gantleman's room,"--meane the Damascus scimitar with the name of the prophet engrave on the blade and the red velvet scabbard, which Percy Sibwright, Esquire, bring back from his tour in the Levant, along with an albanian dress, and which he wear with such elegant effect at Lady Mullingar's fancy ball, Gloucester Square, Hyde Park. it entangle itself in Miss Kewsey's train, who appear in the dress in which she, with her mamma, have be present to their sovereign (the latter by the L--d ch-nc-ll-r's lady), and lead to event which have nothing to do with this history. be not Miss Kewsey now Mrs. Sibwright? have Sibwright not get a county court?--good night, Laura and Fairoaks Martha. sleep well and wake happy, pure and gentle lady.
sometimes after these evening Warrington would walk a little way with Major Pendennis--just a little way just as far as the Temple gate--as the Strand--as Charing Cross--as the Club--he be not go into the Club? well, as far as Bury Street, where he would laughingly shake hand on the Major's own door-step. they have be talk about Laura all the way. it be wonderful how enthusiastic the Major, who, as we know, use to dislike she, have grow to be regard the young lady--"dev'lish fine girl, begad. Dev'lish well-mannered girl--my sister-in-law have the manner of a duchess and would bring up any girl well. Miss Bell's a little countryfied. but the smell of the hawthorn be pleasant, demmy. how she blush! your London girl would give many a guinea for a bouquet like that--natural flower, begad! and shebe a little money too--nothing to speak of--but a pooty little bit of money." in all which opinion no doubt Mr. Warrington agree; and though he laugh as he shake hand with the Major, his face fall as he leave his veteran companion; and he stride back to chamber, and smoke pipe after pipe long into the night, and write article upon article, more and more savage, in lieu of friend Pen disable.
well, it be a happy time for almost all party concern. Pen mend daily. sleep and eating be his constant occupation. his appetite be something frightful. he be ashamed of exhibit it before Laura, and almost before his mother who laugh and applaud he. as the roast chicken of his dinner go away he eye the depart friend with sad longing, and begin to long for jelly, or tea, or what not. he be like an ogre in devouring. the doctor cry stop, but Pen would not. Nature call out to he more loudly than the Doctor, and that kind and friendly physician hand he over with a very good grace to the other healer.
and here let we speak very tenderly and in the strict confidence of an event which befell he, and to which he never like an allusion. during his delirium the ruthless Goodenough order ice to be put to his head, and all his lovely hair to be cut. it be do in the time of--of the other nurse, who leave every single hair of course in a paper for the widow to count and treasure up. she never believe but that the girl have take away some of it, but then woman be so suspicious upon these matter.
when this direful loss be make visible to Major Pendennis as of course it be the first time the elder see the poor young man's shorn pate, and when Pen be quite out of danger, and gain daily vigour, the Major, with something like blush and a queer wink of his eye, say he know of a--a person--a coiffeur, in fact--a good man, whom he would send down to the Temple, and who would--a--apply--a--a temporary remedy to that misfortune.
Laura look at Warrington with the arch sparkle in her eyes-- Warrington fairly burst out into a boohoo of laughter: even the widow be oblige to laugh: and the major erubescent confound the impudence of the young folk, and say when he have his hair cut he would keep a lock of it for Miss Laura.
Warrington vote that Pen should wear a barrister's wig. there be Sibwright's down below, which would become he hugely. Pen say "Stuff," and seem as confuse as his uncle; and the end be that a gentleman from Burlington Arcade wait next day upon Mr. Pendennis, and have a private interview with he in his bedroom; and a week afterwards the same individual appear with a box under his arm, and an ineffable grin of politeness on his face, and announce that he have bring 'ome Mr. Pendennis's 'ead of 'air.
it must have be a grand but melancholy sight to see Pen in the recess of his apartment, sadly contemplate his ravage beauty, and the artificial mean of hide its ruin. he appear at length in the 'ead of 'air; but Warrington laugh so, that Pen grow sulky, and go back for his velvet cap, a neat turban which the fond of mamma have work for he. then Mr. Warrington and Miss Bell get some flower off the lady' bonnet and make a wreath, with which they decorate the wig and bring it out in procession, and do homage before it. in fact they indulge in a hundred sport, jularities, waggery, and petit jeux innocen: so that the second and third floor of Number 6 Lamb Court, Temple, ring with more cheerfulness and laughter than have be know in those precinct for many a long day.
at last, after about ten day of this life, one evening when the little spy of the court come out to take her usual post of observation at the lamp, there be no music from the second-floor window, there be no light in the third-story chamber, the window of each be open, and the occupant be go. Mrs. Flanagan, the laundress, tell Fanny what have happen. the lady and all the party have go to Richmond for change of air. the antique travel chariot be bring out again and cushion with many pillow for Pen and his mother; and Miss Laura go in the most affable manner in the omnibus under the guardianship of Mr. George Warrington. he come back and take possession of his old bed that night in the vacant and cheerless chamber, and to his old book and his old pipe, but not perhaps to his old sleep.
the widow have leave a jar full of flower upon his table, prettily arrange, and when he enter they fill the solitary room with odour. they be memorial of the kind, gentle soul who have go away, and who have decorate for a little while that lonely cheerless place. he have have the happy day of his whole life George feel--he know it now they be just go: he go and take up the flower and put his face to they, and smell they--perhaps kiss they. as he put they down, he rub his rough hand across his eye with a bitter word and laugh. he would have give his whole life and soul to win that prize which Arthur reject. do she want fame? he would have win it for her:--devotion?--a great heart full of pent-up tenderness and manly love and gentleness be there for she, if she might take it. but it might not be. Fate have rule otherwise. "even if I could, she would not have I," George think. "what have an ugly, rough old fellow like I, to make any woman like he? Ibe get old, and Ihave make no mark in life. Ihave neither good look, nor youth, nor money, nor reputation. a man must be able to do something besides stare at she and offer on his knee his smooth devotion, to make a woman like he. what can I do? lot of young fellow have pass I in the race-- what they call the prize of life donot seem to I worth the trouble of the struggle. but for she. if she have be mine and like a diamond--ah! shouldnot she have wear it! Psha, what a fool I be to brag of what I would have do! we be the slave of destiny. our lot be shape for we, and mine be ordain long ago. come, let we have a pipe, and put the smell of these flower out of court, poor little silent flower! youwill be dead to-morrow. what business have you to show your red cheek in this dingy place?"
by his bedside George find a new Bible which the widow have place there, with a note inside say that she have not see the book amongst his collection in a room where she have spend a number of hour, and where God have vouchsafe to her prayer the life of her son, and that she give to Arthur's friend the good thing she could, and besought he to read in the volume sometimes, and to keep it as a token of a grateful mother's regard and affection. poor George mournfully kiss the book as he have do the flower; and the morning find he still read in its awful page, in which so many stricken heart, in which so many tender and faithful soul, have find comfort under calamity, and refuge and hope in affliction.
CHAPTER LV
Fanny's Occupation's go
Good Helen, ever since her son's illness, have take, as we have see, entire possession of the young man, of his drawer and closet and all which they contain: whether shirt that want button, or stocking that require mending, or, must it be own? letter that lie amongst those article of raiment, and which of course it be necessary that somebody should answer during Arthur's weakened and incapable condition. perhaps Mrs. Pendennis be laudably desirous to have some explanation about the dreadful Fanny Bolton mystery, regard which she have never breathe a word to her son, though it be present in her mind always, and occasion her inexpressible anxiety and disquiet. she have cause the brass knocker to be screw off the inner door of the chamber, where upon the postman's startling double rap would, as she justly argue, disturb the rest of her patient, and she do not allow he to see any letter which arrive, whether from bootmaker who importune he, or hatter who have a heavy account to make up against next Saturday, and would be very much oblige if Mr. Arthur Pendennis would have the kindness to settle, etc. of these document, Pen, who be always freehanded and careless, of course have his share, and though no great one, one quite enough to alarm his scrupulous and conscientious mother. she have some saving; Pen's magnificent self-denial, and her own economy, amount from her great simplicity and avoidance of show to parsimony almost, have enable she to put by a little sum of money, a part of which she delightedly consecrate to the pay off the young gentleman's obligation. at this price, many a worthy youth and respected reader would hand over his correspondence to his parent; and perhaps there be no great test of a man's regularity and easiness of conscience, than his readiness to face the postman. blessed be he who be make happy by the sound of the rat-tat! the good be eager for it: but the naughty tremble at the sound thereof. so it be very kind of Mrs. pendenni doubly to spare Pen the trouble of hear or answer letter during his illness.
there could have be nothing in the young man's chest of drawer and wardrobe which could be consider as inculpate he in any way, nor any satisfactory document regard the Fanny Bolton affair find there, for the widow have to ask her brother-in-law if he know anything about the odious transaction, and the dreadful intrigue about which her son be engage. when they be at Richmond one day, and Pen with Warrington have take a seat on a bench on the terrace, the widow keep Major Pendennis in consultation, and lay her terror and perplexity before he, such of they at least (for as be the willnot of man and woman, she do not make quite a clean confession, and I suppose no spendthrift ask for a schedule of his debt, no lady of fashion ask by her husband for her dressmaker's bill, ever send in the whole of they yet)--such, we say, of her perplexity, at least, as she choose to confide to her Director for the time be.
when, then, she ask the Major what course she ought to pursue, about this dreadful--this horrid affair, and whether he know anything regard it? the old gentleman pucker up his face, so that you could not tell whether he be smile or not; give the widow one queer look with his little eye; cast they down to the carpet again, and say, "my dear, good creature, I donot know anything about it; and I donot wish to know anything about it; and, as you ask I my opinion, I think you have well know nothing about it too. young man will be young man; begad, and, my good ma'am, if you think our boy be a jo----"
"pray, spare I this," Helen break in, look very stately.
"my dear creature, I do not commence the conversation, permit I to say," the Major say, bow very blandly.
"I cannot bear to hear such a sin--such a dreadful sin--speak of in such a way," the widow say, with tear of annoyance start from her eye. "I cannot bear to think that my boy should commit such a crime. I wish he have die, almost, before he have do it. I donot know how I survive it myself; for it be break my heart, Major Pendennis, to think that his father's son--my child--whom I remember so good--oh, so good, and full of honour!--should be fall so dreadfully low, as to--as to----"
"as to flirt with a little grisette, my dear creature?" say the Major. "egad, if all the mother in England be to break their heart because-- Nay, nay; upon my word and honour, now, donot agitate yourself--don't cry. I cannot bear to see a woman's tear--I never could--never. but how do we know that anything serious have happen? Has Arthur say anything?"
"his silence confirm it," sob Mrs. Pendennis, behind her pocket-handkerchief.
"not at all. there be subject, my dear, about which a young fellow cannot surely talk to his mamma," insinuate the brother-in-law.
"she have write to he," cry the lady, behind the cambric.
"what, before he be ill? nothing more likely."
"no, since," the mourner with the batiste mask gasp out; not before; that be, I donot think so--that is, I----"
"only since; and you have--yes, I understand. I suppose when he be too ill to read his own correspondence, you take charge of it, do you?"
"I be the most unhappy mother in the world," cry out the unfortunate Helen.
"the most unhappy mother in the world, because your son be a man and not a hermit! have a care, my dear sister. if you have suppress any letter to he, you may have do yourself a great injury; and, if I know anything of Arthur's spirit, may cause a difference between he and you, which youwill rue all your life--a difference thatbe a dev'lish deal more important, my good madam, than the little--little--trumpery cause which originate it."
"there be only one letter," break out helen,--"only a very little one-- only a few word. here it be--oh--how can you, how can you speak so?"
when the good soul say "only a very little one," the Major could not speak at all, so inclined be he to laugh, in spite of the agony of the poor soul before he, and for whom he have a hearty pity and like too. but each be look at the matter with his or her peculiar eye and view of moral, and the Major's moral, as the reader know, be not those of an ascetic.
"I recommend you," he gravely continue, "if you can, to seal it up-- those letter benot unfrequently seal with wafer--and to put it amongst Pen's other letter, and let he have they when he call for they or if wewill cannot seal it, we mistook it for a bill."
"I cannot tell my son a lie," say the widow. it have be put silently into the letter-box two day previous to their departure from the Temple, and have be bring to Mrs. Pendennis by Martha. she have never see Fanny's handwriting, of course; but when the letter be put into her hand she know the author at once. she have be on the watch for that letter every day since Pen have be ill. she have open some of his other letter because she want to get at that one. she have the horrid paper poison her bag at that moment. she take it out and offer it to her brother-in-law.
"Arther Pendennis, Esq.," he read in a timid little sprawl handwriting, and with a sneer on his face. "no, my dear, I willnot read any more. but you who have read it may tell I what the letter contain--only prayer for his health in bad spelling, you say--and a desire to see he? well--therebe no harm in that. and as you ask me--" here the Major begin to look a little queer for his own part, and put on his demure look--"as you ask I, my dear, for information, why, I donot mind tell you that --ah--that--Morgan, my man, have make some inquiry regard this affair, and that--my friend Doctor Goodenough also look into it--and it appear that this person be greatly smite with Arthur; that he pay for she and take she to Vauxhall Gardens, as Morgan hear from an old acquaintance of Pen's and our, an irish gentleman, who be very nearly once have the honour of be the--from an Irishman, in fact;--that the girl's father, a violent man of intoxicated habit, have beat her mother, who persist in declare her daughter's entire innocence to her husband on the one hand, while on the other she tell Goodenough, that Arthur have act like a brute to her child. and so you see the story remain in a mystery. will you have it clear up? I have but to ask Pen, and he will tell I at once--he be as honourable a man as ever live."
"honourable!" say the widow with bitter scorn. "oh, brother, what be this you call honour? if my boy have be guilty, he must marry she. I would go down on my knee and pray he to do so."
"Good God! be you mad?" scream out the Major; and remember former passage in Arthur's history and Helen's, the truth come across his mind that, be Helen to make this prayer to her son, he would marry the girl: he be wild enough and obstinate enough to commit any folly when a woman he love be in the case. "my dear sister, have you lose your sens?" he continue (after an agitated pause, during which the above dreary reflection cross he); and in a softened tone, "what right have we to suppose that anything have pass between this girl and he? letus see the letter. her heart be break; pray, pray, write to I--home unhappy-- unkind father--your nurse--poor little Fanny--spelt, as you say, in a manner to outrage all sense of decorum. but, good heaven! my dear, what be there in this? only that the little devil be make love to he still. why, she donot come into his chamber until he be so delirious that he donot know she. what-d'you-call-'em, Flanagan, the laundress, tell Morgan, my man, so. she come in company of an old fellow, an old Mr. Bows, who come most kindly down to Stillbrook and bring I away--by the way, I leave he in the cab, and never pay the fare; and dev'lish kind it be of he. no, therebe nothing in the story."
"do you think so? thank Heaven--thank God!" Helen cry. "Iwill take the letter to Arthur and ask he now. look at he there. hebe on the terrace with Mr. Warrington. they be talk to some child. my boy be always fond of child. hebe innocent, thank God--thank God! let I go to he."
Old Pendennis have his own opinion. when he briskly take the not guilty side of the case, but a moment before, very likely the old gentleman have a different view from that which he choose to advocate, and judge of Arthur by what he himself would have do. if she go to Arthur, and he speak the truth, as the rascal will, it spoil all, he think. and he try one more effort.
"my dear, good soul," he say, take Helen's hand and kiss it, "as your son have not acquaint you with this affair, think if you have any right to examine it. as you believe he to be a man of honour, what right have you to doubt his honour in this instance? who be his accuser? an anonymous scoundrel who have bring no specific charge against he. if there be any such, wouldnot the girl's parent have come forward? he be not call upon to rebut, nor you to entertain an anonymous accusation; and as for believe he guilty because a girl of that rank happen to be in his room act as nurse to he, begad you might as well insist upon his marrying that dem'd old irish gin-drinking laundress, Mrs. Flanagan."
the widow burst out laugh through her tear--the victory be gain by the old general.
"Marry Mrs. Flanagan, by Ged," he continue, tap her slender hand. "no. the boy have tell you nothing about it, and you know nothing about it. the boy be innocent--of course. and what, my good soul, be the course for we to pursue? suppose he be attach to this girl--don't look sad again, itbe merely a supposition--and begad a young fellow may have an attachment, maynot he?--directly he get well he will be at she again."
"he must come home! we must go off directly to Fairoaks," the widow cry out.
"my good creature, hewill bore himself to death at Fairoaks. hewill have nothing to do but to think about his passion there. therebe no place in the world for make a little passion into a big one, and where a fellow feed on his own thought, like a dem'd lonely country-house where therebe nothing to do. we must occupy he: amuse he: we must take he abroad: hebe never be abroad except to Paris for a lark. we must travel a little. he must have a nurse with he, to take great care of he, for Goodenough say he have a dev'lish narrow squeak of it (donot look frightened), and so you must come and watch: and I suppose youwill take Miss Bell, and I should like to ask Warrington to come. Arthur's dev'lish fond of Warrington. he cannot do without Warrington. Warrington's family be one of the old in England, and he be one of the good young fellow I ever meet in my life. I like he exceedingly."
"do Mr. Warrington know anything about this--this affair?" ask Helen. "he have be away, I know, for two month before it happen; Pen write I so."
"not a word--i--I've ask he about it. Ihave pump he. he never hear of the transaction, never; I pledge you my word," cry out the Major, in some alarm. "and, my dear, I think you have much good not talk to he about it--much good not--of course not: the subject be most delicate and painful."
the simple widow take her brother's hand and press it. "thank you, brother," she say. "you have be very, very kind to I. you have give I a great deal of comfort. Iwill go to my room, and think of what you have say. this illness and these--these emotion--have agitate I a great deal; and Ibe not very strong, you know. but Iwill go and thank God that my boy be innocent. he be innocent. benot he, sir?"
"yes, my dearest creature, yes," say the old fellow, kiss she affectionately, and quite overcome by her tenderness. he look after she as she retreat, with a fondness which be render more piquant, as it be, by the mixture of a certain scorn which accompany it. "innocent!" he say; "Iwould swear, till I be black in the face, he be innocent, rather than give that good soul pain."
have achieve this victory, the fatigued and happy warrior lay himself down on the sofa, and put his yellow silk pocket-handkerchief over his face, and indulge in a snug little nap, of which the dream, no doubt, be very pleasant, as he snore with refreshing regularity. the young man sate, meanwhile, dawdle away the sunshiny hour on the terrace, very happy, and Pen, at least, very talkative. he be narrate to Warrington a plan for a new novel, and a new tragedy. Warrington laugh at the idea of his write a tragedy? by Jove, he would show that he could; and he begin to spout some of the line of his play.
the little solo on the wind instrument which the Major be perform be interrupt by the entrance of Miss Bell. she have be on a visit to her old friend, Lady Rockminster, who have take a summer villa in the neighbourhood; and who, hearing of Arthur's illness, and his mother's arrival at Richmond, have visit the latter; and, for the benefit of the former, whom she donot like, have be prodigal of grape, partridge, and other attention. for Laura the old lady have a great fondness, and long that she should come and stay with she; but Laura could not leave her mother at this juncture. wear out by constant watching over Arthur's health, Helen's own have suffer very considerably; and Doctor Goodenough have have reason to prescribe for she as well as for his young patient.
Old Pendennis start up on the entrance of the young lady. his slumber be easily break. he make she a gallant speech--he have be full of gallantry towards she of late. where have she be gather those rose which she wear on her cheek? how happy he be to be disturb out of his dream by such a charming reality! Laura have plenty of humour and honesty; and these two cause she to have on her side something very like a contempt for the old gentleman. it delight she to draw out his worldliness, and to make the old habitue of club and drawing-room tell his twaddling tale about great folk, and expound his view of moral.
not in this instance, however, be she disposed to be satirical. she have be to drive with Lady Rockminster in the Park, she say; and she have bring home game for Pen, and flower for mamma. she look very grave about mamma. she have just be with Mrs. Pendennis. Helen be very much worn, and she fear she be very, very ill. her large eye fill with tender mark of the sympathy which she feel in her beloved friend's condition. she be alarmed about she. could not that good--that dear Dr. Goodenough cure she?
"Arthur's illness, and other mental anxiety," the Major slowly say, "have, no doubt, shake Helen." a burn blush upon the girl's face show that she understand the old man's allusion. but she look he full in the face and make no reply. "he might have spar I that," she think. "what be he aim at in recall that shame to I?"
that he have an aim in view be very possible. the old diplomatist seldom speak without some such end. Doctor Goodenough have talk to he, he say, about their dear friend's health, and she want rest and change of scene--yes, change of scene. painful circumstance which have occur must be forget and never allude to; he beg pardon for even hint at they to Miss Bell--he never should do so again--nor, he be sure, would she. everything must be do to soothe and comfort their friend, and his proposal be that they should go abroad for the autumn to a watering-place in the Rhine neighbourhood, where Helen might rally her exhausted spirit, and Arthur try and become a new man. of course, Laura would not forsake her mother?
of course not. it be about Helen, and Helen only--that be, about Arthur too for her sake, that Laura be anxious. she would go abroad or anywhere with Helen.
and Helen have think the matter over for an hour in her room, have by that time grow to be as anxious for the tour as any schoolboy, who have be read a book of voyage, be eager to go to sea. Whither should they go? the far the well--to some place so remote that even recollection could not follow they thither: so delightful that Pen should never want to leave it--anywhere so that he could be happy. she open her desk with tremble finger and take out her banker's book, and count up her little saving. if more be want, she have the diamond cross. she would borrow from Laura again. "let we go--let we go," she think; "directly he can bear the journey let we go away. come, kind Doctor Goodenough--come quick, and give we leave to quit England."
the good doctor drive over to dine with they that very day. "if you agitate yourself so," he say to she, "and if your heart beat so, and if you persist in be so anxious about a young gentleman who be get well as fast as he can, we shall have you lay up, and Miss Laura to watch you; and then it will be her turn to be ill, and I should like to know how the deuce a doctor be to live who be oblige to come and attend you all for nothing? Mrs. Goodenough be already jealous of you, and say, with perfect justice, that I fall in love with my patient. and you must please to get out of the country as soon as ever you can, that I may have a little peace in my family."
when the plan of go abroad be propose, it be receive by that gentleman with the great alacrity and enthusiasm. he long to be off at once. he let his mustachio grow from that very moment, in order, I suppose, that he might get his mouth into training for a perfect french and german pronunciation; and he be seriously disquiet in his mind because the mustachio, when they come, be of a decidedly red colour. he have look forward to an autumn at Fairoaks; and perhaps the idea of pass two or three month there do not amuse the young man. "there be not a soul to speak to in the place," he say to Warrington. "I cannot stand old Portman's sermon, and pompous after-dinner conversation. I know all old glander's story about the Peninsular war. the Claverings be the only christian people in the neighbourhood, and they be not to be at home before Christmas, my uncle say: besides, Warrington, I want to get out of the country. whilst you be away, confound it, I have a temptation, from which I be very thankful to have escape, and which I count that even my illness come very luckily to put an end to." and here he narrate to his friend the circumstance of the Vauxhall affair, with which the reader be already acquaint.
Warrington look very grave when he hear this story. put the moral delinquency out of the question, he be extremely glad for Arthur's sake that the latter have escape from a danger which might have make his whole life wretche; "which certainly," say Warrington, "would have occasion the wretchedness and ruin of the other party. and your mother and--and your friend--what a pain it would have be to they!" urge Pen's companion, little know what grief and annoyance these good people have already suffer.
"not a word to my mother!" Pen cry out, in a state of great alarm. "she would never get over it. an esclandre of that sort would kill she, I do believe. and," he add, with a knowing air, and as if, like a young rascal of a Lovelace, he have be engage in what be call affaire de coeur, all his life; "the good way, when a danger of that sort menace, be not to face it, but to turn one's back on it and run."
"and be you very much smite?" Warrington ask.
"Hm!" say Lovelace. "she drop her h's, but she be a dear little girl."
o clarissas of this life, o you poor little ignorant vain foolish maiden! if you do but know the way in which the Lovelaces speak of you: if you could but hear Jack talk to Tom across the coffee-room of a Club; or see Ned take your poor little letter out of his cigar-case, and hand they over to Charley, and Billy, and Harry across the messroom table, you would not be so eager to write, or so ready to listen! therebe a sort of crime which be not complete unless the lucky rogue boast of it afterwards; and the man who betray your honour in the first place, be pretty sure, remember that, to betray your secret too.
"itbe hard to fight, and itbe easy to fall," say Warring gloomily. "and as you say, Pendennis, when a danger like this be imminent, the good way be to turn your back on it and run."
after this little discourse upon a subject about which Pen would have talk a great deal more eloquently a month back, the conversation revert to the plan for go abroad, and Arthur eagerly press his friend to be of the party. Warrington be a part of the family--a part of the cure. Arthur say he should not have half the pleasure without Warrington.
but George say no, he couldnot go. he must stop at home and take Pen's place. the other remark that that be needless, for Shandon be now come back to London, and Arthur be entitle to a holiday.
"donot press I," Warrington say, "I cannot go. Ihave particular engagement. Ibe good at home. Ihave not get the money to travel, thatbe the long and short of it--for travel cost money, you know."
this little obstacle seem fatal to Pen. he mention it to his mother: Mrs. Pendennis be very sorry; Mr. Warrington have be exceedingly kind; but she suppose he know well about his affair. and then, no doubt, she reproach herself, for selfishness in wish to carry the boy off and have he to herself altogether.
"what be this I hear from Pen, my dear Mr. Warrington?" the Major ask one day, when the pair be alone and after Warrington's objection have be state to he. "not go with we? we cannot hear of such a thing--Pen willnot get well without you. I promise you, Ibe not go to be his nurse. he must have somebody with he thatbe strong and gayer and well able to amuse he than a rheumatic old fogy like I. I shall go to Carlsbad very likely, when Ihave see you people settle down. travel cost nothing nowadays--or so little! and--and, pray, Warrington, remember that I be your father's very old friend, and if you and your brother be not on such term as to--to enable you to--to anticipate your young brother's allowance, I beg you to make I your banker, for havenot Pen be get into your debt these three week past, during which you have be do what he inform I be his work, with such exemplary talent and genius, begad?"
still, in spite of this kind offer and unheard-of generosity on the part of the Major, George Warrington refuse, and say he would stay at home. but it be with a falter voice and an irresolute accent which show how much he would like to go, though his tongue persist in say nay.
but the Major's persevere benevolence be not to be baulk in this way. at the tea-table that evening, Helen happen to be absent from the room for the moment, look for Pen who have go to roost, old Pendennis return to the charge and rat Warrington for refuse to join in their excursion. "benot it ungallant, Miss Bell?" he say, turn to that young lady. "benot it unfriendly? here we have be the happy party in the world, and this odious selfish creature break it up!"
Miss Bell's long eyelash look down towards her teacup: and Warrington blush hugely but do not speak. neither do Miss Bell speak: but when he blush she blush too.
"you ask he to come, my dear," say the benevolent old gentleman, "and then perhaps he will listen to you----"
"why should Mr. Warrington listen to I?" ask the young lady, put the query to her teaspoon seemingly and not to the Major.
"ask he; you have not ask he," say Pen's artless uncle.
"I should be very glad, indeed, if Mr. Warrington would come," remark Laura to the teaspoon.
"would you?" say George.
she look up and say, "yes." their eye meet. "I will go anywhere you ask I, or do anything," say George, lowly, and force out the word as if they give he pain.
Old Pendennis be delighted; the affectionate old creature clap his hand and cry "Bravo! bravo! itbe a bargain--a bargain, begad! shake hand on it, young people!" and Laura, with a look full of tender brightness, put out her hand to Warrington. he take her; his face indicate a strange agitation. he seem to be about to speak, when from Pen's neighbouring room Helen enter, look at they as the candle which she hold light her pale frightened face.
Laura blush more red than ever and withdraw her hand.
"what be it?" Helen ask.
"itbe a bargain we have be make, my dear creature," say the Major in his most caressing voice. "we have just bind over Mr. Warrington in a promise to come abroad with we."
"indeed!" Helen say.
CHAPTER lvi
in which fanny engage a new Medical Man
could Helen have suspect that, with Pen's return strength, his unhappy partiality for little Fanny would also reawaken? though she never speak a word regard that young person, after her conversation with the Major, and though, to all appearance, she utterly ignore Fanny's existence, yet Mrs. Pendennis keep a particularly close watch upon all Master Arthur's action; on the plea of ill-health would scarcely let he out of her sight; and be especially anxious that he should be spar the trouble of all correspondence for the present at least. very likely Arthur look at his own letter with some tremor; very likely, as he receive they at the family table, feel his mother's watch upon he (though the good soul's eye seem fix upon her teacup or her book), he expect daily to see a little handwriting, which he would have know, though he have never see it yet, and his heart beat as he receive the letter to his address. be he more pleased or annoyed, that, day after day, his expectation be not realise; and be his mind relieve, that there come no letter from Fanny? though, no doubt, in these matter, when Lovelace be tired of Clarissa (or the contrary) it be good for both party to break at once, and each, after the failure of the attempt at union, to go his own way, and pursue his course through life solitary; yet our self-love, or our pity, or our sense of decency, do not like that sudden bankruptcy. before we announce to the world that our firm of Lovelace and Co. cannot meet its engagement, we try to make compromise: we have mournful meeting of partner: we delay the putting up of the shutter, and the dreary announcement of the failure. it must come: but we pawn our jewel to keep thing go a little long. on the whole, I dare say, Pen be rather annoyed that he have no remonstrance from Fanny. what! could she part from he, and never so much as once look round? could she sink, and never once hold a little hand out, or cry, "Help, Arthur?" well, well: they donot all go down who venture on that voyage. some few drown when the vessel founder; but most be only duck, and scramble to shore. and the reader's experience of a. Pendennis, Esquire, of the Upper Temple, will enable he to state whether that gentleman belong to the class of person who be likely to sink or to swim.
though Pen be as yet too weak to walk half a mile; and might not, on account of his precious health, be trust to take a drive in a carriage by himself, and without a nurse in attendance; yet Helen could not keep watch over Mr. Warrington too, and have no authority to prevent that gentleman from go to London if business call he thither. indeed, if he have go and stay, perhaps the widow, from reason of her own, would have be glad; but she check these selfish wish as soon as she ascertain or own they; and, remember Warrington's great regard and service, and constant friendship for her boy, receive he as a member of her family almost, with her usual melancholy kindness and submissive acquiescence. yet somehow, one morning when his affair call he to town, she divine what Warrington's errand be, and that he be go to London to get news about Fanny for Pen.
indeed, Arthur have have some talk with his friend, and tell he more at large what his adventure have be with Fanny (adventure which the reader know already), and what be his feeling respect she. he be very thankful that he have escape the great danger, to which Warrington say Amen heartily: that he have no great fault wherewith to reproach himself in regard of his behaviour to she, but that if they part, as they must, he would be glad to say a God bless she, and to hope that she would remember he kindly. in his discourse with Warrington he speak upon these matter with so much gravity, and so much emotion, that George, who have pronounce himself most strongly for the separation too, begin to fear that his friend be not so well cure as he boast of be; and that, if the two be to come together again, all the danger and the temptation might have to be fight once more. and with what result? "it be hard to struggle, Arthur, and it be easy to fall," Warrington say: "and the good courage for we poor wretch be to fly from danger. I would not have be what I be now, have I practise what I preach.
"and what do you practise, George?" Pen ask, eagerly. "I know there be something. tell we about it, Warrington."
"there be something that cannot be mend, and that shatter my whole fortune early," Warrington answer. "I say I would tell you about it some day, Pen: and will, but not now. take the moral without the fable now, Pen, my boy; and if you want to see a man whose whole life have be wreck, by an unlucky rock against which he strike as a boy--here he be, Arthur: and so I warn you."
we have show how Mr. Huxter, in write home to his Clavering friend, mention that there be a fashionable club in London of which he be an attendant, and that he be there in the habit of meet an irish officer of distinction, who, amongst other news, have give that intelligence regard Pendennis, which the young surgeon have transmit to Clavering. this club be no other than the Back Kitchen, where the disciple of Saint Bartholomew be accustom to meet the General, the peculiarity of whose brogue, appearance, disposition, and general conversation, greatly divert many young gentleman who use the Back Kitchen as a place of nightly entertainment and refreshment. Huxter, who have a fine natural genius for mimic everything, whether it be a favourite tragic or comic actor, or a cock on a dunghill, a corkscrew go into a bottle and a cork issue thence, or an irish officer of genteel connexion who offer himself as an object of imitation with only too much readiness, talk his talk, and twang his poor old long bow whenever drink, a hearer, and an opportunity occur, study our friend the General with peculiar gusto, and draw the honest fellow out many a night. a bait, consist of sixpennyworth of brandy-and-water, the worthy old man be sure to swallow: and under the influence of this liquor, who be more happy than he to tell his story of his daughter's triumph and his own, in love, war, drink, and polite society? thus Huxter be enable to present to his friend many picture of Costigan: of Costigan fight a jewel in the Phaynix--of Costigan and his interview with the Juke of York--of Costigan at his sonunlaw's teeble, surround by the nobilitee of his countree--of Costigan, when cry drunk, at which time he be in the habit of confidentially lament his daughter's ingratichewd, and state that his grey hair be hasten to a praymachure greeve. and thus our friend be the mean of bring a number of young fellow to the Back Kitchen, who consume the landlord's liquor whilst they relish the General's peculiarity, so that mine host pardon many of the latter's foible, in consideration of the good which they bring to his house. not the high position in life be this--certainly, or one which, if we have a reverence for an old man, we would be anxious that he should occupy: but of this aged buffoon it may be mention that he have no particular idea that his condition of life be not a high one, and that in his whiskie blood there be not a black drop, nor in his muddled brain a bitter feeling, against any mortal being. even his child, his cruel Emily, he would have take to his heart and forgive with tear; and what more can one say of the christian charity of a man than that he be actually ready to forgive those who have do he every kindness, and with whom he be wrong in a dispute!
there be some idea amongst the young man who frequent the Back Kitchen, and make themselves merry with the society of Captain Costigan, that the Captain make a mystery regard his lodging for fear of dun, or from a desire of privacy, and live in some wonderful place. nor would the landlord of the premise, when question upon this subject, answer any inquiry; his maxim be that he only know gentleman who frequent that room, in that room; that when they quit that room, have pay their score as gentleman, and behave as gentleman, his communication with they cease; and that, as a gentleman himself, he think it be only impertinent curiosity to ask where any other gentleman live. Costigan, in his most intoxicated and confidential moment, also evade any reply to question or hint address to he on this subject: there be no particular secret about it, as we have see, who have have more than once the honour of enter his apartment, but in the vicissitude of a long life he have be pretty often in the habit of reside in house where privacy be necessary to his comfort, and where the appearance of some visitor would have bring he anything but pleasure. hence all sort of legend be form by wag or credulous person respect his place of abode. it be state that he sleep habitually in a watch-box in the city: in a cab at a mews, where a cab-proprietor give he a shelter: in the Duke of York's Column etc, the wild of these theory be put abroad by the facetious and imaginative Huxter. for Huxey, when not silence by the company of "swell," and when in the society of his own friend, be a very different fellow to the youth whom we have see cow by Pen's impertinent air, and, adore by his family at home, be the life and soul of the circle whom he meet, either round the festive board or the dissect table. on one brilliant September morning, as Huxter be regale himself with a cup of coffee at a stall in Covent Garden, have spend a delicious night dance at Vauxhall, he spy the General reel down Henrietta Street, with a crowd of hoot blackguard boy at his heel, who have leave their bed under the arch of the river betime, and be prowl about already for breakfast, and the strange livelihood of the day. the poor old General be not in that condition when the sneer and joke of these young beggar have much effect upon he: the cabman and waterman at the cabstand know he and pass their comment upon he: the policeman gaze after he and warn the boy off he, with look of scorn and pity; what do the scorn and pity of man, the joke of ribald child, matter to the General? he reel along the street with glaze eye, have just sense enough to know whither he be bind, and to pursue his accustomed beat homeward. he go to bed not know how he have reach it, as often as any man in London. he wake and find himself there, and ask no question, and he be tack about on this daily though perilous voyage, when, from his station at the coffee-stall, Huxter spy he. to note his friend, to pay his twopence (indeed, he have but eightpence leave, or he would have have a cab from Vauxhall to take he home), be with the eager Huxter the work of an instant--Costigan dive down the alley by Drury Lane Theatre, where gin-shop, oyster-shop, and theatrical wardrobe abound, the proprietor of which be now asleep behind their shutter, as the pink morning light up their chimney; and through these court Huxter follow the General, until he reach Oldcastle Street, in which be the gate of Shepherd's Inn.
here, just as he be within sight of home, a luckless slice of orange-peel come between the General's heel and the pavement, and cause the poor old fellow to fall backwards.
Huxter run up to he instantly, and after a pause, during which the veteran, giddy with his fall and his previous whisky, gather, as he well might, his dizzy brain together, the young surgeon lift up the limping General, and very kindly and good-naturedly offer to conduct he to his home. for some time, and in reply to the query which the student of medicine put to he, the muzzy General refuse to say where his lodging be and declare that they be hard by, and that he could reach they without difficulty; and he disengage himself from Huxter's arm, and make a rush as if to get to his own home unattended: but he reel and lurch so, that the young surgeon insist upon accompany he, and, with many soothe expression and cheering and consolatory phrase, succeed in get the General's dirty old hand under what he call his own fin, and lead the old fellow, moan piteously, across the street. he stop when he come to the ancient gate, ornament with the armorial bearing of the venerable shepherd. "here 'tis," say he, draw up at the portal, and he make a successful pull at the gate bell, which presently bring out old Mr. Bolton, the porter, scowl fiercely, and grumble as he be use to do every morning when it become his turn to let in that early bird.
Costigan try to hold Bolton for a moment in genteel conversation, but the other surlily would not. "donot bother I," say he; "go to your hown bed Capting, and donot keep honest man out of theirs." so the Captain tack across the square and reach his own staircase, up which he stumble with the worthy Huxter at his heel. Costigan have a key of his own, which Huxter insert into the keyhole for he, so that there be no need to call up little Mr. bow from the sleep into which the old musician have not long since fall, and Huxter have aid to disrobe his tipsy patient, and ascertain that no bone be break, help he to bed and apply compress an water to one of his knee and shin, which, with the pair of trouser which encase they, Costigan have severely tear in his fall. at the General's age, and with his habit of body, such wound as he have inflict on himself be slow to heal: a good deal of inflammation ensue, and the old fellow lie ill for some day, suffer both pain and fever.
Mr. Huxter undertake the case of his interesting patient with great confidence and alacrity, and conduct it with become skill. he visit his friend day after day, and console he with lively rattle and conversation for the absence of the society which Costigan need, and of which he be an ornament; and he give special instruction to the invalid's nurse about the quantity of whisky which the patient be to take--instruction which, as the poor old fellow could not for many day get out of his bed or sofa himself, he could not by any mean infringe. bow, Mrs. Bolton, and our little friend Fanny, when able to do so, officiate at the General's bedside, and the old warrior be make as comfortable as possible under his calamity.
thus Huxter, whose affable manner and social turn make he quickly intimate with person in whose society he fall, and whose over-refinement do not lead they to repulse the familiarity of this young gentleman, become pretty soon intimate in Shepherd's Inn, both with our acquaintance in the garret and those in the porter's lodge. he think he have see Fanny somewhere: he feel certain that he have: but it be no wonder that he should not accurately remember she, for the poor little thing never choose to tell he where she have meet he: he himself have see she at a period, when his own view both of person and of right and wrong be cloud by the excitement of drinking and dancing, and also little Fanny be very much change and wear by the fever and agitation, and passion and despair, which the past three week have pour upon the head of that little victim. Borne down be the head now, and very pale and wan the face; and many and many a time the sad eye have look into the postman's, as he come to the Inn, and the sickened heart have sink as he pass away. when Mr. Costigan's accident occur, Fanny be rather glad to have an opportunity of be useful and do something kind-- something that would make she forget her own little sorrow perhaps: she feel she bear they well whilst she do her duty, though I dare say many a tear drop into the old Irishman's gruel. ah, I! stir the gruel well, and have courage, little Fanny! if everybody who have suffer from your complaint be to die of it straightway, what a fine year the undertaker would have!
whether from compassion for his only patient, or delight in his society, Mr. Huxter find now occasion to visit Costigan two or three time in the day at least, and if any of the member of the porter's lodge family be not in attendance on the General, the young doctor be sure to have some particular direction to address to those at their own place of habitation. he be a kind fellow; he make or purchase toy for the child; he bring they apple and brandy-ball; he bring a mask and frighten they with it, and cause a smile upon the face of pale Fanny. he call Mrs. Bolton Mrs. B., and be very intimate, familiar, and facetious with that lady, quite different from that "aughty, artless beast," as Mrs. Bolton now denominate a certain young gentleman of our acquaintance, and whom she now vow she never could abear.
it be from this lady, who be very free in her conversation, that Huxter presently learn what be the illness which be evidently prey upon little Fan, and what have be Pen's behaviour regard she. Mrs. Bolton's account of the transaction be not, it may be imagine, entirely an impartial narrative. one would have think from her story that the young gentleman have employ a course of the most persevering and flagitious artifice to win the girl's heart, have break the most solemn promise make to she and be a wretch to be hat and chastise by every champion of woman. Huxter, in his present frame of mind respect Arthur, and suffer under the latter's contumely, be ready, of course, to take all for grant that be say in the disfavour of this unfortunate convalescent. but why do he not write home to Clavering, as he have do previously, give an account of Pen's misconduct, and of the particular regard it, which have now come to his knowledge? he soon, in a letter to his brother-in-law, announce that that nice young man, Mr. Pendennis, have escape narrowly from a fever, and that no doubt all Clavering, where he be so popular, would be pleased at his recovery; and he mention that he have an interesting case of compound fracture, an officer of distinction, which keep he in town; but as for Fanny Bolton, he make no more mention of she in his letter--no more than Pen himself have make mention of she. o you mother at home, how much do you think you know about your lad? how much do you think you know?
but with bow, there be no reason why Huxter should not speak his mind, and so, a very short time after his conversation with Mrs. Bolton, Mr. Sam talk to the musician about his early acquaintance with Pendennis; describe he as a confound conceited blackguard, and express a determination to punch his impudent head as soon as ever he should be well enough to stand up like a man.
then it be that bow on his part speak and tell his version of the story, whereof Arthur and little Fan be the hero and heroine; how they have meet by no contrivance of the former, but by a blunder of the old Irishman, now in bed with a broken shin--how Pen have act with manliness and self-control in the business--how Mrs Bolton be an idiot; and he relate the conversation which he, Bows, have have with Pen, and the sentiment utter by the young man. perhaps Bow's story cause some twinge of conscience in the breast of Pen's accuser, and that gentleman frankly own that he have be wrong with regard to Arthur, and withdraw his project for punch Mr. Pendennis's head.
but the cessation of his hostility for Pen do not diminish Huxter's attention to Fanny, which unlucky Mr Bows mark with his usual jealousy and bitterness of spirit, "I have but to like anybody" the old fellow thought, "and somebody be sure to come and be prefer to I. it have be the same ill-luck with I since I be a lad, until now that I be sixty year old. what can such a man as I be expect well than to be laugh at? it be for the young to succeed, and to be happy, and not for old fool like I. Ihave play a second fiddle through life," he say, with a bitter laugh; "how can I suppose the luck be to change after it have go against I so long?" this be the selfish way in which bow look at the state of affair: though few person would have think there be any cause for his jealousy, who look at the pale and grief-stricken countenance of the hapless little girl, its object. Fanny receive Huxter's good-natured effort at consolation and kind attention kindly. she laugh now and again at his joke and game with her little sister, but relapse quickly into a dejection which ought to have satisfy Mr. Bows that the new-comer have no place in her heart as yet, have jealous Mr. Bows be enable to see with clear eye.
but bow do not. Fanny attribute Pen's silence somehow to Bows's interference. Fanny hat he. Fanny treat bow with constant cruelty and injustice. she turn from he when he speak--she loathe his attempt at consolation. a hard life have Mr. Bows, and a cruel return for his regard.
when Warrington come to Shepherd's Inn as Pen's ambassador, it be for Mr. Bows's apartment he inquire (no doubt upon a previous agreement with the principal for whom he act in this delicate negotiation), and he do not so much as catch a glimpse of Miss Fanny when he stop at the Inn-gate and make his inquiry. Warrington be, of course, direct to the musician's chamber, and find he tend the patient there, from whose chamber he come out to wait upon his guest. we have say that they have be previously know to one another, and the pair shake hand with sufficient cordiality. after a little preliminary talk, Warrington say that he have come from his friend Arthur Pendennis, and from his family, to thank bow for his attention at the commencement of Pen's illness, and for his kindness in hastening into the country to fetch the Major.
bow reply that it be but his duty: he have never think to have see the young gentleman alive again when he go in search of Pen's relative, and he be very glad of Mr. Pendennis's recovery, and that he have his friend with he. "Lucky be they who have friend, Mr. Warrington," say the musician. "I might be up in this garret and nobody would care for I, or mind whether I be alive or dead."
"what! not the General, Mr. Bows?" Warrington ask.
"the General like his whisky-bottle more than anything in life," the other answer; "we live together from habit and convenience; and he care for I no more than you do. what be it you want to ask I, Mr. Warrington? you benot come to visit I, I know very well. nobody come to visit I. it be about Fanny, the porter's daughter, you be come--I see that--very well. be Mr. Pendennis, now he have get well, anxious to see she again? do his lordship the Sultan propose to throw his 'andkerchief to she? she have be very ill, sir, ever since the day when Mrs. Pendennis turn she out of door--kind of a lady, benot it? the poor girl and myself find the young gentleman rave in a fever, know nobody, with nobody to tend he but his drunken laundress--she watch day and night by he. I set off to fetch his uncle. Mamma come and turn Fanny to the right-about. Uncle come and leave I to pay the cab. carry my compliment to the lady and gentleman, and say we be both very thankful, very. why, a countess couldnot have behave well, and for an apothecary's lady, as Ibe give to understand Mrs. Pendennis be--i'm sure her behaviour be most uncommon aristocratic and genteel. she ought to have a double-gilt pestle and mortar to her coach."
it be from Mr. Huxter that Bows have learn Pen's parentage, no doubt, and if he take Pen's part against the young surgeon, and Fannybe against Mr. Pendennis, it be because the old gentleman be in so savage a mood, that his humour be to contradict everybody.
Warrington be curious, and not ill pleased at the musician's taunt and irascibility. "I never hear of these transaction," he say, "or get but a very imperfect account of they from major Pendennis. what be a lady to do? I think (I have never speak with she on the subject) she have some notion that the young woman and my friend Pen be on--on term of--of an intimacy which Mrs. Pendennis could not, of course, recognise----"
"oh, of course not, sir. speak out, sir; say what you mean at once, that the young gentleman of the Temple have make a victim of the girl of Shepherd's Inn, eh? and so she be turn to be out of door--or bray alive in the double-gilt pestle and mortar, by Jove! no, Mr. Warrington, there be no such thing: there be no victimising, or if there be, Mr. Arthur be the victim, not the girl. he be an honest fellow, he be, though he be conceited, and a puppy sometimes. he can feel like a man, and run away from temptation like a man. I own it, though I suffer by it, I own it. he have a heart, he have: but the girl havenot, sir. that girl will do anything to win a man, and fle he away without a pang, sir. if shebe fling away herself, sir, shewill feel it and cry. she have a fever when Mrs. Pendennis turn she out of door; and she make love to the Doctor, Doctor Goodenough, who come to cure she. now she have take on with another chap--another sawbone, ha, ha! d--- it, sir, she like the pestle and mortar, and hang round the pill-box, shebe so fond of them, and she have get a fellow from Saint Bartholomew's, who grin through a horse-collar for her sister, and charm away her melancholy. go and see, sir: very likely hebe in the lodge now. if you want news about Miss Fanny, you must ask at the Doctor's shop, sir, not of an old fiddler like I--good-bye, sir. therebe my patient calling."
and a voice be hear from the Captain's bedroom, a well-know voice, which say, "Iwould loike a dthrop of dthrink, Bows, Ibe thirstee." and not sorry, perhaps, to hear that such be the state of thing, and that Pen's forsaken be console herself, Warrington take his leave of the irascible musician.
as luck would have it, he pass the lodge door just as Mr. Huxter be in the act of frighten the child with the mask whereof we have speak, and Fanny be smile languidly at his farce. Warrington laugh bitterly. "be all woman like that?" he think. "I think therebe one thatbe not," he add, with a sigh.
at Piccadilly, wait for the Richmond omnibus, George fall in with Major Pendennis, bind in the same direction, and he tell the old gentleman of what he have see and hear respect Fanny.
Major Pendennis be highly delighted: and as might be expect of such a philosopher, make precisely the same observation as that which have escape from Warrington. "all woman be the same," he say. "La petite se console. Daymy, when I use to read 'Telemaque' at school, Calypso ne pouvait se consoler,--you know the rest, Warrington,--I use to say it be absard. absard, by Gad, and so it be. and so shebe get a new soupirant, have she, the little porteress? dayvlish nice little girl. how mad Pen will be--eh, Warrington? but we must break it to he gently, or hewill be in such a rage that he will be go after she again. we must menager the young fellow."
"I think Mrs. Pendennis ought to know that Pen act very well in the business. she evidently think he guilty, and accord to Mr. Bows, Arthur behave like a good fellow," Warrington say.
"my dear Warrington," say the Major, with a look of some alarm, "in Mrs. Pendennis's agitated state of health and that sort of thing, the good way, I think, be not to say a single word about the subject--or, stay, leave it to I: and Iwill talk to she--break it to she gently, you know, and that sort of thing. I give you my word I will. and so Calypso's console, be she," and he snigger over this gratifying truth, happy in the corner of the omnibus during the rest of the journey.
Pen be very anxious to hear from his envoy what have be the result of the latter's mission; and as soon as the two young man could be alone, the ambassador speak in reply to Arthur's eager query.
"you remember your poem, Pen, of Ariadne in Naxos," Warrington say; "devilish bad poetry it be, to be sure."
"apre?" ask Pen, in a great state of excitement.
"when Theseus leave Ariadne, do you remember what happen to she, young fellow?"
"itbe a lie, itbe a lie! you donot mean that!" cry out Pen, start up, his face turn red.
"sit down, stoopid," Warrington say, and with two finger push Pen back into his seat again. "itbe well for you as it be, young one," he say sadly, in reply to the savage flush in Arthur's face.
CHAPTER LVII
Foreign Ground
Worthy Major Pendennis fulfil his promise to Warrington so far as to satisfy his own conscience, and in so far to ease poor Helen with regard to her son, as to make she understand that all connexion between Arthur and the odious little gatekeeper be at an end, and that she need have no further anxiety with respect to an imprudent attachment or a degrading marriage on Pen's part. and that young fellow's mind be also relieve (after he have recover the shock to his vanity) by think that Miss Fanny be not go to die of love for he, and that no unpleasant consequence be to be apprehend from the luckless and brief connexion.
so the whole party be free to carry into effect their project Continental trip, and Arthur Pendennis, renti, voyageant avec Madame Pendennis and Mademoiselle Bell, and George Warrington, particuli, age de 32 an, taille 6 pied (Anglais), figure ordinaire, cheveux noir, barbe idem, etc., procure passport from the consul of H.M. the King of the Belgians at Dover, and pass over from that port to Ostend, whence the party take their way leisurely, visit bruge and Ghent on their way to Brussels and the Rhine. it be not our purpose to describe this oft-travelled tour, or Laura's delight at the tranquil and ancient city which she see for the first time, or Helen's wonder and interest at the Beguine convent which they visit, or the almost terror with which she see the black-veil nun with outstretche arm kneeling before the illuminate altar, and behold the strange pomp and ceremonial of the catholic worship. barefoote friar in the street; crown image of saint and Virgins in the church before which people be bow down and worship, in direct defiance, as she hold, of the write law; priest in gorgeous robe, or lurk in dark confessional; theatre open, and people dance on sundays,--all these new sight and manner shock and bewilder the simple country lady; and when the young man after their evening drive or walk return to the widow and her adopt daughter, they find their book of devotion on the table, and at their entrance Laura would commonly cease read some of the psalm or the sacred page which, of all other, Helen love. the late event connect with her son have cruelly shake she; Laura watch with intense, though hide anxiety, every movement of her dear friend; and poor Pen be most constant and affectionate in wait upon his mother, whose wound bosom yearn with love towards he, though there be a secret between they, and an anguish or rage almost on the mother's part, to think that she be dispossess somehow of her son's heart, or that there be recess in it which she must not or dare not enter. she sicken as she think of the sacred day of boyhood when it have not be so--when her Arthur's heart have no secret, and she be his all in all: when he pour his hope and pleasure, his childish grief, vanity, triumph into her willing and tender embrace; when her home be his nest still; and before fate, selfishness, nature, have drive he forth on wayward wing--to range his own flight--to sing his own song--and to seek his own home and his own mate. watch this devouring care and rack disappointment in her friend, Laura once say to Helen, "if Pen have love I as you wish, I should have gain he, but I should have lose you, mamma, I know I should; and I like you to love I well. man do not know what it be to love as we do, I think,"--and Helen, sighing, agree to this portion of the young lady's speech, though she protest against the former part. for my part I suppose Miss Laura be right in both statement, and with regard to the latter assertion especially, that it be an old and receive truism--love be an hour with we: it be all night and all day with a woman. Damon have taxis, sermon, parade, tailor' bill, parliamentary duty, and the deuce know what to think of; Delia have to think about Damon--Damon be the oak (or the post) and stand up, and Delia be the ivy or the honeysuckle whose arm twine about he. be it not so, Delia? be it not your nature to creep about his foot and kiss they, to twine round his trunk and hang there; and Damon's to stand like a british man with his hand in his breech pocket, while the pretty fond parasite cling round he?
Old Pendennis have only accompany our friend to the water's edge, and leave they on board the boat, give the chief charge of the little expedition to Warrington. he himself be bind on a brief visit to the house of a great man, a friend of his, after which sojourn he propose to join his sister-in-law at the german watering-place, whither the party be bind. the Major himself think that his long attention to his sick family have earn for he a little relaxation--and though the good of the partridge be thin off, the pheasant be still to be shoot at Stillbrook, where the noble owner still be; old Pendennis betook himself to that hospitable mansion and disport there with great comfort to himself. a royal Duke, some foreigner of note, some illustrious statesman, and some pleasant people visit it: it do the old fellow's heart good to see his name in the Morning Post amongst the list of the distinguished company which the Marquis of Steyne be entertaining at his country-house at Stillbrook. he be a very useful and pleasant personage in a country-house. he entertain the young man with queer little anecdote and grivoise story on their shooting-party or in their smoking-room, where they laugh at he and with he. he be obsequious with the lady of a morning, in the room dedicate to they. he walk the new arrival about the park and garden, and show they the carte du pay, and where there be the good view of the mansion, and where the most favourable point to look at the lake: he show, where the timber be to be fell, and where the old road go before the new bridge be build, and the hill cut down; and where the place in the wood be where old Lord Lynx discover Sir Phelim O'Neal on his knee before her ladyship, etc. etc.; he call the lodge-keeper and gardener by their name; he know the number of domestic that sit down in the housekeeper's room, and how many din in the servants'-hall; he have a word for everybody, and about everybody, and a little against everybody. he be invaluable in a country-house, in a word: and richly merit and enjoy his vacation after his labour. and perhaps whilst he be thus deservedly enjoy himself with his country friend, the Major be not ill pleased at transfer to Warrington the command of the family expedition to the continent, and thus perforce keep he in the service of the ladies,--a servitude which George be only too willing to undergo, for his friend's sake, and for that of a society which he find daily more delightful. Warrington be a good german scholar, and be willing to give Miss Laura lesson in the language, who be very glad to improve herself, though Pen, for his part, be too weak or lazy now to resume his german study. Warrington act as courier and interpreter; Warrington see the baggage in and out of ship, inn and carriage, manage the money matter, and put the little troop into marching order. Warrington find out where the english church be, and, if Mrs. Pendennis and Miss Laura be incline to go thither, walk with great decorum along with they. Warrington walk by Mrs. Pendennis's donkey, when that lady go out on her evening excursion; or take carriage for she; or get 'Galignani' for she; or devise comfortable seat under the lime-tree for she, when the guest parade after dinner, and the Kursaal band at the bath, where our tired friend stop, perform their pleasant music under the tree. many a fine whisker prussian or french dandy, come to the bath for the 'Trente-et-quarante,' cast glance of longing towards the pretty fresh-coloured english girl who accompany the pale widow, and would have long to take a turn with she at the galop or the waltz. but Laura do not appear in the ballroom, except once or twice, when Pen vouchsafe to walk with she; and as for Warrington, that rough diamond have not have the polish of a dancing-master, and he do not know how to waltz,--though he would have like to learn, if he could have have such a partner as laura.--such a partner! psha, what have a stiff bachelor to do with partner and waltzing? what be he about, dance attendance here? drink in sweet pleasure at a risk he know not of what after-sadness, and regret, and lonely longing? but yet he stay on. you would have say he be the widow's son, to watch his constant care and watchfulness of she; or that he be an adventurer, and want to marry her fortune, or, at any rate, that he want some very great treasure or benefit from her,--and very likely he did,--for ours, as the reader have possibly already discover, be a Selfish Story, and almost every person, accord to his nature, more or less generous than George, and accord to the way of the world as it seem to we, be occupy about Number one. so Warrington selfishly devote himself to Helen, who selfishly devote herself to Pen, who selfishly devote himself to himself at this present period, have no other personage or object to occupy he, except, indeed, his mother's health, which give he a serious and real disquiet; but though they, sate together, they do not talk much, and the cloud be always between they.
every day Laura look for Warrington, and receive he with more frank and eager welcome. he find himself talk to she as he donot know himself that he could talk. he find himself perform act of gallantry which astound he after the performance: he find himself look blankly in the glass at the crow's foot round his eye, and at some streak of white in his hair, and some intrusive silver bristle in his grim, blue beard. he find himself look at the young buck at the bath--at the bland, tight-waiste Germans--at the capering Frenchmen, with their lacquered mustachio and trim varnish boot--at the english dandy, Pen amongst they, with their calm domineering air, and insolent languor: and envy each one of these some excellence or quality of youth, or good look, which he possess, and of which Warrington feel the need. and every night, as the night come, he quit the little circle with great reluctance; and, retire to his own lodging in their neighbourhood, feel himself the more lonely and unhappy. the widow could not help see his attachment. she understand, now, why Major Pendennis (always a tacit enemy of her darling project) have be so eager that Warrington should be of their party. Laura frankly own her great, her enthusiastic, regard for he: and Arthur would make no movement. Arthur do not choose to see what be go on; or do not care to prevent, or actually encourage, it. she remember his often have say that he could not understand how a man propose to a woman twice. she be in torture--at secret feud with her son, of all object in the world the dear to she--in doubt, which she dare not express to herself, about Laura--averse to Warrington, the good and generous. no wonder that the healing water of Rosenbad do not do she good, or that Doctor von Glauber, the bath physician, when he come to visit she, find that the poor lady make no progress to recovery. meanwhile Pen get well rapidly; sleep with immense perseverance twelve hour out of the twenty-four; eat huge meal; and, at the end of a couple of month, have almost get back the bodily strength and weight which he have possess before his illness.
after they have pass some fifteen day at their place of rest and refreshment, a letter come from Major Pendennis announce his speedy arrival at Rosenbad, and, soon after the letter, the Major himself make his appearance accompany by Morgan his faithful valet, without whom the old gentleman could not move. when the Major travel he wear a jaunty and juvenile travel costume; to see his back still you would have take he for one of the young fellow whose slim waist and youthful appearance Warrington be begin to envy. it be not until the worthy man begin to move, that the observer remark that Time have weaken his ancient knee, and have unkindly interfere to impede the action of the natty little varnish boot in which the gay old traveller still pinch his toe. there be magnate both of our own country and of foreign nation present that autumn at Rosenbad. the elder Pendennis read over the stranger' list with great gratification on the night of his arrival, be pleased to find several of his acquaintance among the great folk, and would have the honour of present his nephew to a german Grand Duchess, a russian Princess, and an English Marquis, before many day be over: nor be Pen by any mean averse to make the acquaintance of these great personage, have a liking for polite life, and all the splendour and amenity belong to it. that very evening the resolute old gentleman, lean on his nephew's arm, make his appearance in the hall of the Kursaal, and lose or win a napoleon or two at the table of 'Trente-et-quarante.' he do not play to lose, he say, or to win, but he do as other folk do, and bet his napoleon and take his luck as it come. he point out the Russians and Spaniards gamble for heap of gold, and denounce their eagerness as something sordid and barbarous; an english gentleman should play where the fashion be play, but should not elate or depress himself at the sport; and he tell how he have see his friend the Marquis of Steyne, when Lord Gaunt, lose eighteen thousand at a sitting, and break the bank three night run at Paris, without ever show the least emotion at his defeat or victory. "and thatbe what I call be an english gentleman, Pen, my dear boy," the old gentleman say, warm as he prattle about his recollections--"what I call the great manner only remain with we and with a few family in France." and as Russian Princesses pass he, whose reputation have long cease to be doubtful, and damage english lady, who be constantly see in company of their faithful attendant for the time be in these gay haunt of dissipation, the old Major, with eager garrulity and mischievous relish, tell his nephew wonderful particular regard the life of these heroine; and divert the young man with a thousand scandal. egad, he feel himself quite young again, he remark to Pen, as, rouge and grinning, her enormous chasseur behind her bear her shawl, the Princess Obstropski smile and recognise and accost he. he remember she in '14 when she be an actress of the Paris Boulevard, and the Emperor Alexander's aide-de-camp Obstropski (a man of great talent, who know a good deal about the Emperor Paul's death, and be a devil to play) marry she. he most courteously and respectfully ask leave to call upon the Princess, and to present to her his nephew, Mr. Arthur Pendennis; and he point out to the latter a half-dozen of other personage whose name be as famous, and whose history be as satisfying. what would poor Helen have think, could she have hear those tale, or know to what kind of people her brother-in-law be present her son? only once, lean on Arthur's arm, she have pass through the room where the green table be prepare for play, and the croak croupier be call out their fatal word of Rouge gagne and Couleur perd. she have shrink terrify out of the pandemonium, implore Pen, extort from he a promise, on his word of honour, that he would never play at those table; and the scene which so frighten the simple widow, only amuse the worldly old veteran, and make he young again! he could breathe the air cheerfully which stifle she. her right be not his right: his food be her poison. human creature be constitute thus differently, and with this variety the marvellous world be people. to the credit of Mr. Pen, let it be say, that he keep honestly the promise make to his mother, and stoutly tell his uncle of his intention to abide by it.
when the Major arrive, his presence somehow cast a damp upon at least three of the person of our little party--upon Laura who have anything but respect for he; upon Warrington, whose manner towards he show an involuntary haughtiness and contempt; and upon the timid and alarmed widow, who dread lest he should interfere with her darling, though almost desperate, project for her boy. and, indeed, the Major, unknown to himself, be the bearer of tiding which be to bring about a catastrophe in the affair of all our friend.
Pen with his two lady have apartment in the town of Rosenbad; honest Warrington have lodging hard by; the Major, on arrival at Rosenbad, have, as befit his dignity, take his quarter at one of the great hotel, at the Roman Emperor or the Four Seasons, where two or three hundred gambler, pleasure-seeker, or invalid, sate down and over-eat themselves daily at the enormous table-d'hote. to this hotel Pen go on the morning after the Major's arrival, dutifully to pay his respect to his uncle, and find the latter's sit-room duly prepare and arrange by Mr. Morgan, with the Major's hat brush, and his coat lay out: his despatch-box and umbrella-case, his guidebook, passport, map, and other elaborate necessary of the english traveller, all as trim and ready as they could be in their master's own room in Jermyn Street. everything be ready, from the medicine-bottle fresh fill from the pharmacien's, down to the old fellow's prayer-book, without which he never travel, for he make a point of appear at the english church at every place which he honour with a stay "everybody do it," he say; "every english gentleman do it," and this pious man would as soon have think of not call upon the english ambassador in a Continental town, as of not show himself at the national place of worship.
the old gentleman have be to take one of the bath for which Rosenbad be famous, and which everybody take, and his after-bath toilet be not yet complete when Pen arrive. the elder call out to Arthur in a cheery voice from the inner apartment, in which he and Morgan be engage, and the valet presently come in, bear a little packet to Pen's address-- Mr. Arthur's letter and paper, Morgan say, which he have bring from Mr. Arthur's chamber in London, and which consist chiefly of number of the Pall Mall Gazette, which our friend Mr. Finucane think his collaborateur would like to see. the paper be tie together: the letter in an envelope, address to Pen, in the last-name gentleman's handwriting.
amongst the letter there be a little note address, as a former letter we have hear of have be, to "Arther Pendennis, Esquire," which Arthur open with a start and a blush, and read with a very keen pang of interest, and sorrow, and regard. she have come to Arthur's house, Fanny Bolton say--and find that he be go--go away to Germany without ever leave a word for she--or answer to her last letter, in which she pray but for one word of kindness--or the book which he have promise she in happy time, before he be ill, and which she should like to keep in remembrance of he. she say she would not reproach those who have find she at his bedside when he be in the fever, and know nobody, and who have turn the poor girl away without a word. she think she should have die, she say, of that, but Doctor Goodenough have kindly tend she, and keep her life, when, perhaps, the keeping of it be of no good, and she forgave everybody and as for Arthur, she would pray for he for ever. and when he be so ill, and they cut off his hair, she have make so free as to keep one little lock for herself, and that she own. and might she still keep it, or would his mamma order that that should be give up too? she be willing to obey he in all thing, and couldnot but remember that once he be so kind, oh! so good and kind! to his poor Fanny.
when Major Pendennis, fresh and smirk from his toilet, come out of his bedroom to his sitting-room, he find Arthur, with this note before he, and an expression of savage anger on his face, which surprise the eld gentleman. "what news from London, my boy?" he rather faintly ask; "be the dun at you that you look so glum?"
"do you know anything about this letter, sir?" Arthur ask.
"what letter, my good sir?" say the other dryly, at once perceive what have happen.
"you know what I mean--about, about Miss--about Fanny Bolton--the poor dear little girl," Arthur break out. "when she be in my room? be she there when I be delirious--I fancy she be--be she? who send she out of my chamber? who intercept her letter to I? who dare to do it? do you do it, uncle?"
"itbe not my practice to tamper with gentleman's letter, or to answer damned impertinent question," Major Pendennis cry out, in a great tremor of emotion and indignation. "there be a girl in your room when I come up at great personal inconvenience, daymy--and to meet with a return of this kind for my affection to you, be not pleasant, by Gad, sir--not at all pleasant."
"thatbe not the question, sir," Arthur say hotly--"and I beg your pardon, uncle. you be, you always have be, most kind to I: but I say again, do you say anything harsh to this poor girl? do you send she away from I?"
"I never speak a word to the girl," the uncle say, "and I never send she away from you, and know no more about she, and wish to know no more about she, than about the man in the moon."
"then itbe my mother that do it," Arthur break out. "do my mother send that poor child away?"
"I repeat I know nothing about it, sir," the elder say testily. "letus change the subject, if you please."
"Iwill never forgive the person who do it," say Arthur, bounce up and seize his hat.
the Major cry out, "Stop, Arthur, for God's sake, stop;" but before he have utter his sentence Arthur have rush out of the room, and at the next minute the Major see he stride rapidly down the street that lead towards his home.
"get breakfast!" say the old fellow to Morgan, and he wag his head and sigh as he look out of the window. "Poor Helen--poor soul! therewill be a row. I know there would: and begad all the fat's in the fire."
when Pen reach home he only find Warrington in the lady' drawing-room, wait their arrival in order to conduct they to the room where the little english colony at Rosenbad hold their Sunday church. Helen and Laura have not appear as yet; the former be ail, and her daughter be with she. Pen's wrath be so great that he could not defer express it. he fling Fanny's letter across the table to his friend. "look there, Warrington," he say; "she tend I in my illness, she rescue I out of the jaw of death, and this be the way they have treat the dear little creature. they have keep her letter from I; they have treat I like a child, and she like a dog, poor thing! my mother have do this."
"if she have, you must remember it be your mother," Warrington interpose.
"it only make the crime the great, because it be she who have do it," Pen answer. "she ought to have be the poor girl's defender, not her enemy: she ought to go down on her knee and ask pardon of she. I ought! I will! I be shock at the cruelty which have be show she. what? she give I she all, and this be her return! she sacrifice everything for I, and they spurn she."
"hush!" say Warrington, "they can hear you from the next room."
"hear? let they hear!" Pen cry out, only so much the louder. "those may overhear my talk who intercept my letter. I say this poor girl have be shamefully use, and I will do my good to right she; I will."
the door of the neighbouring room open, and Laura come forth with a pale and stern face. she look at Pen with glance from which beam pride, defiance, aversion. "Arthur, your mother be very ill," she say; "it be a pity that you should speak so loud as to disturb she."
"it be a pity that I should have be oblige to speak at all," Pen answer. "and I have more to say before I have do."
"I should think what you have to say will hardly be fit for I to hear," Laura say, haughtily.
"you be welcome to hear it or not, as you like," say Mr. Pen. "I shall go in now and speak to my mother."
Laura come rapidly forward, so that she should not be overhear by her friend within. "not now, sir," she say to Pen. "you may kill she if you do. your conduct have go far enough to make she wretche."
"what conduct?" cry out Pen, in a fury. "who dare impugn it? who dare meddle with I? be it you who be the instigator of this persecution?"
"I say before it be a subject of which it do not become I to hear or to speak," Laura say. "but as for mamma, if she have act otherwise than she do with regard to--to the person about whom you seem to take such an interest, it would have be I that must have quit your house, and not that--that person."
"by heaven! this be too much," Pen cry out, with a violent execration.
"perhaps that be what you wish," Laura say, toss her head up. "no more of this, if you please; I be not accustomed to hear such subject speak of in such language," and with a stately curtsey the young lady pass to her room, look her adversary full in the face as she retreat and close the door upon he.
Pen be bewilder with wonder, perplexity, fury, at this monstrous and unreasonable persecution. he burst out into a loud and bitter laugh as Laura quit he, and with sneer and reviling, as a man who jeer under an operation, ridicule at once his own pain and his persecutor's anger. the laugh, which be one of bitter humour, and no unmanly or unkindly expression of suffer under most cruel and unmerited torture, be hear in the next apartment, as some of his unlucky previous expression have be, and, like they, entirely misinterpret by the hearer. it strike like a dagger into the wounded and tender heart of Helen; it pierce Laura, and inflame the high-spirited girl with scorn and anger. "and it be to this hardened libertine," she thought--"to this boaster of low intrigue, that I have give my heart away." "he break the most sacred law," think Helen. "he prefer the creature of his passion to his own mother; and when he be upbraided, he laugh, and glory in his crime. 'she give I she all,' I hear he say it," argue the poor widow, "and he boast of it, and laugh, and break his mother's heart." the emotion, the shame, the grief, the mortification almost kill she. she feel she should die of his unkindness.
Warrington think of Laura's speech--"perhap that be what you wish." "she love Pen still," he say. "it be jealousy make she speak."--"come away, Pen. come away, and let we go to church and get calm. you must explain this matter to your mother. she do not appear to know the truth: nor do you quite, my good fellow. come away, and let we talk about it." and again he mutter to himself, "'perhaps that be what you wish.' yes, she love he. why shouldnot she love he? whom else would I have her love? what can she be to I but the dear and the fairest and the good of woman?" so, leave the woman similarly engage within, the two gentleman walk away, each occupy with his own thought, and silent for a considerable space. "I must set this matter right," think honest George "as she love he still--I must set his mind right about the other woman." and with this charitable thought, the good fellow begin to tell more at large what bow have say to he regard Miss Bolton's behaviour and fickleness, and he describe how the girl be no well than a little light-minded flirt; and, perhaps, he exaggerate the good-humour and contentedness which he have himself, as he think, witness in her behaviour in the scene with Mr. Huxter.
now, all bow's statement have be colour by an insane jealousy and rage on that old man's part; and instead of allay Pen's renascent desire to see his little conquest again, Warrington's account inflame and angered Pendennis, and make he more anxious than before to set himself right, as he persist in phrase it, with Fanny. they arrive at the church door presently; but scarce one word of the service, and not a syllable of Mr. Shamble's sermon, do either of they comprehend, probably--so much be each engage with his own private speculation. the Major come up to they after the service, with his well-brush hat and wig, and his jaunty, most cheerful air. he compliment they upon be see at church; again he say that every comme-il faut person make a point of attend the english service abroad; and he walk back with the young man, prattle to they in garrulous good-humour, and make bow to his acquaintance as they pass; and think innocently that Pen and George be both highly delighted by his anecdote, which they suffer to run on in a scornful and silent acquiescence.
at the time of Mr. Shamble's sermon (an erratic anglican divine, hire for the season at place of english resort, and addict to debt, drinking, and even to roulette, it be say), Pen, chafe under the persecution which his womankind inflict upon he, have be meditate a great act of revolt and of justice, as he have work himself up to believe; and Warrington on his part have be think that a crisis in his affair have likewise come, and that it be necessary for he to break away from a connexion which every day make more and more wretched and dear to he. yes, the time be come. he take those fatal word, "perhaps that be what you wish," as a text for a gloomy homily, which he preach to himself, in the dark pew of his own heart, whilst Mr. Shamble be feebly give utterance to his sermon.
CHAPTER LVIII
"fairoak to let"
our poor widow (with the assistance of her faithful Martha of Fairoaks, who laugh and wonder at the german way, and superintend the affair of the simple household) have make a little feast in honour of Major Pendennis's arrival, of which, however, only the Major and his two young friend partook, for Helen send to say that she be too unwell to dine at their table, and Laura bear her company. the Major talk for the party, and do not perceive, or choose to perceive, what a gloom and silence pervade the other two sharer of the modest dinner. it be evening before Helen and Laura come into the sitting-room to join the company there. she come in lean on Laura, with she back to the wan light, so that Arthur could not see how pallid and woe-stricken her face be, and as she go up to Pen, whom she have not see during the day, and place her fond arm on his shoulder and kiss he tenderly, Laura leave she, and move away to another part of the room. Pen remark that his mother's voice and her whole frame tremble, her hand be clammy cold as she put it up to his forehead, piteously embrace he. the spectacle of her misery only add, somehow, to the wrath and testiness of the young man. he scarcely return the kiss which the suffering lady give he: and the countenance with which he meet the appeal of her look be hard and cruel. "she persecute I," he think within himself, "and she come to I with the air of a martyr!" "you look very ill, my child," she say. "I donot like to see you look in that way." and she totter to a sofa, still hold one of his passive hand in her thin cold cling finger.
"I have have much to annoy I, mother," Pen say, with a throb breast: and as he speak Helen's heart begin to beat so, that she sate almost dead and speechless with terror.
Warrington, Laura, and Major Pendennis, all remain breathless, aware that the storm be about to break.
"I have have letter from London," Arthur continue, "and one that have give I more pain than I ever have in my life. it tell I that former letter of mine have be intercept and purloin away from me;--that-- that a young creature who have show the great love and care for I, have be most cruelly use by--by you, mother."
"for God's sake stop," cry out Warrington. "shebe ill--don't you see she be ill?"
"let he go on," say the widow, faintly.
"let he go on and kill she," say Laura, rush up to her mother's side. "speak on, sir, and see she die."
"it be you who be cruel," cry Pen, more exasperate and more savage, because his own heart, naturally soft and weak, revolt indignantly at the injustice of the very suffering which be lay at his door. "it be you that be cruel, who attribute all this pain to I: it be you who be cruel with your wicked reproach, your wicked doubt of I, your wicked persecution of those who love me,--ye, those who love I, and who brave everything for I, and whom you despise and trample upon because they be of low degree than you. shall I tell you what I will do,--what I be resolve to do, now that I know what your conduct have been?--i will go back to this poor girl whom you turn out of my door, and ask she to come back and share my home with I. Iwill defy the pride which persecute she, and the pitiless suspicion which insult she and I."
"do you mean, Pen, that you----" here the widow, with eager eye and outstretche hand, be break out, but Laura stop she: "silence, hush, dear mother," she cry, and the widow hush. savagely as Pen speak, she be only too eager to hear what more he have to say. "go on, Arthur, go on, Arthur," be all she say, almost swoon away as she speak.
"by Gad, I say he shallnot go on, or I willnot hear he, by Gad," the Major say, tremble too in his wrath. "if you choose, sir, after all wehave do for you, after all Ihave do for you myself, to insult your mother and disgrace your name, by ally yourself with a low-bear kitchen-girl, go and do it, by gad,--but let we, ma'am, have no more to do with he. I wash my hand of you, sir,--I wash my hand of you. Ibe an old fellow,--i benot long for this world. I come of as ancient and honourable a family as any in England, by Gad, and I do hope, before I go off the hook, by Gad, that the fellow that Ihave like, and bring up, and nurse through life, by Jove, would do something to show I that our name--yes, the name of Pendennis, by Gad, be leave undishonoure behind we, but if he willnot, dammy, I say, amen. by g--, both my father and my brother Jack be the proud man in England, and I never would have think that there would come this disgrace to my name,--never--and--and Ibe ashamed that itbe Arthur Pendennis." the old fellow's voice here break off into a sob: it be the second time that Arthur have bring tear from those wrinkle lid.
the sound of his break voice stay Pen's anger instantly, and he stop pace the room, as he have be do until that moment. Laura be by Helen's sofa; and Warrington have remain hitherto an almost silent, but not uninterested spectator of the family storm. as the party be talk, it have grow almost dark; and after the lull which succeed the passionate outbreak of the Major, George's deep voice, as it here break tremble into the twilight room, be hear with no small emotion by all. "will you let I tell you something about myself, my kind friend?" he said,--"you have be so good to I, ma'am, you have be so kind to I, Laura--I hope I may call you so sometimes--my dear Pen and I have be such friend that I have long want to tell you my story such as it be, and would have tell it to you early but that it be a sad one and contain another's secret. however, it may do good for Arthur to know it --it be that every one here should. it will divert you from think about a subject, which, out of a fatal misconception, have cause a great deal of pain to all of you. may I please tell you, Mrs. Pendennis?"
"pray speak," be all Helen say; and indeed she be not much heeding; her mind be full of another idea with which Pen's word have supply she, and she be in a terror of hope that what he have hint might be as she wish.
George fill himself a bumper of wine and empty it, and begin to speak. "you all of you know how you see I," he say, "a man without a desire to make an advance in the world: careless about reputation; and live in a garret and from hand to mouth, though I have friend and a name, and I daresay capability of my own, that would serve I if I have a mind. but mind I have none. I shall die in that garret most likely, and alone. I nail myself to that doom in early life. shall I tell you what it be that interested I about Arthur year ago, and make I inclined towards he when first I see he? the man from our college at Oxbridge bring up account of that early affair with the Chatteris actress, about whom Pen have talk to I since; and who, but for the Major's generalship, might have be your daughter-in-law, ma'am. I cannot see Pen in the dark, but he blush, Ibe sure; and I dare say Miss Bell do; and my friend Major Pendennis, I dare say, laugh as he ought to do--for he win. what would have be Arthur's lot now have he be tie at nineteen to an illiterate woman old than himself, with no quality in common between they to make one a companion for the other, no equality, no confidence, and no love speedily? what could he have be but most miserable? and when he speak just now and threaten a similar union, be sure it be but a threat occasion by anger, which you must give I leave to say, ma'am, be very natural on his part, for after a generous and manly conduct--let I say who know the circumstance well--most generous and manly and self-deny (which be rare with him),--he have meet from some friend of his with a most unkind suspicion, and have have to complain of the unfair treatment of another innocent person, towards whom he and you all be under much obligation."
the widow be go to get up here, and Warrington, see her attempt to rise, say, "do I tire you, ma'am?"
"oh no--go on--go on," say Helen, delight, and he continue.
"I like he, you see, because of that early history of his, which have come to my ear in college gossip, and because I like a man, if you will pardon I for say so, Miss Laura, who show that he can have a great unreasonable attachment for a woman. that be why we become friend--and be all friend here--for always, benot we?" he add, in a low voice, lean over to she, "and Pen have be a great comfort and companion to a lonely and unfortunate man.
"I be not complain of my lot, you see; for no man's be what he would have it; and up in my garret, where you leave the flower, and with my old book and my pipe for a wife, I be pretty content, and only occasionally envy other man, whose career in life be more brilliant, or who can solace their ill fortune by what Fate and my own fault have deprive I of--the affection of a woman or a child." here there come a sigh from somewhere near Warrington in the dark, and a hand be hold out in his direction, which, however, be instantly, withdraw, for the prudery of our female be such, that before all expression of feeling, or natural kindness and regard, a woman be 'teach to think of herself and the propriety, and to be ready to blush at the very slight notice;' and check, as, of course, it ought, this spontaneous motion, modesty draw up again, kindly friendship shrink back ashamed of itself, and Warrington resume his history. "my fate be such as I make it, and not lucky for I or for other involve in it.
"I, too, have an adventure before I go to college; and there be no one to save I as Major Pendennis save Pen. pardon I, Miss Laura, if I tell this story before you. it be as well that you all of you should hear my confession. before I go to college, as a boy of eighteen, I be at a private tutor's, and there, like Arthur, I become attach, or fancy I be attach, to a woman of a much low degree and a great age than my own. you shrink from me----"
"no, I donot," Laura say, and here the hand go out resolutely, and lay itself in Warrington's. she have divine his story from some previous hint let fall by he, and his first word at its commencement.
"she be a yeoman's daughter in the neighbourhood," Warrington say, with rather a falter voice, "and I fancy--what all young man fancy. her parent know who my father be, and encourage I, with all sort of coarse artifice and scoundrel flattery, which I see now, about their house. to do her justice, I own she never care for I, but be force into what happen by the threat and compulsion of her family. would to God that I have not be deceive: but in these matter we be deceive because we wish to be so, and I think I love that poor woman.
"what could come of such a marriage? I find, before long, that I be married to a boor. she could not comprehend one subject that interest I. her dulness pal upon I till I grow to loathe it. and after some time of a wretched, furtive union--I must tell you all--I find letter somewhere (and such letter they be!) which show I that her heart, such as it be, have never be mine, but have always belong to a person of her own degree.
"at my father's death, I pay what debt I have contract at college, and settle every shilling which remain to I in an annuity upon--upon those who bear my name, on condition that they should hide themselves away, and not assume it. they have keep that condition, as they would break it, for more money. if I have earn fame or reputation, that woman would have come to claim it: if I have make a name for myself those who no right to it would have bear it; and I enter life at twenty, God help I--hopeless and ruin beyond remission. I be the boyish victim of vulgar cheat, and, perhaps, it be only of late I have find out how hard--ah, how hard--it be to forgive they. I tell you the moral before, Pen; and now I have tell you the fable. beware how you marry out of your degree. I be make for a well lot than this, I think: but God have award I this one--and so, you see, it be for I to look on, and see other successful and other happy, with a heart that shall be as little bitter as possible."
"by Gad, sir," cry the Major, in high good-humour, "I intend you to marry Miss Laura here."
"and, by Gad, Master Shallow, I owe you a thousand pound," Warrington say.
"how d'ye mean a thousand? it be only a pony, sir," reply the Major simply, at which the other laugh.
as for Helen, she be so delighted, that she start up, and say, "God bless you--God for ever bless you, Mr. Warrington;" and kiss both his hand, and run up to Pen, and fall into his arm.
"yes, dear mother," he say as he hold she to he, and with a noble tenderness and emotion, embrace and forgave she. "I be innocent, and my dear, dear mother have do I a wrong."
"oh yes, my child, I have wrong you, thank God, I have wrong you!" Helen whisper. "come away, Arthur--not here--I want to ask my child to forgive I--and--and my God, to forgive I; and to bless you, and love you, my son."
he lead she, tottering, into her room, and close the door, as the three touch spectator of the reconciliation look on in pleased silence. ever after, ever after, the tender accent of that voice falter sweetly at his ear--the look of the sacred eye beam with an affection unutterable--the quiver of the fond lip smile mournfully--be remember by the young man. and at his good moment, and at his hour of trial and grief, and at his time of success or well-doing, the mother's face look down upon he, and bless he with its gaze of pity and purity, as he see it in that night when she yet linger with he; and when she seem, ere she quite leave he, an angel, transfigure and glorify with love--for which love, as for the great of the bounty and wonder of God's provision for we, let we kneel and thank our Father.
the moon have rise by this time; Arthur recollect well afterwards how it light up his mother's sweet pale face. their talk, or his rather, for she scarcely could speak, be more tender and confidential than it have be for year before. he be the frank and generous boy of her early day and love. he tell she the story, the mistake regard which have cause she so much pain--his struggle to fly from temptation, and his thankfulness that he have be able to overcome it. he never would do the girl wrong, never; or wound his own honour or his mother's pure heart. the threat that he would return be utter in a moment of exasperation, of which he repent. he never would see she again. but his mother say yes he should; and it be she who have be proud and culpable--and she would like to give Fanny Bolton something--and she beg her dear boy's pardon for open the letter--and she would write to the young girl, if,--if she have time. poor thing! be it not natural that she should love her Arthur? and again she kiss he, and she bless he.
as they be talk the clock strike nine, and Helen remind he how, when he be a little boy, she use to go up to his bedroom at that hour, and hear he say our Father. and once more, oh, once more, the young man fall down at his mother's sacred knee, and sob out the prayer which the Divine Tenderness utter for we, and which have be echo by twenty age since by million of sinful and humble man. and as he speak the last word of the supplication, the mother's head fall down on her boy's, and her arm close round he, and together they repeat the word "for ever and ever" and "amen."
a little time after, it might have be a quarter of an hour, Laura hear Arthur's voice call from within, "Laura! Laura!" she rush into the room instantly and find the young man still on his knee, and hold his mother's hand. Helen's head have sink back and be quite pale in the room. Pen look round, scar with a ghastly terror. "Help, Laura, help!" he say, "shebe faint--she's----"
Laura scream, and fall by the side of Helen. the shriek bring Warrington and Major Pendennis and the servant to the room. the sainted woman be dead. the last emotion of her soul here be joy to be henceforth unchequered and eternal. the tender heart beat no more; it be to have no more pang, no more doubt, no more grief and trial. its last throb be love; and Helen's last breath be a benediction.
the melancholy party bend their way speedily homeward, and Helen be lay by her husband's side at Clavering, in the old church where she have pray so often. for a while Laura go to stay with Dr. Portman, who read the service over his dear depart sister, amidst his own sob and those of the little congregation which assemble round Helen's tomb. there be not many who care for she, or who speak of she when go. scarcely more than of a nun in a cloister do people know of that pious and gentle lady. a few word among the cottager whom her bounty be accustom to relieve, a little talk from house to house at Clavering, where this lady tell how their neighbour die of a complaint in the heart; whilst that speculate upon the amount of a property which the widow have leave; and a third wonder whether Arthur would let Fairoaks or live in it, and expect that he would not be long get through his property,--this be all, and except with one or two who cherish she, the kind soul be forget by the next market-day. would you desire that grief for you should last for a few more week? and do after-life seem less solitary, provide that our name, when we "go down into silence," be echo on this side of the grave yet for a little while, and human voice be still talk about we? she be go, the pure soul, whom only two or three loved and know. the great blank she leave be in Laura's heart, to whom her love have be everything, and who have now but to worship her memory. "I be glad that she give I her blessing before she go away," Warrington say to Pen; and as for Arthur, with a humble acknowledgment and wonder at so much affection, he hardly dare to ask of Heaven to make he worthy of it, though he feel that a saint there be intercede for he.
all the lady's affair be find in perfect order, and her little property ready for transmission to her son, in trust for whom she hold it. paper in her desk show that she have long be aware of the complaint, one of the heart, under which she labour, and know that it would suddenly remove she: and a prayer be find in her handwriting, ask that her end might be, as it be, in the arm of her son.
Laura and Arthur talk over her saying, all of which the former most fondly remember, to the young man's shame somewhat, who think how much great her love have be for Helen than his own. he refer himself entirely to Laura to know what Helen would have wish should be do; what poor person she would have like to relieve; what legacy or remembrance she would have wish to transmit. they pack up the vase which Helen in her gratitude have destine to Dr. Goodenough, and duly send it to the kind doctor; a silver coffee-pot, which she use, be send off to Portman: a diamond ring, with her hair, be give with affectionate greeting to Warrington.
it must have be a hard day for poor Laura when she go over to Fairoaks first and to the little room which she have occupy, and which be her no more, and to the widow's own blank chamber in which those two have pass so many beloved hour. there, of course, be the clothe in the wardrobe, the cushion on which she pray, the chair at the toilette: the glass that be no more to reflect her dear sad face. after she have be here a while Pen knock and lead she downstair to the parlour again, and make she drink a little wine, and say, "God bless you," as she touch the glass. "nothing shall ever be change in your room," he said--"it be always your room--it be always my sister's room. shall it not be so, Laura?" and Laura say, "yes!"
among the widow's paper be find a packet, mark by the widow, "letter from Laura's father," and which Arthur give to she. they be the letter which have pass between the cousin in the early day before the marriage of either of they. the ink be fade in which they be write: the tear dry out that both perhaps have shed over they: the grief heal now whose bitterness they chronicle: the friend doubtless unite whose parting on earth have cause to both pang so cruel. and Laura learn fully now for the first time what the tie be which have bind she so tenderly to Helen: how faithfully she more than mother have cherish her father's memory, how truly she have love he, how meekly resign he.
one legacy of his mother's Pen remember, of which Laura could have no cognisance. it be that wish of Helen's to make some present to Fanny Bolton; and Pen write to she, put his letter under an envelope to Mr. Bows, and request that gentleman to read it before he deliver it to Fanny. "Dear Fanny," Pen say, "I have to acknowledge two letter from you, one of which be delay in my illness" (Pen find the first letter in his mother's desk after her decease and the reading it give he a strange pang), "and to thank you, my kind nurse and friend, who watch I so tenderly during my fever. and I have to tell you that the last word of my dear mother who be no more, be word of goodwill and gratitude to you for nurse I: and she say she would have write to you, have she have time--that she would like to ask your pardon if she have harshly treat you--and that she would beg you to show your forgiveness by accept some token of friendship and regard from she." Pen conclude by say that his friend, George Warrington, Esq., of Lamb Court, Temple, be trustee of a little sum of money, of which the interest would be pay to she until she become of age, or change her name, which would always be affectionately remember by her grateful friend, a. Pendennis. the sum be in truth but small, although enough to make a little heiress of Fanny Bolton, whose parent be appease, and whose father say Mr. P. have act quite as the gentleman--though bow growl out that that to plaster a wound heart with a banknote be an easy kind of sympathy; and poor Fanny feel only too clearly that Pen's letter be one of farewell.
"send hundred-pound note to porter' daughter be all dev'lish well," old Major Pendennis say to his nephew (whom, as thee proprietor of Fairoaks and the head of the family, he now treat with marked deference and civility), "and as there be a little ready money at the bank, and your poor mother wish it, therebe perhaps no harm do. but, my good lad, Iwould have you to remember that youhave not above five hundred a year, though, thank to I the world give you credit for be a doosid deal well off; and, on my knee, I beg you, my boy, donot break into your capital: stick to it, sir; donot speculate with it, sir; keep your land, and donot borrow on it. Tatham tell I that the Chatteris branch of the railway may--will almost certainly pass through Chatteris, and of it can be bring on this side of the Brawl, sir, and through your field, theywill be worth a dev'lish deal of money, and your five hundred a year will jump up to eight or nine. whatever it be, keep it, I implore you keep it. and I say, Pen, I think you should give up live in those dirty chamber in the Temple and let a decent lodging. and I should have a man, sir, to wait upon I; and a horse or two in town in the season. all this will pretty well swallow up your income, and I know you must live close. but remember you have a certain place in society, and you cannot afford to cut a poor figure in the world. what be you go to do in the winter? you donot intend to stay down here, or, I suppose, to go on writing for that--what-d'ye-call-'em--that newspaper?"
"Warrington and I be go abroad again, sir, for a little, and then we shall see what be to be do," Arthur reply.
"and youwill let Fairoaks, of course? good school in the neighbourhood; cheap country: dev'lish nice place for East India Colonels, or family want to retire. Iwill speak about it at the club; there be lot of fellow at the club want a place of that sort."
"I hope Laura will live in it for the winter, at least, and will make it her home," Arthur reply: at which the Major pish'd and psha'd, and say that there ought to be convent, begad, for english lady, and wish that Miss Bell have not be there to interfere with the arrangement of the family, and that she would mope herself to death alone in that place.
indeed, it would have be a very dismal abode for poor Laura, who be not too happy either in Dr. Portman's household, and in the town where too many thing remind she of the dear parent whom she have lose. but old Lady Rockminster, who adore her young friend Laura, as soon as she read in the paper of her loss, and of her presence in the country, rush over from Baymouth, where the old lady be stay, and insist that Laura should remain six month, twelve month, all her life with she; and to her ladyship's house, Martha from Fairoaks, as femme de chambre, accompany her young mistress.
Pen and Warrington see her depart. it be difficult to say which of the young man seem to regard she the most tenderly. "your cousin be pert and rather vulgar, my dear, but he seem to have a good heart," little Lady Rockminster say, who say she say about everybody--"but I like Bluebeard well. tell I, be he touche au coeur?"
"Mr. Warrington have be long--engage," Laura say, drop her eye.
"nonsense, child! and good heaven, my dear! thatbe a pretty diamond cross. what do you mean by wear it in the morning?"
"Arthur--my brother, give it I just now. it be--it was----"
she could not finish the sentence. the carriage pass over the bridge, and by the dear, dear gate of Fairoaks--home no more.
CHAPTER LIX
Old Friends
it chance at that great english festival, at which all London take a holiday upon Epsom Downs, that a great number of the personage to whom we have be introduce in the course of this history, be assemble to see the Derby. in a comfortable open carriage, which have be bring to the ground by a pair of horse, might be see Mrs. Bungay, of Paternoster Row, attire like Solomon in all his glory, and have by her side modest Mrs. Shandon, for whom, since the commencement of their acquaintance, the worthy publisher's lady have maintain a steady friendship. Bungay, have recreate himself with a copious luncheon, be madly shy at the stick hard by, till the perspiration run off his bald pate. Shandon be shamble about among the drinking tenant and gipsy: Finucane constant in attendance on the two lady, to whom gentleman of their acquaintance, and connect with the publishing house, come up to pay a visit.
among other, Mr. Archer come up to make she his bow, and tell Mrs. Bungay who be on the course. yonder be the Prime Minister: his lordship have just tell he to back Borax for the race; but Archer think Munmeer the well horse. he point out countless duke and grandee to the delighted Mrs. Bungay. "look yonder in the Grand Stand," he say. "there sit the chinese Ambassador with the Mandarins of his suite, Fou-choo-foo bring I over letter of introduction from the Governor-General of India, my most intimate friend, and I be for some time very kind to he, and he have his chopstick lay for he at my table whenever he choose to come and dine. but he bring his own cook with he, and--would you believe it, Mrs. Bungay?--one day, when I be out, and the Ambassador be with Mrs. Archer in our garden eat gooseberry, of which the Chinese be passionately fond, the beast of a cook, see my wife's dear little Blenheim spaniel (that we have from the Duke of Marlborough himself, whose ancestor's life Mrs. Archer's great-great-grandfather save at the battle of Malplaquet), seize upon the poor little devil, cut his throat, and skin he, and serve he up stuff with force-meat in the second course."
"Law!" say Mrs. Bungay.
"you may fancy my wife's agony when she know what have happen! the cook come scream upstairs, and tell we that she have find poor Fido's skin in the area, just after we have all of we taste of the dish! she never would speak to the Ambassador again--never; and, upon my word, he have never be to dine with we since. the Lord Mayor, who do I the honour to dine, like the dish very much; and, eat with green pea, it taste rather like duck."
"you donot say so, now!" cry the astonished publisher's lady.
"fact, upon my word. look at that lady in blue, seat by the Ambassador: that be Lady Flamingo, and they say she be go to be married to he, and return to Pekin with his Excellency. she be get her foot squeeze down on purpose. but shewill only cripple herself, and will never be able to do it--never. my wife have the small foot in England, and wear shoe for a six-year-old child; but what be that to a chinese lady's foot, Mrs. Bungay?"
"who be that carriage as Mr. Pendennis be with, Mr. Archer?" Mrs. Bungay presently ask. "he and Mr. Warrington be here jest now. hebe 'aughty in his manner, that Mr. Pendennis, and well he may be, for Ibe tell he keep tip-top company. 'as he 'ad a large fortune leave he, Mr. Archer? hebe in black still, I see."
"eighteen hundred a year in land, and twenty-two thousand five hundred in the three-and-a-half per cent; thatbe about it," say Mr. Archer.
"Law! why, you know everything, Mr. A.!" cry the lady of Paternoster Row.
"I happen to know, because I be call in about poor Mrs. Pendennis's will," Mr. Archer reply. "Pendennis's uncle, the Major, seldom do anything without I; and as he be likely to be extravagant wehave tie up the property, so that he cannot make duck and drake with it.--how do you do, my lord?--do you know that gentleman, lady? you have read his speech in the House; it be Lord Rochester."
"Lord Fiddlestick," cry out Finucane, from the box. "sure itbe Tom Staples, of the Morning Advertiser, Archer."
"be it?" Archer say, simply. "well Ibe very short-sighted, and upon my word I think it be Rochester. that gentleman with the double opera-glass (another nod) be Lord John; and the tall man with he, donot you know he? be Sir James."
"you know them because you see them in the House," growl Finucane.
"I know they because they be kind enough to allow I to call they my most intimate friend," Archer continue. "look at the Duke of Hampshire; what a pattern of a fine old english gentleman! he never miss 'the Derby.' 'Archer,' he say to I only yesterday, 'I have be at sixty-five Derbies! appear on the field for the first time on a piebald pony when I be seven year old, with my father, the Prince of Wales, and Colonel Hanger; and only miss two race--one when I have the measle at Eton, and one in the Waterloo year, when I be with my friend Wellington in Flanders."
"and who be that yellow carriage, with the pink and yellow parasol, that Mr. Pendennis be talk to, and ever so many gentleman?" ask Mrs. Bungay.
"that be Lady Clavering, of Clavering Park, next estate to my friend Pendennis. that be the young son and heir upon the box; hebe awfully tipsy, the little scamp! and the young lady be Miss Amory, Lady Clavering's daughter by a first marriage, and uncommonly sweet upon my friend Pendennis; but Ihave reason to think he have his heart fix elsewhere. you have hear of young Mr. Foker--the great brewer, Foker, you know--he be go to hang himself in consequence of a fatal passion for Miss Amory who refuse he, but be cut down just in time by his valet, and be now abroad, under a keeper."
"how happy that young fellow be!" sigh Mrs. Bungay. "whowould have think when he come so quiet and demure to dine with we, three or four year ago, he would turn out such a grand character! why, I see his name at Court the other day, and present by the Marquis of Steyne and all; and in every party of the nobility his namebe down as sure as a gun."
"I introduce he a good deal when he first come up to town," Mr. Archer say, "and his uncle, Major Pendennis, do the rest. Hallo! therebe Cobden here, of all man in the world! I must go and speak to he. good-bye, Mrs. Bungay. good morning, Mrs. Shandon."
an hour previous to this time, and at a different part of the course, there might have be see an old stage-coach, on the battered roof of which a crowd of shabby raff be stamp and hallooing, as the great event of the day--the Derby race--rush over the greensward, and by the shout million of people assemble to view that magnificent scene. this be Wheeler's (the Harlequin's Head) drag, which have bring down a company of choice spirit from Bow Street, with a slap-up luncheon in the boot. as the whirling race flash by, each of the choice spirit bellow out the name of the horse or the colour which he think or he hop might be foremost. "the Cornet!" "itbe Muffineer!" "itbe blue sleeve!" "yallow cap! yallow cap! yallow cap!" and so forth, yell the gentleman sportsman during that delicious and thrilling minute before the contest be decide; and as the flutter signal blow out, show the number of the famous horse Podasokus as winner of the race, one of the gentleman on the Harlequin's Head drag spring up off the roof, as if he be a pigeon and about to fly away to London or York with the news.
but his elation do not lift he many inch from his standing-place, to which he come down again on the instant, cause the board of the crazy old coach-roof to crack with the weight of his joy. "hurray, hurray!" he bawl out, "Podasokus be the horse! supper for ten, Wheeler, my boy. ask you all round of course, and damn the expense."
and the gentleman on the carriage, the shabby swaggerer, the dubious buck, say, "thank you--congratulate you, Colonel; sup with you with pleasure:" and whisper to one another, "the Colonel stand to win fifteen hundred, and he get the odd from a good man, too."
and each of the shabby buck and dusky dandy begin to eye his neighbour with suspicion, lest that neighbour, take his advantage, should get the Colonel into a lonely place and borrow money of he. and the winner on Podasokus could not be alone during the whole of that afternoon, so closely do his friend watch he and each other.
at another part of the course you might have see a vehicle certainly more modest, if not more shabby than that batter coach which have bring down the choice spirit from the Harlequin's Head; this be cab no. 2002, which have convey a gentleman and two lady from the cabstand in the Strand: whereof one of the lady, as she sate on the box of the cab enjoy with her mamma and their companion a repast of lobster salad and bitter ale, look so fresh and pretty that many of the splendid young dandy who be stroll about the course, and enjoy themselves at the noble diversion of Sticks, and talk to the beautifully dress lady in the beautiful carriage, on the hill, forsook these fascination to have a glance at the smile and rosy-cheeked lass on the cab. the blush of youth and good-humour mantle on the girl's cheek, and play over that fair countenance like the pretty shin cloudlet on the serene sky overhead; the eld lady's cheek be red too; but that be a permanent mottled rose, deepen only as it receive free draught of pale ale and brandy-and-water, until her face emulate the rich shell of the lobster which she devour.
the gentleman who escort these two lady be most active in attendance upon they: here on the course, as he have be during the previous journey. during the whole of that animate and delightful drive from London, his joke have never cease. he speak up undauntedly to the most awful drag full of the big and most solemn guardsman; as to the humblest donkey-chaise in which Bob the dustman be drive molly to the race. he have fire astonishing volley of what be call "chaff" into endless window as he pass; into line of grin girl' school; into little regiment of shout urchin hurraye behind the railing of their classical and commercial Academies; into casement whence smile maid-servant, and nurse toss baby, or demure old maiden lady with dissent countenance, be look. and the pretty girl in the straw bonnet with pink ribbon, and her mamma the devourer of lobster, have both agree that when he be in "spirit" there be nothing like that Mr. Sam. he have cram the cab with trophy win from the bankrupt proprietor of the Sticks hard by, and with countless pincushion, wooden apple, backy-box, Jack-in-the-box, and little soldier. he have bring up a gipsy with a tawny child in her arm to tell the fortune of the lady: and the only cloud which momentarily obscure the sunshine of that happy party, be when the teller of fate inform the young lady that have have reason to beware of a fair man, who be false to she: that she have have a bad illness, and that she would find that a man would prove true.
the girl look very much abash at this news: her mother and the young man interchange sign of wonder and intelligence. perhaps the conjurer have use the same word to a hundred different carriage on that day.
make his way solitary amongst the crowd and the carriage, and note, accord to his willnot, the various circumstance and character which the animate scene present, a young friend of our come suddenly upon cab 2002, and the little group of person assemble on the outside of the vehicle. as he catch sight of the young lady on the box, she start and turn pale: her mother become red than ever: the heretofore gay and triumphant Mr. Sam immediately assume a fierce and suspicious look, and his eye turn savagely from Fanny Bolton (whom the reader, no doubt, have recognise in the young lady of the cab) to Arthur Pendennis, advance to meet she.
Arthur, too, look dark and suspicious on perceive Mr. Samuel Huxter in company with his old acquaintance: his suspicion be that of alarmed morality, and, I dare say, highly creditable to Mr. Arthur: like the suspicion of Mrs. Lynx, when she see Mr. Brown and Mrs. Jones talk together, or when she remark Mrs. Lamb twice or thrice in a handsome opera-box. there may be no harm in the conversation of Mr. B. and Mr. J.: and Mrs. Lamb's opera-box (though she notoriously cannot afford one) may be honestly come by: but yet a moralist like Mrs. Lynx have a right to the little precautionary fright: and Arthur be no doubt justify in adopt that severe demeanour of his.
Fanny's heart begin to patter violently: Huxter's fist, plunge into the pocket of his paletot, clench themselves involuntarily and armed themselves, as it be, in ambush: Mrs. Bolton begin to talk with all her might, and with a wonderful volubility: and Lor! she be so 'apply to see Mr. Pendennis, and how well he be a-lookin', and wewould be talk' about Mr. P. only jest before; havenot we, Fanny? and if this be the famous Epsom race that they talk so much about, she donot care, for her part, if she never see they again. and how be Major Pendennis, and that kind Mr. Warrington, who bring Mr. P.'s great kindness to Fanny? and she never would forget it, never: and Mr. Warrington be so tall, he almost break his 'ead up against their lodge door. you recollect Mr. Warrington a-knock' of his head--don't you, Fanny?
Whilst Mrs. Bolton be so discourse, I wonder how many thousand of thought pass through Fanny's mind, and what dear time, sad struggle, lonely grief, and subsequent shameface consolation be recall to she? what pang have the poor little thing, as she think how much she have love he, and that she love he no more? there he stand, about whom she be go to die ten month since, dandified, supercilious, with a black crape to his white hat, and jet button in his shirt-front and a pink in his coat, that some one else have probably give he: with the tight lavender-colour glove sew with black and the small of cane. and Mr. Huxter wear no glove, and great Blucher boot, and smell very much of tobacco certainly; and look, oh, it must be own, he look as if a bucket of water would do he a great deal of good! all these thought, and a myriad of other, rush through Fanny's mind as her mamma be deliver herself of her speech, and as the girl, from under her eye, survey Pendennis--survey he entirely from head to foot, the circle on his white forehead that his hat leave when he lift it (his beautiful, beautiful hair have grow again), the trinket at his watch-chain, the ring on his hand under his glove, the neat shin boot, so, so unlike Sam's high-low!--and after her hand have give a little twitter pressure to the lavender-colour kid grasp which be hold out to it, and after her mother have deliver herself of her speech, all Fanny could find to say be, "this be Mr. Samuel Huxter whom you know formerly, I believe, sir; Mr. Samuel, you know you know Mr. Pendennis formerly--and--and, will you take a little refreshment?"
these little word, tremulous and uncoloure as they be, yet be understand by Pendennis in such a manner as to take a great load of suspicion from off his mind--of remorse, perhaps, from his heart. the frown on the countenance of the Prince of Fairoaks disappear, and a good-natured smile and a knowing twinkle of the eye illuminate his highness's countenance. "I be very thirsty," he say, "and I will be glad to drink your health, Fanny; and I hope Mr. Huxter will pardon I for have be very rude to he the last time we meet, and when I be so ill and out of spirit, that indeed I scarcely know what I say." and herewith the lavender-colour Dexter kid-glove be hand out, in token of amity, to Huxter.
the dirty fist in the young surgeon's pocket be oblige to undoable itself, and come out of its ambush disarm. the poor fellow himself feel, as he lay it in Pen's hand, how hot his own be, and how black--it leave black mark on Pen's glove; he see them,--he would have like to have clench it again and dash it into the other's good-humour face; and have see, there upon that round, with Fanny, with all England look on, which be the good man--he Sam Huxter of Bartholomew's, or that grin dandy.
Pen with ineffable good-humour take a glass--he donot mind what it was-- he be content to drink after the lady; and he fill it with froth lukewarm beer, which he pronounce to be delicious, and which he drink cordially to the health of the party.
as he be drink and talk on in an engaging manner, a young lady in a shot dove-colour dress, with a white parasol line with pink, and the prettiest dove-colour boot that ever step, pass by Pen, lean on the arm of a stalwart gentleman with a military moustache.
the young lady clench her little fist, and give a mischievous side-look as she pass Pen. he of the mustachio burst out into a jolly laugh. he have take off his hat to the lady of cab no. 2002. you should have see Fanny Bolton's eye watch after the dove-colour young lady. immediately Huxter perceive the direction which they take, they cease look after the dove-colour nymph, and they turn and look into Sam Huxter's orb with the most artless good-humour expression.
"what a beautiful creature!" Fanny say. "what a lovely dress! do you remark, Mr. Sam, such little, little hand?"
"it be Capting Strong," say Mrs. Bolton: "and who be the young woman, I wonder?"
"a neighbour of mine in the country--Miss 'Amory,'" Arthur said,--"lady Clavering's daughter. youhave see Sir Francis often in Shepherd's Inn, Mrs. Bolton."
as he speak, Fanny build up a perfect romance in three volume love-- faithlessness--splendid marriage at St. George's, Hanover square-- break-hearted maid--and Sam Huxter be not the hero of that story--poor Sam, who by this time have get out an exceedingly rank Cuba cigar, and be smoke it under Fanny's little nose.
after that confound prig Pendennis join and leave the party, the sun be less bright to Sam Huxter, the sky less blue--the Sticks have no attraction for he--the bitter beer hot and undrinkable--the world be change. he have a quantity of pea and a tin pea-shooter in the pocket of the cab for amusement on the homeward route. he donot take they out, and forget their existence until some other wag, on their return from the race, fire a volley into Sam's sad face; upon which salute, after a few oath indicative of surprise, he burst into a savage and sardonic laugh.
but Fanny be charming all the way home. she coax, and snuggle, and smile. she laugh pretty laugh; she admire everything; she take out the darling little Jack-in-the-box, and be so obliged to Sam. and when they get home, and Mr. Huxter, still with darkness on his countenance, be take a frigid leave of she--she burst into tear, and say he be a naughty unkind thing.
upon which, with a burst of emotion almost as emphatic as her, the young surgeon hold the girl in his arm--swear that she be an angel, and that he be a jealous brute; own that he be unworthy of she, and that he have no right to hate Pendennis; and ask she, implore she, to say once more that she----
that she what?--the end of the question and Fanny's answer be pronounce by lip that be so near each other, that no bystander could hear the word. Mrs. Bolton only say, "come, come, Mr. H.--no nonsense, if you please; and I think youhave act like a wicked wretch, and be most uncommon cruel to Fanny, that I do."
when Arthur leave no. 2002, he go to pay his respect to the carriage to which, and to the side of her mamma, the dove-colour author of Mes Larmes have by this time return. indefatigable old Major Pendennis be in wait upon Lady Clavering, and have occupy the back seat in her carriage; the box be in possession of young Hopeful, under the care of Captain Strong.
a number of dandy, and man of a certain fashion--of military buck, of young rake of the public office, of those who may be style man's man rather than ladies'--had come about the carriage during its station on the hill--and have exchange a word or two with Lady Clavering, and a little talk (a little "chaff," some of the most elegant of the man style their conversation) with Miss Amory. they have offer her sportive bet, and exchange with she all sort of free-talk and knowing innuendo. they point out to she who be on the course: and the "who" be not always the person a young lady should know.
when Pen come up to Lady Clavering's carriage, he have to push his way through a crowd of these young buck who be pay their court to Miss Amory, in order to arrive as near that young lady, who beckon he by many pretty signal to her side.
"Je lay vue," she say; "Elle a de bien beaux yeux; vous ete un monster!"
"why monster?" say Pen, with a laugh; "hone suit qui mal y peen. my young friend, yonder, be as well protect as any young lady in Christendom. she have her mamma on one side, her pretend on the other. could any harm happen to a girl between those two?"
"one do not know what may or may not arrive," say Miss Blanche, in French, "when a girl have the mind, and when she be pursue by a wicked monster like you. figure to yourself, Major, that I come to find Monsieur, your nephew, near to a cab, by two lady, and a man, oh, such a man! and who eat lobster, and who laugh, who laugh!"
"it do not strike I that the man laugh," Pen say, "and as for lobster, I think he would have like to eat I after the lobster. he shake hand with I, and grip I so, that he bruise my glove black-and-blue. he be a young surgeon. he come from Clavering. donot you remember the gilt pestle and mortar in High Street?"
"if he attend you when you be sick," continue Miss Amory, "he will kill you. he will serve you right; for you be a monster."
the perpetual recurrence to the word "monster" jarred upon Pen. "she speak about these matter a great deal too lightly," he think. "if I have be a monster, as she call it, she would have receive I just the same. this be not the way in which an english lady should speak or think. Laura would not speak in that way, thank God;" and as he think so, his own countenance fall.
"of what be you think? be you go to bouder I at present?" Blanche ask. "Major, scold your mechant nephew. he do not amuse I at all. he be as bete as Captain Crackenbury."
"what be you say about I, Miss Amory?" say the guardsman, with a grin. "if itbe anything good, say it in English, for I donot understand French when itbe speak so devilish quick."
"it benot anything good, Crack," say Crackenbury's fellow, Captain Clinker. "letus come away, and donot spoil sport. they say Pendennis be sweet upon she."
"Ibe tell hebe a devilish clever fellow," sigh Crackenbury. "Lady Violet Lebas say hebe a devilish clever fellow. he write a work, or a poem, or something; and he write those devilish clever thing in the--in the paper, you know. Dammy, I wish I be a clever fellow, Clinker."
"thatbe past wish for, Crack, my boy," the other say. "I cannot write a good book, but I think I can make a pretty good one on the Derby. what a flat Clavering be! and the Begum! I like that old Begum. shebe worth ten of her daughter. how please the old girl be at win the lottery!"
"claver's safe to pay up, benot he?" ask Captain Crackenbury.
"I hope so," say his friend; and they disappear, to enjoy themselves among the stick.
before the end of the day's amusement, many more gentleman of Lady Clavering's acquaintance come up to her carriage, and chat with the party which it contain. the worthy lady be in high spirit and good-humour, laugh and talk accord to she willnot, and offer refreshment to all her friend, until her ample basket and bottle be empty, and her servant and postillion be in such a royal state of excitement as servant and postillion commonly be upon the Derby day.
the Major remark that some of the visitor to the carriage appear to look with rather queer and mean glance towards its owner. "how easily she take it!" one man whisper to another. "the Begum's make of money," the friend reply. "how easily she take what?" think old Pendennis. "have anybody lose any money?" Lady Clavering say she be happy in the morning because Sir Francis have promise she not to bet.
Mr. Welbore, the country neighbour of the Claverings, be pass the carriage, when he be call back by the Begum, who rally he for wish to cut she. "why donot he come before? why donot he come to lunch?" her ladyship be in great delight, she tell he--she tell everybody, that she have win five pound in a lottery. as she convey this piece of intelligence to he, Mr. Welbore look so particularly know, and withal melancholy, that a dismal apprehension seize upon Major Pendennis. "he would go and look after the horse and those rascal of postillion, who be so long in come round." when he come back to the carriage, his usually benign and smirk countenance be obscure by some sorrow. "what be the matter with you now?" the good-natured Begum ask. the Major pretend a headache from the fatigue and sunshine of the day. the carriage wheel off the course and take its way Londonwards, not the least brilliant equipage in that vast and picturesque procession. the tipsy driver dash gallantly over the turf, amidst the admiration of foot-passenger, the ironical cheer of the little donkey-carriage and spring van, and the loud objurgation of horse-and-chaise man, with whom the reckless post-boy come in contact. the jolly Begum look the picture of good-humour as she recline on her splendid cushion; the lovely Sylphide smile with languid elegance. many an honest holiday-maker with his family wad into a tax-cart, many a cheap dandy work his way home on his weary hack, admire that brilliant turn-out, and think, no doubt, how happy those "swell" must be. Strong sit on the box still, with a lordly voice call to the post-boy and the crowd. Master Frank have be put inside of the carriage and be asleep there by the side of the Major, doze away the effect of the constant luncheon and champagne of which he have freely partake.
the Major be revolve in his mind meanwhile the news the receipt of which have make he so grave. "if Sir Francis Clavering go on in this way," Pendennis the eld thought, "this little tipsy rascal will be as bankrupt as his father and grandfather before he. the Begum's fortune cannot stand such drain upon it: no fortune can stand they: she have pay his debt half a dozen time already. a few year more of the turf, and a few coup like this, will ruin she."
"donot you think we could get up race at Clavering, mamma?" Miss Amory ask. "yes, we must have they there again. there be race there in the old time, the good old time. itbe a national amusement, you know: and we could have a Clavering ball: and we might have dance for the tenantry, and rustic sport in the park--oh, it would be charming."
"capital fun," say mamma. "wouldnot it, Major?"
"the turf be a very expensive amusement, my dear lady," Major Pendennis answer, with such a rueful face, that the Begum rally he, and ask laughingly whether he have lose money on the race?
after a slumber of about an hour and a half, the heir of the house begin to exhibit symptom of wakefulness, stretch his youthful arm over the Major's face, and kick his sister's knee as she sate opposite to he. when the amiable youth be quite restore to consciousness, he begin a sprightly conversation.
"I say, Ma," he say, "Ihave go and do it this time, I have."
"what have you go and do, franky dear?" ask Mamma.
"how much be seventeen half-crown? two pound and half-a crown, benot it? I draw Borax in our lottery, but I buy Podasokus and Man-milliner of Leggat minor for two open tart and a bottle of ginger-beer."
"you little wicked gambling creature, how dare you begin so soon?" cry Miss Amory.
"hold your tongue, if you please. who ever ask your leave, miss?" the brother say. "and I say, ma----"
"well, franky dear?"
"youwill tip I all the same, you know, when I go back----" and here he break out into a laugh. "I say, Ma, shall I tell you something?"
the Begum express her desire to hear this something, and her son and heir continue:
"when I and Strong be down at the grand stand after the race, and I be talk to Leggat minor, who be there with his governor, I see Pa look as savage as a bear. and I say, Ma, Leggat minor tell I that he hear his governor say that Pa have lose seven thousand back the favourite. Iwill never back the favourite when Ibe of age. no, no--hang I if I do: leave I alone, Strong, will you?"
"Captain Strong! Captain Strong! be this true?" cry out the unfortunate Begum. "have Sir Francis be bet again? he promise I he wouldnot. he give I his word of honour he wouldnot."
Strong, from his place on the box, have overhear the end of young Clavering's communication, and be try in vain to stop his unlucky tongue.
"Ibe afraid itbe true, ma'am," he say, turn round, "I deplore the loss as much as you can. he promise I as he promise you; but the play be too strong for he! he cannot refrain from it."
Lady Clavering at this sad news burst into a fit of tear. she deplore her wretched fate as the most miserable of woman, she declare she would separate, and pay no more debt for the ungrateful man. she narrate with tearful volubility a score of story only too authentic, which show how her husband have deceive, and how constantly she have befriend he: and in this melancholy condition, whilst young Hopeful be think about the two guineas which he himself have win; and the major revolving, in his darkened mind, whether certain plan which he have be form have well not be abandon; the splendid carriage drive up at length to the Begum's house in Grosvenor Place; the idler and boy linger about the place to witness, accord to public willnot, the close of the Derby Day, cheer the carriage as it draw up, and envy the happy folk who descend from it.
"and itbe for the son of this man that I be make a beggar!" Blanche say, quiver with anger, as she walk upstairs lean on the Major's arm-- "for this cheat--for this blackleg--for this liar--for this robber of woman."
"calm yourself, my dear Miss Blanche," the old gentleman say; "I pray calm yourself. you have be hardly treat, most unjustly. but remember that you have always a friend in I, and trust to an old fellow who will try and serve you."
and the young lady, and the heir of the hopeful house of Clavering, have retire to their bed, the remain three of the Epsom party remain for some time in deep consultation.
CHAPTER LX
Explanations
almost a year, as the reader will perceive, have pass since an event describe a few page back. Arthur's black coat be about to be exchange for a blue one. his person have undergo other more pleasing and remarkable change. his wig have be lay aside, and his hair, though somewhat thin, have return to public view. and he have have the honour of appear at Court in the uniform of a Cornet of the Clavering troop of the ----shire Yeomanry Cavalry, be present to the Sovereign by the Marquis of Steyne.
this be a measure strongly and pathetically urge by Arthur's uncle. the Major would not hear of a year pass before this ceremony of gentlemanhood be go through. the old gentleman think that his nephew should belong to some rather more select Club than the Megatherium; and have announce everywhere in the world his disappointment that the young man's property have turn out not by any mean as well as he could have hop, and be under fifteen hundred a year.
that be the amount at which Pendennis's property be set down in the world--where his publisher begin to respect he much more than formerly, and where even mamma be by no mean uncivil to he. for if the pretty daughter be, naturally, to marry people of very different expectation --at any rate, he will be eligible for the plain one: and if the brilliant and fascinating Myra be to hook an Earl, poor little Beatrice, who have one shoulder high than the other, must hang on to some boor through life, and why should not Mr. Pendennis be her support? in the very first winter after the accession to his mother's fortune, Mrs. Hawxby in a country-house cause her Beatrice to learn billiard from Mr. Pendennis and would be drive by nobody but he in the pony carriage, because he be literary and her Beatrice be literary too, and declare that the young man, under the instigation of his horrid old uncle, have behave most infamously in trifle with Beatrice's feeling. the truth be the old gentleman, who know Mrs. Hawxby's character, and how desperately that lady would practise upon unwary young man, have come to the country-house in question and carry Arthur out of the danger of her immediate claw, though not out of the reach of her tongue. the elder Pendennis would have have his nephew pass a part of the Christmas at Clavering, whither the family have return; but Arthur have not the heart for that. Clavering be too near poor old Fairoaks; and that be too full of sad recollection for the young man.
we have lose sight of the Claverings, too, until their reappearance upon the Epsom race-ground, and must give a brief account of they in the interval. during the past year, the world have not treat any member of the Clavering family very kindly; Lady Clavering, one of the well-natured woman that ever enjoy a good dinner, or make a slip in grammar, have have her appetite and good-nature sadly try by constant family grievance, and dispute such as make the effort of the good french cook unpalatable, and the most delicately-stuff sofa-cushion hard to lie on. "Iwould rather have a turnip, Strong, for dessert, than that pineapple, and all they Muscatel grape, from Clavering," say poor Lady Clavering, look at her dinner-table, and confide her grief to her faithful friend, "if I could but have a little quiet to eat it with. oh, how much happy I be when I be a widow and before all this money fall in to I!"
the Clavering family have indeed make a false start in life, and have get neither conduct, nor position, nor thank for the hospitality which they administer, nor a return of kindness from the people whom they entertain. the success of their first London season be doubtful; and their failure afterwards notorious. "human patience be not great enough to put up with Sir Francis Clavering," people say. "he be too hopelessly low, dull, and disreputable. you could not say what, but there be a taint about the house and its entourage. who be the Begum, with her money, and without her h's, and where do she come from? what an extraordinary little piece of conceit the daughter be, with her gallicised grace and daring affectation, not fit for well-breed english girl to associate with! what strange people be those they assemble round about they! Sir Francis Clavering be a gambler, live notoriously in the society of blackleg and profligate. hely Clinker, who be in his regiment, say that he not only cheat at card, but show the white feather. what could Lady Rockminster have mean by take she up? after the first season, indeed, Lady Rockminster, who have take up Lady Clavering, put she down; the great lady would not take their daughter to her party; the young man who attend they behave with the most odious freedom and scornful familiarity; and poor Lady Clavering herself avow that she be oblige to take what she call 'the canal' into her parlour, because the tip-top wouldnot come."
she have not the slight ill-will towards "the canal," the poor dear lady, or any pride about herself, or idea, that she be well than her neighbour; but she have take implicitly the order which on her entry into the world her social godmother have give she: she have be willing to know whom they know, and ask whom they ask. the "canal," in fact, be much pleasanter than what be call "society;" but, as we say before, that to leave a mistress be easy, while, on the contrary, to be leave by she be cruel: so you may give up society without any great pang, or anything but a sensation of relief at the parting; but severe be the mortification and pain you have if society give up you.
one young man of fashion we have mention, who at least it might have be expect would have be find faithful amongst the faithless, and Harry Foker, Esq., be indeed that young man. but he have not manage matter with prudence, and the unhappy passion at first confide to Pen become notorious and ridiculous to the town, be carry to the ear of his weak and fond mother; and finally bring under the cognisance of the bald-headed and inflexible Foker senior.
when Mr. Foker learn this disagreeable news, there take place between he and his son a violent and painful scene, which end in the poor little gentleman's banishment from England for a year, with a positive order to return at the expiration of that time and complete his marriage with his cousin, or to retire into private life and three hundred a year altogether, and never see parent or brewery more. Mr. Henry Foker go away then, carry with he that grief and care which pass free at the strict custom-house, and which proverbially accompany the exile; and with this crape over his eye, even the Parisian Boulevard look melancholy to he, and the sky of Italy black.
to Sir Francis Clavering, that year be a most unfortunate one. the event describe in the last chapter come to complete the ruin of the year. it be that year of grace in which, as our sporting reader may remember, Lord Harrowhill's horse (he be a classical young nobleman, and name his stud out of the Iliad)--when Podasokus win the Derby, to the dismay of the know one, who pronounce the win horse's name in various extraordinary way, and who back Borax, who be nowhere in the race. Sir Francis Clavering, who be intimate with some of the most rascally character of the turf, and, of course, have "valuable information," have lay heavy odd against the win horse, and back the favourite freely, and the result of his dealing be, as his son correctly state to poor Lady Clavering, a loss of seven thousand pound.
indeed, it be a cruel blow upon the lady, who have discharge her husband's debt many time over; who have receive as many time his oath and promise of amendment; who have pay his money-lender and horse-dealer; who have furnish his town and country house, and who be call upon now instantly to meet this enormous sum, the penalty of her cowardly husband's extravagance.
it have be describe in former page how the elder Pendennis have become the adviser of the Clavering family, and, in his quality of intimate friend of the house, have go over every room of ii, and even see that ugly closet which we all of we have, and in which, accord to the proverb, the family skeleton be lock up. about the Baronet's pecuniary matter, if the Major do not know, it be because clavering himself do not know they, and hide they from himself and other in such a hopeless entanglement of lie that it be impossible for adviser or attorney or principal to get an accurate knowledge of his affair. but, concern Lady Clavering, the Major be much well inform; and when the unlucky mishap of the Derby arise, he take upon himself to become completely and thoroughly acquaint with all her mean, whatsoever they be; and be now accurately inform of the vast and repeat sacrifice which the widow Amory have make in behalf of her present husband.
he do not conceal--and he have win no small favour from Miss Blanche by avow it--his opinion, that Lady Clavering's daughter have be hardly treat at the expense of her son, by her second marriage: and in his conversation with Lady Clavering have fairly hint that he think Miss Blanche ought to have a well provision. we have say that he have already give the widow to understand that he know all the particular of her early and unfortunate history, have be in India at the time when --when the painful circumstance occur which have end in her parting from her first husband. he could tell she where to find the Calcutta newspaper which contain the account of Amory's trial, and he show, and the Begum be not a little grateful to he for his forbearance, how, be aware all along of this mishap which have befall she, he have keep all knowledge of it to himself, and be constantly the friend of her family.
"interested motif, my dear Lady Clavering," he say, "of course I may have have. we all have interested motif, and mine, I donot conceal from you, be to make a marriage between my nephew and your daughter." to which Lady Clavering, perhaps with some surprise that the Major should choose her family for a union with his own, say she be quite willing to consent.
but frankly he say, "my dear lady, my boy have but five hundred a year, and a wife with ten thousand pound to her fortune would scarcely better he. we could do well for he than that, permit I to say, and he be a shrewd, cautious young fellow who have sow his wild oats now--who have very good part and plenty of ambition--and whose object in marry be to well himself. if you and Sir Francis choose--and Sir Francis, take my word for it, will refuse you nothing--you could put Arthur in a way to advance very considerably in the world, and show the stuff which he have in he. of what use be that seat in Parliament to Clavering, who scarcely ever show his face in the House, or speak a word there? Ibe tell by gentleman who hear my boy at Oxbridge, that he be famous as an orator, begad!--and once put his foot into the stirrup and mount he, Ihave no doubt he willnot be the last of the field, ma'am. Ihave test the chap, and know he pretty well, I think. he be much too lazy, and careless, and flighty a fellow, to make a jog-trot journey, and arrive, as your lawyer do, at the end of their life! but give he a start and good friend, and an opportunity, and take my word for it, hewill make himself a name that his son shall be proud of. I donot see any way for a fellow like he to parvenir, but by make a prudent marriage--not with a beggarly heiress-- to sit down for life upon a miserable fifteen hundred a year--but with somebody whom he can help, and who can help he forward in the world, and whom he can give a good name and a station in the country, begad, in return for the advantage which she bring he. it would be well for you to have a distinguished son-in-law, than to keep your husband on in Parliament, whobe of no good to himself or to anybody else there, and thatbe, I say, why Ihave be interested about you, and offer you what I think a good bargain for both."
"you know I look upon Arthur as one of the family almost now," say the good-natured Begum; "he come and go when he like; and the more I think of his dear mother, the more I see therebe few people so good--none so good to I. and Ibe sure I cry when I hear of her death, and would have go into mourning for her myself, only black donot become I. and I know who his mother want he to marry--Laura, I mean--whom old Lady Rockminster have take such a fancy to, and, no wonder. shebe a well girl than my girl. I know both. and my Betsy--Blanche, I mean--ain't be a comfort to I, Major. itbe Laura Pen ought to marry.
"Marry on five hundred a year! my dear good soul, you be mad!" Major Pendennis say. "think over what I have say to you. do nothing in your affair with that unhappy husband of your without consult I; and remember that old Pendennis be always your friend."
for some time previous, Pen's uncle have hold similar language to Miss Amory. he have point out to she the convenience of the match which he have at heart, and be bind to say, that mutual convenience be of all thing the very good in the world to marry upon--the only thing. "look at your love-marriage, my dear young creature. the love-match people be the most notorious of all for quarrel afterwards; and a girl who run away with Jack to Gretna Green, constantly run away with Tom to Switzerland afterwards. the great point in marriage be for people to agree to be useful to one another. the lady bring the mean, and the gentleman avail himself of they. my boy's wife bring the horse, and begad Pen go in and win the plate. thatbe what I call a sensible union. a couple like that have something to talk to each other about when they come together. if you have Cupid himself to talk to--if Blanche and Pen be Cupid and Psyche, begad--they'd begin to yawn after a few evening, if they have nothing but sentiment to speak on."
as for Miss Amory, she be content enough with Pen as long as there be nobody well. and how many other young lady be like her?--and how many love-marriage carry on well to the last?--and how sentimental firm do not finish in bankruptcy?--and how many heroic passion donot dwindle down into despicable indifference, or end in shameful defeat?
these view of life and philosophy the Major be constantly, accord to his custom, inculcate to Pen, whose mind be such that he could see the right on both side of many question, and, comprehend the sentimental life which be quite out of the reach of the honest Major's intelligence, could understand the practical life too, and accommodate himself, or think he could accommodate himself, to it. so it come to pass that during the spring succeed his mother's death he become a good deal under the influence of his uncle's advice, and domesticate in Lady Clavering's house; and in a measure be accept by Miss Amory without be a suitor, and be receive without be engage. the young people be extremely familiar, without be particularly sentimental, and meet and part with each other in perfect good-humour. "and I," think Pendennis, "be the fellow who eight year ago have a Grand passion, and last year be rag in a fever about Briseis!"
yes, it be the same Pendennis, and time have bring to he, as to the rest of we, its ordinary consequence, consolation, development. we alter very little. when we talk of this man or that woman be no long the same person whom we remember in youth, and remark (of course to deplore) change in our friend, we donot, perhaps, calculate that circumstance only bring out the latent defect or quality, and do not create it. the selfish languor and indifference of to-day's possession be the consequence of the selfish ardour of yesterday's pursuit: the scorn and weariness which cry vanita vanitatum be but the lassitude of the sick appetite pal with pleasure: the insolence of the successful parvenu be only the necessary continuance of the career of the needy struggler: our mental change be like our grey hair or our wrinkles-- but the fulfilment of the plan of mortal growth and decay: that which be snow-white now be glossy black once; that which be sluggish obesity to-day be boisterous rosy health a few year back; that calm weariness, benevolent, resign, and disappoint, be ambition, fierce and violent, but a few year since, and have only settle into submissive repose after many a battle and defeat. lucky he who can bear his failure so generously, and give up his broken sword to fate the Conqueror with a manly and humble heart! be you not awestricken, you, friendly reader, who, take the page up for a moment's light reading, lie it down, perchance, for a graver reflection,--to think how you, who have consummate your success or your disaster, may be hold mark station, or a hopeless and nameless place, in the crowd--who have pass through how many struggle of defeat, success, crime, remorse, to yourself only known!--who may have love and grow cold, weep and laugh again, how often!--to think how you be the same, You, whom in childhood you remember, before the voyage of life begin? it have be prosperous, and you be rid into port, the people huzzae and the gun saluting,--and the lucky captain bow from the ship's side, and there be a care under the star on his breast which nobody know of: or you be wreck, and lash, hopeless, to a solitary spar out at sea:--the sink man and the successful one be think each about home, very likely, and remember the time when they be child; alone on the hopeless spar, drown out of sight; alone in the midst of the crowd applaud you.
CHAPTER LXI
Conversations
our good-natured Begum be at first so much enraged at this last instance of her husband's duplicity and folly, that she refuse to give Sir Francis Clavering any aid in order to meet his debt of honour, and declare that she would separate from he, and leave he to the consequence of his incorrigible weakness and waste. after that fatal day's transaction at the Derby, the unlucky gambler be in such a condition of mind that he be disposed to avoid everybody; alike his turf-associate with whom he have make the debt which he tremble lest he should not have the mean of pay, and his wife, his long-suffer banker, on whom he reasonably doubt whether he should be allow any long to draw. when Lady Clavering ask the next morning whether Sir Francis be in the house, she receive answer that he have not return that night, but have send a messenger to his valet, order he to forward clothe and letter by the bearer. Strong know that he should have a visit or a message from he in the course of that or the subsequent day, and accordingly get a note beseech he to call upon his distracted friend F. C. at Short Hotel, Blackfriars, and ask for Mr. Francis there. for the Baronet be a gentleman of that peculiarity of mind that he would rather tell a lie than not, and always begin a contest with fortune by run away and hide himself. the boot of Mr. Short's establishment, who carry Clavering's message to Grosvenor Place, and bring back his carpet-bag, be instantly aware who be the owner of the bag, and he impart his information to the footman who be lay the breakfast-table, who carry down the news to the servants'-hall, who take it to Mrs. Bonner, my lady's housekeeper and confidential maid, who carry it to my lady. and thus every single person in the Grosvenor Place establishment know that Sir Francis be in hiding, under the name of Francis, at an inn in the Blackfriars Road. and Sir Francis's coachman tell the news to other gentleman's coachman, who carry it to their master, and to the neighbouring Tattersall's, where very gloomy anticipation be form that Sir Francis Clavering be about to make a tour in the Levant.
in the course of that day the number of letter address to Sir Francis Clavering, Bart., which find their way to his hall-table, be quite remarkable. the french cook send in his account to my lady; the tradesman who supply her ladyship's table, and Messrs. Finer and Gimcrack, the mercer and ornamental dealer, and Madame Crinoline, the eminent milliner, also forward their little bill to her ladyship, in company with Miss Amory's private, and by no mean inconsiderable, account at each establishment.
in the afternoon of the day after the Derby, when Strong (after a colloquy with his principal at Short's Hotel, whom he find cry and drink Curacoa) call to transact business accord to his custom at Grosvenor Place, he find all these suspicious document range in the Baronet's study; and begin to open they and examine they with a rueful countenance.
Mrs. Bonner, my lady's maid and housekeeper, come down upon he whilst engage in this occupation. Mrs. Bonner, a part of the family and as necessary to her mistress as the Chevalier be to Sir Francis, be of course on Lady Clavering's side in the dispute between she and her husband, and as by duty bind even more angry than her ladyship herself.
"she willnot pay, if she take my advice," Mrs. Bonner say. "youwill please to go back to Sir Francis, Captain--and he lurk about in a low public-house and donot dare to face his wife like a man!--and say that we willnot pay his debt no long. we make a man of he, we take he out of gaol (and other folk too perhaps), wehave pay his debt over and over again--we set he up in Parliament and give he a house in town and country, and where he donot dare show his face, the shabby sneak! wehave give he the horse he rid and the dinner he eat and the very clothe he have on his back; and we will give he no more. our fortune, such as be leave of it, be leave to ourselves, and we willnot waste any more of it on this ungrateful man. wewill give he enough to live upon and leave he, thatbe what wewill do: and thatbe what you may tell he from Susan Bonner."
Susan Bonner's mistress hearing of Strong's arrival send for he at this juncture, and the Chevalier go up to her ladyship not without hope that he should find she more tractable than her factotum Mrs. Bonner. many a time before have he plead his client's cause with Lady Clavering and cause her good-nature to relent. he try again once more. he paint in dismal colour the situation in which he have find Sir Francis: and would not answer for any consequence which might ensue if he could not find mean of meet his engagement.
"kill hisself," laugh Mrs. Bonner, "kill hisself, will he? die's the good thing he could do." Strong vow that he have find he with the razor on the table; but at this, in her turn, Lady Clavering laugh bitterly. "hewill do himself no harm, as long as therebe a shilling left of which he can rob a poor woman. his lifebe quite safe, captain: you may depend upon that. ah! it be a bad day that ever I set eye on he."
"hebe bad than the first man," cry out my lady's aide-de-camp. "he be a man, he be--a wild devil, but he have the courage of a man--whereas this fellow--whatbe the use of my lady pay his bill, and sell her diamond, and forgive he? hewill be as bad again next year. the very next chance he have hewill be a-cheating of she, and rob of she; and her money will go to keep a pack of rogue and swindler--I donot mean you, Captain--you've be a good friend to we enough, bat we wish wewould never set eye on you."
the Chevalier see from the word which Mrs. Bonner have let slip regard the diamond, that the kind Begum be dispose to relent once more at least, and that there be hope still for his principal.
"upon my word, ma'am," he say, with a real feeling of sympathy for Lady Clavering's trouble, and admiration for her untiring good-nature, and with a show of enthusiasm which advance not a little his graceless patron's cause--"anything you say against Clavering, or Mrs. Bonner here cry out against I, be no well than we deserve, both of we, and it be an unlucky day for you when you see either. he have behave cruelly to you and if you be not the most generous and forgiving woman in the world, I know there would be no chance for he. but you cannot let the father of your son be a disgrace man, and send little Frank into the world with such a stain upon he. tie he down; bind he by any promise you like: I vouch for he that he will subscribe they."
"and break them," say Mrs. Bonner.
"and keep them this time," cry out Strong. "he must keep they. if you could have see how he weep, ma'am! 'oh, Strong,' he say to I, 'itbe not for myself I feel now: itbe for my boy--itbe for the good woman in England, whom I have treat basely--I know I have.' he donot intend to bet upon this race, ma'am--indeed he donot. he be cheat into it: all the ring be take in. he think he might make the bet quite safely, without the least risk. and it will be a lesson to he for all his life long. to see a man cry--oh, itbe dreadful."
"he donot think much of make my dear missus cry," say Mrs. Bonner-- "poor dear soul!--look if he do, Captain."
* * * * * *
"if youhave the soul of a man, clavering," Strong say to his principal, when he recount this scene to he, "youwill keep your promise this time: and, so help I Heaven! if you break word with she, Iwill turn against you, and tell all."
"what all?" cry Mr. Francis, to whom his ambassador bring the news back at Short's Hotel, where Strong find the Baronet cry and drinking curacoa.
"Psha! do you suppose I be a fool?" burst out Strong. "do you suppose I could have live so long in the world, Frank Clavering, without have my eye about I? you know I have but to speak and you be a beggar to-morrow. and I be not the only man who know your secret."
"who else do?" gasp Clavering.
"Old Pendennis do, or I be very much mistaken. he recognise the man the first night he see he, when he come drunk into your house."
"he know it, do he?" shriek out Clavering. "damn he--kill he."
"youwould like to kill we all, wouldnot you, old boy?" say Strong, with a sneer, puff his cigar.
the Baronet dash his weak hand against his forehead; perhaps the other have interpret his wish rightly. "oh, Strong!" he cry, "if I dare, Iwould put an end to myself, for Ibe the d----- miserable dog in all England. itbe that that make I so wild and reckless. itbe that which make I take to drink" (and he drank, with a trembling hand, a bumper of his fortifier--the curacoa), "and to live about with these thief. I know theybe thief, every one of them, d----d thief. and--and how can I help it?--and I donot know it, you know--and, by Gad, Ibe innocent-- and until I see the d----d scoundrel first, I know no more about it than the dead--and Iwill fly, and Iwill go abroad out of the reach of the confounded hell, and Iwill bury myself in a forest, by Gad! and hang myself up to a tree--and, oh--i'm the most miserable beggar in all England!" and so with more tear, shriek, and curse, the impotent wretch vent his grief and deplore his unhappy fate; and, in the midst of groan and despair and blasphemy, vow his miserable repentance.
the honoured proverb which declare that to be an ill wind which blow good to nobody, be verify in the case of Sir Francis Clavering, and another of the occupant of Mr. Strong's chamber in Shepherd's Inn. the man be "good," by a lucky hap, with whom Colonel Altamont make his bet; and on the settle day of the Derby--as Captain Clinker, who be appoint to settle Sir Francis Clavering's book for he (for Lady Clavering by the advice of Major Pendennis, would not allow the Baronet to liquidate his own money transaction), pay over the note to the Baronet's many creditor--Colonel Altamont have the satisfaction of receive the odd of thirty to one in fifty, which he have take against the win horse of the day.
number of the Colonel's friend be present on the occasion to congratulate he on his luck--all Altamont's own set, and the gent who meet in the private parlour of the convivial Wheeler, my host of the Harlequin's Head, come to witness their comrade's good fortune, and would have like, with a generous sympathy for success, to share in it. "now be the time," Tom Driver have suggest to the Colonel, "to have up the specie ship that be sink in the Gulf of Mexico, with the three hundred and eighty thousand dollar on board, besides bar and doubloon." "the Tredyddlums be very low--to be buy for an old song--never be such an opportunity for buy share," Mr. Keightley insinuate; and Jack Holt press forward his tobacco-smuggling scheme, the audacity of which please the Colonel more than any other of the speculation propose to he. then of the Harlequin's Head boy: there be Jack Rackstraw, who know of a pair of horse which the Colonel must buy; Tom Fleet, whose satirical paper, the Swell, want but two hundred pound of capital to be worth a thousand a year to any man--"with such a power and influence, Colonel, you rogue, and the entree of the green-room in London," Tom urge; whilst little Moss Abiams entreat the Colonel not to listen to these absurd fellow with their humbug speculation, but to invest his money in some good bill which Moss could get for he, and which would return he fifty per cent as safe as the Bank of England.
each and all of these worthy come round the Colonel with their various blandishment; but he have courage enough to resist they, and to button up his note in the pocket of his coat, and go home to Strong, and "sport" the outer door of the chamber. Honest Strong have give his fellow-lodger good advice about all his acquaintance; and though, when press, he do not mind frankly take twenty pound himself out of the Colonel's winning, Strong be a great deal too upright to let other cheat he.
he be not a bad fellow when in good fortune, this Altamont. he order a smart livery for Grady, and make poor old Costigan shed tear of quickly dry gratitude by give he a five-pound note after a snug dinner at the Back Kitchen, and he buy a green shawl for Mrs. Bolton, and a yellow one for Fanny: the most brilliant "sacrifice" of a Regent Street haberdasher's window. and a short time after this, upon her birthday, which happen in the month of June, Miss Amory receive from "a friend" a parcel contain an enormous brass inlay writing-desk, in which there be a set of amethyst, the most hideous eye ever look upon,--a musical snuff-box, and two Keepsakes of the year before last, and accompany with a couple of gown piece of the most astounding colour, the receipt of which good make the Sylphide laugh and wonder immoderately. now it be a fact that Colonel Altamont have make a purchase of cigar and french silk from some duffer in Fleet Street about this period; and he be find by Strong in the open Auction Room in Cheapside, have invest some money in two desk, several pair of richly-plat candlestick, a dinner epergne, and a bagatelle-board. the dinner epergne remain at chamber, and figure at the banquet there, which the Colonel give pretty freely. it seem beautiful in his eye, until Jack Holt say it look as if it have be take "in a bill." and Jack Holt certainly know.
the dinner be pretty frequent at chamber, and Sir Francis Clavering condescend to partake of they constantly. his own house be shut up: the successor of Mirobolant, who have send in his bill so prematurely, be dismiss by the indignant Lady Clavering: the luxuriance of the establishment be greatly prune and reduce. one of the large footman be cashier, upon which the other give warning, not like to serve without his mate, or in a family where on'y one footman be kep'. General and severe economical reform be practise by the Begum in her whole household, in consequence of the extravagance of which her graceless husband have be guilty. the Major, as her ladyship's friend; Strong, on the part of poor Clavering; her ladyship's lawyer, and the honest Begum herself, execute these reform with promptitude and severity. after pay the Baronet's debt, the settlement of which occasion considerable public scandal, and cause the Baronet to sink even lower in the world's estimation than he have be before, Lady Clavering quit London for Tunbridge Wells in high dudgeon, refuse to see her reprobate husband, whom nobody pity. Clavering remain in London patiently, by no mean anxious to meet his wife's just indignation, and sneak in and out of the House of Commons, whence he and Captain Raff and Mr. Marker would go to have a game at billiard and a cigar or show in the sport public-house; or might be see lurk about Lincoln's Inn and his lawyer', where the principal keep he for hour wait, and the clerk wink at each other, as he sate in their office. no wonder that he relish the dinner at Shepherd's Inn, and be perfectly resign there: resign? he be so happy nowhere else; he be wretched amongst his equal, who scorn he--but here he be the chief guest at the table, where they continually address he with "yes, Sir Francis" and "no, Sir Francis," where he tell his wretched joke, and where he quaver his dreary little french song, after Strong have sing his Jovial chorus, and honest Costigan have pip his irish ditty. such a jolly menage as Strong's, with Grady's irish-stew, and the Chevalier's brew of punch after dinner, would have be welcome to many a well man than Clavering, the solitude of whose great house at home frighten he, where he be attend only by the old woman who keep the house, and his valet who sneer at he.
"yes, dammit," say he to his friend in Shepherd's Inn, "that fellow of mine, I must turn he away, only I owe he two year' wage, curse he, and cannot ask my lady. he bring I my tea cold of a morning, with a dem'd leaden teaspoon, and he say my lady's send all the plate to the banker's because it benot safe.--Now benot it hard that she willnot trust I with a single teaspoon; benot it ungentlemanlike, Altamont? you know my lady's of low birth--that be--I beg your pardon--hem--that is, itbe most cruel of she not to show more confidence in I. and the very servant begin to laugh--the damn scoundrel! I break every bone in their great hulking body, curse them, I will.--they donot answer my bell: and --and my man be at Vauxhall last night with one of my dress-shirt and my velvet waistcoat on, I know it be mine--the confound impudent blackguard--and he go on dancing before my eye confound he! Ibe sure hewill live to be hang--he deserve to be hang--all those infernal rascal of valet."
he be very kind to Altamont now: he listen to the Colonel's loud story when Altamont describe how--when he be work his way home once from New Zealand, where he have be on a whale expedition--he and his comrade have be oblige to slink on board at night, to escape from their wife, by Jove--and how the poor devil put out in their canoe when they see the ship under sail, and paddle madly after she: how he have be lose in the bush once for three month in New South Wales, when he be there once on a trading speculation: how he have see Boney at Saint Helena, and be present to he with the rest of the officer of the Indiaman of which he be a mate--to all these tale (and over his cup Altamont tell many of they; and, it must be own, lie and brag a great deal) Sir Francis now listen with great attention; make a point of drink wine with Altamont at dinner and of treat he with every distinction.
"leave he alone, I know what hebe a-come to," Altamont say, laugh to Strong, who remonstrate with he, "and leave I alone; I know what Ibe a-telling, very well. I be officer on board an Indiaman, so I be; I trade to New South Wales, so I do, in a ship of my own, and lose she. I become officer to the Nawaub, so I do; only I and my royal master have have a difference, Strong--thatbe it. whobe the well or the bad for what I tell? or know anything about I? the other chap be dead--shoot in the bush, and his body reckonise at Sydney. if I think anybody would split, do you think I wouldnot wring his neck? Ihave do as good before now, Strong--I tell you how I do for the overseer before I take leave-- but in fair fight, I mean--in fair fight; or, rayther, he have the good of it. he have his gun and bay'net, and I have only an axe. fifty of them see it--ay, and cheer I when I do it--and Iwould do it again,--him, wouldnot I? I benot afraid of anybody; and Iwould have the life of the man who split upon I. thatbe my maxim, and pass I the liquor.--You wouldnot turn on a man. I know you. yoube an honest feller, and will stand by a feller, and have look death in the face like a man. but as for that lily-livere sneak--that poor lyin' swindlin' cringin' cur of a Clavering--who stand in my shoe--stand in my shoe, hang he! Iwill make he pull my boot off and clean them, I will. ha, ha!" here he burst out into a wild laugh, at which Strong get up and put away the brandy-bottle. the other still laugh good-humouredly. "yoube right, old boy," he say; "you always keep your head cool, you do--and when I begin to talk too much--I say, when I begin to pitch, I authorise you, and order you, and command you, to put away the rum-bottle."
"take my counsel, Altamont," Strong say, gravely, "and mind how you deal with that man. donot make it too much his interest to get rid of you; or who know what he may do?"
the event for which, with cynical enjoyment, Altamont have be on the look-out, come very speedily. one day, Strong be absent upon an errand for his principal, Sir Francis make his appearance in the chamber, and find the envoy of the Nawaub alone. he abuse the world in general for be heartless and unkind to he: he abuse his wife for be ungenerous to he; he abuse Strong for be ungrateful--hundred of pound have he give Ned Strong--be his friend for life and keep he out of gaol, by Jove,--and now Ned be take her ladyship's side against he and abet she in her infernal unkind treatment of he. "theyhave enter into a conspiracy to keep I penniless, Altamont," the Baronet say: "they donot give I as much pocket money as Frank have at school,"
"why donot you go down to Richmond and borrow of he, Clavering?" Altamont break out with a savage laugh. "he wouldnot see his poor old beggar of a father without pocket-money, would he?"
"I tell you, Ihave be oblige to humiliate myself cruelly" Clavering say. "look here, sir--look here, at these pawn-ticket! Fancy a Member of Parliament and an old English Baronet, by Gad! oblige to put a drawing-room clock and a buhl inkstand up the spout; and a gold duck's-head paper-holder, that I dare say cost my wife five pound, for which theywould only give I fifteen-and-six! oh, itbe a humiliating thing, sir, poverty to a man of my habit; and itbe make I shed tear, sir,-- tear; and that d----d valet of mine--curse he, I wish he be hanged!-- he have the confound impudence to threaten to tell my lady: as the thing in my own house benot my own, to sell or to keep, or fle out of window if I choose--by Gad! the confounded scoundrel.
"cry a little; donot mind cryin' before I--it'll relieve you clavering," the other say. "why, I say, old feller, what a happy feller I once think you, and what a miserable son of a gun you really be!"
"itbe a shame that they treat I so, benot it?" clavering go on,--for, though ordinarily silent and apathetic, about his own grief the Baronet could whine for an hour at a time. "and--and, by Gad, sir, I havenot get the money to pay the very cab thatbe wait for I at the door; and the porteress, that Mrs. Bolton, lend I three shillin's, and I donot like to ask she for any more: and I ask that d----d old Costigan, the confound old penniless irish miscreant, and he havenot get a shillin', the beggar; and Campionbe out of town, or else hewould do a little bill for I, I know he would."
"I think you swear on your honour to your wife that you wouldnot put your name to paper," say Mr. Altamont, puff at his cigar.
"why do she leave I without pocket-money, then? Damme, I must have money," cry out the Baronet. "oh, Am----, oh, Altamont, Ibe the most miserable beggar alive."
"youwould like a chap to lend you a twenty-pound note, wouldnot you now?" the other ask.
"if you would, Iwould be grateful to you for ever--for ever, my dear friend," cry Clavering.
"how much would you give? will you give a fifty-pound bill, at six month, for half down and half in plate?" ask Altamont.
"yes, I would, so help me----, and pay it on the day," scream Clavering. "Iwill make it payable at my banker's: Iwill do anything you like."
"well, I be only chaff you. Iwill give you twenty pound."
"you say a pony," interpose Clavering; "my dear fellow, you say a pony, and Iwill be eternally oblige to you; and Iwill not take it as a gift--only as a loan, and pay you back in six month. I take my oath, I will."
"well--well--therebe the money, Sir Francis Clavering. I benot a bad fellow. when Ihave money in my pocket, dammy, I spend it like a man. here's five-and-twenty for you. donot be lose it at the hell now. donot be make a fool of yourself. go down to Clavering Park, and itwill keep you ever so long. you neednot 'ave butcher' meat: therebe pig, I dare say, on the premise: and you can shoot rabbit for dinner, you know, every day till the game come in. besides, the neighbour will ask you about to dinner, you know, sometimes: for you be a Baronet, though you have outrun the constable. and youhave get this comfort, that Ibe off your shoulder for a good bit to come--p'raps this two year--if I donot play; and I donot intend to touch the confound black and red: and by that time my lady, as you call she--Jimmy, I use to say--will have come round again; and youwill be ready for I, you know, and come down handsomely to yours truly."
at this juncture of their conversation Strong return, nor do the Baronet care much about prolong the talk, have get the money: and he make his way from Shepherd's Inn, and go home and bully his servant in a manner so unusually brisk and insolent that the man conclude his master must have pawn some more of the house furniture, or, at any rate, have come into possession of some ready money.
* * * * * *
"and yet Ihave look over the house, Morgan, and I donot thin he have take any more of the thing," Sir Francis's valet say to Major Pendennis's man, as they meet at their Club soon after. "my lady lock up a'most all the bejews afore she go away, and he couldnot take away the picter and look-glass in a cab and he wouldnot spout the fender and fire-iron--he benot so bad as that. but hebe get money somehow. hebe so dam'd imperent when he have. a few night ago I sor he at Vauxhall, where I be a-polkin with Lady Hemly Babewood's gal--a wery pleasant room that be, and an uncommon good lot in it, hall except the 'ousekeeper, and shebe methodisticle--I be a-polkin--you're too old a cove to polk, Mr. Morgan--and 'erebe your 'ealth--and I 'appened to 'ave on some of Clavering's abberdashery, and he sor it too: and he donot dare so much as speak a word."
"how about the house in St. John's Wood?" Mr. Morgan ask.
"execution in it.--Sold up heverythin: pony, and pianna, and brougham, and all. Mrs. Montague be hoff to Boulogne,--non e inwentus, Mr. Morgan. itbe my belief she put the execution in herself: and be tired of he."
"play much?" ask Morgan.
"not since the smash. when your governor, and the lawyer, and my lady and he have that tremendous scene: he go down on his knee, my lady tell Mrs. Bonner, as tell me,--and swear as he never more would touch a card or a dice, or put his name to a bit of paper; and my lady be a-go to give he the note down to pay his liability after the race: only your Governor say (which he write it on a piece of paper, and pass it across the table to the lawyer and my lady) that some one else have well book up for he, for hewould have kep' some of the money. hebe a sly old cove, your Gov'nor."
the expression of "old cove," thus flippantly apply by the young gentleman to himself and his master, displease Mr. Morgan exceedingly. on the first occasion, when Mr. Lightfoot use the obnoxious expression, his comrade's anger be only indicate by a silent frown; but on the second offence, Morgan, who be smoke his cigar elegantly, and hold it on the tip of his penknife, withdraw the cigar from his lip, and take his young friend to task.
"donot call Major Pendennis an old cove, if youwill 'ave the goodness, Lightfoot, and donot call I an old cove, nether. such word benot use in society; and we have live in the fust society, both at 'ome and foring. wehave be intimate with the fust statesmen of Europe. when we go abroad we dine with Prince Metternitch and Louy Philup reg'lar. we go here to the good house, the tip-top, I tell you. we ride with Lord John and the noble Whycount at the edd of Foring Affairs. we dine with the Hearl of Burgrave, and be consult by the Marquis of Steyne in everythink. we ought to know a thing or two, Mr. Lightfoot. yoube a young man, Ibe an old cove, as you say. wehave both see the world, and we both know that it benot money, nor bein' a Baronet, nor 'avin' a town and country 'ouse, nor a paltry five or six thousand a year."
"itbe ten, Mr. Morgan," cry Mr. Lightfoot, with great animation.
"it may have be, sir," Morgan say, with calm severity; "it may have be, Mr. Lightfoot, but it benot six now, nor five, sir. itbe be doosedly dip and cut into, sir, by the confounded extravygance of your master, with his helbow shakin', and his bill discountin', and his cottage in the Regency Park, and his many wickedness. hebe a bad un, Mr. Lightfoot,--a bad lot, sir, and that you know. and it benot money, sir--not such money as that, at any rate, come from a Calcuttar attorney, and I dussay wrung out of the pore starve black--that will give a pusson position in society, as you know very well. wehave no money, but we go everywhere; therebe not a housekeeper's room, sir, in this town of any consiquince, where James Morgan benot welcome. and it be I who get you into this Club, Lightfoot, as you very well know, though I be an old cove, and they would have blackball you without I as sure as your name be Frederic."
"I know they would, Mr. Morgan," say the other, with much humility.
"well, then, donot call I an old cove, sir. it benot gentlemanlike, Frederic Lightfoot, which I know you when you be a cab-boy, and when your father be in trouble, and get you the place you have now when the Frenchman go away. and if you think, sir, that because yoube make up to Mrs. Bonner, who may have save her two thousand pound--and I dare say she have in five-and-twenty year as she have live confidential maid to Lady Clavering--yet, sir, you must remember who put you into that service; and who know what you be before, sir, and it donot become you, Frederic Lightfoot, to call I an old cove."
"I beg your pardon, Mr. Morgan--I cannot do more than make an apology-- will you have a glass, sir, and let I drink your 'ealth?"
"you know I donot take sperrit. Lightfoot," reply Morgan, appease. "and so you and Mrs. Bonner be go to put up together, be you?"
"shebe old, but two thousand pound's a good bit, you see, Mr Morgan. and wewill get the 'Clavering arm' for a very little; and thatwill be no bad thing when the railroad run through Clavering. and when we be there, I hope youwill come and see we, Mr. Morgan."
"itbe a stoopid place, and no society," say Mr. Morgan. "I know it well. in Mrs Pendennis's time we use to go down, reg'lar, and the hair refresh I after the London racket."
"the railroad will improve Mr. Arthur's property," remark Lightfoot. "whatbe about the figure of it, should you say, sir?"
"under fifteen hundred, sir," answer Morgan; at which the other, who know the extent of poor Arthur's acre, thrust his tongue in his cheek, but remain wisely silent.
"be his man any good, Mr. Morgan?" Lightfoot resume.
"Pidgeon benot use to society as yet; but hebe young and have good talent, and have read a good deal, and I dessay he will do very well," reply Morgan. "he wouldnot quite do for this kind of thing, Lightfoot, for he benot see the world yet."
when the pint of sherry for which Mr. Lightfoot call, upon Mr. Morgan's announcement that he ecline to drink spirit, have be discuss by the two gentleman, who hold the wine up to the light, and smack their lip, and wink their eye at it, and rally the landlord as to the vintage, in the most approve manner of connoisseur, Morgan's ruffled equanimity be quite restore, and he be prepared to treat his young friend with perfect good-humour.
"what d'you think about Miss Amory, Lightfoot--tell we in confidence, now--do you think we should do well--you understand--if we make Miss a. into Mrs. A. P., comprendy vous?"
"she and her Mabe always quarrellin'," say Mr. Lightfoot. "Bonner be more than a match for the old lady, and treat Sir Francis like that-- like this year spill, which I fling into the grate. but she darenot say a word to Miss Amory. no more dare none of we. when a visitor come in, she smile and languishe, youwould think that butter wouldnot melt in her mouth: and the minute he be go, very likely, she flare up like a little demon, and say thing fit to send you wild. if Mr. Arthur come, itbe 'do letus sing that there delightful Song!' or, 'come and write I they pooty verse in this halbum!' and very likely shebe be a-rilin' her mother, or stick pin into her maid, a minute before. she do stick pin into she and pinch she. Mary Hann show I one of her arm quite black and blue; and I recklect Mrs. Bonner, whobe as jealous of I as a old cat, box her ear for show I. and then you should see Miss at luncheon, when therebe nobody but the family! she make b'leave she never heat, and my! you should only jest see she. she have Mary Hann to bring she up plum-cake and cream into her bedroom; and the cook's the only man in the house shebe civil to. Bonner say, how, the second season in London, Mr. Soppington be a-go to propose for she, and actially come one day, and sor she fle a book into the fire, and scold her mother so, that he go down softly by the back droring-room door, which he come in by; and next thing we hear of he be, he be married to Miss Rider. oh, shebe a devil, that little Blanche, and thatbe my candig apinium, Mr. Morgan."
"Apinion, not apinium, Lightfoot, my good fellow," Mr. Morgan say, with parental kindness, and then ask of his own bosom with a sigh, why the deuce do my Governor want Master Arthur to marry such a girl as this? and the tete-a-tete of the two gentleman be break up by the entry of other gentleman, member of the Club--when fashionable town-talk, politic, cribbage, and other amusement ensue, and the conversation become general.
the Gentleman's Club be hold in the parlour of the Wheel of Fortune public-house, in a snug little by-lane, lead out of one of the great street of Mayfair, and frequent by some of the most select gentleman about town. their master' affair, debt, intrigue, adventure; their lady' good and bad quality and quarrel with their husband; all the family secret be here discuss with perfect freedom and confidence, and here, when about to enter into a new situation, a gentleman be enable to get every requisite information regard the family of which he propose to become a member. livery it may be imagine be exclude from this select precinct; and the powdered head of the large metropolitan footman might bow down in vain entreating admission into the Gentleman's Club. these outcast giant in plush take their beer in an outer apartment of the Wheel of Fortune, and could no more get an entry into the Clubroom than a Pall Mall tradesman or a Lincoln's Inn attorney could get admission into Bays's or Spratt's. and it be because the conversation which we have permit to overhear here, in some measure explain the character and bearing of our story, that we have venture to introduce the reader into a society so exclusive.
CHAPTER LXII
the Way of the World
a short time after the piece of good fortune which befell Colonel Altamont at Epsom, that gentleman put into execution his project foreign tour, and the chronicler of the polite world who go down to London Bridge for the purpose of take leave of the people of fashion who quit this country, announce that among the company on board the Soho to Antwerp last Saturday, be "Sir Robert, Lady, and the Misses Hodge; Mr. Serjeant Kewsy, and Mrs. and Miss Kewsy; Colonel Altamont, Major Coddy, etc." the Colonel travel in state, and as become a gentleman: he appear in a rich travel costume; he drink brandy-and-water freely during the passage, and be not sick, as some of the other passenger be; and he be attend by his body-servant; the faithful Irish legionary who have be for some time in wait upon himself and Captain Strong in their chamber of Shepherd's Inn.
the Chevalier partook of a copious dinner at Blackwall with his depart friend the Colonel, and one or two other, who drink many health to Altamont at that liberal gentleman's expense. "strong, old boy," the Chevalier's worthy chum say, "if you want a little money, nowbe your time. Ibe your man. yoube a good feller, and have be a good feller to I, and a twenty-pound note, more or less, will make no odd to I," but Strong say, no, he donot want any money; he be flush, quite flush-- "that be, not flush enough to pay you back your last loan, Altamont, but quite able to carry on for some time to come," and so, with a not uncordial greeting between they, the two part. have the possession of money really make Altamont more honest and amiable than he have hitherto be, or only cause he to seem more amiable in Strong's eye? perhaps he really be well, and money improve he. perhaps it be the beauty of wealth Strong see and respect. but he argue within himself, "this poor devil, this unlucky outcast of a return convict, be ten time as good a fellow as my friend Sir Francis Clavering, Bart. he have pluck and honesty in his way. he will stick to a friend, and face an enemy. the other never have courage to do either. and what be it that have put the poor devil under a cloud? he be only a little wild, and sign his father-in-law's name. many a man have do bad, and come to no wrong, and hold his head up. clavering do. no, he donot hold his head up: he never do in his good day." and Strong, perhaps, repent he of the falsehood which he have tell to the free-handed Colonel, that he be not in want of money; but it be a falsehood on the side of honesty, and the Chevalier could not bring down his stomach to borrow a second time from his outlawed friend. besides, he could get on. clavering have promise he some: not that Clavering's promise be much to be believe, but the Chevalier be of a hopeful turn, and trust in many chance of catch his patron, and waylay some of those stray remittance and supply, in the procuring of which for his principal lie Mr. Strong's chief business.
he have grumble about Altamont's companionship in the Shepherd's Inn chamber; but he find those lodging more glum now without his partner than with he. the solitary life be not agreeable to his social soul; and he have get into extravagant and luxurious habit, too, have a servant at his command to run his errand, to arrange his toilet, and to cook his meal. it be rather a grand and touching sight now to see the portly and handsome gentleman paint his own boot, and broil his own mutton chop. it have be before state that the Chevalier have a wife, a spanish lady of Vittoria, who have go back to her friend, after a few month' union with the Captain, whose head she break with a dish. he begin to think whether he should not go back and see his Juanita. the Chevalier be grow melancholy after the departure of his friend the Colonel; or, to use his own picturesque expression, be "down on his luck." these moment of depression and interval of ill fortune occur constantly in the life of hero; Marius at Minturme, Charles Edward in the Highlands, Napoleon before Elba. what great man have not be call upon to face evil fortune?
from Clavering no supply be to be have for some time, the five-and-twenty pound or the "pony," which the exemplary Baronet have receive from Mr. Altamont, have flee out of Clavering's keeping as swiftly as many previous pony. he have be down the river with a choice party of sporting gent, who dodge the police and land in Essex, where they put up Billy Bluck to fight Dick the cabman whom the Baronet back, and who have it all his own way for thirteen round, when, by an unlucky blow in the windpipe, Billy kill he. "itbe always my luck, Strong," Sir Francis say; "the betting be three to one on the cabman, and I think myself as sure of thirty pound, as if I have it in my pocket. and dammy, I owe my man Lightfoot fourteen pound now which hebe lend and pay for I: and he dun I--the confound impudent blackguard: and I wish to Heaven I know any way of get a bill do, or of screw a little out of my lady! Iwill give you half, Ned, upon my soul and honour, Iwill give you half if you can get anybody to do we a little fifty."
but Ned say sternly that he have give his word of honour, as a gentleman, that he would be no party to any future bill transaction in which her husband might engage (who have give his word of honour too), and the Chevalier say that he, at least, would keep his word, and would black his own boot all his life rather than break his promise. and what be more, he vow he would advise Lady Clavering that Sir Francis be about to break his faith towards she upon the very first hint which he could get that such be Clavering's intention.
upon this information Sir Francis Clavering, accord to his custom, cry and curse very volubly. he speak of death as his only resource. he besought and implore his dear Strong, his good friend, his dear old Ned, not to throw he over: and when he quit his dear Ned, as he go down the stair of Shepherd's Inn, swore and blaspheme at Ned as the most infernal villain, and traitor, and blackguard, and coward under the sun, and wish Ned be in his grave, and in a bad place, only he would like the confound ruffian to live, until Frank Clavering have have his revenge out of he.
in Strong's chamber the Baronet meet a gentleman whose visit be now, as it have be show, very frequent in Shepherd's Inn, Mr. Samuel Huxter, of Clavering. that young fellow, who have poach the walnut in Clavering Park in his youth, and have see the Baronet drive through the street at home with four horse, and prance up to church with powdered footman, have an immense respect for his Member, and a prodigious delight in make his acquaintance. he introduce himself with much blushing and trepidation, as a Clavering man--son of Mr. Huxter, of the market-place--father attend Sir Francis's keeper, Coxwood, when his gun burst and take off three finger--proud to make Sir Francis's acquaintance. all of which introduction Sir Francis receive affably. and honest Huxter talk about Sir Francis to the chap at Bartholomew's: and tell Fanny, in the lodge, that, after all, there be nothing like a thoroughbred un, a regular good old english gentleman, one of the olden time! to which Fanny reply, that she think Sir Francis be an ojous creature--she donot know why-- but she couldnot abear he--she be sure he be wicked, and low, and mean--she know he be; and when Sam to this reply that Sir Francis be very affable, and have borrow half a sov' of he quite kindly, Fanny burst into a laugh, pull Sam's long hair (which be not yet of irreproachable cleanliness), pat his chin, and call he a stoopid, stoopid, old foolish stoopid, and say that Sir Francis be always borrere money of everybody, and that Mar have actially refuse he twice, and have have to wait three month to get seven shilling which he have borrow of 'er.
"donot say 'er but she, borrer but borrow, actially but actually, Fanny," Mr. Huxter reply--not to a fault in her argument, but to grammatical error in her statement.
"well then, she, and borrow, and hactually--there then, you stoopid," say the other; and the scholar make such a pretty face that the grammar master be quickly appease, and would have willingly give she a hundred more lesson on the spot at the price which he take for that one.
of course Mrs. Bolton be by, and I suppose that Fanny and Dr. Sam be on exceedingly familiar and confidential term by this time, and that time have bring to the former certain consolation, and soothe certain regret, which be deucedly bitter when they occur, but which be, no more than tooth-pulling, or any other pang, eternal.
as you sit, surround by respect and affection; happy, honour, and flatter in your old age; your foible gently indulge; your least word kindly cherish; your garrulous old story receive for the hundredth time with dutiful forbearance, and never-fail hypocritical smile; the woman of your house constant in their flattery; the young man hush and attentive when you begin to speak; the servant awestricken; the tenant cap in hand, and ready to act in the place of your worship's horse when your honour take a drive--it have often strike you, o thoughtful dive! that this respect, and these glory, be for the main part transfer, with your fee-simple, to your successor--that the servant will bow, and the tenant shout, for your son as for you; that the butler will fetch he the wine (improve by a little keeping) thatbe now in your cellar; and that, when your night be come, and the light of your life be go down, as sure as the morning rise after you and without you, the sun of prosperity and flattery shin on your heir. man come and bask in the halo of consol and acre that beam round about he: the reverence be transfer with the estate; of which, with all its advantage, pleasure, respect, and good-will, he in turn become the life-tenant. how long do you wish or expect that your people will regret you? how much time do a man devote to grief before he begin to enjoy? a great man must keep his heir at his feast like a live memento mori. if he hold very much by life, the presence of the other must be a constant sting and warning. "make ready to go," say the successor to your honour; "I be wait: and I could hold it as well as you."
what have this reference to the possible reader, to do with any of the character of this history? do we wish to apologise for Pen because he have get a white hat, and because his mourning for his mother be fainter? all the lapse of year, all the career of fortune, all the event of life, however strongly they may move or eagerly excite he, never can remove that sainted image from his heart, or banish that bless love from its sanctuary. if he yield to wrong, the dear eye will look sadly upon he when he dare to meet they; if he do well, endure pain, or conquer temptation, the ever present love will greet he, he know, with approval and pity; if he fall, plead for he; if he suffer, cheer he; --be with he and accompany he always until death be past; and sorrow and sin be no more. be this mere dreaming, or, on the part of an idle story-teller, useless moralising? may not the man of the world take his moment, too, to be grave and thoughtful? ask of your own heart and memory, brother and sister, if we do not live in the dead; and (to speak reverently) prove God by love?
of these matter Pen and Warrington often speak in many a solemn and friendly converse in after day; and Pendennis's mother be worship in his memory, and canonise there, as such a saint ought to be. lucky he in life who know a few such woman! a kind provision of Heaven it be, that send we such; and give we to admire that touching and wonderful spectacle of innocence, and love, and beauty.
but as it be certain that if, in the course of these sentimental conversation, any outer stranger, Major Pendennis for instance, have walk into Pen's chamber, Arthur and Warrington would have stop their talk, and choose another subject, and discourse about the Opera, or the last debate in Parliament, or Miss Jones's marriage with Captain Smith, or what not,--so, let we imagine that the public step in at this juncture, and stop the confidential talk between author and reader, and beg we to resume our remark about this world, with which both be certainly well acquaint than with that other one into which we have just be peep.
on come into his property, Arthur Pendennis at first comport himself with a modesty and equanimity which obtain his friend Warrington's praise, though Arthur's uncle be a little inclined to quarrel with his nephew's meanness of spirit, for not assume great state and pretension now that he have enter on the enjoyment of his kingdom. he would have have Arthur instal in handsome quarter, and rid on showy park hack, or in well-build cabriolet, every day. "I be too absent," Arthur say, with a laugh, "to drive a cab in London; the omnibus would cut I in two, or I should send my horse's head into the lady' carriage-window; and you wouldnot have I drive about by my servant like an apothecary, uncle?" no, Major Pendennis would on no account have his nephew appear like an apothecary; the august representative of the house of Pendennis must not so demean himself. and when Arthur, pursue his banter, say, "and yet, I dare say, sir, my father be proud enough when he first set up his gig," the old Major hem and ha'd, and his wrinkle face redden with a blush as he answer, "you know what Buonaparte say, sir, 'Il faut laver son linge sale en famille.' there be no need, sir, for you to brag that your father be a--a medical man. he come of a most ancient but fallen house, and be oblige to reconstruct the family fortune as many a man of good family have do before he. you be like the fellow in Sterne, sir--the Marquis who come to demand his sword again. your father get back yours for you. you be a man of land estate, by Gad, sir, and a gentleman--never forget you be a gentleman."
then Arthur slily turn on his uncle the argument which he have hear the old gentleman often use regard himself. "in the society which I have the honour of frequent through your introduction, who care to ask about my paltry mean or my humble gentility, uncle?" he ask. "it would be absurd of I to attempt to compete with the great folk; and all that they can ask from we be, that we should have a decent address and good manner."
"but for all that, sir, I should belong to a well Club or two," the uncle answer: "I should give an occasional dinner, and select my society well; and I should come out of that horrible garret in the Temple, sir." and so Arthur compromise by descend to the second floor in Lamb Court: Warrington still occupy his old quarter, and the two friend be determined not to part one from the other. cultivate kindly, reader, those friendship of your youth: it be only in that generous time that they be form. how different the intimacy of after day be, and how much weak the grasp of your own hand after it have be shake about in twenty year' commerce with the world, and have squeeze and drop a thousand equally careless palm! as you can seldom fashion your tongue to speak a new language after twenty, the heart refuse to receive friendship pretty soon: it get too hard to yield to the impression.
so Pen have many acquaintance, and be of a jovial and easy turn, get more daily: but no friend like Warrington; and the two man continue to live almost as much in common as the Knights of the Temple, rid upon one horse (for Pen's be at Warrington's service), and have their chamber and their servitor in common.
Mr. Warrington have make the acquaintance of Pen's friend of Grosvenor Place during their last unlucky season in London, and have express himself no well satisfied with Sir Francis and Lady Clavering and her ladyship's daughter than be the public in general. "the world be right," George say, "about those people. the young man laugh and talk freely before those lady, and about they. the girl see people whom she have no right to know, and talk to man with whom no girl should have an intimacy. do you see those two reprobate lean over Lady Clavering's carriage in the Park the other day, and leer under Miss Blanche's bonnet? no good mother would let her daughter know those man, or admit they within her door."
"the Begum be the most innocent and good-natured soul alive," interpose Pen. "she never hear any harm of Captain Blackball, or read that trial in which Charley Lovelace figure. do you suppose that honest lady read and remember the Chronique Scandaleuse as well as you, you old grumbler?"
"would you like Laura Bell to know those fellow?" Warrington ask, his face turn rather red. "would you let any woman you love be contaminate by their company? I have no doubt that the poor Begum be ignorant of their history. it seem to I she be ignorant of a great number of well thing. it seem to I that your honest Begum be not a lady, Pen. it be not her fault, doubtless, that she have not have the education, or learn the refinement of a lady."
"she be as moral as Lady Portsea, who have all the world at her ball, and as refine as Mrs. Bull, who break the King's English. and have half a dozen duke at her table," Pen answer, rather sulkily. "why should you and I be more squeamish than the rest of the world? why be we to visit the sin of her father on this harmless kind creature? she never do anything but kindness to you or any mortal soul. as far as she know she do she good. she do not set up to be more than she be. she give you the good dinner she can buy, and the good company she can get. she pay the debt of that scamp of a husband of her. she spoil her boy like the most virtuous mother in England. her opinion about literary matter, to be sure, be not much; and I daresay she never read a line of Wordsworth, or hear of Tennyson in her life."
"no more have Mrs. Flanagan the laundress," growl out Pen's mentor; "no more have Betty the housemaid; and I have no word of blame against they. but a high-souled man donot make friend of these. a gentleman donot choose these for his companion, or bitterly rue it afterwards if he do. be you, who be set up to be a man of the world and a philosopher, to tell I that the aim of life be to guttle three course and dine off silver? do you dare to own to yourself that your ambition in life be good claret, and that youwill dine with any, provide you get a stall ox to feed on? you call I a Cynic--why, what a monstrous cynicism it be, which you and the rest of you man of the world admit! Iwould rather live upon raw turnip and sleep in a hollow tree, or turn backwoodsman or savage, than degrade myself to this civilisation, and own that a french cook be the thing in life well worth live for."
"because you like a raw beefsteak and a pipe afterwards," break out Pen, "you give yourself air of superiority over people whose taste be more dainty, and be not ashamed of the world they live in. who go about profess particular admiration, or esteem, or friendship, or gratitude even, for the people one meet every day? if a. ask I to his house, and give I his good, I take his good thing for what they be worth and no more. I do not profess to pay he back in friendship, but in the conventional money of society. when we part, we part without any grief. when we meet, we be tolerably glad to see one another. if I be only to live with my friend, your black muzzle, old George, be the only face I should see."
"you be your uncle's pupil," say Warrington, rather sadly; and you speak like a worldling."
"and why not?" ask Pendennis; "why not acknowledge the world I stand upon, and submit to the condition of the society which we live in and live by? I be old than you, George, in spite of your grizzle whisker, and have see much more of the world than you have in your garret here, shut up with your book and your revery and your idea of one-and-twenty. I say, I take the world as it be, and be of it, will not be ashamed of it. if the time be out of joint, have I any calling or strength to set it right?"
"indeed, I donot think you have much of either," growl Pen's interlocutor.
"if I doubt whether I be well than my neighbour," Arthur continue, "if I concede that I be no better,--i also doubt whether he be well than I. I see man who begin with idea of universal reform, and who, before their beard be grow, propound their loud plan for the regeneration of mankind, give up their scheme after a few year of bootless talking and vainglorious attempt to lead their fellow; and after they have find that man will no long bear they, as indeed they never be in the least worthy to be hear, sink quietly into the rank-and-file,--acknowledging their aim impracticable, or thankful that they be never put into practice. the fierce reformer grow calm, and be faire to put up with thing as they be: the loud radical orator become dumb, quiescent placeman: the most fervent liberal when out of power, become humdrum Conservatives or downright tyrant or despot in office. look at the Thiers, look at Guizot, in opposition and in place! look at the whig appeal to the country, and the whig in power! would you say that the conduct of these man be an act of treason, as the Radicals bawl,--who would give way in their turn, be their turn ever to come? no, only that they submit to circumstance which be strong than they,--march as the world march towards reform, but at the world's pace (and the movement of the vast body of mankind must need be slow), forgo this scheme as impracticable, on account of opposition,--that as immature, because against the sense of the majority,--are force to calculate drawback and difficulty, as well as to think of reform and advances,--and compel finally to submit, and to wait, and to compromise."
"the right Honourable Arthur Pendennis could not speak well, or be more satisfied with himself, if he be First Lord of the Treasury and Chancellor of the Exchequer," Warrington say.
"self-satisfied? why self-satisfied?" continue Pen. "it seem to I that my scepticism be more respectful and more modest than the revolutionary ardour of other folk. many a patriot of eighteen, many a Spouting-Club orator, would turn the bishop out of the House of Lords to-morrow, and throw the Lords out after the bishop, and throw the throne into the Thames after the Peers and the Bench. be that man more modest than I, who take these institution as I find they, and wait for time and truth to develop, or fortify, or (if you like) destroy they? a college tutor, or a nobleman's toady, who appear one fine day as my right reverend lord, in a silk apron and a shovel-hat, and assume benedictory air over I, be still the same man we remember at Oxbridge, when he be truckle to the tuft, and bully the poor undergraduate in the lecture-room. an hereditary legislator, who pass his time with jockey and black-leg and ballet-girl, and who be call to rule over I and his other better because his grandfather make a lucky speculation in the fund, or find a coal or tin mine on his property, or because his stupid ancestor happen to be in command of ten thousand man as brave as himself, who overcome twelve thousand Frenchmen, or fifty thousand Indians--such a man, I say, inspire I with no more respect than the bitter democrat can feel towards he. but, such as he be, he be a part of the old society to which we belong and I submit to his lordship with acquiescence; and he take his place above the good of we at all dinner-party, and there bid his time. I donot want to chop his head off with a guillotine, or to fle mud at he in the street. when they call such a man a disgrace to his order; and such another, who be good and gentle, refined and generous, who employ his great mean in promote every kindness and charity, and art and grace of life, in the kind and most gracious manner, an ornament to his rank--the question as to the use and propriety of the order be not in the least affected one way or other. there it be, extant among we, a part of our habit, the creed of many of we, the growth of century, the symbol of a most complicated tradition--there stand my lord the bishop and my lord the hereditary legislator--what the french call transaction both of them,--representing in their present shape mail-clothe baron and double-sworded chief (from whom their lordship the hereditarie, for the most part, donot descend), and priest, profess to hold an absolute truth and a divinely inherit power, the which truth absolute our ancestor burn at the stake, and deny there; the which divine transmissible power still exist in print--to be believe, or not, pretty much at choice; and of these, I say, I acquiesce that they exist, and no more. if you say that these scheme, devise before printing be know, or steam be bear; when think be an infant, scar and whip; and truth under its guardian be gag, and swathe, and blindfold, and not allow to lift its voice, or to look out or to walk under the sun; before man be permit to meet, or to trade, or to speak with each other--if any one say (as some faithful soul do) that these scheme be for ever, and have be change and modify constantly be to be subject to no further development or decay, I laugh, and let the man speak. but I would have toleration for these, as I would ask it for my own opinion; and if they be to die, I would rather they have a decent and natural than an abrupt and violent death."
"you would have sacrifice to Jove," Warrington say, "have you live in the time of the christian persecution."
"perhaps I would," say Pen, with some sadness. "perhaps I be a coward,-- perhaps my faith be unsteady; but this be my own reserve. what I argue here be that I will not persecute. make a faith or a dogma absolute, and persecution become a logical consequence; and Dominic burn a Jew, or Calvin an Arian, or Nero a Christian, or Elizabeth or Mary a Papist or Protestant; or their father both or either, accord to his humour; and act without any pang of remorse,--but, on the contrary, notion of duty fulfil. make dogma absolute, and to inflict or to suffer death become easy and necessary; and Mahomet's soldier shout, 'Paradise! paradise!' and die on the christian spear, be not more or less praiseworthy than the same man slaughter a townful of Jews, or cut off the head of all prisoner who would not acknowledge that there be but one Prophet of God."
"a little while since, young one," Warrington say, who have be listen to his friend's confession neither without sympathy nor scorn, for his mood lead he to indulge in both, "you ask I why I remain out of the strife of the world, and look on at the great labour of my neighbour without take any part in the struggle? why, what a mere dilettante you own yourself to be, in this confession of general scepticism, and what a listless spectator yourself! you be six-and-twenty year old; and as blase as a rake of sixty. you neither hope much nor care much, nor believe much. you doubt about other man as much as about yourself. be it make of such pococuranti as you, the world would be intolerable; and I have rather live in a wilderness of monkey, and listen to their chatter, than in a company of man who deny everything."
"be the world compose of Saint Bernards or Saint Dominies, it would be equally odious," say Pen, "and at the end of a few score of year would cease to exist altogether. would you have every man with his head shave, and every woman in a cloister,--carrye out to the full the ascetic principle? would you have conventicle hymn twang from every lane in every city in the world? would you have all the bird of the forest sing one note and fly with one feather? you call I a sceptic because I acknowledge what be; and in acknowledge that, be it linnet or lark, or priest or parson, be it, I mean, any single one of the infinite variety of the creature of God (whose very name I would be understand to pronounce with reverence, and never to approach but with distant awe), I say that the study and acknowledgment of that variety amongst man especially increase our respect and wonder for the Creator, Commander, and Ordainer of all these mind, so different and yet so united,--meeting in a common adoration, and offer up, each accord to his degree and mean of approach the Divine centre, his acknowledgment of praise and worship, each singing (to recur to the bird simile) his natural song."
"and so, Arthur, the hymn of a saint, or the ode of a poet, or the chant of a newgate thief, be all pretty much the same in your philosophy," say George.
"even that sneer could be answer be it to the point," Pendennis reply; "but it be not; and it could be reply to you, that even to the wretched outcry of the thief on the tree, the wise and the good of all teacher we know of, the untiring Comforter and Consoler, promise a pitiful hearing and a certain hope. hymn of saint! ode of poet! who be we to measure the chance and opportunity, the mean of do, or even judge, right and wrong, award to man; and to establish the rule for mete out their punishment and reward? we be as insolent and unthinke in judging of man's moral as of their intellect. we admire this man as be a great philosopher, and set down the other as a dullard, not know either, or the amount of truth in either, or be certain of the truth anywhere. we sing Te Deum for this hero who have win a battle, and De Profundis for that other one who have break out of prison, and have be catch afterwards by the policeman. our measure of reward and punishment be most partial and incomplete, absurdly inadequate, utterly worldly, and we wish to continue it into the next world. into that next and awful world we strive to pursue man, and send after they our impotent party verdict of condemnation or acquittal. we set up our paltry little rod to measure Heaven immeasurable, as if, in comparison to that, Newton's mind or Pascal's or Shakspeare's be any lofty than mine; as if the ray which travel from the sun would reach I soon than the man who black my boot. measure by that altitude, the tall and the small among we be so alike diminutive and pitifully base, that I say we should take no count of the calculation, and it be a meanness to reckon the difference."
"your figure fail there, Arthur," say the other, well please; "if even by common arithmetic we can multiply as we can reduce almost infinitely, the Great Reckoner must take count of all; and the small be not small, or the great great, to his infinity."
"I donot call those calculation in question," Arthur say; "I only say that yours be incomplete and premature; false in consequence, and, by every operation, multiply into wide error. I do not condemn the man who murder Socrates and damn Galileo. I say that they damn Galileo and murder Socrates."
"and yet but a moment since you admit the propriety of acquiescence in the present, and, I suppose, all other tyranny?"
"no: but that if an opponent menace I, of whom and without cost of blood and violence I can get rid, I would rather wait he out, and starve he out, than fight he out. Fabius fight Hannibal sceptically. who be his roman coadjutor, whom we read of in Plutarch when we be boy, who scoff at the other's procrastination and doubt his courage, and engage the enemy and be beat for his pain?"
in these speculation and confession of Arthur, the reader may perhaps see allusion to question which, no doubt, have occupy and discompose himself, and which he have answer by very different solution to those come to by our friend. we be not pledge ourselves for the correctness of his opinion, which reader will please to consider be deliver dramatically, the writer be no more answerable for they, than for the sentiment utter by any other character of the story: our endeavour be merely to follow out, in its progress, the development of the mind of a worldly and selfish, but not ungenerous or unkind or truth-avoid man. and it will be see that the lamentable stage to which his logic at present have bring he, be one of general scepticism and sneer acquiescence in the world as it be; or if you like so to call it, a belief qualify with scorn in all thing extant. the taste and habit of such a man prevent he from be a boisterous demagogue, and his love of truth and dislike of cannot keep he from advance crude proposition, such as many loud reformer be constantly ready with; much more of utter downright falsehood in argue question or abuse opponent, which he would die or starve rather than use. it be not in our friend's nature to be able to utter certain lie; nor be he strong enough to protest against other, except with a polite sneer; his maxim be, that he owe obedience to all act of Parliament, as long as they be not repeal.
and to what do this easy and sceptical life lead a man? Friend Arthur be a Sadducee, and the baptist might be in the Wilderness shout to the poor, who be listen with all their might and faith to the preacher's awful accent and denunciation of wrath or woe or salvation; and our friend the Sadducee would turn his sleek mule with a shrug and a smile from the crowd, and go home to the shade of his terrace, and muse over preacher and audience, and turn to his roll of Plato, or his pleasant greek songbook babbling of honey and Hybla, and nymph and fountain and love. to what, we say, do this scepticism lead? it lead a man to a shameful loneliness and selfishness, so to speak--the more shameful, because it be so good-humour and conscienceless and serene. Conscience! what be conscience? why accept remorse? what be public or private faith? mythuse alike envelop in enormous tradition. if see and acknowledge the lie of the world, Arthur, as see they you can with only too fatal a clearness, you submit to they without any protest far than a laugh: if, plunge yourself in easy sensuality, you allow the whole wretched world to pass groan by you unmove: if the fight for the truth be take place, and all man of honour be on the ground arm on the one side or the other, and you alone be to lie on your balcony and smoke your pipe out of the noise and the danger, you have well have die, or never have be at all, than such a sensual coward.
"the truth, friend!" Arthur say, imperturbably; "where be the truth? show it I. that be the question between we. I see it on both side. I see it on the conservative side of the house, and amongst the Radicals, and even on the ministerial bench. I see it in this man, who worship by Act of Parliament, and be reward with a silk apron and five thousand a year; in that man, who, drive fatally by the remorseless logic of his creed, give up everything, friend, fame, dearest tie, close vanity, the respect of an army of churchman, the recognise position of a leader, and pass over, truth-impel, to the enemy, in whose rank he will serve henceforth as a nameless private soldier:--i see the truth in that man, as I do in his brother, whose logic drive he to quite a different conclusion, and who, after have pass a life in vain endeavour to reconcile an irreconcilable book, fling it at last down in despair, and declare, with tearful eye, and hand up to heaven, his revolt and recantation. if the truth be with all these, why should I take side with any one of they? some be call upon to preach: let they preach. of these preacher there be somewhat too many, methink, who fancy they have the gift. but we cannot all be parson in church, that be clear. some must sit silent and listen, or go to sleep mayhap. have we not all our duty? the head charity-boy blow the bellow; the master can the other boy in the organ-loft; the clerk sing out amen from the desk; and the beadle with the staff open the door for his Reverence, who rustle in silk up to the cushion. I willnot cane the boy, nay, or say amen always, or act as the church's champion and warrior, in the shape of the beadle with the staff; but I will take off my hat in the place, and say my prayer there too, and shake hand with the clergyman as he step on the grass outside. donot I know that his be there be a compromise, and that he stand before I an Act of Parliament? that the church he occupy be build for other worship? that the Methodist chapel be next door; and that Bunyan the tinker be bawl out the tiding of damnation on the common hard by? yes, I be a Sadducee; and I take thing as I find they, and the world, and the act of Parliament of the world, as they be; and as I intend to take a wife, if I find one--not to be madly in love and prostrate at her foot like a fool--not to worship she as an angel, or to expect to find she as such--but to be good-natured to she, and courteous, expect good-nature and pleasant society from she in turn. and so, George, if ever you hear of my marrying, depend on it, it willnot be a romantic attachment on my side: and if you hear of any good place under Government, I have no particular scruple that I know of, which would prevent I from accept your offer."
"o Pen, you scoundrel! I know what you mean," here Warrington break out. "this be the meaning of your scepticism, of your quietism, of your atheism, my poor fellow. yoube go to sell yourself, and Heaven help you! you be go to make a bargain which will degrade you and make you miserable for life, and therebe no use talk of it. if you be once bent on it, the devil willnot prevent you."
"on the contrary, hebe on my side, benot he, George?" say Pen with a laugh. "what good cigar these be! come down and have a little dinner at the Club; the chef's in town, and hewill cook a good one for I. no, you willnot? donot be sulky, old boy, Ibe go down to--to the country to-morrow."
CHAPTER LXIII
which account perhaps for chapter LXI
the information regard the affair of the Clavering family, which Major Pendennis have acquire through Strong, and by his own personal interference as the friend of the house, be such as almost make the old gentleman pause in any plan which he might have once entertain for his nephew's benefit. to bestow upon Arthur a wife with two such father-in-law, as the two worthy whom the guileless and unfortunate Lady Clavering have draw in her marriage venture, be to benefit no man. and though the one, in a manner, neutralise the other, and the appearance of Amory or Altamont in public would be the signal for his instantaneous withdrawal and condign punishment,--for the fugitive convict have cut down the officer in charge of him,--and a rope would be inevitably his end; if he come again under british authority; yet, no guardian would like to secure for his ward a wife, whose parent be to be get rid of in such a way; and the old gentleman's notion always have be that Altamont, with the gallow before his eye, would assuredly avoid recognition; while, at the same time, by hold the threat of his discovery over Clavering, the latter, who would lose everything by Amory's appearance, would be a slave in the hand of the person who know so fatal a secret.
but if the Begum pay Clavering's debt many time more, her wealth would be expend altogether upon this irreclaimable reprobate; and her heir, whoever they might be, would succeed but to an emptied treasury; and Miss Amory, instead of bring her husband a good income and a seat in Parliament, would bring to that individual her person only, and her pedigree with that lamentable note of sus. per coll. at the name of the last male of her line.
there be, however, to the old schemer revolve these thing in his mind, another course yet open; the which will appear to the reader who may take the trouble to peruse a conversation, which presently ensue, between Major Pendennis and the honourable Baronet, the Member for Clavering.
when a man, under pecuniary difficulty, disappear from among his usual friend and equals,--dive out of sight, as it be, from the flock of bird in which he be accustomed to sail, it be wonderful at what strange and distant nook he come up again for breath. I have know a Pall Mall lounger and rotten row buck, of no inconsiderable fashion, vanish from amongst his comrade of the Clubs and the Park, and be discover, very happy and affable, at an eighteenpenny ordinary in Billingsgate: another gentleman, of great learning and wit, when outrun the constable (be I to say he be a literary man, some critic would vow that I intend to insult the literary profession), once send I his address at a little public-house call the "Fox under the Hill," down a most darksome and cavernous archway in the Strand. such a man, under such misfortune, may have a house, but he be never in his house; and have an address where letter may be leave; but only simpleton go with the hope of see him.--only a few of the faithful know where he be to be find, and have the clue to his hiding-place. so, after the dispute with his wife, and the misfortune consequent thereon, to find Sir Francis Clavering at home be impossible. "ever since I hast he for my book, which be fourteen pound, he donot come home till three o'clock, and purtend to be asleep when I bring his water of a mornin', and dodge hout when Ibe downstairs," Mr. Lightfoot remark to his friend Morgan; and announce that he should go down to my Lady, and be butler there, and marry his old woman. in like manner, after his altercation with Strong, the Baronet do not come near he, and flee to other haunt, out of the reach of the Chevalier's reproaches;--out of the reach of conscience, if possible, which many of we try to dodge and leave behind we by change of scene and other fugitive stratagem.
so, though the elder Pendennis, have his own ulterior object, be bent upon see Pen's country neighbour and representative in Parliament, it take the Major no inconsiderable trouble and time before he could get he into such a confidential state and conversation, as be necessary for the end which the Major have in view. for since the Major have be call in as family friend, and have cognisance of Clavering's affair, conjugal and pecuniary, the Baronet avoid he: as he always avoid all his lawyer and agent when there be an account to be render, or an affair of business to be discuss between they; and never keep any appointment but when its object be the raising of money. thus, previous to catch this most shy and timorous bird, the Major make more than one futile attempt to hold him;--on one day it be a most innocent-look invitation to dinner at Greenwich, to meet a few friend; the Baronet accept, suspect something, and do not come; leave the Major (who indeed propose to represent in himself the body of friend) to eat his whitebait alone:--on another occasion the Major write and ask for ten minute' talk, and the Baronet instantly acknowledge the note, and make the appointment at four o'clock the next day at Bays's precisely (he carefully underline the "precisely"); but though four o'clock come, as in the course of time and destiny it could not do otherwise, no Clavering make his appearance. indeed, if he have borrow twenty pound of Pendennis, he could not have be more timid, or desirous of avoid the Major; and the latter find that it be one thing to seek a man, and another to find he.
before the close of that day in which Strong's patron have give the Chevalier the benefit of so many blessing before his face and curse behind his back, Sir Francis Clavering, who have pledge his word and his oath to his wife's adviser to draw or accept no more bill of exchange, and to be content with the allowance which his victimised wife still award he, have manage to sign his respectable name to a piece of stamp paper, which the Baronet's friend, Mr. Moss Abrams, have carry off, promise to have the bill "do" by a party with whose intimacy Mr. Abrams be favour. and it chance that Strong hear of this transaction at the place where the writing have be drawn,--in the back-parlour, namely, of Mr. Santiago's cigar-shop, where the Chevalier be constantly in the habit of spend an hour in the evening.
"he be at his old work again," Mr. Santiago tell his customer. "he and Moss Abrams be in my parlour. Moss send out my boy for a stamp. it must have be a bill for fifty pound. I hear the Baronet tell Moss to date it two month back. he will pretend that it be an old bill, and that he forget it when he come to a settlement with his wife the other day. I dare say they will give he some more money now he be clear." a man who have the habit of put his unlucky name to "promise to pay" at six month, have the satisfaction of know, too, that his affair be know and canvass, and his signature hand round among the very bad knave and rogue of London.
Mr. Santiago's shop be close by St. James's Street and Bury Street, where we have have the honour of visit our friend Major Pendennis in his lodging. the Major be walk daintily towards his apartment, as Strong, burn with wrath and redolent of Havanna, stride along the same pavement opposite to he.
"confound these young man: how they poison everything with their smoke," think the Major. "here come a fellow with mustachio and a cigar. every fellow who smoke and wear mustachio be a low fellow. oh! itbe Mr. Strong.--I hope you be well, Mr. Strong?" and the old gentleman, make a dignified bow to the Chevalier, be about to pass into his house; direct towards the lock of the door, with tremble hand, the polished door-key.
we have say that, at the long and weary dispute and conference regard the payment of Sir Francis Clavering's last debt, Strong and Pendennis have both be present as friend and adviser of the Baronet's unlucky family. Strong stop and hold out his hand to his brother negotiator, and old Pendennis put out towards he a couple of ungracious finger.
"what be your good news?" say Major Pendennis, patronise the other still far, and condescend to address to he an observation; for old Pendennis have keep such good company all his life, that he vaguely imagine he honour common man by speak to they. "still in town, Mr. Strong? I hope I see you well."
"my news be bad news, sir," Strong answer; "it concern our friend at Tunbridge Wells, and I should like to talk to you about it. clavering be at his old trick again, Major Pendennis."
"indeed! pray do I the favour to come into my lodging," cry the Major with awakened interest; and the pair enter and take possession of his drawing-room. here seat, Strong unburthene himself of his indignation to the Major, and speak at large of Clavering's recklessness and treachery. "no promise will bind he, sir," he say. "you remember when we meet, sir, with my lady's lawyer, how he wouldnot be satisfied with give his honour, but want to take his oath on his knee to his wife, and ring the bell for a Bible, and swear perdition on his soul if he ever would give another bill. he have be sign one this very day, sir: and will sign as many more as you please for ready money: and will deceive anybody, his wife or his child, or his old friend, who have back he a hundred time. why, therebe a bill of his and mine will be due next week"
"I think we have pay all."
"not that one," Strong say, blush. "he ask I not to mention it, and--and--I have half the money for that, Major; and they will be down on I. but I donot care for it; Ibe use to it. itbe Lady Clavering that rile I. itbe a shame that that good-natured woman, who have pay he out of gaol a score of time, should be ruin by his heartlessness. a parcel of bill-stealer boxer, any rascal, get his money; and he donot scruple to throw an honest fellow over. would you believe it, sir, he take money of Altamont--you know whom I mean."
"indeed? of that singular man, who I think come tipsy once to Sir Francis's house?" Major Pendennis say, with impenetrable countenance. "who be Altamont, Mr. Strong?"
"I be sure I donot know, if you donot know," the Chevalier answer, with a look of surprise and suspicion.
"to tell you frankly," say the Major, "I have my suspicion--I suppose-- mind, I only suppose--that in our friend Clavering's a life--who, between you and I, Captain Strong, we must own about as loose a fish as any in my acquaintance--there be, no doubt, some queer secret and story which he would not like to have know: none of we would. and very likely this fellow, who call himself Altamont, know some story against Clavering, and have some hold on he, and get money out of he on the strength of his information. I know some of the good man of the good family in England who be pay through the nose in that way. but their private affair be no business of mine, Mr. Strong; and it be not to be suppose that because I go and dine with a man, I pry into his secret, or be answerable for all his past life. and so with our friend Clavering, I be most interested for his wife's sake, and her daughter's, who be a most charming creature: and when her ladyship ask I, I look into her affair, and try to set they straight; and shall do so again, you understand, to the good of my humble power and ability, if I can make myself useful. and if I be call upon--you understand, if I be call upon--and--by the way, this Mr. Altamont, Mr. Strong? how be this Mr. Altamont? I believe you be acquaint with he. be he in town?"
"I donot know that I be call upon to know where he be, Major Pendennis," say Strong, rise and take up his hat in dudgeon, for the Major's patronising manner and impertinence of caution offend the honest gentleman not a little.
Pendennis's manner alter at once from a tone of hauteur to one of know good-humour. "ah, Captain Strong, you be cautious too, I see; and quite right, my good sir, quite right. we donot know what ear wall may have, sir, or to whom we may be talk; and as a man of the world, and an old soldier,--an old and distinguished soldier, I have be tell, Captain Strong,--you know very well that there be no use in throw away your fire; you may have your idea, and I may put two and two together and have mine. but there be thing which donot concern he that many a man have well not know, eh, Captain? and which I, for one, willnot know until I have reason for know they: and that I believe be your maxim too. with regard to our friend the Baronet, I think with you, it would be most advisable that he should be check in his imprudent course; and most strongly reprehend any man's departure from his word, or any conduct of his which can give any pain to his family, or cause they annoyance in any way. that be my full and frank opinion, and I be sure it be your."
"certainly," say Mr. Strong, drily.
"I be delighted to hear it; delight that an old brother soldier should agree with I so fully. and I be exceedingly glad of the lucky meeting which have procure I the good fortune of your visit. good evening. thank you. Morgan, show the door to Captain Strong."
and Strong, precede by Morgan, take his leave of Major Pendennis; the Chevalier not a little puzzled at the old fellow's prudence; and the valet, to say the truth, to the full as much perplex at his master's reticence. for Mr. Morgan, in his capacity of accomplished valet, move here and there in a house as silent as a shadow; and, as it so happen, during the latter part of his master's conversation with his visitor, have be stand very close to the door, and have overhear not a little of the talk between the two gentleman, and a great deal more than he could understand.
"who be that Altamont? know anything about he and strong?" Mr. Morgan ask of Mr. Lightfoot, on the next convenient occasion when they meet at the Club.
"Strongbe his man of business, draw the Governor's bill, and indosse them, and do his odd job and that; and I suppose Altamontbe in it too," Mr. Lightfoot reply. "that kite-flying, you know, Mr. M., always take two or three on them to set the paper go. Altamont put the pot on at the Derby, and win a good bit of money. I wish the Governor could get some somewhere, and I could get my book pay up."
"do you think my Lady would pay his debt again?" Morgan ask. "find out that for I, Lightfoot, and Iwill make it worth your while, my boy."
* * * * * *
Major Pendennis have often say with a laugh, that his vale Morgan be a much rich man than himself: and, indeed, by long course of careful speculation, this wary and silent attendant have be amass a considerable sum of money, during the year which he have pass in the Major's service, where he have make the acquaintance of many other valet of distinction, from whom he have learn the affair of their principal. when Mr. Arthur come into his property, but not until then, Morgan have surprise the young gentleman, by say that he have a little sum of money, some fifty or a hundred pound, which he want to lay out to advantage; perhaps the gentleman in the Temple, know about affair and business and that, could help a poor fellow to a good investment? Morgan would be very much oblige to Mr. Arthur, most grateful and oblige indeed, if Arthur could tell he of one. when Arthur laughingly reply, that he know nothing about money matter, and know no earthly way of help Morgan, the latter, with the utmost simplicity, be very grateful, very grateful indeed, to Mr. Arthur, and if Mr. Arthur should want a little money before his rent be pay, perhaps he would kindly remember that his uncle's old and faithful servant have some as he would like to put out: and be most proud if he could be useful anyways to any of the family.
the Prince of Fairoaks, who be tolerably prudent and have no need of ready money, would as soon have think of borrow from his uncle's servant as of steal the valet's pocket-handkerchief, and be on the point of make some haughty reply to Morgan's offer, but be check by the humour of the transaction. Morgan a capitalist! Morgan offer to lend to he--the joke be excellent. on the other hand, the man might be quite innocent, and the proposal of money a simple offer of good-will. so Arthur withhold the sarcasm that be rise to his lip, and content himself by decline Mr. Morgan's kind proposal. he mention the matter to his uncle, however, and congratulate the latter on have such a treasure in his service.
it be then that the Major say that he believe Morgan have be get devilish rich for a devilish long time; in fact, he have buy the house in Bury Street, in which his master be a lodger and have actually make a considerable sum of money, from his acquaintance with the Clavering family and his knowledge obtain through his master that the Begum would pay all her husband's debt, by buy up as many of the Baronet's acceptance as he could raise money to purchase. of these transaction the Major, however, know no more than most gentleman do of their servant, who live with we all our day and be stranger to we, so strong custom be, and so pitiless the distinction between class and class.
"so he offer to lend you money, do he?" the elder Pendennis remark to his nephew. "hebe a dev'lish sly fellow, and a dev'lish rich fellow; and therebe many a nobleman would like to have such a valet in his service, and borrow from he too. and he benot a bit change, Monsieur Morgan. he do his work just as well as ever--hebe always ready to my bell--steal about the room like a cat--hebe so dev'lishly attach to I, Morgan!"
on the day of Strong's visit, the Major bethink he of Pen's story, and that Morgan might help he, and rally the valet regard his wealth with that free and insolent way which so high-place a gentleman might be dispose to adopt towards so unfortunate a creature.
"I hear that you have get some money to invest, Morgan," say the Major.
"itbe Mr. Arthur have be tell, hang he," think the valet.
"Ibe glad my place be such a good one."
"thank you, sir--i've no reason to complain of my place, nor of my master," reply Morgan, demurely.
"yoube a good fellow: and I believe you be attach to I; and Ibe glad you get on well. and I hope youwill be prudent, and not be take a public-house or that kind of thing."
a public-house, think Morgan--I in a public-house!--the old fool!-- Dammy, if I be ten year young Iwould set in Parlyment before I die, that I would.--"No, thank you kindly, sir. I donot think of the public line, sir. and Ihave get my little saving pretty well put out, sir."
"you do a little in the discount way, eh, Morgan?"
"yes, sir, a very little--I--I beg your pardon, sir--might I be so free as to ask a question----"
"speak on, my good fellow," the elder say, graciously.
"about Sir Francis Clavering's paper, sir? do you think hebe any long any good, sir? will my Lady pay on them, any more, sir?"
"what, youhave do something in that business already?"
"yes, sir, a little," reply Morgan, drop down his eye. and I donot mind own, sir, and I hope I may take the liberty of say, sir, that a little more would make I very comfortable if it turn out as well as the last."
"why, how much have you net by he, in Gad's name?" ask the Major.
"Ihave do a good bit, sir, at it: that I own, sir. have some information, and make acquaintance with the fam'ly through your kindness, I put on the pot, sir."
"you do what?"
"I lay my money on, sir--I get all I could, and borrow, and buy Sir Francis's bill; many of them have his name, and the gentleman's as be just go out, Edward Strong, Esquire, sir: and of course I know of the blow-hup and shindy as be take place in Grosvenor Place, sir: and as I may as well make my money as another, Iwould be very much obleege to you if youwould tell I whether my Lady will come down any more."
although major Pendennis be as much surprised at this intelligence regard his servant, as if he have hear that Morgan be a disguised Marquis, about to throw off his mask and assume his seat in the House of Peers; and although he be of course indignant at the audacity of the fellow who have dare to grow rich under his nose, and without his cognisance; yet he have a natural admiration for every man who represent money and success, and find himself respect Morgan, and be rather afraid of that worthy, as the truth begin to dawn upon he.
"well, Morgan," say he, "I mustnot ask how rich you be; and the rich the well for your sake, Ibe sure. and if I could give you any information that could serve you, I would speedily help you. but frankly, if Lady Clavering ask I whether she shall pay any more of Sir Francis's debt, I shall advise and I hope she willnot, though I fear she will--and that be all I know. and so you be aware that Sir Francis be begin again in his--eh--reckless and imprudent course?"
"at his old game, sir--can't prevent that gentleman. he will do it."
"Mr. Strong be say that a Mr. Moss Abrams be the holder of one of Sir Francis Clavering's note. do you know anything of this Mr. Abrams; or the amount of the bill?"
"donot know the bill, know Abrams quite well, sir."
"I wish you would find out about it for I. and I wish you would find out where I can see Sir Francis Clavering, Morgan."
and Morgan say, "thank you, sir, yes, sir, I will, sir;" and retire from the room, as he have enter it, with his usual stealthy respect and quiet humility; leave the Major to muse and wonder over what he have just hear.
the next morning the valet inform Major Pendennis that he have see Mr. Abrams; what be the amount of the bill that gentleman be desirous to negotiate; and that the Baronet would be sure to be in the back-parlour of the Wheel of Fortune Tavern that day at one o'clock.
to this appointment Sir Francis Clavering be punctual, and as at one o'clock he sate in the parlour of the tavern in question, surround by spittoon, Windsor chair, cheerful print of boxer, trot horse, and pedestrian, and the lingering of last night's tobacco fume--as the descendant of an ancient line sate in this delectable place accommodate with an old copy of Bell's life in London, much blot with beer, the polite Major Pendennis walk into the apartment.
"so itbe you, old boy?" ask the Baronet, think that Mr. Moss Abrams have arrive with the money.
"how do you do, Sir Francis Clavering? I want to see you, and follow you here," say the Major, at sight of whom the other's countenance fall.
now that he have his opponent before he, the Major be determined to make a brisk and sudden attack upon he, and go into action at once. "I know," he continue, "who be the exceedingly disreputable person for whom you take I, Clavering; and the errand which bring you here."
"it benot your business, be it?" ask the Baronet, with a sulky and deprecatory look. "why be you follow I about and take the command, and meddle in my affair, Major Pendennis? Ihave never do you any harm, have I? Ihave never have your money. and I donot choose to be dodged about in this way, and domineer over. I donot choose it, and I willnot have it. if Lady Clavering have any proposal to make to I, let it be do in the regular way, and through the lawyer. Iwould rather not have you."
"I be not come from Lady Clavering," the Major say, "but of my own accord, to try and remonstrate with you, Clavering, and see if you can be keep from ruin. it be but a month ago that you swear on your honour, and want to get a Bible to strengthen the oath, that you would accept no more bill, but content yourself with the allowance which Lady Clavering give you. all your debt be pay with that proviso, and you have break it; this Mr. Abrams have a bill of yours for sixty pound."
"itbe an old bill. I take my solemn oath itbe an old bill," shriek out the Baronet.
"you draw it yesterday, and you date it three month back purposely. by Gad, Clavering, you sicken I with lie, I cannot help tell you so. Ihave no patience with you, by Gad. you cheat everybody, yourself include. Ihave see a deal of the world, but I never meet your equal at humbug. itbe my belief you have rather lie than not."
"have you come here, you old--old beast, to tempt I to--to pitch into you, and--and knock your old head off?" say the Baronet, with a poisonous look of hatred at the Major.
"what, sir?" shout out the old Major, rise to his foot and clasp his cane, and look so fiercely, that the Baronet's tone instantly change towards he.
"no, no," say Clavering, piteously, "I beg your pardon. I donot mean to be angry, or say anything unkind, only yoube so damned harsh to I, Major Pendennis. what be it you want of I? why have you be hunt I so? do you want money out of I too? by Jove, you know Ihave not get a shilling,"--and so Clavering, accord to his custom, pass from a curse into a whimper.
Major Pendennis see, from the other's tone, that Clavering know his secret be in the Major's hand.
"Ihave no errand from anybody, or no design upon you," Pendennis say, "but an endeavour, if itbe not too late, to save you and your family from utter ruin, through the infernal recklessness of your course. I know your secret----"
"I donot know it when I marry she; upon my oath I donot know it till the d----d scoundrel come back and tell I himself; and itbe the misery about that which make I so reckless, Pendennis; indeed it be," the Baronet cry, clasp his hand.
"I know your secret from the very first day when I see Amory come drunk into your dining-room in Grosvenor Place. I never forget face. I remember that fellow in Sydney a convict, and he remember I. I know his trial, the date of his marriage, and of his report death in the bush. I could swear to he. and I know that you be no more married to Lady Clavering than I be. Ihave keep your secret well enough, for Ihave not tell a single soul that I know it,--not your wife, not yourself till now."
"Poor Lady C., it would cut she up dreadfully," whimper Sir Francis; "and it benot my fault, Major; you know it benot."
"rather than allow you to go on ruin she as you do; I will tell she, Clavering, and tell all the world too; that be what I swear I will do, unless I can come to some term with you, and put some curb on your infernal folly. by play, debt, and extravagance of all kind, youhave get through half your wife's fortune, and that of her legitimate heir, mind --her legitimate heir. here it must stop. you cannot live together. yoube not fit to live in a great house like Clavering; and before three year' more be over would not leave a shilling to carry on. Ihave settle what must be do. you shall have six hundred a year; you shall go abroad and live on that. you must give up Parliament, and get on as well as you can. if you refuse, I give you my word Iwill make the real state of thing know to-morrow; Iwill swear to Amory, who, when identify, will go back to the country from whence he come, and will rid the widow of you and himself together. and so that boy of yours lose at once all title to old Spell's property, and it go to your wife's daughter. benot I make myself pretty clearly understand?"
"you wouldnot be so cruel to that poor boy, would you, Pendennis?" ask the father, plead piteously; "hang it, think about he. hebe a nice boy: though hebe dev'lish wild, I own hebe dev'lish wild."
"itbe you who be cruel to he," say the old moralist. "why, sir, youwill ruin he yourself inevitably in three year."
"yes, but perhaps I willnot have such dev'lish bad luck, you know;--the luck must turn: and Iwill reform, by Gad, Iwill reform. and if you be to split on I, it would cut up my wife so; you know it would, most infernally."
"to be part from you," say the old Major, with a sneer; "you know she willnot live with you again."
"but why cannot Lady C. live abroad, or at Bath, or at Tunbridge, or at the doose, and I go on here?" Clavering continue. "I like be here well than abroad, and I like be in Parliament. itbe dev'lish convenient being in Parliament. therebe very few seat like mine leave; and if I give it to them, I should not wonder the ministry would give I an island to govern, or some dev'lish good thing; for you know Ibe a gentleman of dev'lish good family, and have a handle to my name, and--and that sort of thing, Major Pendennis. eh, donot you see? donot you think theywould give I something dev'lish good if I be to play my card well? and then, you know, Iwould save money, and be keep out of the way of the confound hell and rouge et noir--and--and so Iwould rather not give up Parliament, please." for at one instant to hate and defy a man, at the next to weep before he, and at the next to be perfectly confidential and friendly with he, be not an unusual process with our versatile-minded Baronet.
"as for your seat in Parliament," the Major say, with something of a blush on his cheek, and a certain tremor, which the other do not see, "you must part with that, Sir Francis Clavering, to--to I."
"what! be you go into the House, Major Pendennis?"
"no--not I; but my nephew, Arthur, be a very clever fellow and would make a figure there: and when Clavering have two member, his father might very likely have be one; and--and should like Arthur to be there," the Major say.
"Dammy, do he know it, too?" cry out Clavering.
"nobody know anything out of this room," Pendennis answer; and if you do this favour for I, I hold my tongue. "if not, Ibe a man of my word, and will do what I have say."
"I say, Major," say Sir Francis, with a peculiarly humble smile "You-- you couldnot get I my first quarter in advance, could you, like the good of fellow? you can do anything with Lady Clavering; and, upon my oath, Iwill take up that bill of Abrams'. the little dam scoundrel, I know hewill do I in the business--he always do; and if you could do this for I, wewould see, Major."
"and I think your good plan would be to go down in September to Clavering to shoot, and take my nephew with you, and introduce he. yes, that will be the good time. and we will try and manage about the advance." (Arthur may lend he that, think old Pendennis. confound he, a seat in Parliament be worth a hundred and fifty pound.) "and, Clavering, you understand, of course, my nephew know nothing about this business. you have a mind to retire: he be a Clavering man and a good representative. for the borough; you introduce he, and your people vote for he--you see."
"when can you get I the hundred and fifty, Major? when shall I come and see you? will you be at home this evening or to-morrow morning? will you have anything here? theyhave get some dev'lish good bitter in the bar. I often have a glass of bitter, it set one up so."
the old Major would take no refreshment; but rise and take his leave of the Baronet, who walk with he to the door of the Wheel of Fortune, and then stroll into the bar, where he take a glass of gin and bitter with the landlady there: and a gentleman connect with the ring (who board at the Wheel of F.) come in, he and Sir Francis Clavering and the landlord talk about the fight and the news of the sporting world in general; and at length Mr. Moss Abrams arrive with the proceed of the Baronet's bill, from which his own handsome commission be deduct, and out of the remainder Sir Francis "stand" a dinner at Greenwich to his distinguished friend, and pass the evening gaily at Vauxhall.
meanwhile Major Pendennis, call a cab in Piccadilly, drive to Lamb Court, Temple, where he speedily be closet with his nephew in deep conversation.
after their talk they part on very good term, and it be in consequence of that unreported conversation, whereof the reader nevertheless can pretty well guess the bearing, that Arthur express himself as we have hear in the colloquy with Warrington, which be report in the last chapter. when a man be tempt to do a tempting thing, he can find a hundred ingenious reason for gratify his liking; and Arthur think very much that he would like to be in Parliament, and that he would like to distinguish himself there, and that he need not care much what side he take, as there be falsehood and truth on every side. and on this and on other matter he think he would compromise with his conscience, and that Sadduceeism be a very convenient and good-humour profession of faith.
CHAPTER LXIV
Phyllis and Corydon
on a picturesque common in the neighbourhood of Tunbridge Wells, Lady Clavering have find a pretty villa, whither she retire after her conjugal dispute at the end of that unlucky London season. Miss Amory, of course, accompany her mother, and Master Clavering come home for the holiday, with whom Blanche's chief occupation be to fight and quarrel. but this be only a home pastime, and the young schoolboy be not fond of home sport. he find cricket, and horse, and plenty of friend at Tunbridge. the good-natured Begum's house be fill with a constant society of young gentleman of thirteen, who eat and drink much too copiously of tart and champagne, who ride race on the lawn, and frighten the fond mother, who smoke and make themselves sick, and the dining-room unbearable to Miss Blanche. she do not like the society of young gentleman of thirteen.
as for that fair young creature, any change as long as it be change be pleasant to she; and for a week or two she would have like poverty and a cottage, and bread-and-cheese; and, for a night, perhaps, a dungeon and bread-and-water, and so the move to Tunbridge be by no mean unwelcome to she. she wander in the wood, and sketch tree and farmhouse; she read french novel habitually; she drive into Tunbridge Wells pretty often, and to any play, or ball, or conjurer, or musician who might happen to appear in the place; she sleep a great deal; she quarrel with Mamma and Frank during the morning; she find the little village school and attend it, and first fondle the girl and thwart the mistress, then scold the girl and laugh at the teacher; she be constant at church, of course. it be a pretty little church, of immense antiquity--a little anglo-Norman bijou, build the day before yesterday, and decorate with all sort of paint window, carve saint' head, gilt scripture text, and open pew. Blanche begin forthwith to work a most correct high-church altar-cover for the church. she pass for a saint with the clergyman for a while, whom she quite take in, and whom she coax, and wheedle, and fondle so artfully, that poor Mrs. Smirke, who at first be charm with she, then bear with she, then would hardly speak to she, be almost mad with jealousy. Mrs. Smirke be the wife of our old friend Smirke, Pen's tutor and poor Helen's suitor. he have console himself for her refusal with a young lady from Clapham whom his mamma provide. when the latter die, our friend's view become every day more and more pronounced. he cut off his coat collar, and let his hair grow over his back. he rigorously give up the curl which he use to sport on his forehead, and the tie of his neckcloth, of which he be rather proud. he go without any tie at all. he go without dinner on Fridays. he read the Roman hour, and intimate that he be ready to receive confession in the vestry. the most harmless creature in the world, he be denounce as a black and most dangerous Jesuit and Papist, by Muffin of the dissenting chapel, and Mr. Simeon Knight at the old church. Mr. Smirke have build his chapel-of-ease with the money leave he by his mother at Clapham. Lord! lord! what would she have say to hear a table call an altar! to see candlestick on it! to get letter sign on the Feast of Saint so-and-so, or the Vigil of Saint what-do-you-call-'em! all these thing do the boy of Clapham practise; his faithful wife follow he. but when Blanche have a conference of near two hour in the vestry with Mr. Smirke, Belinda pace up and down on the grass, where there be only two little grave-stone as yet; she wish that she have a third there: only, only he would offer very likely to that creature, who have infatuate he in a fortnight. no, she would retire; she would go into a convent, and profess and leave he. such bad thought have Smirke's wife and his neighbour regard he; these, think he in direct correspondence with the Bishop of Rome; that, bewail error to she even more odious and fatal; and yet our friend mean no earthly harm. the post-office never bring he any letter from the Pope; he think Blanche, to be sure, at first, the most pious, gifted, right-thinking, fascinating person he have ever meet; and her manner of sing the chant delight he--but after a while he begin to grow rather tired of Miss Amory, her way and grace grow stale somehow; then he be doubtful about Miss Amory; then she make a disturbance in his school, lose her temper, and rap the child's finger. Blanche inspire this admiration and satiety, somehow, in many man. she try to please they, and fling out all her grace at once; come down to they with all her jewel on, all her smile, and cajolery, and coaxing, and ogle. then she grow tired of they and of try to please they, and never have care about they, drop they: and the man grow tired of she, and drop she too. it be a happy night for Belinda when Blanche go away; and her husband, with rather a blush and a sigh, say "he have be deceive in she; he have think she endow with many precious gift, he fear they be mere tinsel; he think she have be a right-think person, he fear she have merely make religion an amusement--she certainly have quite lose her temper to the schoolmistress, and beat Polly Rucker's knuckle cruelly." Belinda fly to his arm, there be no question about the grave or the veil any more. he tenderly embrace she on the forehead. "there be none like thee, my Belinda," he say, throw his fine eye up to the ceiling, "precious among woman!" as for Blanche, from the instant she lose sight of he and Belinda, she never think or care about either any more.
but when Arthur go down to pass a few day at Tunbridge Wells with the Begum, this stage of indifference have not arrive on Miss Blanche's part or on that of the simple clergyman. Smirke believe she to be an angel and wonder of a woman. such a perfection he have never see, and sate listen to her music in the summer evening, open-mouthed, rapt in wonder, tea-less, and bread-and-butter-less. fascinating as he have hear the music of the opera to be--he have never but once attend an exhibition of that nature (which he mention with a blush and a sigh--it be on that day when he have accompany Helen and her son to the play at Chatteris)--he could not conceive anything more delicious, more celestial, he have almost say, than Miss Amory's music. she be a most gifted being: she have a precious soul: she have the most remarkable talent--to all outward seem, the most heavenly disposition, etc. etc. it be in this way that, be then at the height of his own fever and bewitchment for Blanche, Smirke discourse to Arthur about she.
the meeting between the two old acquaintance have be very cordial. Arthur love anybody who love his mother; Smirke could speak on that theme with genuine feeling and emotion. they have a hundred thing to tell each other of what have occur in their life. "Arthur would perceive," Smirke say, "that his--his view on Church matter have develop themselves since their acquaintance." Mrs. Smirke, a most exemplary person, second they with all her endeavour. he have build this little church on his mother's demise, who have leave he provide with a sufficiency of worldly mean. though in the cloister himself, he have hear of Arthur's reputation. he speak in the kind and most sadden tone; he hold his eyelid down, and bow his fair head on one side. Arthur be immensely amuse with he; with his air; with his folly and simplicity; with his blank stock and long hair; with his real goodness, kindness, friendliness of feeling. and his praise of Blanche please and surprise our friend not a little, and make he regard she with eye of particular favour.
the truth be, Blanche be very glad to see Arthur; as one be glad to see an agreeable man in the country, who bring down the last news and story from the great city; who can talk well than most country-folk, at least can talk that darle London jargon, so dear and indispensable to London people, so little understand by person out of the world. the first day Pen come down, he keep Blanche laugh for hour after dinner. she sing her song with redoubled spirit. she do not scold her mother; she fondle and kiss she, to the honest Begum's surprise. when it come to be bedtime, she say, "Deja!" with the pretty air of regret possible; and be really quite sorry to go to bed, and squeeze Arthur's hand quite fondly. he on his side give she pretty palm a very cordial pressure. our young gentleman be of that turn, that eye very moderately bright dazzle he.
"she be very much improve," think Pen, look out into the night, "very much. I suppose the Begum willnot mind my smoking with the window open. shebe a jolly good old woman, and Blanche be immensely improve. I like her manner with her mother tonight. I like her laugh way with that stupid young cub of a boy, whom they oughtnot to allow to get tipsy. she sing those little verse very prettily; they be devilish pretty verse too, though I say it who shouldnot say it." and he hum a tune which Blanche have put to some verse of his own. "ah! what a fine night! how jolly a cigar be at night! how pretty that little Saxon church look in the moonlight! I wonder what old Warrington's doing? yes, shebe a dayvlish nice little thing, as my uncle say."
"oh, heavenly!" here break out a voice from a clematis-cover casement near--a girl's voice: it be the voice of the author of 'Mes Larmes.'
Pen burst into a laugh. "donot tell about my smoking," he say, lean out of his own window.
"oh! go on! I adore it," cry the lady of 'Mes Larmes.' "heavenly night! heavenly, heavenly moon! but I must shut my window, and not talk to you on account of les moeur. how droll they be, les moeur! Adieu." and Pen begin to sing the Goodnight to Don Basilio.
the next day they be walk in the field together, laugh and chattering--the gayest pair of friend. they talk about the day of their youth, and Blanche be prettily sentimental. they talk about Laura, dear Laura--Blanche have love she as a sister: be she happy with that odd Lady Rockminster? wouldnot she come and stay with they at Tunbridge? oh, what walk they would take together! what song they would sing--the old, old song! Laura's voice be splendid. do Arthur--she must call he Arthur--remember the song they sing in the happy old day, now he be grow such a great man, and have such a succe? etc. etc.
and the day after, which be enliven with a happy ramble through the wood to Penshurst, and a sight of that pleasant park and hall, come that conversation with the curate which we have narrate, and which make our young friend think more and more.
"be she all this perfection?" he ask himself. "have she become serious and religious? do she tend school, and visit the poor? be she kind to her mother and brother? yes, I be sure of that, I have see she." and walk with his old tutor over his little parish, and go to visit his school, it be with inexpressible delight that Pen find Blanche seat instruct the child, and fancy to himself how patient she must be, how good-nature, how ingenuous, how really simple in her taste, and unspoile by the world.
"and do you really like the country?" he ask she, as they walk together.
"I should like never to see that odious city again. O Arthur--that be, Mr.--well, Arthur, then--one's good thought grow up in these sweet wood and calm solitude, like those flower which willnot bloom in London, you know. the gardener come and change our balcony once a week. I donot think I shall bear to look London in the face again--its odious, smoky, brazen face! but, heigho!"
"why that sigh, Blanche?"
"never mind why."
"yes, I do mind why. tell I, tell I everything."
"I wish you havenot come down;" and a second edition of 'Mes Soupirs' come out.
"you donot want I, Blanche?"
"I donot want you to go away. I donot think this house will be very happy without you, and thatbe why I wish that you never have come."
'Mes Soupirs' be here lay aside, and 'Mes Larmes' have begin.
ah! what answer be give to those in the eye of a young woman? what be the method employ for dry they? what take place? o ringdove and rose, o dew and wildflower, o wave greenwood and balmy air of summer! here be two batter London rake, take themselves in for a moment, and fancy that they be in love with each other, like Phillis and Corydon!
when one think of country house and country walk, one wonder that any man be leave unmarried.
CHAPTER LXV
Temptation
Easy and frank-speak as Pendennis commonly be with Warrington, how come it that Arthur do not inform the friend and depository of all his secret, of the little circumstance which have take place at the villa near Tunbridge Wells? he talk about the discovery of his old tutor Smirke, freely enough, and of his wife, and of his anglo-Norman church, and of his departure from Clapha to Rome; but, when ask about Blanche, his answer be evasive or general: he say she be a good-natured clever little thing, that rightly guide she make no such bad wife after all, but that he have for the moment no intention of marriage, that his day of romance be over, that he be content with his present lot, and so forth.
in the meantime there come occasionally to Lamb Court, Temple, pretty little satin envelope, superscribe in the neat handwriting, and seal with one of those admirable cipher, which, if Warrington have be curious enough to watch his friend's letter, or indeed if the cipher have be decipherable, would have show George that Mr. Arthur be in correspondence with a young lady whose initial be B. a. to these pretty little composition Mr. Pen reply in his good and gallant manner; with joke, with news of the town, with point of wit, nay, with pretty little verse very likely, in reply to the versicle of the Muse of 'Mes Larmes.' Blanche we know rhyme with "branch," and "stanch," and "launch," and no doubt a gentleman of Pen's ingenuity would not forgo these advantage of position, and would ring the pretty little change upon these pleasing note. indeed we believe that those love-verse of Mr. Pen's, which have such a pleasing success in the 'roseleave,' that charming Annual edit by Lady Violet Lebas, and illustrate by portrait of the female nobility by the famous artist Pinkney, be compose at this period of our hero's life; and be first address to Blanche per post, before they figure in print, cornet as it be to Pinkney's pictorial garland.
"Verses be all very well," the elder Pendennis say, who find Pen scratch down one of these artless effusion at the Club as he be wait for his dinner; "and letter-writing if mamma allow it, and between such old country friend of course there may be a correspondence, and that sort of thing--but mind, Pen, and donot commit yourself, my boy. for who know what the doose may happen? the good way be to make your letter safe. I never write a letter in all my life that would commit I, and demmy, sir, I have have some experience of woman." and the worthy gentleman, grow more garrulous and confidential with his nephew as he grow old, tell many affecting instance of the evil result consequent upon this want of caution to many person in "Society;"--how from use too ardent expression in some poetical note to the widow Naylor, young Spoony have subject himself to a visit of remonstrance from the widow's brother, Colonel Flint; and thus have be force into a marriage with a woman old enough to be his mother: how when Louisa Salter have at length succeed in secure young Sir John Bird, Hopwood, of the Blues, produce some letter which Miss S. have write to he, and cause a withdrawal on Bird's part, who afterwards be unite to Miss Stickney, of Lyme Regis, etc. the Major, if he have not read, have plenty of observation, and could back his wise saw with a multitude of modern instance, which he have acquire in a long and careful perusal of the great book of the world.
Pen laugh at the example, and blush a little at his uncle's remonstrance, say that he would bear they in mind and be cautious. he blush, perhaps, because he have bear they in mind; because he be cautious: because in his letter to Miss Blanche he have from instinct, or honesty perhaps, refrain from any avowal which might compromise he. "donot you remember the lesson I have, sir, in Lady Mirabel's--Miss Fotheringay's affair? I be not to be catch again, uncle," Arthur say with mock frankness and humility. Old Pendennis congratulate himself and his nephew heartily on the latter's prudence and progress, and be pleased at the position which Arthur be take as a man of the world.
no doubt, if Warrington have be consult, his opinion would have be different: and he would have tell Pen that the boy's foolish letter be well than the man's adroit compliment and slippery gallantry; that to win the woman he love, only a knave or a coward advance under cover, with subterfuge, and a retreat secure behind he: but Pen speak not on this matter to Mr. Warrington, know pretty well that he be guilty, and what his friend's verdict would be.
Colonel Altamont have not be for many week absent on his foreign tour, Sir Francis Clavering have retire meanwhile into the country pursuant to his agreement with Major Pendennis, when the ill of fate begin to fall rather suddenly and heavily upon the sole remain partner of the little firm of Shepherd's Inn. when Strong, at part with Altamont, refuse the loan proffer by the latter in the fulness of his purse and the generosity of his heart, he make such a sacrifice to conscience and delicacy as cause he many an after twinge and pang; he and feel--it be not very many hour in his life he have experience the feeling--that in this juncture of his affair he have be too delicate and too scrupulous. why should a fellow in want refuse a kind offer kindly make? why should a thirsty man decline a pitcher of water from a friendly hand, because it be a little soil? Strong's conscience smite he for refuse what the other have fairly come by, and generously proffer: and he think ruefully, now it be too late, that Altamont's cash would have be as well in his pocket as in that of the gambling--house proprietor at Baden or Ems, with whom his Excellency would infallibly leave his Derby winning. it be whisper among the tradesman, bill-discounter, and other who have commercial dealing with Captain Strong, that he and the Baronet have part company, and that the Captain's "paper" be henceforth of no value. the tradesman, who have put a wonderful confidence in he hitherto,--for who could resist Strong's jolly face and frank and honest demeanour?--now begin to pour in their bill with a cowardly mistrust and unanimity. the knock at the Shepherd's Inn chamber door be constant, and tailor, bootmaker, pastrycook who have furnish dinner, in their own person, or by the boy their representative, hold levee on Strong's stair. to these be add one or two person of a less clamorous but far more sly and dangerous sort,--the young clerk of lawyer, namely, who lurk about the Inn, or concert with Mr. Campion's young man in the chamber hard by, have in their dismal pocketbook copy of writ to be serve on Edward Strong, require he to appear on an early day next term before our Sovereign Lady the Queen, and answer to, etc. etc.
from this invasion of creditor, poor Strong, who have not a guinea in his pocket, have, of course, no refuge but that of the Englishman's castle, into which he retire, shut the outer and inner door upon the enemy, and not quit his stronghold until after nightfall. against this outer barrier the foe use to come and knock and curse in vain, whilst the Chevalier peep at they from behind the little curtain which he have put over the orifice of his letter-box; and have the dismal satisfaction of see the face of furious clerk and fiery dun, as they dash up against the door and retreat from it. but as they could not be always at his gate, or sleep on his staircase, the enemy of the Chevalier sometimes leave he free.
Strong, when so pressed by his commercial antagonist, be not quite alone in his defence against they, but have secure for himself an ally or two. his friend be instruct to communicate with he by a system of private signal: and they thus keep the garrison from starve by bring in necessary supply, and keep up Strong's heart and prevent he from surrender by visit he and cheer he in his retreat. two of Ned's most faithful ally be Huxter and Miss Fanny Bolton: when hostile visitor be prowl about the Inn, Fanny's little sister be teach a particular cry or jodel, which they innocently whoop in the court: when Fanny and Huxter come up to visit Strong, they archly sing this same note at his door; when that barrier be straightway open, the honest garrison come out smile, the provision and the pot of porter be bring in, and in the society of his faithful friend the beleaguered one pass a comfortable night. there be some man who could not live under this excitement, but Strong be a brave man, as we have say, who have see service and never lose heart in peril.
but besides ally, our general have secure for himself, under difficulty, that still more necessary aid, a retreat. it have be mention in a former part of this history, how Messrs. Costigan and Bows live in the house next door to Captain Strong, and that the window of one of their room be not very far off the kitchen-window which be situate in the upper story of Strong's chamber. a leaden water-pipe and gutter serve for the two; and Strong, look out from his kitchen one day, see that he could spring with great ease up to the sill of his neighbour's window, and clamber up the pipe which communicate from one to the other. he have laughingly show this refuge to his chum, Altamont; and they have agree that it would be as well not to mention the circumstance to Captain Costigan, whose dun be numerous, and who would be constantly fly down the pipe into their apartment if this way of escape be show to he.
but now that the evil day be come, Strong make use of the passage, and one afternoon burst in upon bow and Costigan with his jolly face, and explain that the enemy be in wait on his staircase, and that he have take this mean of give they the slip. so while Mr. Marks's aide-de-camp be in wait in the passage of no. 3, Strong walk down the step of No. 4, din at the Albion, go to the play, and return home at midnight, to the astonishment of Mrs. Bolton and Fanny, who have not see he quit his chamber and could not conceive how he could have pass the line of sentry.
strong bear this siege for some week with admirable spirit and resolution, and as only such an old and brave soldier would, for the pain and privation which he have to endure be enough to depress any man of ordinary courage; and what vex and rile he (to use his own expression) be the infernal indifference and cowardly ingratitude of Clavering, to whom he write letter after letter, which the Baronet never acknowledge by a single word, or by the small remittance, though a five-pound note, as Strong say, at that time would have be a fortune to he.
but well day be in store for the Chevalier, and in the midst of his despondency and perplexity there come to he a most welcome aid. "yes, if it havenot be for this good fellow here," say strong,--"for a good fellow you be, Altamont, my boy, and hang I if I donot stand by you as long as I live,--i think, Pendennis, it would have be all up with Ned Strong. I be the fifth week of my be keep a prisoner, for I couldnot be always risk my neck across that water-pipe, and take my walk abroad through poor old Cos's window, and my spirit be quite break, sir--dammy, quite beat, and I be think of put an end to myself, and should have do it in another week, when who should drop down from heaven but Altamont!"
"Heaven benot exactly the place, Ned," say Altamont. "I come from Baden-Baden," say he, "and Iwould have a deuced lucky month there, thatbe all."
"well, sir, he take up Marks's bill, and he pay the other fellow that be upon I, like a man, sir, that he do," say Strong, enthusiastically.
"and I shall be very happy to stand a bottle of claret for this company, and as many more as the company choose," say Mr. Altamont, with a blush. "Hallo! waiter, bring we a magnum of the right sort, do you hear? and wewill drink our health all round, sir--and may every good fellow like Strong find another good fellow to stand by he at a pinch. thatbe my sentiment, Mr. Pendennis, though I donot like your name."
"no! and why?" ask Arthur.
Strong press the Colonel's foot under the table here; and Altamont, rather excited, fill up another bumper, nod to Pen, drink off his wine, and say, "he be a gentleman, and that be sufficient, and they be all gentleman."
the meeting between these "all gentleman" take place at Richmond, whither Pendennis have go to dinner, and where he find the Chevalier and his friend at table in the coffee-room. both of the latter be exceedingly hilarious, talkative, and excite by wine; and Strong, who be an admirable story-teller, tell the story of his own siege, and adventure, and escape with great liveliness and humour, and describe the talk of the sheriff's officer at his door, the pretty little signal of Fanny, the grotesque exclamation of Costigan when the Chevalier burst in at his window, and his final rescue by Altamont, in a most graphic manner, and so as greatly to interest his hearer.
"as for I, itbe nothing," Altamont say. "when a ship's pay off, a chap spend his money, you know. and itbe the feller at the black and red at Baden-Baden that do it. I win a good bit of money there, and intend to win a good bit more, donot I, strong? Ibe go to take he with I. Ihave get a system. Iwill make his fortune, I tell you. Iwill make your fortune, if you like--dammy, everybody's fortune. but what Iwill do, and no mistake, boy, I promise you. Iwill put in for that little Fanny. Dammy, sir, what do you think she do? she have two pound, and Ibe blest if she donot go and lend it to Ned Strong! donot she, Ned? letus drink her health."
"with all my heart," say Arthur, and pledge this toast with the great cordiality.
Mr. Altamont then begin, with the great volubility, at great length, to describe his system. he say that it be infallible, if play with coolness; that he have it from a chap at Baden, who have lose by it, it be true, but because he have not enough capital; if he could have stand one more turn of the wheel, he would have have all his money back; that he and several more chap be go to make a bank, and try it; and that he would put every shilling he be worth into it, and have come back to the country for the express purpose of fetch away his money, and Captain Strong; that Strong should play for he; that he could trust Strong and his temper much well than he could his own; and much well than Bloundell-Bloundell or the italian that "stand in." as he empty his bottle, the Colonel describe at full length all his plan and prospect to Pen, who be interested in listen to his story, and the confession of his daring and lawless good-humour.
"I meet that queer fellow Altamont the other day," Pen say to his uncle, a day or two afterwards.
"Altamont? what altamont? therebe Lord Westport's son," say the Major.
"no, no; the fellow who come tipsy into Clavering's dining-room one day when we be there," say the nephew, laugh, "he say he do not like the name of Pendennis, though he do I the honour to think that I be a good fellow."
"I donot know any man of the name of Altamont, I give you my honour," say the impenetrable Major; "and as for your acquaintance, I think the less you have to do with he the well, Arthur."
Arthur laugh again. "he be go to quit the country, and make his fortune by a gambling system. he and my amiable college acquaintance, Bloundell, be partner, and the Colonel take out Strong with he as aide-de-camp. what be it that bind the Chevalier and Clavering, I wonder?"
"I should think, mind you, Pen, I should think, but of course I have only the idea, that there have be something in Clavering's previous life which give these fellow and some other a certain power over he; and if there should be no such a secret, which affair of our, my boy, dammy, I say, it ought to be a lesson to a man to keep himself straight in life, and not to give any man a chance over he."
"why, I think you have some mean of persuasion over Clavering, uncle, or why should he give I that seat in Parlament?"
"clavering think he benot fit for Parliament," the Major answer. "no more he be. whatbe to prevent he from put you or anybody else into his place if he like? do you think that vernment or the opposition would make any bone about accept the seat if he offer it to they! why should you be more squeamish than the first man, and the most honourable man, and man of the high birth and position in the country, begad?" the Major have an answer of this kind to most of Pen's objection, and Pen accept his uncle's reply, not so much because he believe they, but because he wish to believe they. we do a thing--which of we have not?-- not because "everybody do it," but because we like it; and our acquiescence, alas! prove not that everybody be right, but that we and the rest of the world be poor creature alike.
at his next visit to Tunbridge, Mr. Pen do not forget to amuse Miss Blanche with the history which he have learn at Richmond of the Chevalier's imprisonment, and of Altamont's gallant rescue. and after he have tell his tale in his usual satirical way, he mention with praise and emotion little Fanny's generous behaviour to the Chevalier, and Altamont's enthusiasm in her behalf.
Miss Blanche be somewhat jealous, and a good deal pique and curious about Fanny. among the many confidential little communication which Arthur make to Miss Amory in the course of their delightful rural drive and their sweet evening walk, it may be suppose that our hero would not forget a story so interesting to himself and so likely to be interesting to she, as that of the passion and cure of the poor little Ariadne of Shepherd's Inn. his own part in that drama he describe, to do he justice, with become modesty; the moral which he wish to draw from the tale be one in accordance with his usual satirical mood, viz., that woman get over their first love quite as easily as man do (for the fair Blanche, in their intime conversation, do not cease to twit Mr. Pen about his notorious failure in his own virgin attachment to the Fotheringay), and, number one be withdraw, transfer themselves to number two without much difficulty. and poor little Fanny be offer up in sacrifice as an instance to prove this theory. what grief she have endure and surmount, what bitter pang of hopeless attachment she have go through, what time it have take to heal those wound of the tender little bleed heart, Mr. Pen do not know, or perhaps do not choose to know; for he be at once modest and doubtful about his capability as a conqueror of heart, and averse to believe that he have execute any dangerous ravage on that particular one, though his own instance and argument tell against himself in this case; for if, as he say, Miss Fanny be by this time in love with her surgical adorer, who have neither good look, nor good manner, nor wit, nor anything but ardour and fidelity to recommend he, must she not in her first sickness of the love-complaint have have a serious attack, and suffer keenly for a man who have certainly a number of the showy quality which Mr. Huxter want?
"you wicke odious creature," Miss Blanche say, "I believe that you be enrage with Fanny for be so impudent as to forget you, and that you be actually jealous of Mr. Huxter." perhaps Miss Amory be right, as the blush which come in spite of himself and tingle upon Pendennis's cheek (one of those blow with which a man's vanity be constantly slap his face) prove to Pen that he be angry to think he have be supersede by such a rival. by such a fellow as that! without any conceivable good quality! o Mr. Pendennis! (although this remark do not apply to such a smart fellow as you) if Nature have not make that provision for each sex in the credulity of the other, which see good quality where none exist, good look in donkey' ear, wit in their numskull, and music in their bray, there would not have be near so much marrying and give in marriage as now obtain, and as be necessary for the due propagation and continuance of the noble race to which we belong.
"jealous or not," Pen say, "and, Blanche, I donot say no, I should have like Fanny to have come to a well end than that. I donot like history that end in that cynical way; and when we arrive at the conclusion of the story of a pretty girl's passion, to find such a figure as Huxter's at the last page of the tale. be a life a compromise, my lady fair, and the end of the battle of love an ignoble surrender? be the search for the Cupid which my poor little psyche pursue in the darkness --the god of her soul's longing--the god of the bloom cheek and rainbow pinions,--to result in Huxter smelling of tobacco and gallypot? I wish, though I donot see it in life, that people could be like Jenny and Jessamy, or my Lord and Lady Clementina in the story-book and fashionable novel, and at once under the ceremony, and, as it be, at the parson's benediction, become perfectly handsome and good and happy ever after."
"and donot you intend to be good and happy, pray, Monsieur le Misanthrope--and be you very discontent with your lot--and will your marriage be a compromise"--(asked the author of 'Mes Larmes,' with a charming moue)--"and be your psyche an odious vulgar wretch? you wicke satirical creature, I cannot abide you! you take the heart of young thing, play with they, and fle they away with scorn. you ask for love and trample on it. you--you make I cry, that you do, Arthur, and--and don't--and I willnot be console in that way--and I think Fanny be quite right in leave such a heartless creature."
"again, I donot say no," say Pen, look very gloomily at Blanche, and not offer by any mean to repeat the attempt at consolation, which have elicit that sweet monosyllable "donot" from the young lady. "I donot think I have much of what people call heart; but I donot profess it. I make my venture when I be eighteen, and light my lamp and go in search of Cupid. and what be my discovery of love?--a vulgar dancing-woman! I fail, as everybody do, almost everybody; only it be lucky to fail before marriage than after."
"merci du choix, Monsieur," say the sylphide, make a curtsey.
"look, my little Blanche," say Pen, take her hand, and with his voice of sad good-humour; "at least I stoop to no flattery."
"quite the contrary," say Miss Blanche.
and tell you no foolish lie, as vulgar man do. why should you and I, with our experience, ape romance and dissemble passion? I do not believe Miss Blanche Amory to be peerless among the beautiful, nor the great poetess, nor the most surpass musician, any more than I believe you to be the tall woman in the whole world--like the giantess whose picture we see as we ride through the fair yesterday. but if I donot set you up as a heroine, neither do I offer you your very humble servant as a hero. but I think you be--well, there, I think you be very sufficiently good-look."
"merci," Miss Blanche say, with another curtsey.
"I think you sing charmingly. Ibe sure yoube clever. I hope and believe that you be good-natured, and that you will be companionable."
"and so, provide I bring you a certain sum of money and a seat in Parliament, you condescend to fle to I your royal pocket-handkerchief," say Blanche. "Que d'honneur! we use to call your Highness the Prince of Fairoaks. what an honour to think that I be to be elevate to the throne, and to bring the seat in Parliament as backsheesh to the sultan! I be glad I be clever, and that I can play and sing to your liking; my song will amuse my lord's leisure."
"and if thief be about the house," say Pen, grimly pursue the simile, "forty besetting thief in the shape of lurking care and enemy in ambush and passion in arm, my Morgiana will dance round I with a tambourine, and kill all my rogue and thief with a smile. willnot she?" but Pen look as if he do not believe that she would. "ah, Blanche," he continue after a pause, "donot be angry; donot be hurt at my truth-telling.--Don't you see that I always take you at your word? you say you will be a slave and dance--I say, dance. you say, 'I take you with what you bring:' I say, 'I take you with what you bring.' to the necessary deceit and hypocrisy of our life, why add any that be useless and unnecessary? if I offer myself to you because I think we have a fair chance of be happy together, and because by your help I may get for both of we a good place and a not undistinguished name, why ask I to feign rapture and counterfeit romance, in which neither of we believe? do you want I to come wooing in a Prince Prettyman's dress from the masquerade warehouse, and to pay you compliment like Sir Charles Grandison? do you want I to make you verse as in the day when we be --when we be child? I will if you like, and sell they to Bacon and Bungay afterwards. shall I feed my pretty princess with bonbon?"
"Mais j'adore le bonbon, moi," say the little sylphide, with a queer piteous look.
"I can buy a hatful at Fortnum and Mason's for a guinea. and it shall have its bonbon, its pooty little sugar-plum, that it shall," Pen say with a bitter smile. "Nay, my dear, nay, my dear little Blanche, donot cry. dry the pretty eye, I cannot bear that;" and he proceed to offer that consolation which the circumstance require, and which the tear, the genuine tear of vexation, which now spring from the angry eye of the author of 'Mes Larmes' demand.
the scornful and sarcastic tone of Pendennis quite frightened and overcome the girl. "I--I donot want your consolation. I--I never be--so --spoken to before--by any of my--my--by anybody"--she sob out, with much simplicity.
"anybody!" shout out Pen, with a savage burst of laughter, and Blanche blush one of the most genuine blush which her cheek have ever exhibit, and she cry out, "O Arthur, vous ete un homme terrible!" she feel bewildered, frightened, oppressed, the worldly little flirt who have be play at love for the last dozen year of her life, and yet not displeased at meet a master.
"tell I, Arthur," she say, after a pause in this strange love-making. "why do Sir Francis Clavering give up his seat in Parliament?"
"Au fait, why do he give it to I?" ask Arthur, now blush in his turn.
"you always mock I, sir," she say. "if it be good to be in Parliament, why do Sir Francis go out?"
"my uncle have talk he over. he always say that you be not sufficiently provide for. in the--the family dispute, when your mamma pay his debt so liberally, it be stipulate, I suppose, that you--that be, that I--that is, upon my word, I donot know why he go out of Parliament," Pen say, with rather a forced laugh. "you see, Blanche, that you and I be two good little child, and that this marriage have be arrange for we by our mamma and uncle, and that we must be obedient, like a good little boy and girl."
so, when Pen go to London, he send Blanche a box of bonbon, each sugar-plum of which be wrap up in ready-make french verse, of the most tender kind; and, besides, despatch to she some poem of his own manufacture, quite as artless and authentic; and it be no wonder that he do not tell Warrington what his conversation with Miss Amory have be, of so delicate a sentiment be they, and of a nature so necessarily private.
and if, like many a bad and well man, Arthur Pendennis, the widow's son, be meditate an apostasy, and go to sell himself to--we all know whom,--at least the renegade do not pretend to be a believer in the creed to which he be ready to swear. and if every woman and man in this kingdom, who have sell she or himself for money or position, as Mr. Pendennis be about to do, would but purchase a copy of his memoir, what ton of volume Messrs. Bradbury and Evans would sell!
CHAPTER LXVI
in which Pen begin his Canvass
Melancholy as the great house at Clavering Park have be in the day before his marriage, when its bankrupt proprietor be a refugee in foreign land, it be not much more cheerful now when Sir Francis Clavering come to inhabit it. the great part of the mansion be shut up, and the Baronet only occupy a few of the room on the ground floor, where his housekeeper and her assistant from the lodge-gate wait upon the luckless gentleman in his forced retreat, and cook a part of the game which he spend the dreary morning in shooting. Lightfoot, his man, have pass over to my Lady's service; and, as Pen be inform in a letter from Mr. Smirke, who perform the ceremony, have execute his prudent intention of marry Mrs. Bonner, my Lady's woman, who, in her mature year, be stricken with the charm of the youth, and endow he with her saving and her mature person.
to be landlord and landlady of the Clavering Arms be the ambition of both of they; and it be agree that they be to remain in Lady Clavering's service until quarter-day arrive, when they be to take possession of their hotel. Pen graciously promise that he would give his election dinner there, when the Baronet should vacate his seat in the young man's favour; and, as it have be agree by his uncle, to whom Clavering seem to be able to refuse nothing, Arthur come down in September on a visit to Clavering Park, the owner of which be very glad to have a companion who would relieve his loneliness, and perhaps would lend he a little ready money.
Pen furnish his host with these desirable supply a couple of day after he have make his appearance at Clavering: and no soon be these small fund in Sir Francis's pocket, than the latter find he have business at Chatteris and at the neighbouring watering-place, of which ------shire boast many, and go off to see to his affair, which be transact, as might be suppose, at the county race-ground and billiard-room. Arthur could live alone well enough, have many mental resource and amusement which do not require other person' company: he could walk with the gamekeeper of a morning, and for the evening there be a plenty of book and occupation for a literary genius like Mr. Arthur, who require but a cigar and a sheet of paper or two to make the night pass away pleasantly. in truth, in two or three day he have find the society of Sir Francis Clavering perfectly intolerable; and it be with a mischievous eagerness and satisfaction that he offer Clavering the little pecuniary aid which the latter accord to his custom solicit, and supply he with the mean of take flight from his own house.
besides, our ingenious friend have to ingratiate himself with the townspeople of Clavering, and with the voter of the borough which he hop to represent; and he set himself to this task with only the more eagerness, remember how unpopular he have before be in Clavering, and determine to vanquish the odium which he have inspire amongst the simple people there. his sense of humour make he delight in this task. naturally rather reserved and silent in public, he become on a sudden as frank, easy, and jovial as Captain Strong. he laugh with everybody who would exchange a laugh with he, shake hand right and leave, with what may be certainly call a dexterous cordiality; make his appearance at the market-day and the farmer' ordinary; and, in fine, act like a consummate hypocrite, and as gentleman of the high birth and most spotless integrity act when they wish to make themselves agreeable to their constituent, and have some end to gain of the country-folk. how be it that we allow ourselves not to be deceive, but to be ingratiate so readily by a glib tongue, a ready laugh, and a frank manner? we know, for the most part, that it be false coin, and we take it we know that it be flattery, which it cost nothing to distribute to everybody, and we have rather have it than be without it. Friend Pen go about at Clavering, laboriously simple and adroitly pleased, and quite a different being from the scornful and rather sulky young dandy whom the inhabitant remember ten year ago.
the Rectory be shut up. Doctor Portman be go, with his gout and his family, to Harrogate,--an event which Pen deplore very much in a letter to the Doctor, in which, in a few kind and simple word, he express his regret at not see his old friend, whose advice he want and whose aid he might require some day: but Pen console himself for the Doctor's absence by make acquaintance with Mr. Simcoe, the opposition preacher, and with the two partner of the cloth-factory at Chatteris, and with the Independent preacher there, all of whom he meet at Clavering Athenaeum, which the Liberal party have set up in accordance with the advanced spirit of the age, and perhaps in opposition to the aristocratic old reading-room, into which the Edinburgh Review have once scarcely get an admission, and where no tradesman be allow an entrance. he propitiate the young partner of the cloth-factory, by ask he to dine in a friendly way at the Park; he compliment the Honourable Mrs. Simcoe with hare and partridge from the same quarter, and a request to read her husband's last sermon; and be a little unwell one day, the rascal take advantage of the circumstance to show his tongue to Mr. Huxter, who send he medicine and call the next morning. how delight old Pendennis would have be with his pupil! Pen himself be amuse with the sport in which he be engage, and his success inspire he with a wicked good-humour.
and yet, as he walk out of Clavering of a night, after "preside" at a meeting of the Athenaeum, or work through an evening with Mrs. Simcoe, who, with her husband, be awe by the young Londoner's reputation, and have hear of his social success; as he pass over the old familiar bridge of the rushing Brawl, and hear that well-remember sound of water beneath, and see his own cottage of Fairoaks among the tree, their darkling outline clear against the starlit sky, different thought no doubt come to the young man's mind, and awaken pang of grief and shame there. there still use to be a light in the window of the room which he remember so well, and in which the Saint who love he have pass so many hour of care and yearning and prayer. he turn away his gaze from the faint light which seem to pursue he with its wan reproachful gaze, as though it be his mother's spirit watch and warning. how clear the night be! how keen the star shine! how ceaseless the rush of the flow water! the old home tree whisper, and wave gently their dark head and branch over the cottage roof. Yonder, in the faint starlight glimmer, be the terrace where, as a boy, he walk of summer evening, ardent and trustful, unspotted, untried, ignorant of doubt or passion; shelter as yet from the world's contamination in the pure and anxious bosom of love. the clock of the near town tolling midnight, with a clang, disturb our wanderer's reverie, and send he onwards towards his night's resting-place, through the lodge into Clavering avenue, and under the dark arcade of the rustle lime.
when he see the cottage the next time, it be smile in sunset; those bedroom window be open where the light be burn the night before; and Pen's tenant, Captain Stokes, of the Bombay Artillery (whose mother, old Mrs. Stokes, live in Clavering), receive his landlord's visit with great cordiality: show he over the ground and the new pond he have make in the back-garden from the stable; talk to he confidentially about the roof and chimney, and beg Mr. Pendennis to name a day when he will do himself and Mrs. Stokes the pleasure to, etc. Pen, who have be a fortnight in the country, excuse himself for not have call soon upon the Captain by frankly own that he have not the heart to do it. "I understand you, sir," the Captain say; and Mrs. Stokes, who have slip away at the ring of the bell (how odd it seem to Pen to ring the bell!), come down in her good gown, surround by her child. the young one clamb about Stokes: the boy jump into an arm-chair. it be Pen's father's arm-chair; and Arthur remember the day when he would as soon have think of mount the king's throne as of seat himself in that arm-chair. he ask if Miss Stokes--she be the very image of her mamma--if she can play? he should like to hear a tune on that piano. she play. he hear the note of the old piano once more, enfeeble by age, but he do not listen to the player. he be listen to Laura singing as in the day of their youth, and see his mother bend and beat time over the shoulder of the girl.
the dinner at Fairoaks give in Pen's honour by his tenant, and at which old Mrs. Stokes, Captain Glanders, Squire Hobnel and the clergyman and his lady from Tinckleton, be present, be very stupid and melancholy for Pen, until the waiter from Clavering (who aid the captain's stable-boy and Mrs. Stokes's butler) whom Pen remember as a street boy, and who be now indeed barber in that place, drop a plate over Pen's shoulder, on which Mr. Hobnell (who also employ he) remark, "I suppose, Hodson, your hand be slippery with bear'-grease. hebe always drop the crockery about, that Hodson be--haw, haw!" on which Hodson blush, and look so disconcerted, that Pen burst out laugh; and good-humour and hilarity be the order of the evening. for the second course, there be a hare and partridge top and bottom, and when after the withdrawal of the servant Pen say to the Vicar of Tinckleton, "I think, Mr. Stooks, you should have ask Hodson to cut the hare," the joke be take instantly by the clergyman, who be follow in the course of a few minute by Captains Stokes and Glanders, and by Mr. Hobnell, who arrive rather late, but with an immense guffaw.
* * * * * *
while Mr. Pen be engage in the country in the above scheme, it happen that the lady of his choice, if not of his affection, come up to London from the Tunbridge villa bind upon shopping expedition or important business, and in company of old Mrs. Bonner, her mother's maid, who have live and quarrel with Blanche many time since she be an infant, and who now be about to quit Lady Clavering's service for the hymeneal state, be anxious like a good soul to bestow some token of respectful kindness upon her old and young mistress before she quit they altogether, to take her post as the wife of Lightfoot, and landlady of the Clavering Arms.
the honest woman take the benefit of Miss Amory's taste to make the purchase which she intend to offer her ladyship; and, request the fair Blanche to choose something for herself that should be to her liking, and remind she of her old nurse who have attend she through many a wakeful night, and eventful teething, and childish fever, and who love she like a child of her own a'most. these purchase be make, and as the nurse insist on buy an immense Bible for Blanche, the young lady suggest that Bonner should purchase a large Johnson's Dictionary for her mamma. each of the two woman might certainly profit by the present make to she.
then Mrs. Bonner invest money in some bargain in linen-drapery, which might be useful at the Clavering Arms, and buy a red and yellow neck-handkerchief, which Blanche could see at once be intend for Mr. Lightfoot. young than herself by at least five-and-twenty year, Mrs. Bonner regard that youth with a fondness at once parental and conjugal, and love to lavish ornament on his person, which already glitter with pin, ring, shirt-stud, and chain and seal, purchase at the good creature's expense.
it be in the Strand that Mrs. Bonner make her purchase, aid by Miss Blanche, who like the fun very well; and when the old lady have buy everything that she desire, and be leave the shop, Blanche, with a smile face, and a sweet bow to one of the shopman, say, "pray, sir, will you have the kindness to show we the way to Shepherd's Inn?"
Shepherd's Inn be but a few score of yard off, Old Castle Street be close by, the elegant young shopman point out the turning which the young lady be to take, and she and her companion walk off together.
"Shepherd's Inn! what can you want in Shepherd's Inn, Miss Blanche?" Bonner inquire. "Mr. Strong live there. do you want to go and see the Captain?"
"I should like to see the Captain very well. I like the Captain; but it be not he I want. I want to see a dear little good girl, who be very kind to--to Mr. Arthur when he be so ill last year, and save his life almost; and I want to thank she and ask she if she would like anything. I look out several of my dress on purpose this morning, Bonner!" and she look at Bonner as if she have a right to admiration, and have perform an act of remarkable virtue. Blanche, indeed, be very fond of sugar-plum; she would have feed the poor upon they, when she have have enough, and give a country girl a ball-dress, when she have wear it and be tired of it.
"pretty girl--pretty young woman!" mumble Mrs. Bonner. "I know I want no pretty young woman to come about Lightfoot," and in imagination she people the Clavering Arms with a harem of the most hideous chambermaid and barmaid.
Blanche, with pink and blue, and feather, and flower, and trinket (that wondrous invention, a chatelaine, be not extant yet, or she would have have one, we may be sure), and a shot-silk dress, and a wonderful mantle, and a charming parasol, present a vision of elegance and beauty such as bewilder the eye of Mrs. Bolton, who be scrub the lodge-floor of Shepherd's Inn and cause Betsy-Jane and Ameliar-Ann to look with delight.
Blanche look on they with a smile of ineffable sweetness and protection; like Rowena go to see Rebecca; like Marie Antoinette visit the poor in the famine; like the Marchioness of Carabas alight from her carriage-and-four at a pauper-tenant's door, and take from John No II. the packet of Epsom salt for the invalid's benefit, carry it with her own imperial hand into the sick-room-- Blanche feel a queen step down from her throne to visit a subject, and enjoy all the bland consciousness of do a good action.
"my good woman! I want to see Fanny--Fanny Bolton; be she here?"
Mrs. Bolton have a sudden suspicion, from the splendour of Blanche's appearance, that it must be a play-actor, or something bad.
"what do you want with Fanny, pray?" she ask.
"I be Lady Clavering's daughter--you have hear of Sir Francis Clavering? and I wish very much indeed to see Fanny Bolton."
"pray step in, miss.--betsy-Jane, wherebe fanny?"
Betsy-Jane say Fanny have go into no. 3 staircase, on which Mrs. Bolton say she be probably in Strong's room, and bade the child go and see if she be there.
"in Captain Strong's room! oh, let we go to Captain Strong's room," cry out Miss Blanche. "I know he very well. you dearest little girl, show we the way to Captain Strong!" cry out Miss Blanche, for the floor reek with the recent scrubbing, and the goddess do not like the smell of brown-soap.
and as they pass up the stair, a gentleman by the name of Costigan, who happen to be swagger about the court, and give a very knowing look with his "oi" under Blanche's bonnet, remark to himself, "thatbe a devilish foine gyurll, bedad, goan up to Sthrong and Altamont: theybe always have foine gyurll up their stair."
"Hallo--hwhatbe that?" he presently say, look up at the window: from which some pierce shriek issue.
at the sound of the voice of a distressed female the intrepid cos rush up the stair as fast as his old leg would carry he, be nearly overthrow by Strong's servant, who be descend the stair. cos find the outer door of Strong's chamber open, and begin to thunder at the knocker. after many and fierce knock, the inner door be partially unclose, and Strong's head appear.
"itbe oi, I boy. Hwhatbe that noise, Sthrong?" ask Costigan.
"go to the d----!" be the only answer, and the door be shut on Cos's venerable red nose: and he go downstairs mutter threat at the indignity offer to he, and vow that he would have satisfaction. in the meanwhile the reader, more lucky than Captain Costigan, will have the privilege of be make acquainted with the secret which be withhold from that officer.
it have be say of how generous a disposition Mr. Altamont be, and when he be well supply with fund how liberally he spend they. of a hospitable turn, he have no great pleasure than drink in company with other people; so that there be no man more welcome at Greenwich and Richmond than the Emissary of the Nawaub of Lucknow.
now it chance that on the day when Blanche and Mrs. Bonner ascend the staircase to Strong's room in Shepherd's Inn, the Colonel have invite Miss Delaval of the ------ Theatre Royal, and her mother, Mrs. Hodge, to a little party down the river, and it have be agree that they be to meet at Chambers, and thence walk down to a port in the neighbouring Strand to take water. so that when Mrs. Bonner and Mes Larmes come to the door, where Grady, Altamont's servant, be stand, the domestic say, "walk in, lady," with the utmost affability, and lead they into the room, which be arrange as if they have be expect there. indeed, two bouquet of flower, buy at Covent Garden that morning, and instance of the tender gallantry of Altamont, be await his guest upon the table. Blanche smell at the bouquet, and put she pretty little dainty nose into it, and trip about the room, and look behind the curtain, and at the book and print, and at the plan of Clavering estate hang up on the wall; and have ask the servant for Captain Strong, and have almost forget his existence and the errand about which she have come, namely, to visit Fanny Bolton; so pleased be she with the new adventure, and the odd, strange, delightful, droll little idea of be in a bachelor's chamber in a queer old place in the city!
Grady meanwhile, with a pair of ample varnish boot, have disappear into his master's room. Blanche have hardly the leisure to remark how big the boot be, and how unlike Mr. Strong's.
"the woman's come," say Grady, help his master to the boot.
"do you ask them if they would take a glass of anything?" ask Altamont.
Grady come out--"he say, will you take anything to drink?" the domestic ask of they; at which Blanche, amuse with the artless question, break out into a pretty little laugh, and ask of Mrs. Bonner, "shall we take anything to drink?"
"well, you may take it or lave it," say Mr. Grady, who think his offer slight, and do not like the contemptuous manner of the new-comer, and so leave they.
"will we take anything to drink?" Blanche ask again: and again begin to laugh.
"Grady," bawl out a voice from the chamber within:--a voice that make Mrs. Bonner start.
Grady do not answer: his song be hear from afar off, from the kitchen, his upper room, where Grady be sing at his work.
"Grady, my coat!" again roar the voice from within.
"why, that be not Mr. Strong's voice," say the sylphide, still half laugh. "grady my coat!--bonner, who be Grady my coat? we ought to go away."
Bonner still look quite puzzled at the sound of the voice which she have hear.
the bedroom door here open and the individual who have call out "Grady, my coat," appear without the garment in question.
he nod to the woman, and walk across the room. "I beg your pardon, lady. Grady, bring my coat down, sir! well, my dear, itbe a fine day, and wewill have a jolly lark at----"
he say no more; for here Mrs. Bonner, who have be look at he with scared eye, suddenly shriek out, "Amory! Amory!" and fall back scream and faint in her chair.
the man, so apostrophised, look at the woman an instant, and, rush up to Blanche, seize she and kiss she. "yes, Betsy," he say, "by g-- it be I. Mary Bonner know I. what a fine gal wehave grow! but itbe a secret, mind. Ibe dead, though Ibe your father. your poor mother donot know it. what a pretty gal wehave grow! kiss I--kiss I close, my Betsy? d--- it, I love you: Ibe your old father."
Betsy or Blanche look quite bewildered, and begin to scream too--once, twice, thrice; and it be she pierce shriek which Captain Costigan hear as he walk the court below.
at the sound of these shriek the perplexed parent clasp his hand (his wristband be open, and on one brawny arm you could see letter tattooed in blue), and, rush to his apartment, come back with an eau-de-cologne bottle from his grand silver dressing-case, with the fragrant content of which he begin liberally to sprinkle Bonner and Blanche.
the scream of these woman bring the other occupant of the chamber into the room: Grady from his kitchen, and Strong from his apartment in the upper story. the latter at once see from the aspect of the two woman what have occur.
"Grady, go and wait in the court," he say, "and if anybody come--you understand I."
"be it the play-actress and her mother?" say Grady.
"yes--confound you--say that therebe nobody in chamber, and the partybe off for to-day."
"shall I say that, sir? and after I buy they bokay?" ask Grady of his master.
"yes," say Amory, with a stamp of his foot; and Strong go to the door, too, reach it just in time to prevent the entrance of Captain Costigan, who have mount the stair.
the lady from the theatre do not have their treat to Greenwich, nor do Blanche pay her visit to Fanny Bolton on that day. and cos, who take occasion majestically to inquire of Grady what the mischief be, and who be crying?--had for answer that 'twas a woman, another of they, and that they be, in Grady's opinion, the cause of 'most all the mischief in the world.
CHAPTER LXVII
in which Pen begin to doubt about his Election
Whilst Pen, in his own county, be thus carry on his selfish plan and parliamentary scheme, news come to he that Lady Rockminster have arrive at Baymouth, and have bring with she our friend Laura. at the announcement that Laura his sister be near he, Pen feel rather guilty. his wish be to stand high in her esteem, perhaps; than in that of any other person in the world. she be his mother's legacy to he. he be to be her patron and protector in some sort. how would she brave the news which he have to tell she; and how should he explain the plan which he be meditate? he feel as if neither he nor Blanche could bear Laura's dazzle glance of calm scrutiny, and as if he would not dare to disclose his worldly hope and ambition to that spotless judge. at her arrival at Baymouth, he write a letter thither which contain a great number of fine phrase and protest of affection, and a great deal of easy satire and raillery; in the midst of all which Mr. Pen could not help feel that he be in panic, and that he be act like a rogue and hypocrite.
how be it that a simple country girl should be the object of fear and tremble to such an accomplished gentleman as Mr. Pen? his worldly tactic and diplomacy, his satire and knowledge of the world, could not bear the test of her purity, he feel somehow. and he have to own to himself that his affair be in such a position, that he could not tell the truth to that honest soul. as he ride from Clavering to Baymouth he feel as guilty as a schoolboy who donot know his lesson and be about to face the awful master. for be not truth the master always, and do she not have the power and hold the book?
under the charge of her kind, though somewhat wayward and absolute patroness, Lady Rockminster, Laura have see somewhat of the world in the last year, have gather some accomplishment, and profit by the lesson of society. many a girl who have be accustom to that too great tenderness in which Laura's early life have be pass, would have be unfit for the change existence which she now have to lead. Helen worship her two child, and think, as home-breed woman will, that all the world be make for they, or to be consider after they. she tend Laura with a watchfulness of affection which never leave she. if she have a headache, the widow be as alarmed as if there have never be an ache head before in the world. she sleep and wake, read and move under her mother's fond superintendence, which be now withdraw from she, along with the tender creature whose anxious heart would beat no more. and painful moment of grief and depression no doubt Laura have, when she stand in the great careless world alone. nobody heed her grief or her solitude. she be not quite the equal, in social rank, of the lady whose companion she be, or of the friend and relative of the imperious, but kind old dowager. some very likely bear she no goodwill-- some, perhaps, slight she: it might have be that servant be occasionally rude; their mistress certainly be often. Laura not seldom find herself in family meeting, the confidence and familiarity of which she feel be interrupt by her intrusion; and her sensitiveness of course be wound at the idea that she should give or feel this annoyance. how many governess be there in the world, think cheerful Laura,--how many lady, whose necessity make they slave and companion by profession! what bad temper and coarse unkindness have not these to encounter? how infinitely well my lot be with these really kind and affectionate people than that of thousand of unprotected girl! it be with this cordial spirit that our young lady adapt herself to her new position; and go in advance of her fortune with a trustful smile.
do you ever know a person who meet Fortune in that way, whom the goddess do not regard kindly? be not even bad people win by a constant cheerfulness and a pure and affectionate heart? when the babe in the wood, in the ballad, look up fondly and trustfully at those notorious rogue whom their uncle have set to make away with the little folk, we all know how one of the rascal relent, and make away with the other-- not have the heart to be unkind to so much innocence and beauty. oh, happy they who have that virgin love trust and sweet smile confidence in the world, and fear no evil because they think none! Miss Laura Bell be one of these fortunate person; and besides the gentle widow's little cross, which, as we have see, Pen give she, have such a sparkling and brilliant kohinoor in her bosom, as be even more precious than that famous jewel; for it not only fetch a price, and be retain, by its owner in another world where diamond be state to be of no value, but here, too, be of inestimable worth to its possessor; be a talisman against evil, and lighten up the darkness of life, like Cogia Hassan's famous stone.
so that before Miss Bell have be a year in Lady Rockminster's house, there be not a single person in it whose love she have not win by the use of this talisman. from the old lady to the low dependent of her bounty, Laura have secure the goodwill and kindness of everybody. with a mistress of such a temper, my Lady's woman (who have endure her mistress for forty year, and have be claw and scold and jib every day and night in that space of time) could not be expect to have a good temper of her own; and be at first angry against Miss Laura, as she have be against her ladyship's fifteen precede companion. but when Laura be ill at Paris, this old woman nurse she in spite of her mistress, who be afraid of catch the fever, and absolutely fight for her medicine with Martha from Fairoaks, now advanced to be Miss Laura's own maid. as she be recover, Grandjean the chef want to kill she by the number of delicacy which he dress for she, and weep when she eat her first slice of chicken. the swiss major-domo of the house celebrate Miss Bell's praise in almost every european language, which he speak with indifferent incorrectness; the coachman be happy to drive she out; the page cry when he hear she be ill; and Calverley and Coldstream (those two footman, so large, so calm ordinarily, and so difficult to move) break out into extraordinary hilarity at the news of her convalescence, and intoxicate the page at a wine-shop, to fete Laura's recovery. even Lady Diana Pynsent (our former acquaintance Mr. Pynsent have marry by this time), Lady Diana, who have have a considerable dislike to Laura for some time, be so enthusiastic as to say that she think Miss Bell be a very agreeable person, and that grandmamma have find a great trouvaille in she. all this goodwill and kindness Laura have acquire, not by any art, not by any flattery, but by the simple force of good-nature, and by the blessed gift of please and be pleased.
on the one or two occasion when he have see Lady Rockminster, the old lady, who do not admire he, have be very pitiless and abrupt with our young friend, and perhaps Pen expect when he come to Baymouth to find Laura instal in her house in the quality of humble companion, and treat no well than himself. when she hear of his arrival she come run downstairs, and I be not sure that she do not embrace he in the presence of Calverley and Coldstream: not that those gentleman ever tell: if the fractus orbis have come to a smash, if Laura, instead of kiss Pen, have take her scissor and snip off his head--Calverley and Coldstream would have look on impavidly, without allow a grain of powder to be disturb by the calamity.
Laura have so much improve in health and look that Pen could not but admire she. the frank and kind eye which meet his, beam with good-health; the cheek which he kiss blush with beauty. as he look at she, artless and graceful, pure and candid, he think he have never see she so beautiful. why should he remark her beauty now so much, and remark too to himself that he have not remark it soon? he take her fair trustful hand and kiss it fondly: he look in her bright clear eye, and read in they that kindle welcome which he be always sure to find there. he be affect and touch by the tender tone and the pure sparkling glance; their innocence smite he somehow and move he.
"how good you be to I, Laura--sister!" say Pen; "I donot deserve that you should--that you should be so kind to I."
"Mamma leave you to I," she say, stoop down and brush his forehead with her lip hastily. "you know you be to come to I when you be in trouble, or to tell I when you be very happy: that be our compact, Arthur, last year, before we part. be you very happy now, or be you in trouble--which be it?" and she look at he with an arch glance of kindness. "do you like go into Parliament! do you intend to distinguish yourself there? how I shall tremble for your first speech!"
"do you know about the Parliament plan, then?" Pen ask.
"Know?--all the world know! I have hear it talk about many time. Lady Rockminster's doctor talk about it to-day. I daresay it will be in the Chatteris paper to-morrow. it be all over the county that Sir Francis Clavering, of Clavering, be go to retire, in behalf of Mr. Arthur Pendennis, of Fairoaks; and that the young and beautiful Miss Blanche Amory is----"
"what! that too?" ask Pendennis.
"that, too, dear Arthur. Tout se sait, as somebody would say, whom I intend to be very fond of; and who I be sure be very clever and pretty. I have have a letter from Blanche. the kind of letter. she speak so warmly of you, Arthur! I hope--I know she feel what she writes.--When be it to be, Arthur? why do you not tell I? I may come and live with you then, maynot I?"
"my home be your, dear Laura, and everything I have," Pen say. "if I do not tell you, it be because--because--I do not know: nothing be decide as yet. no word have pass between we. but you think Blanche could be happy with I--don't you? not a romantic fondness, you know. I have no heart, I think; Ihave tell she so: only a sober-sided attachment: --and want my wife on one side of the fire and my sister on the other,-- Parliament in the session and Fairoaks in the holiday, and my Laura never to leave I until somebody who have a right come to take she away."
somebody who have a right--somebody with a right! why do Pen, as he look at the girl and slowly utter the word, begin to feel angry and jealous of the invisible somebody with the right to take she away? anxious, but a minute ago, how she would take the news regard his probable arrangement with Blanche, Pen be hurt somehow that she receive the intelligence so easily, and take his happiness for grant.
"until somebody come," Laura say, with a laugh, "I will stay at home and be aunt Laura, and take care of the child when Blanche be in the world. I have arrange it all. I be an excellent housekeeper. do you know I have be to market at Paris with Mrs. Beck, and have take some lesson from M. Grandjean? and I have have some lesson in Paris in sing too, with the money which you send I, you kind boy: and I can sing much well now: and I have learn to dance, though not so well as Blanche; and when you become a minister of state, Blanche shall present I:" and with this, and with a provoking good-humour, she perform for he the last parisian curtsey.
Lady Rockminster come in whilst this curtsey be be perform, and give to Arthur one finger to shake; which he take, and over which he bow as well as he could, which, in truth, be very clumsily.
"so you be go to be marry, sir," say the old lady.
"scold he, Lady Rockminster, for not tell we," Laura say, go away: which, in truth, the old lady begin instantly to do. "so you be go to marry, and to go into Parliament in place of that good-for-nothing Sir Francis Clavering. I want he to give my grandson his seat--why do he not give my grandson his seat? I hope you be to have a great deal of money with Miss Amory. I wouldnot take she without a great deal."
"Sir Francis Clavering be tired of Parliament," Pen say, wince, "and-- and I rather wish to attempt that career. the rest of the story be at least premature."
"I wonder, when you have Laura at home, you could take up with such an affected little creature as that," the old lady continue.
"I be very sorry Miss Amory do not please your ladyship," say Pen, smile.
"you mean--that it be no affair of mine, and that I be not go to marry she. well, Ibe not, and Ibe very glad I be not--a little odious thing-- when I think that a man could prefer she to my Laura, Ihave no patience with he, and so I tell you, Mr. Arthur Pendennis."
"I be very glad you see Laura with such favourable eye," Pen say.
"you be very glad, and you be very sorry. what do it matter, sir, whether you be very glad or very sorry? a young man who prefer Miss Amory to Miss Bell have no business to be sorry or glad. a young man who take up with such a crooked lump of affectation as that little Amory,-- for she be crook, I tell you she is,--after see my Laura, have no right to hold up his head again. where be your friend Bluebeard? the tall young man, I mean,--Warrington, benot his name? why do he not come down, and marry Laura? what do the young man mean by not marry such a girl as that? they all marry for money now. you be all selfish and coward. we run away with each other, and make foolish match in my time. I have no patience with the young man! when I be at Paris in the winter, I ask all the three attache at the Embassy why they do not fall in love with Miss Bell? they laugh--they say they want money. you be all selfish--you be all coward."
"I hope before you offer Miss Bell to the attache," say Pen, with some heat, "you do she the favour to consult she?"
"Miss Bell have only a little money. Miss Bell must marry soon. somebody must make a match for she, sir; and a girl cannot offer herself," say the old dowager, with great state. "Laura, my dear, Ihave be tell your cousin that all the young man be selfish; and that there be not a pennyworth of romance leave among they. he be as bad as the rest."
"have you be ask Arthur why he willnot marry I?" say Laura, with a kindling smile, come back and take her cousin's hand. (she have be away, perhaps, to hide some trace of emotion, which she do not wish other to see.) "he be go to marry somebody else; and I intend to be very fond of she, and to go and live with they, provide he then do not ask every bachelor who come to his house, why he do not marry I?"
the terror of Pen's conscience be thus appease, and his examination before Laura over without any reproach on the part of the latter, Pen begin to find that his duty and inclination lead he constantly to Baymouth, where Lady Rockminster inform he that a place be always reserve for he at her table. "and I recommend you to come often," the old lady say, "for Grandjean be an excellent cook, and to be with Laura and I will do your manner good. it be easy to see that you be always think about yourself. donot blush and stammer--almost all young man be always think about themselves. my son and grandson always be until I cure they. come here, and let we teach you to behave properly; you will not have to carve, that be do at the side-table. Hecker will give you as much wine as be good for you; and on day when you be very good and amusing you shall have some champagne. Hecker, mind what I say. Mr. Pendennis be Miss Laura's brother; and you will make he comfortable, and see that he do not have too much wine, or disturb I whilst I be take my nap after dinner. you be selfish: I intend to cure you of be selfish. you will dine here when you have no other engagement; and if it rain you have well put up at the hotel." as long as the good lady could order everybody round about she, she be not hard to please; and all the slave and subject of her little dowager court tremble before she, but love she.
she do not receive a very numerous or brilliant society. the doctor, of course, be admit as a constant and faithful visitor; the vicar and his curate; and on public day the vicar's wife and daughter, and some of the season visitor at Baymouth, be receive at the old lady's entertainment: but generally the company be a small one, and Mr. Arthur drink his wine by himself, when Lady Rockminster retire to take her doze, and to be play and sing to sleep by Laura after dinner.
"if my music can give she a nap," say the good-natured girl, "ought I not to be very glad that it can do so much good? Lady Rockminster sleep very little of night: and I use to read to she until I fall ill at Paris, since when she will not hear of my sit up."
"why do you not write to I when you be ill?" ask Pen, with a blush.
"what good could you do I? I have Martha to nurse I and the doctor every day. you be too busy to write to woman or to think about they. you have your book and your newspaper, and your politic and your railroad to occupy you. I write when I be well."
and Pen look at she, and blush again, as he remember that, during all the time of her illness, he have never write to she and have scarcely think about she.
in consequence of his relationship, Pen be free to walk and ride with his cousin constantly, and in the course of those walk and ride, could appreciate the sweet frankness of her disposition, and the truth, simplicity, and kindliness of her fair and spotless heart. in their mother's lifetime, she have never speak so openly or so cordially as now. the desire of poor Helen to make an union between her two child, have cause a reserve on Laura's part towards Pen; for which, under the altered circumstance of Arthur's life, there be now no necessity. he be engage to another woman; and Laura become his sister at once,-- hiding, or banish from herself, any doubt which she might have as to his choice; strive to look cheerfully forward, and hope for his prosperity; promise herself to do all that affection might do to make her mother's darling happy.
their talk be often about the depart mother. and it be from a thousand story which Laura tell he that Arthur be make aware how constant and absorb that silent maternal devotion have be; which have accompany he present and absent through life, and have only end with the fond widow's last breath. one day the people in Clavering see a lad in charge of a couple of horse at the churchyard-gate: and it be tell over the place that Pen and Laura have visit Helen's grave together. since Arthur have come down into the country, he have be there once or twice: but the sight of the sacred stone have bring no consolation to he. a guilty man do a guilty deed: a mere speculator, content to lay down his faith and honour for a fortune and a worldly career; and own that his life be but a contemptible surrender--what right have he in the holy place? what boot it to he in the world he live in, that other be no well than himself? Arthur and Laura ride by the gate of Fairoaks; and he shake hand with his tenant's child, play on the lawn and the terrace--Laura look steadily at the cottage wall, at the creeper on the porch and the magnolia grow up to her window. "Mr. Pendennis ride by to-day," one of the boy tell his mother, "with a lady, and he stop and talk to we, and he ask for a bit of honeysuckle off the porch, and give it the lady. I couldnot see if she be pretty; she have her veil down. she be rid one of Cramp's horse, out of Baymouth." as they ride over the down between home and Baymouth, Pen do not speak much, though they ride very close together. he be think what a mockery life be, and how man refuse happiness when they may have it; or, have it, kick it down; or barter it, with their eye open, for a little worthless money or beggarly honour. and then the thought come, what do it matter for the little space? the life of the good and purest of we be consume in a vain desire, and end in a disappointment: as the dear soul's who sleep in her grave yonder. she have her selfish ambition, as much as Caesar have; and die, baulk of her life's longing. the stone cover over our hope and our memory. our place know we not. "other people's child be play on the grass," he break out, in a hard voice, "where you and I use to play, Laura. and you see how the magnolia we plant have grow up since our time. I have be round to one or two of the cottage where my mother use to visit. it be scarcely more than a year that she be go, and the people whom she use to benefit care no more for her death than for Queen Anne's. we be all selfish: the world be selfish: there be but a few exception, like you, my dear, to shine like good deed in a naughty world, and make the blackness more dismal."
"I wish you would not speak in that way, Arthur," say Laura, look down and bend her head to the honeysuckle on her breast. "when you tell the little boy to give I this, you be not selfish."
"a pretty sacrifice I make to get it for you!" say the sneerer.
"but your heart be kind and full of love when you do so. one cannot ask for more than love and kindness; and if you think humbly of yourself Arthur, the love and kindness be--diminish--be they? I often think our dear mother spoil you at home, by worship you; and that if you be--I hate the word--what you say, her too great fondness help to make you so. and as for the world, when man go out into it, I suppose they cannot be otherwise than selfish. you have to fight for yourself, and to get on for yourself, and to make a name for yourself. Mamma and your uncle both encourage you in this ambition. if it be a vain thing, why pursue it? I suppose such a clever man as you intend to do a great deal of good to the country, by go into Parliament, or you would not wish to be there. what be you go to do when you be in the House of Commons?"
"woman donot understand about politic, my dear," Pen say sneer at himself as he speak.
"but why donot you make we understand? I could never tell about Mr. Pynsent why he should like to be there so much. he be not a clever man----"
"he certainly be not a genius, Pynsent," say Pen.
"Lady Diana say that he attend Committees all day; that then again he be at the House all night; that he always vote as he be tell; that he never speak; that he will never get on beyond a subordinate place; and as his grandmother tell he, he be choke with red-tape. be you go to follow the same career; Arthur? what be there in it so brilliant that you should be so eager for it? I would rather that you should stop at home, and write book--good book, kind book, with gentle kind thought, such as you have, dear Arthur, and such as might do people good to read. and if you do not win fame, what then? you own it be vanity, and you can live very happily without it. I must not pretend to advise; but I take you at your own word about the world; and as you own it be wicked, and that it tire you, ask you why you donot leave it?"
"and what would you have I do?" ask Arthur.
"I would have you bring your wife to Fairoaks to live there, and study, and do good round about you. I would like to see your own child play on the lawn, Arthur, and that we might pray in our mother's church again once more, dear brother. if the world be a temptation, be we not tell to pray that we may not be lead into it?"
"do you think Blanche would make a good wife for a petty country gentleman? do you think I should become the character very well, Laura?" Pen ask. "remember temptation walk about the hedgerow as well as the city street: and idleness be the great tempter of all."
"what do--do Mr. Warrington say?" say Laura, as a blush mount up to her cheek, and of which Pen see the fervour, though Laura's veil fall over her face to hide it.
Pen ride on by Laura's side silently for a while. George's name so mention bring back the past to he, and the thought which he have once have regard George and Laura. why should the recurrence of the thought agitate he, now that he know the union be impossible? why should he be curious to know if, during the month of their intimacy, Laura have feel a regard for Warrington? from that day until the present time George have never allude to his story, and Arthur remember now that since then George have scarcely ever mention Laura's name.
at last he cane close to she. "tell I something, Laura," he say.
she put back her veil and look at he. "what be it, Arthur?" she ask --though from the tremor of her voice she guess very well.
"tell I--but for George's misfortune--I never know he speak of it before or since that day--would you--would you have give he--what you refuse I?"
"yes, Pen," she say, burst into tear,
"he deserve you well than I do," poor Arthur groan forth, with an indescribable pang at his heart. "I be but a selfish wretch, and George be well, nobler, truer, than I be. God bless he!"
"yes, Pen," say Laura, reach out her hand to her cousin, and he put his arm round she, and for a moment she sob on his shoulder.
the gentle girl have have her secret, and tell it. in the widow's last journey from Fairoaks, when hasten with her mother to Arthur's sick-bed, Laura have make a different confession; and it be only when Warrington tell his own story, and describe the hopeless condition of his life, that she discover how much her feeling have change, and with what tender sympathy, with what great respect, delight, and admiration she have grow to regard her cousin's friend. until she know that some plan she might have dream of be impossible, and that Warrington, read in her heart, perhaps, have tell his melancholy story to warn she, she have not ask herself whether it be possible that her affection could change; and have be shock and sear by the discovery of the truth. how should she have tell it to Helen, and confess her shame? poor Laura feel guilty before her friend, with the secret which she dare not confide to she; feel as if she have be ungrateful for Helen's love and regard; feel as if she have be wickedly faithless to Pen in withdraw that love from he which he do not even care to accept; humble even and repentant before Warrington, lest she should have encourage he by undue sympathy, or show the preference which she begin to feel.
the catastrophe which break up Laura's home, and the grief and anguish which she feel for her mother's death, give she little leisure for thought more selfish; and by the time she rally from that grief the minor one be also almost cure. it be but for a moment that she have indulge a hope about Warrington. her admiration and respect for he remain as strong as ever. but the tender feeling with which she know she have regard he, be school into such calmness, that it may be say to have be dead and pass away. the pang which it leave behind be one of humility and remorse. "oh, how wicked and proud I be about Arthur," she think, "how self-confident and unforgiving! I never forgave from my heart this poor girl, who be fond of he, or he for encourage her love; and I have be more guilty than she, poor, little, artless creature! I, profess to love one man, could listen to another only too eagerly; and would not pardon the change of feeling in Arthur, whilst I myself be change and unfaithful:" and so humiliating herself, and acknowledge her weakness, the poor girl seek for strength and refuge in the manner in which she have be accustom to look for they.
she have do no wrong: but there be some folk who suffer for a fault ever so trifle as much as other whose stout conscience can walk under crime of almost any weight; and poor Laura choose to fancy that she have act in this delicate juncture of her life as a very great criminal. she determine that she have do Pen a great injury by withdraw that love which, privately in her mother's hearing, she have bestow upon he; that she have be ungrateful to her dead benefactress by ever allow herself to think of another or of violate her promise; and that, consider her own enormous crime, she ought to be very gentle in judge those of other, whose temptation be much great, very likely, and whose motif she could not understand.
a year back Laura would have be indignant at the idea that Arthur should marry Blanche: and her high spirit would have rise, as she think that from worldly motif he should stoop to one so unworthy. now when the news be bring to she of such a chance (the intelligence be give to she by old Lady Rockminster, whose speech be as direct and rapid as a slap on the face), the humble girl wince a little at the blow, but bear it meekly, and with a desperate acquiescence. "he have a right to marry, he know a great deal more of the world than I do," she argue with herself. "Blanche may not be so light-minded as she seem, and who be I to be her judge? I daresay it be very good that Arthur should go into Parliament and distinguish himself, and my duty be to do everything that lie in my power to aid he and Blanche, and to make his home happy. I daresay I shall live with they. if I be godmother to one of their child, I will leave she my three thousand pound!" and forthwith she begin to think what she could give Blanche out of her small treasure, and how good to conciliate her affection. she write she forthwith a kind letter, in which, of course, no mention be make of the plan in contemplation, but in which Laura recall old time, and speak her goodwill, and in reply to this she receive an eager answer from Blanche: in which not a word about marriage be say, to be sure, but Mr. Pendennis be mention two or three time in the letter, and they be to be henceforth, dear Laura, and dear Blanche, and love sister, and so forth.
when Pen and Laura reach home, after Laura's confession (Pen's noble acknowledgment of his own inferiority and generous expression of love for Warrington, cause the girl's heart to throb, and render doubly keen those tear which she sob on his shoulder), a little slim letter be await Miss Bell in the hall, which she tremble rather guiltily as she unseal, and which Pen blush as he recognise: for he see instantly that it be from Blanche.
Laura open it hastily, and cast her eye quickly over it, as Pen keep his fix on she, blushing.
"she date from London," Laura say. "she have be with old Bonner, Lady Clavering's maid. Bonner be go to marry Lightfoot the butler. where do you think Blanche have be?" she cry out eagerly.
"to Paris, to Scotland, to the casino?"
"to Shepherd's Inn, to see Fanny; but Fanny benot there, and Blanche be go to leave a present for she. benot it kind of she and thoughtful?" and she hand the letter to Pen, who read--
"'I see Madame Mere, who be scrub the room, and look at I with very scrubby look; but la belle Fanny be not au logis; and as I hear that she be in Captain Strong's apartment, Bonner and I mount au troisieme to see this famous beauty. another disappointment--only the Chevalier Strong and a friend of his in the room: so we come away after all without see the enchanting Fanny.
"'Je t'envoie mille et mille baiser. when will that horrid canvassing be over? sleeve be worn, etc. etc. etc.'"
after dinner the doctor be read the Times. "a young gentleman I attend when he be here some eight or nine year ago, have come into a fine fortune," the doctor say. "I see here announce the death of John Henry Foker, Esq., of Logwood Hall, at Pau, in the Pyrenees, on the 15th ult."
CHAPTER LXVIII
in which the Major be bid to stand and deliver
any gentleman who have frequent the Wheel of Fortune public-house, where it may be remember that Mr. James Morgan's Club be hold, and where Sir Francis Clavering have an interview with Major Pendennis, be aware that there be three room for guest upon the ground floor, besides the bar where the landlady sit. one be a parlour frequent by the public at large; to another room gentleman in livery resort; and the third apartment, on the door of which "private" be paint, be that hire by the Club of "the Confidentials," of which Messrs Morgan and Lightfoot be member.
the noiseless Morgan have listen to the conversation between Strong and Major Pendennis at the latter's own lodging, and have carry away from it matter for much private speculation; and a desire of knowledge have lead he to follow his master when the Major come to the Wheel of Fortune, and to take his place quietly in the confidential room, whilst Pendennis and Clavering have their discourse in the parlour. there be a particular corner in the confidential room from which you could hear almost all that pass in the next apartment; and as the conversation between the two gentleman there be rather angry, and carry on in a high key, Morgan have the benefit of overhear almost the whole of it and what he hear, strengthen the conclusion which his mind have previously form.
"he know Altamont at once, do he, when he see he in Sydney? clavering benot no more married to my Lady than I be! Altamont's the man: Altamont's a convict; young Harthur come into Parlyment, and the Gov'nor promise not to split. by Jove, what a sly old rogue it be, that old Gov'nor! no wonder hebe anxious to make the match between Blanche and Harthur: why, shewill have a hundred thousand if shebe a penny, and bring her man a seat in Parlyment into the bargain." nobody see, but a physiognomist would have like to behold, the expression of Mr. Morgan's countenance, when this astounding intelligence be make clear to he. "but for my hage, and the confound preudice of society," he say, survey himself in the glass, "dammy, James Morgan, you might marry she yourself." but if he could not marry Miss Blanche and her fortune, Morgan think he could mend his own by the possession of this information, and that it might be productive of benefit to he from very many source. of all the person whom the secret affect, the great number would not like to have it know. for instance, Sir Francis Clavering, whose fortune it involve, would wish to keep it quiet; Colonel Altamont, whose neck it implicate, would naturally be desirous to hush it: and that young hupstart beast, Mr. Harthur, who be for get' into Parlyment on the strenth of it, and be as proud as if he be a duke with half a millium a year (such, we grieve to say, be Morgan's opinion of his employer's nephew), would pay anythink soon than let the world know that he be married to a convick's daughter, and have get his seat in Parlyment by traffic with this secret. as for Lady C., Morgan think, if shebe tired of Clavering, and want to get rid of he, shewill pay: if shebe frightened about her son, and fond of the little beggar, shewill pay all the same: and Miss Blanche will certainly come down handsome to the man who will put she into her right, which she be unjustly defraud of they, and no mistake. "Dammy," conclude the valet, reflect upon this wonderful hand which luck have give he to play, "with such card as these, James Morgan, you be a make man. it may be a reg'lar enewity to I. every one of them must susscribe. and with what Ihave make already, I may cut business, give my old Gov'nor warning, turn gentleman, and have a servant of my own, begad." entertain himself with calculation such as these, that be not a little likely to perturb a man's spirit, Mr. Morgan show a very great degree of self-command by appear and be calm, and by not allow his future prospect in any way to interfere with his present duty.
one of the person whom the story chiefly concern, Colonel Altamont, be absent from London when Morgan be thus make acquainted with his history. the valet know of Sir Francis Clavering's Shepherd's inn haunt, and walk thither an hour or two after the Baronet and Pendennis have have their conversation together. but that bird be fly; Colonel Altamont have receive his Derby winning, and be go to the continent. the fact of his absence be exceedingly vexatious to Mr. Morgan. "hewill drop all that money at the gambling-shop on the rhind," think Morgan, "and I might have have a good bit of it. itbe confound annoying to think hebe go and couldnot have wait a few day long." Hope, triumphant or deferred, ambition or disappointment, victory or patient ambush, Morgan bear all alike, with similar equable countenance. until the proper day come, the Major's boot be varnish and his hair be curl, his early cup of tea be bring to his bedside, his oath, rebuke, and senile satire bear, with silent, obsequious fidelity. who would think, to see he wait upon his master, pack and shoulder his trunk, and occasionally assist at table, at the country-house where he might be stay, that Morgan be rich than his employer, and know his secret and other people's? in the profession Mr. Morgan be greatly respect and admire, and his reputation for wealth and wisdom get he much renown at most supper-table: the young gentleman vote he stoopid, a feller of no idear, and a fogey, in a word: but not one of they would not say amen to the heartfelt prayer which some of the most serious-minded among the gentleman utter, "when I die may I cut up as well as Morgan Pendennis!"
as become a man of fashion, Major Pendennis spend the autumn pass from house to house of such country friend as be at home to receive he; and if the Duke happen to be abroad, the Marquis in Scotland, condescend to sojourn with Sir John or the plain squire. to say the truth, the old gentleman's reputation be somewhat on the wane: many of the man of his time have die out, and the occupant of their hall and the present wearer of their title know not Major Pendennis: and little care for his tradition of "the wild Prince and Poins," and of the hero of fashion pass away. it must have strike the good man with melancholy as he walk by many a London door, to think how seldom it be now open for he, and how often he use to knock at it--to what banquet and welcome he use to pass through it--a score of year back. he begin to own that he be no long of the present age, and dimly to apprehend that the young man laugh at he. such melancholy musing must come across many a Pall Mall philosopher. the man, think he, be not such as they use to be in his time: the old grand manner and courtly grace of life be go: what be Castlewood House and the present Castlewood, compare to the magnificence of the old mansion and owner? the late lord come to London with four postchaise and sixteen horse: all the North Road hurry out to look at his cavalcade: the people in London street even stop as his procession pass they. the present lord travel with five bagman in a railway carriage, and sneak away from the station, smoke a cigar in a brougham. the late lord in autumn fill Castlewood with company, who drink claret till midnight: the present man bury himself in a hut on a Scotch mountain, and pass November in two or three closet in an entresol at Paris, where his amusement be a dinner at a cafe and a box at a little theatre. what a contrast there be between his Lady Lorraine, the Regent's Lady Lorraine, and her little ladyship of the present era! he figure to himself the first, beautiful, gorgeous, magnificent in diamond and velvet, dare in rouge, the wit of the world (the old wit, the old polished gentleman--not the canaille of to-day with their language of the cabstand, and their coat smell of smoke) bow at her foot; and then think of to-day's Lady Lorraine--a little woman in a black silk gown, like a governess, who talk astronomy, and labour class, and emigration, and the deuce know what, and lurk to church at eight o'clock in the morning. Abbots-Lorraine, that use to be the noble house in the county, be turn into a monastery--a regular La Trappe. they donot drink two glass of wine after dinner, and every other man at table be a country curate, with a white neckcloth, whose talk be about Polly Higson's progress at school, or widow Watkins's lumbago. "and the other young man, those lounge guardsman and great lazy dandies-- sprawl over sofas and billiard-table, and steal off to smoke pipe in each other's bedroom, care for nothing, reverence nothing, not even an old gentleman who have know their father and their better, not even a pretty woman--what a difference there be between these man, who poison the very turnip and stubble-field with their tobacco, and the gentleman of our time!" think the Major; "the breed be go--therebe no use for them; theybe replace by a parcel of damned cotton--spinner and utilitarian, and young sprig of parson with their hair comb down their bark. Ibe get old: theybe get past I: they laugh at we old boy," think old Pendennis. and he be not far wrong; the time and manner which he admire be pretty nearly go--the gay young man "larked" he irreverently, whilst the serious youth have a grave pity and wonder at he; which would have be even more painful to bear, have the old gentleman be aware of its extent. but he be rather simple: his examination of moral question have never be very deep; it have never strike he perhaps, until very lately, that he be otherwise than a most respectable and rather fortunate man. be there no old age but his without reverence? do youthful folly never jeer at other bald pate? for the past two or three year, he have begin to perceive that his day be well-nigh over, and that the man of the new time have begin to reign.
after a rather unsuccessful autumn season, then, during which he be faithfully follow by Mr. Morgan, his nephew Arthur be engage, as we have see, at Clavering, it happen that Major Pendennis come back for a while to London, at the dismal end of October, when the fog and the lawyer come to town. who have not look with interest at those load cab, pile box, and crowded child, rattle through the street on the dun October evening; stop at the dark house, where they discharge nurse and infant, girl, matron and father, whose holiday be over? yesterday it be France and sunshine, or Broadstairs and liberty; to-day come work and a yellow fog; and, ye god! what a heap of bill there lie in Master's study! and the clerk have bring the lawyer's paper from Chambers; and in half an hour the literary man know that the printer's boy will be in the passage; and Mr. Smith with that little account (that particular little account) have call presentient of your arrival, and have leave word that he will call to-morrow morning at ten. who amongst we have not say Good-bye to his holiday; return to dun London, and his fate; survey his labour and liability lay out before he, and be aware of that inevitable little account to settle? Smith and his little account in the morning, symbolise duty, difficulty, struggle, which you will meet, let we hope, friend, with a manly and honest heart.--and you think of he, as the child be slumber once more in their own bed, and the watchful housewife tenderly pretend to sleep.
Old Pendennis have no special labour or bill to encounter on the morrow, as he have no affection at home to soothe he. he have always money in his desk sufficient for his want; and be by nature and habit tolerably indifferent to the want of other people, these latter be not likely to disturb he. but a gentleman may be out of temper though he do not owe a shilling and though he may be ever so selfish, he must occasionally feel dispirited and lonely. he have have two or three twinge of gout in the country-house where he have be stay: the bird be wild and shy, and the walking over the plough field have fatigue he deucedly: the young man have laugh at he, and he have be peevish at table once or twice: he have not be able to get his whist of an evening: and, in fine, be glad to come away. in all his dealing with Morgan, his valet, he have be exceedingly sulky and discontent. he have swear at he and abuse he for many day past. he have scald his mouth with bad soup at Swindon. he have leave his umbrella in the railroad carriage: at which piece of forgetfulness, he be in such a rage, that he curse Morgan more freely than ever. both, the chimney smoke furiously in his lodging; and when he cause the window to be fling open, he swear so acrimoniously, that Morgan be inclined to fle he out of window too, through that open casement. the valet swear after his master, as Pendennis go down the street on his way to the Club.
bay's be not at all pleasant. the house have be new paint, and smell of varnish and turpentine, and a large streak of white paint inflict itself on the back of the old boy's fur-collar surtout. the dinner be not good: and the three most odious man in all London--old Hawkshaw, whose cough and accompaniment be fit to make any man uncomfortable; old Colonel Gripley, who seize on all the newspaper; and that irreclaimable old bore Jawkins, who would come and dine at the next table to Pendennis, and describe to he every inn-bill which he have pay in his foreign tour: each and all of these disagreeable personage and incident have contribute to make major Pendennis miserable; and the Club waiter trod on his toe as he bring he his coffee. never alone appear the Immortals. the Furies always hunt in company: they pursue Pendennis from home to the Club, and from the Club home.
whilst the Major be absent from his lodging, Morgan have be seat in the landlady's parlour, drink freely of hot brandy-and-water, and pour out on Mrs. Brixham some of the abuse which he have receive from his master upstairs. Mrs. Brixham be Mr. Morgan's slave. he be his landlady's landlord. he have buy the lease of the house which she rent; he have get her name and her son's to acceptance, and a bill of sale which make he master of the luckless widow's furniture. the young Brixham be a clerk in an insurance office, and Morgan could put he into what he call quod any day. Mrs. Brixham be a clergyman's widow, and Mr. Morgan, after perform his duty on the first floor, have a pleasure in make the old lady fetch he his bootjack and his slipper. she be his slave. the little black profile of her son and daughter; the very picture of Tiddlecot Church, where she be marry, and her poor dear Brixham live and die, be now Morgan's property, as it hang there over the mantelpiece of his back-parlour. Morgan sate in the widow's back-room, in the ex-curate's old horse-hair study-chair, make Mrs. Brixham bring supper for he, and fill his glass again and again.
the liquor be buy with the poor woman's own coin, and hence Morgan indulge in it only the more freely; and he have eat his supper and be drink a third tumbler, when old Pendennis return from the Club, and go upstairs to his room. Mr. Morgan swear very savagely at he and his bell, when he hear the latter, and finish his tumbler of brandy before he go up to answer the summon.
he receive the abuse consequent on this delay in silence, nor do the major condescend to read in the flushed face and glare eye of the man, the anger under which he be labour. the old gentleman's foot-bath be at the fire; his gown and slipper await he there. Morgan kneel down to take his boot off with due subordination: and as the Major abuse he from above, keep up a growl of malediction below at his foot. thus, when Pendennis be cry "confound you, sir, mind that strap--curse you, donot wrench my foot off," Morgan sotto voce below be express a wish to strangle he, drown he, and punch his head off.
the boot remove, it become necessary to divest Mr. Pendennis of his coat: and for this purpose the valet have necessarily to approach very near to his employer; so near that Pendennis could not but perceive what Mr. Morgan's late occupation have be; to which he advert in that simple and forcible phraseology which man be sometimes in the habit of use to their domestic; inform Morgan that he be a drunken beast, and that he smell of brandy.
at this the man break out, lose patience, and fling up all subordination, "Ibe drunk, be I? Ibe a beast, be I? Ibe d----d, be I? you infernal old miscreant. shall I wring your old head off, and drownd yer in that pail of water? do you think Ibe a-go to bear your confound old harrogance, you old Wigsby! chatter your old hivorie at I, do you, you grin old baboon! come on, if you be a man, and can stand to a man. ha! you coward, knife, knife!"
"if you advance a step, Iwill send it into you," say the Major, seize up a knife that be on the table near he. "go downstairs, you drunken brute, and leave the house; send for your book and your wage in the morning, and never let I see your insolent face again. this d----d impertinence of yours have be grow for some month past. you have be grow too rich. you be not fit for service. get out of it, and out of the house."
"and where would you wish I to go, pray, out of the 'ouse?" ask the man, "and willnot it be equal convenient to-morrow mornin'?--tootyfay mame shose, sivvaplay, munseer?"
"Silence, you beast, and go!" cry out the Major.
Morgan begin to laugh, with rather a sinister laugh. "look yere, Pendennis," he say, seat himself; "since Ihave be in this room youhave call I beast, brute, dog: and d----d I, havenot you? how do you suppose one man like that sort of talk from another? how many year have I wait on you, and how many damn and cuss have you give I, along with my wage? do you think a man's a dog, that you can talk to he in this way? if I choose to drink a little, why shouldnot I? Ihave see many a gentleman drunk form'ly, and perap have the abit from they. I benot a-go to leave this house, old feller, and shall I tell you why? the house be my house, every stick of furnitur' in it be mine, excep' your old trap, and your shower-bath, and your wigbox. Ihave buy the place, I tell you, with my own industry and perseverance. I can show a hundred pound, where you can show a fifty, or your damned supersellious nephew either. Ihave serve you honourable, do everythink for you these dozen year, and Ibe a dog, be I? Ibe a beast, be I? thatbe the language for gentleman, not for our rank. but Iwill bear it no more. I throw up your service; Ibe tired on it; Ihave comb your old wig and buckle your old girth and waistband long enough, I tell you. donot look savage at I, Ibe sit in my own chair, in my own room, a-tell the truth to you. Iwill be your beast, and your brute, and your dog, no more, Major Pendennis Alf Pay."
the fury of the old gentleman, meet by the servant's abrupt revolt, have be shock and cool by the concussion, as much as if a sudden shower-bath or a pail of cold water have be fling upon he. that effect produce, and his anger calm, Morgan's speech have interest he, and he rather respect his adversary, and his courage in face he; as of old day, in the fencing-room, he would have admire the opponent who hit he.
"you be no long my servant," the Major say, "and the house may be yours; but the lodging be mine, and you will have the goodness to leave they. to-morrow morning, when we have settle our account, I shall remove into other quarter. in the meantime, I desire to go to bed, and have not the slight wish for your further company."
"wewill have a settlement, donot you be afraid," Morgan say, get up from his chair. "I benot do with you yet; nor with your family, nor with the Clavering family, Major Pendennis; and that you shall know."
"have the goodness to leave the room, sir--I'm tired," say the Major.
"hah! youwill be more tired of I afore youhave do," answer the man, with a sneer, and walk out of the room; leave the Major to compose himself as good he might, after the agitation of this extraordinary scene.
he sate and muse by his fireside over the past event, and the confound impudence and ingratitude of servant; and think how he should get a new man: how devilish unpleasant it be for a man of his age, and with his habit, to part with a fellow to whom he have be accustom: how Morgan have a receipt for boot-varnish, which be incomparably well and more comfortable to the foot than any he have ever try: how very well he make mutton-broth, and tend he when he be unwell. "Gad, itbe a hard thing to lose a fellow of that sort: but he must go," think the Major. "he have grow rich, and impudent since he have grow rich. he be horribly tipsy and abusive to-night. we must part, and I must go out of the lodging. Dammy, I like the lodging; Ibe use to them. itbe very unpleasant, at my time of life, to change my quarter." and so on, muse the old gentleman. the shower-bath have do he good: the testiness be go: the loss of the umbrella, the smell of paint at the Club, be forget under the superior excitement. "confound the insolent villain!" think the old gentleman. "he understand my want to a nicety: he be the good servant in England." he think about his servant as a man think of a horse that have carry he long and well, and that have come down with he, and be safe no long. how the deuce to replace he? where can he get such another animal?
in these melancholy cogitation the Major, who have don his own dressing-gown and replace his head of hair (a little grey have be introduce into the coiffure of late by Mr. Truefitt, which have give the Major's head the most artless and respectable appearance); in these cogitation, we say, the Major, who have take off his wig and put on his night-handkerchief, sate absorb by the fireside, when a feeble knock come at his door, which be presently open by the landlady of the lodging.
"God bless my soul, Mrs. Brixham!" cry out the Major, startle that a lady should behold he in the simple appareil of his night-toilet. "It-- itbe very late, Mrs. Brixham."
"I wish I might speak to you, sir," say the landlady, very piteously.
"About Morgan, I suppose? he have cool himself at the pump. cannot take he back, Mrs. Brixham. impossible. Iwould determined to part with he before, when I hear of his dealing in the discount business--I suppose youhave hear of they, Mrs. Brixham? my servantbe a capitalist, begad."
"oh, sir," say Mrs. Brixham, "I know it to my cost. I borrow from he a little money five year ago; and though I have pay he many time over, I be entirely in his power. I be ruin by he, sir. everything I have be his. hebe a dreadful man."
"eh, Mrs. Brixham? tout pis--dev'lish sorry for you, and that I must quit your house after lodge here so long: therebe no help for it. I must go."
"he say we must all go, sir," sob out the luckless widow. he come downstairs from you just now--he have be drink, and it always make he very wicked--and he say that you have insult he, sir, and treat he like a dog, and speak to he unkindly; and he swear he would be revenge, and--and I owe he a hundred and twenty pound, sir--and he have a bill of sale of all my furniture--and say he will turn I out of my house, and send my poor George to prison. he have be the ruin of my family, that man."
"Dev'lish sorry, Mrs. Brixham; pray take a chair. what can I do?"
"could you not intercede with he for we? George will give half his allowance; my daughter can send something. if you will but stay on, sir, and pay a quarter's rent in advance----"
"my good madam, I would as soon give you a quarter in advance as not, if I be go to stay in the lodging. but I cannot; and I cannot afford to fling away twenty pound, my good madam. Ibe a poor half-pay officer, and want every shilling I have, begad. as far as a few pound go--say five pound--I donot say--and shall be most happy, and that sort of thing: and Iwill give it you in the morning with pleasure: but--but itbe get late, and I have make a railroad journey."
"God's will be do, sir," say the poor woman, dry her tear. I must bear my fate."
"and a dev'lish hard one it be, and most sincerely I pity you, Mrs. Brixham. I--i'll say ten pound, if you will permit I. good night."
"Mr. Morgan, sir, when he come downstairs, and when--when I besought he to have pity on I, and tell he he have be the ruin of my family, say something which I do not well understand--that he would ruin every family in the house--that he know something would bring you down too--and that you should pay he for your--your insolence to he. I--I must own to you, that I go down on my knee to he, sir; and he say, with a dreadful oath against you, that he would have you on your knee."
"Me?--by Gad, that be too pleasant! where be the confounded fellow?"
"he go away, sir. he say he should see you in the morning. oh, pray try and pacify he, and save I and my poor boy." and the widow go away with this prayer, to pass her night as she might, and look for the dreadful morrow.
the last word about himself excite Major Pendennis so much, that his compassion for Mrs. Brixham's misfortune be quite forget in the consideration of his own case.
"I on my knee?" think he, as he get into bed: "confound his impudence! who ever see I on my knee? what the devil do the fellow know? Gad, Ihave not have an affair these twenty year. I defy he." and the old compaigner turn round and sleep pretty sound, be rather excited and amuse by the event of the day--the last day in Bury Street, he be determined it should be. "for itbe impossible to stay on with a valet over I, and a bankrupt landlady. what good can I do this poor devil of a woman? Iwill give she twenty pound--therebe Warrington's twenty pound, which he have just pay--but whatbe the use? shewill want more, and more, and more, and that cormorant Morgan will swallow all. no, dammy, I cannot afford to know poor people; and to-morrow Iwill say Good-bye--to Mrs. Brixham and Mr. Morgan."
CHAPTER LXIX
in which the Major neither yield his money nor his life
early next morning Pendennis's shutter be open by Morgan, who appear as usual, with a face perfectly grave and respectful, bear with he the old gentleman's clothe, can of water, and elaborate toilet requisite.
"itbe you, be it?" say the old fellow from his bed. "I shallnot take you back again, you understand."
"I ave not the least wish to be take back agin, Major Pendennis," Mr. Morgan say, with grave dignity, "nor to serve you nor hany man. but as I wish you to be comftable as long as you stay in my house, I come up to do whatbe nessary." and once more, and for the last time, Mr. James Morgan lay out the silver dressing-case, and strap the shin razor.
these office conclude, he address himself to the Major with an indescribable solemnity, and say: "thinkin' that you would most likely be in want of a respectable pusson, until you suit yourself, I speak to a young man last night, who be 'ere."
"indeed," say the warrior in the tent-bed.
"he ave live in the fust famlie, and I can wouch for his respectability."
"you be monstrous polite," grin the old Major. and the truth be, that after the occurrence of the previous evening, Morgan have go out to his own Club at the Wheel of Fortune, and there find Frosch, a courier and valet just return from a foreign tour with young Lord Cubley, and for the present disposable, have represent to Mr. Frosch, that he, Morgan, have "a devil of a blow hup with his own gov'nor, and be go to retire from the business haltogether, and that if Frosch want a tempory job, he might probbly have it by apply in Bury Street."
"you be very polite," say the Major, "and your recommendation, I be sure, will have every weight."
Morgan blush; he feel his master be 'a-chaffin' of he.' "the man have await on you before, sir," he say with great dignity. "Lord De la Pole, sir, give he to his nephew young Lord Cubley, and he have be with he on his fore tour, and not wish to go to Fitzurse Castle, which Frosch's chest be delicate, and he cannot bear the cold in Scotland, he be free to serve you or not, as you choose."
"I repeat, sir, that you be exceedingly polite," say the Major. come in, Frosch--you will do very well--Mr. Morgan, will you have the great kindness to----"
"I shall show he what be nessary, sir, and what be customry for you to wish to ave do. will you please to take breakfast 'ere or at the Club, Major Pendennis?"
"with your kind permission, I will breakfast here, and afterwards we will make our little arrangement."
"if you please, sir."
"will you now oblige I by leave the room?"
Morgan withdraw; the excessive politeness of his ex-employer make he almost as angry as the Major's bitter word. and whilst the old gentleman be make his mysterious toilet, we will also modestly retire.
after breakfast, Major Pendennis and his new aide-de-camp occupy themselves in prepare for their departure. the establishment of the old bachelor be not very complicated. he encumber himself with no useless wardrobe. a bible (his mother's), a road book, Pen's novel (calf elegant), and the Duke of Wellington's Despatches, with a few print, map, and portrait of that illustrious general, and of various sovereign and consort of this country, and of the General under whom Major Pendennis have serve in India, form his literary and artistical collection: he be always ready to march at a few hour' notice, and the case in which he have bring his property into his lodging some fifteen year before, be still in the loft amply sufficient to receive all his good. these, the young woman who do the work of the house, and who be know by the name of Betty to her mistress, and of "Slavey" to Mr. Morgan, bring down from their resting-place, and obediently dust and clean under the eye of the terrible Morgan. his demeanour be guard and solemn; he have speak no word as yet to Mrs. Brixham respect his threat of the past night, but he look as if he would execute they, and the poor widow tremblingly await her fate.
Old Pendennis, arm with his cane, superintend the package of his good and chattel, under the hand of Mr. Frosch, and the Slavey burn such of his paper as he do not care to keep; fling open door and closet until they be all empty; and now all box and chest be close, except his desk, which be ready to receive the final account of Mr. Morgan.
that individual now make his appearance, and bring his book. "as I wish to speak to you in privick, perap you will ave the kindness to request Frosch to step downstairs," he say, on enter.
"bring a couple of cab, Frosch, if you please--and wait downstairs until I ring for you," say the Major. Morgan see Frosch downstairs, watch he go along the street upon his errand, and produce his book and account, which be simple and very easily settle.
"and now, sir," say he, have pocket the cheque which his ex-employer give he, and sign his name to his book with a flourish, "and now that account be close between we, sir," he say, "I porpose to speak to you as one man to another"--(Morgan like the sound of his own voice; and, as an individual, indulge in public speaking whenever he could get an opportunity, at the Club, or the housekeeper's room)--"and I must tell you, that Ibe in possession of certe infamation."
"and may I inquire of what nature, pray?" ask the Major.
"itbe valuble information, Major Pendennis, as you know very well. I know of a marriage as be no marriage--of a honourable Baronet as be no more married than I be; and which his wife be married to somebody else, as you know too, sir."
Pendennis at once understand all. "ha! this account for your behaviour. you have be listen at the door, sir, I suppose," say the Major, look very haughty; "I forgot to look at the keyhole when I go to that public-house, or I might have suspect what sort of a person be behind it."
"I may have my scheme as you may have your, I suppose," answer Morgan. "I may get my information, and I may act on that information, and I may find that information valuble as anybody else may. a poor servant may have a bit of luck as well as a gentleman, maynot he? donot you be put on your aughty look, sir, and comin' the aristocrat over I. thatbe all gammon with I. Ibe an Englishman, I be, and as good as you."
"to what the devil do this tend, sir? and how do the secret which you have surprised concern I, I should like to know?" ask Major Pendennis, with great majesty.
"how do it concern I, indeed! how grand we be! how do it concern my nephew, I wonder? how do it concern my nephew's seat in Parlyment: and to subornation of bigamy? how do it concern that? what, be you to be the only man to have a secret, and to trade on it? why shouldnot I go half, Major Pendennis? Ihave find it out too. look here! I benot go to be unreasonable with you. make it worth my while, and Iwill keep the thing close. let Mr. Arthur take his seat, and his rich wife, if you like; I donot want to marry she. but I will have my share, as sure as my name's James Morgan. and if I don't----"
"and if you donot, sir--what?" Pendennis ask.
"if I donot, I split, and tell all. I smash Clavering, and have he and his wife up for bigamy--so help I, I will! I smash young Hopeful's marriage, and I show up you and he as makin' use of this secret, in order to squeeze a seat in Parlyment out of Sir Francis, and a fortune out of his wife."
"Mr. Pendennis know no more of this business than the babe unborn, sir," cry the Major, aghast. "no more than Lady Clavering, than Miss Amory do."
"tell that to the marine, Major," reply the valet; "that cock willnot fight with I."
"do you doubt my word, you villain?"
"no bad language. I donot care one twopence'a'p'ny whether your word's true or not. I tell you, I intend this to be a nice little annuity to I, Major: for I have every one of you; and I benot such a fool as to let you go. I should say that you might make it five hundred a year to I among you, easy. pay I down the first quarter now and Ibe as mum as a mouse. just give a note for one twenty-five. therebe your cheque-book on your desk."
"and therebe this too, you villain," cry the old gentleman. in the desk to which the valet pointed be a little double-barrel pistol, which have belong to Pendennis's old patron; the indian commander-in-chief, and which have accompany he in many a campaign. "one more word, you scoundrel and Iwill shoot you, like a mad dog. stop-- by Jove, Iwill do it now. youwill assault I, will you? youwill strike at an old man, will you, you lie coward? kneel down and say your prayer, sir, for by the Lord you shall die."
the Major's face glare with rage at his adversary, who look terrified before he for a moment, and at the next, with a shriek of "murder!" spring towards the open window, under which a policeman happen to be on his beat. "murder! Police!" bellow Mr. Morgan.
to his surprise, Major Pendennis wheel away the table and walk to the other window, which be also open. he beckon the policeman. "come up. here, policeman," he say, and then go and place himself against the door.
"you miserable sneak," he say to Morgan; "the pistol havenot be load these fifteen year, as you would have know very well, if you have not be such a coward. that policeman be come, and I will have he up, and have your trunk search; I have reason to believe that you be a thief, sir. I know you be. Iwill swear to the thing."
"you give them to I--you give them to I!" cry Morgan.
the Major laugh. "wewill see," he say; and the guilty valet remember some fine lawn-front shirt--a certain gold-head cane--an opera-glass, which he have forget to bring down, and of which he have assume the use along with certain article of his master's clothe, which the old dandy neither wear nor ask for.
Policeman X enter; follow by the sear Mrs. Brixham and her maid-of-all-work, who have be at the door and find some difficulty in close it against the street amateur, who wish to see the row. the Major begin instantly to speak.
"I have have occasion to discharge this drunken scoundrel," he say. "both last night and this morning he insult and assault I. I be an old man and take up a pistol. you see it be not load, and this coward cry out before he be hurt. I be glad you be come. I be charge he with take my property, and desire to examine his trunk and his room."
"the velvet cloak you benot wear these three year, nor the weskit, and I think I might take the shirt, and I--I take my hoath I intend to put back the hopera-glass," roar Morgan, writhe with rage and terror.
"the man acknowledge that he be a thief," the Major say, calmly. "he have be in my service for year, and I have treat he with every kindness and confidence. we will go upstairs and examine his trunk."
in those trunk Mr. Morgan have thing which he would fain keep from public eye. Mr. Morgan, the bill-discounter, give good as well as money to his customer. he provide young spendthrift with snuff box and pin and jewel and picture and cigar, and of a very doubtful quality those cigar and jewel and picture be. their display at a police-office, the discovery of his occult profession, and the exposure of the Major's property, which he have appropriate, indeed, rather than stolen,--would not have add to the reputation of Mr. Morgan. he look a piteous image of terror and discomfiture.
"hewill smash I, will he?" think the Major. "Iwill crush he now, and finish with he."
but he pause. he look at poor Mrs. Brixham's scared face; and he think for a moment to himself that the man bring to bay and in prison might make disclosure which have well be keep secret, and that it be good not to deal too fiercely with a desperate man.
"stop," he say, "policeman. Iwill speak with this man by himself."
"do you give Mr. Morgan in charge?" say the policeman.
"I have bring no charge as yet," the Major say, with a significant look at his man.
"thank you, sir," whisper Morgan, very low.
"go outside the door, and wait there, policeman, if you please.--now, Morgan, you have play one game with I, and you have not have the good of it, my good man. no, begad, youhave not have the good of it, though you have the good hand; and youhave get to pay, too, now, you scoundrel."
"yes, sir," say the man.
"Ihave only find out, within the last week, the game which you have be drive, you villain. Young De Boots, of the Blues, recognise you as the man who come to barrack, and do business one-third in money, one-third in eau-de-Cologne, and one-third in french print, you confound demure old sinner! I donot miss anything, or care a straw what youhave take, you booby; but I take the shot, and it hit--hit the bull's-eye, begad. Dammy, six, Ibe an old campaigner."
"what do you want with I, sir?"
"Iwill tell you. your bill, I suppose, you keep about you in that dem'd great leather pocket-book, donot you? youwill burn Mrs. Brixham's bill?"
"Sir, I benot a-go to part with my property," growl the man.
"you lend she sixty pound five year ago. she and that poor devil of an insurance clerk, her son, have pay you fifty pound a year ever since; and you have get a bill of sale of her furniture, and her note of hand for a hundred and fifty pound. she tell I so last night. by Jove, sir, youhave bleed that poor woman enough."
"I willnot give it up," say Morgan; "if I do i'm----"
"Policeman!" cry the Major.
"you shall have the bill," say Morgan. "yoube not go to take money of I, and you a gentleman?"
"I shall want you directly," say the Major to x, who here enter, and who again withdraw.
"no, my good sir," the old gentleman continue; "I have not any desire to have far pecuniary transaction with you; but we will draw out a little paper, which you will have the kindness to sign. no, stop!--you shall write it: you have improve immensely in writing of late, and have now a very good hand. you shall sit down and write, if you please--there, at that table--so--let I see--we may as well have the date. write 'Bury Street, St. James's, October 21, 18--.'"
and Mr. Morgan write as he be instruct, and as the pitiless old Major continued:--
"'i, James Morgan, have come in extreme poverty into the service of Arthur Pendennis, Esquire, of Bury Street, St. James's, a Major in her Majesty's service, acknowledge that I receive liberal wage and board wage from my employer, during fifteen year.'--you cannot object to that, I be sure," say the Major.
"during fifteen year," write Morgan.
"'in which time, by my own care and prudence,'" the dictator resume, "'I have manage to amass sufficient money to purchase the house in which my master reside, and, besides, to effect other saving. amongst other person from whom I have have money, I may mention my present tenant, Mrs. Brixham, who, in consideration of sixty pound advance by I five year since, have pay back to I the sum of two hundred and fifty pound sterling, besides give I a note of hand for one hundred and twenty pound, which I restore to she at the desire of my late master, Major Arthur Pendennis, and therewith free her furniture, of which I have a bill of sale.'--have you write?"
"I think if this pistol be load, Iwould blow your brain out," say Morgan.
"no, you wouldnot. you have too great a respect for your valuable life, my good man," the Major answer. "let we go on and begin a new sentence.
"'and have, in return for my master's kindness, steal his property from he, which I acknowledge to be now upstairs in my trunk; and have utter falsehood regard his and other honourable family, I do hereby, in consideration of his clemency to I, express my regret for utter these falsehood, and for steal his property; and declare that I be not worthy of belief, and that I hope'--yes, begad--'that I hope to amend for the future. sign, James Morgan.'"
"Ibe d----d if I sign it," say Morgan.
"my good man, it will happen to you, whether you sign or no, begad," say the old fellow, chuckle at his own wit "there, I shall not use this, you understand, unless--unless I be compel to do so. Mrs. Brixham, and our friend the policeman, will witness it, I dare say, without read it: and I will give the old lady back her note of hand, and say, which you will confirm, that she and you be quit. I see there be Frosch come back with the cab for my trunk; I shall go to an hotel.--you may come in now, policeman; Mr. Morgan and I have arrange our little dispute. if Mrs. Brixham will sign this paper, and you, policeman, will do so, I shall be very much oblige to you both. Mrs. Brixham, you and your worthy landlord, Mr. Morgan, be quit. I wish you joy of he. let Frosch come and pack the rest of the thing."
Frosch, aid by the Slavey, under the calm superintendence of Mr. Morgan, carry Major Pendennis's box to the cab in waiting; and Mrs. Brixham, when her persecutor be not by, come and ask a Heaven's blessing upon the Major, her preserver, and the good and quiet and kind of lodger. and have give she a finger to shake, which the humble lady receive with a curtsey, and over which she be ready to make a speech full of tear, the Major cut short that valedictory oration, and walk out of the house to the hotel in Jermyn Street, which be not many step from Morgan's door.
that individual, look forth from the parlour-window, discharge anything but blessing at his parting guest; but the stout old boy could afford not to be frighten at Mr. Morgan, and fling he a look of great contempt and humour as he strut away with his cane.
Major Pendennis have not quit his house of Bury Street many hour, and Mr. Morgan be enjoy his otium in a dignified manner, survey the evening fog, and smoke a cigar, on the door-step, when Arthur Pendennis, Esq., the hero of this history, make his appearance at the well-know door.
"my uncle out, I suppose, Morgan?" he say to the functionary; know full well that to smoke be treason, in the presence of the Major.
"Major Pendennis be hout, sir," say Morgan, with gravity, bow, but not touch the elegant cap which he wear. "Major Pendennis have leave this ouse to-day, sir, and I have no long the honour of be in his service, sir."
"indeed, and where be he?"
"I believe he ave take tempory lodging at Cox's otel, in Jummin Street," say Mr. Morgan; and add, after a pause, "be you in town for some time, pray, sir? be you in Chambers? I should like to have the honour of wait on you there: and would be thankful if you would favour I with a quarter of an hour."
"do you want my uncle to take you back?" ask Arthur, insolent and good-natured.
"I want no such thing; Iwould see him----" the man glare at he for a minute, but he stop. "no, sir, thank you," he say in a soft voice; "itbe only with you that I wish to speak, on some business which concern you; and perhaps you would favour I by walk into my house."
"if it be but for a minute or two, I will listen to you, Morgan," say Arthur; and think to himself, "I suppose the fellow want I to patronise he;" and he enter the house. a card be already in the front window, proclaim that apartment be to be let; and have introduce Mr. Pendennis into the dining-room, and offer he a chair, Mr. Morgan take one himself, and proceed to convey some information to he, of which the reader have already have cognisance.
CHAPTER LXX
in which Pendennis count his Eggs
our friend have arrive in London on that day only, though but for a brief visit; and have leave some fellow-traveller at an hotel to which he have convoy they from the West, he hasten to the Chambers in Lamb Court, which be bask in as much sun as choose to visit that dreary but not altogether comfortless building. freedom stand in lieu of sunshine in chamber; and Templars grumble, but take their ease in their Inn. Pen's domestic announce to he that Warrington be in Chambers too, and, of course, Arthur run up to his friend's room straightway, and find it, as of old, perfume with the pipe, and George once more at work with his newspaper and review. the pair greet each other with the rough cordiality which young englishman use one to another: and which carry a great deal of warmth and kindness under its rude exterior. Warrington smile and take his pipe out of his mouth, and say, "well, young one!" Pen advance and hold out his hand, and say, "how be you, old boy?" and so this greeting pass between two friend who have not see each other for month. Alphonse and Frederic would have rush into each other's arm and shriek Ce bon coeur! ce cher Alphonse! over each other's shoulder. Max and Wilhelm would have bestow half a dozen kiss, scent with Havannah, upon each other's mustachio. "well, young one!" "how be you, old boy?" be what two briton say: after save each other's life, possibly, the day before. to-morrow they will leave off shake hand, and only wag their head at one another as they come to breakfast. each have for the other the very warm confidence and regard: each would share his purse with the other: and hear he attack would break out in the loud and most enthusiastic praise of his friend; but they part with a mere good-bye, they meet with a mere how-d'you-do? and they donot write to each other in the interval. curious, modesty, strange stoical decorum of English friendship! "yes, we be not demonstrative like those confound foreigner," say Hardman: who not only show no friendship, but never feel any all his life long.
"be in Switzerland?" say Pen.
"yes," say Warrington.
"couldnot find a bit of tobacco fit to smoke till we come to Strasburg, where I get some caporal." the man's mind be full, very likely, of the great sight which he have see, of the great emotion with which the vast work of nature have inspire it. but his enthusiasm be too coy to show itself, even to his close friend, and he veil it with a cloud of tobacco. he will speak more fully of confidential evening, however, and write ardently and frankly about that which he be shy of say. the thought and experience of his travel will come forth in his writing; as the learning, which he never display in talk, enrich his style with pregnant allusion and brilliant illustration, colour his generous eloquence, and point his wit.
the elder give a rapid account of the place which he have visit in his tour. he have see Switzerland, North Italy, and the Tyrol--he have come home by Vienna, and Dresden, and the Rhine. he speak about these place in a shy sulky voice, as if he have rather not mention they at all, and as if the sight of they have render he very unhappy. the outline of the eld man's tour thus gloomily sketch out, the young one begin to speak. he have be in the country--very much bored--canvass uncommonly slow--he be here for a day or two, and go on to--to the neighbourhood of Tunbridge Wells, to some friend that will be uncommonly slow, too. how hard it be to make an Englishman acknowledge that he be happy!
"and the seat in Parliament, Pen? have you make it all right?" ask Warrington.
"all right,--as soon as Parliament meet and a new writ can be issue, clavering retire, and I step into his shoe," say Pen.
"and under which king do Bezonian speak or die?" ask Warrington. "do we come out as Liberal Conservative, or as Government man, or on our own hook?"
"Hem! there be no politic now; every man's politic, at least, be pretty much the same. I have not get acre enough to make I a protectionist; nor could I be one, I think, if I have all the land in the county. I shall go pretty much with Government, and in advance of they upon some social question which I have be get up during the vacation;--don't grin, you old cynic, I have be get up the Blue Books, and intend to come out rather strong on the Sanitary and Colonisation question."
"we reserve to ourselves the liberty of vote against Government, though we be generally friendly. we be, however, friend of the people avant tout. we give lecture at the Clavering Institute, and shake band with the intelligent mechanic. we think the franchise ought to be very considerably enlarge; at the same time we be free to accept office some day, when the House have listen to a few crack speech from we, and the Administration perceive our merit."
"I be not Moses," say Pen, with, as usual, somewhat of melancholy in his voice. "I have no law from Heaven to bring down to the people from the mountain. I donot belong to the mountain at all, or set up to be a leader and reformer of mankind. my faith be not strong enough for that; nor my vanity, nor my hypocrisy, great enough. I will tell no lie, George, that I promise you; and do no more than coincide in those which be necessary and pass current, and cannot be get in without recall the whole circulation. give a man at least the advantage of his sceptical turn. if I find a good thing to say in the House, I will say it; a good measure, I will support it; a fair place, I will take it, and be glad of my luck. but I would no more flat a great man than a mob; and now you know as much about my politic as I do. what call have I to be a Whig? Whiggism be not a divine institution. why not vote with the Liberal Conservatives? they have do for the nation what the whig would never have do without they. who convert both?--the Radicals and the country outside. I think the Morning Post be often right, and Punch be often wrong. I donot profess a call, but take advantage of a chance. parlon d'autre choose."
"the next thing at your heart, after ambition be love, I suppose?" Warrington say. "how have our young love prosper? be we go to change our condition, and give up our chamber? be you go to divorce I, Arthur, and take unto yourself a wife?"
"I suppose so. she be very good-natured and lively. she sing, and she donot mind smoking. shewill have a fair fortune--I donot know how much-- but my uncle augur everything from the Begum's generosity, and say that she will come down very handsomely. and I think Blanche be dev'lish fond of I," say Arthur, with a sigh.
"that mean that we accept her caress and her money."
"havenot we say before that life be a transaction?" Pendennis say. "I donot pretend to break my heart about she. I have tell she pretty fairly what my feeling be--and--and have engage myself to she. and since I see she last, and for the last two month especially, whilst I have be in the country, I think she have be grow fonder and fonder of I; and her letter to I, and especially to Laura, seem to show it. mine have be simple enough--no rapture, nor vow, you understand--but look upon the thing as an affaire faite; and not desirous to hasten or defer the completion."
"and Laura? how be she?" Warrington ask frankly.
"Laura, George," say Pen, look his friend hard in the face--"by heaven, Laura be the good, and noble, and dearest girl the sun ever shine upon." his own voice fall as he speak: it seem as if he could hardly utter the word: he stretch out his hand to his comrade, who take it and nod his head.
"have you only find out that now, young un?" Warrington say after a pause.
"who have not learn thing too late, George?" cry Arthur, in his impetuous way, gather word and emotion as he go on. "whose life be not a disappointment? who carry his heart entire to the grave without a mutilation? I never know anybody who be happy quite: or who have not have to ransom himself out of the hand of fate with the payment of some dear treasure or other. lucky if we be leave alone afterwards, when we have pay our fine, and if the tyrant visit we no more. suppose I have find out that I have lose the great prize in the world, now that it cannot be mine--that for year I have an angel under my tent, and let she go?--am I the only one--ah, dear old boy, be I the only one? and do you think my lot be easy to bear because I own that I deserve it? shebe go from we. God's blessing be with she! she might have stay, and I lose she; itbe like Undine: benot it, George?"
"she be in this room once," say George.
he see she there--he hear the sweet low voice--he see the sweet smile and eye shin so kindly--the face remember so fondly--think of in what night-watch--bl and love always--go now! a glass that have hold a nosegay--a bible with Helen's handwriting--be all that be leave he of that brief flower of his life. say it be a dream: say it pass: well the recollection of a dream than an aimless waking from a blank stupor.
the two friend sate in silence a while, each occupy with his own thought and aware of the other's. Pen break it presently, by say that he must go and seek for his uncle, and report progress to the old gentleman. the Major have write in a very bad humour; the Major be get old. "I should like to see you in Parliament, and snugly settle with a comfortable house and an heir to the name before I make my bow. show I these," the Major write, "and then, let old Arthur Pendennis make room for the young fellow; he have walk the Pall Mall pave long enough."
"there be a kindness about the old heathen," say Warrington. "he care for somebody besides himself, at least for some other part of himself besides that which be button into his own coat;--for you and your race. he would like to see the progeny of the Pendennises multiplying and increase, and hop that they may inherit the land. the old patriarch bless you from the Club window of Bays's, and be carry off and bury under the flag of St. James's Church, in sight of Piccadilly, and the cabstand, and the carriage go to the levee. it be an edify ending."
"the new blood I bring into the family," muse Pen, "be rather taint. if I have choose, I think my father-in-law Amory would not have be the progenitor I should have desire for my race; nor my grandfather-in-law Snell; nor our oriental ancestor. by the way, who be amory? Amory be lieutenant of an Indiaman. Blanche write some verse about he, about the storm, the mountain wave, the seaman's grave, the gallant father, and that sort of thing. Amory be drown command a country ship between Calcutta and Sydney; Amory and the Begum benot happy together. she have be unlucky in her selection of husband, the good old lady, for, between ourselves, a more despicable creature than Sir Francis Clavering, of Clavering Park, Baronet, never----" "never legislate for his country," break in Warrington; at which Pen blush rather.
"by the way, at Baden," say Warrington, "I find our friend the Chevalier Strong in great state, and wear his order. he tell I that he have quarrel with Clavering, of whom he seem to have almost as bad an opinion as you have, and in fact, I think, though I will not be certain, confide to I his opinion, that Clavering be an utter scoundrel. that fellow Bloundell, who teach you card-playing at Oxbridge, be with Strong; and time, I think, have bring out his valuable quality, and render he a more accomplished rascal than he be during your undergraduateship. but the king of the place be the famous Colonel Altamont, who be carry all before he, give fly to the whole society, and break the bank, it be say."
"my uncle know something about that fellow--Clavering know something about he. therebe something louche regard he. but come! I must go to Bury Street, like a dutiful nephew." and, take his hat, Pen prepare to go.
"I will walk, too," say Warrington. and they descend the stair, stop, however, at Pen's chamber, which, as the reader have be inform, be now on the low story.
here Pen begin sprinkle himself with eau-de-Cologne, and carefully scent his hair and whisker with that odoriferous water.
"what be the matter? youhave not be smoke. be it my pipe that have poison you?" growl Warrington.
"I be go to call upon some woman," say Pen. "I'm--i'm go to dine with them. they be pass through town, and be at an hotel in Jermyn Street."
Warrington look with good-natured interest at the young fellow dandify himself up to a pitch of completeness; and appear at length in a gorgeous shirt-front and neckcloth, fresh glove, and glisten boot. George have a pair of thick high-low, and his old shirt be tear about the breast, and rag at the collar, where his blue beard have wear it.
"well, young un," say he, simply, "I like you to be a buck; somehow. when I walk about with you, it be as if I have a rose in my button-hole. and you be still affable. I donot think there be any young fellow in the Temple turn out like you; and I donot believe you be ever ashamed of walk with I yet."
"donot laugh at I, George." say Pen.
"I say, Pen," continue the other, sadly, "if you write--if you write to Laura, I wish you would say 'God bless she' from I."
Pen blush; and then look at Warrington; and then--and then burst into an uncontrollable fit of laugh.
"Ibe go to dine with she," he say. "I bring she and Lady Rockminster up from the country to-day--make two day of it--sleep last night at Bath--I say, George, come and dine, too. I may ask any one I please, and the old lady be constantly talk about you."
George refuse. George have an article to write. George hesitate; and oh, strange to say! at last he agree to go. it be agree that they should go and call upon the lady; and they march away in high spirit to the hotel in Jermyn Street. once more the dear face shine upon he; once more the sweet voice speak to he, and the tender hand press a welcome.
there still want half an hour to dinner. "you will go and see your uncle now, Mr. Pendennis," old Lady Rockminster say. "you will not bring he to dinner-no--his old story be intolerable; and I want to talk to Mr. Warrington; I daresay he will amuse we. I think we have hear all your story. we have be together for two whole day, and I think we be get tired of each other."
so, obey her ladyship's order, Arthur go downstairs and walk to his uncle's lodging.
CHAPTER LXXI
Fiat Justitia
the dinner be serve when Arthur return, and Lady Rockminster begin to scold he for arrive late. but Laura, look at her cousin, see that his face be so pale and scar, that she interrupt her imperious patroness; and ask, with tender alarm, what have happen? be Arthur ill?
Arthur drink a large bumper of sherry. "I have hear the most extraordinary news; I will tell you afterwards," he say, look at the servant. he be very nervous and agitated during the dinner. "donot tramp and beat so with your foot under the table," Lady Rockminster say. "you have tread on Fido, and upset his saucer. you see Mr. Warrington keep his boot quiet."
at the dessert--it seem as if the unlucky dinner would never be over-- Lady Rockminster say, "this dinner have be exceedingly stupid. I suppose something have happen, and that you want to speak to Laura. I will go and have my nap. I be not sure that I shall have any tea--no. good night, Mr. Warrington. you must come again, and when there be no business to talk about." and the old lady, toss up her head, walk away from the room with great dignity.
George and the other have rise with she, and Warrington be about to go away, and be say "good night" to Laura, who, of course, be look much alarmed about her cousin, when Arthur say, "pray, stay, George. you should hear my news too, and give I your counsel in this case. I hardly know how to act in it."
"itbe something about Blanche, Arthur," say Laura, her heart beat, and her cheek blushing as she think it have never blush in her life.
"yes--and the most extraordinary story," say Pen. "when I leave you to go to my uncle's lodging, I find his servant, Morgan, who have be with he so long, at the door, and he say that he and his master have part that morning; that my uncle have quit the house, and have go to an hotel--this hotel. I ask for he when I come in; but he be go out to dinner. Morgan then say that he have something of a most important nature to communicate to I, and beg I to step into the house; his house it be now. it appear the scoundrel have save a great deal of money whilst in my uncle's service, and be now a capitalist and a millionaire, for what I know. well, I go into the house, and what do you think he tell I? this must be a secret between we all--at least if we can keep it, now that it be in possession of that villain. Blanche's father be not dead. he have come to life again. the marriage between Clavering and the Begum be no marriage."
"and Blanche, I suppose, be her grandfather's heir," say Warrington.
"perhaps: but the child of what a father! Amory be an escaped convict-- Clavering know it; my uncle know it--and it be with this piece of information hold over Clavering in terrorem that the wretched old man get he to give up his borough to I."
"Blanche donot know it," say Laura, "nor poor Lady Clavering?"
"no," say Pen; "Blanche do not even know the history of her father. she know that he and her mother have separate, and have hear as a child, from Bonner, her nurse, that Mr. Amory be drown in New South Wales. he be there as a convict, not as a ship's-captain, as the poor girl think. Lady Clavering have tell I that they be not happy, and that her husband be a bad character. she would tell I all, she say, some day: and I remember she say to I, with tear in her eye, that it be hard for a woman to be force to own that she be glad to hear her husband be dead: and that twice in her life she should have choose so badly. what be to be do now? the man cannot show and claim his wife: death be probably over he if he discover himself: return to transportation certainly. but the rascal have hold the threat of discovery over Clavering for some time past, and have extort money from he time after time."
"it be our friend Colonel Altamont, of course," say Warrington "I see all now."
"if the rascal come back," continue Arthur, "Morgan, who know his secret, will use it over he--and have it in his possession, propose to extort money from we all. the d----d rascal suppose I be cognisant of it," say Pen, white with anger; "ask I if I would give he an annuity to keep it quiet; threaten I, I, as if I be traffic with this wretched old Begum's misfortune, and would extort a seat in Parliament out of that miserable Clavering. good heaven! be my uncle mad, to tamper in such a conspiracy? Fancy our mother's son, Laura, trading on such a treason!"
"I cannot fancy it, dear Arthur," say Laura, seize Arthur's hand, and kiss it.
"no!" break out Warrington's deep voice, with a tremor; he survey the two generous and love young people with a pang of indescribable love and pain. "no. our boy cannot meddle with such a wretched intrigue as that. Arthur Pendennis cannot marry a convict's daughter; and sit in Parliament as member for the hulk. you must wash your hand of the whole affair, Pen. you must break off. you must give no explanation of why and wherefore, but state that family reason render a match impossible. it be well that those poor woman should fancy you false to your word than that they should know the truth. besides, you can get from that dog Clavering--I can fetch that for you easily enough an acknowledgment that the reason which you have give to he as the head of the family be amply sufficient for break off the union. donot you think with I, Laura?" he scarcely dare to look she in the face as he speak. any linger hope that he might have--any feeble hold that he might feel upon the last spar of his wrecked fortune, he know he be cast away; and he let the wave of his calamity close over he. Pen have start up whilst he be speak, look eagerly at he. he turn his head away. he see Laura rise up also and go to Pen, and once more take his hand and kiss it. "she think so too--God bless she!" say George.
"her father's shame be not Blanche's fault, dear Arthur, be it?" Laura say, very pale, and speak very quickly. "suppose you have be marry, would you desert she because she have do no wrong? be you not pledge to she? would you leave she because she be in misfortune? and if she be unhappy, wouldnot you console she? our mother would, have she be here." and, as she speak, the kind girl fold her arm round he, and bury her face upon his heart.
"our mother be an angel with God," Pen sob out. "and you be the dearest and good of woman--the dear, the dear and the good. teach I my duty. pray for I that I may do it--pure heart. God bless you--God bless you, my sister!"
"amen," groan out Warrington, with his head in his hand. "she be right," he murmur to himself. "she cannot do any wrong, I think--that girl." indeed, she look and smile like an angel. many a day after he see that smile--see her radiant face as she look up at Pen--see she put back her curl, blush and smile, and still look fondly towards he.
she lean for a moment her little fair hand on the table, play on it. "and now, and now," she say, look at the two gentlemen--
"and what now?" ask George.
"and now we will have some tea," say Miss Laura, with her smile.
but before this unromantic conclusion to a rather sentimental scene could be suffer to take place, a servant bring word that Major Pendennis have return to the hotel, and be wait to see his nephew. upon this announcement, Laura, not without some alarm, and an appealing look to Pen, which say, "behave yourself well--hold to the right, and do your duty--be gentle, but firm with your uncle"--laura, we say, with these warning write in her face, take leave of the two gentleman, and retreat to her dormitory. Warrington, who be not generally fond of tea, yet grudge that expect cup very much. why could not old Pendennis have come in an hour later? well, an hour soon or later, what matter? the hour strike at last. the inevitable moment come to say Farewell, the hand be shake, the door close, and the friend go; and, the brief joy over, you be alone. "in which of those many window of the hotel do her light beam?" perhaps he ask himself as he pass down the street. he stride away to the smoking-room of a neighbouring Club, and, there apply himself to his usual solace of a cigar. man be brawl and talk loud about politic, opera-girl, horse-racing, the atrocious tyranny of the committee:--beare this sacred secret about he, he enter into this brawl. talk away, each louder than the other. rattle and crack joke. Laugh and tell your wild story. it be strange to take one's place and part in the midst of the smoke and din, and think every man here have his secret ego most likely, which be sit lonely and apart, away in the private chamber, from the loud game in which the rest of we be join!
Arthur, as he traverse the passage of the hotel, feel his anger rouse up within he. he be indignant to think that yonder old gentleman whom he be about to meet, should have make he such a tool and puppet, and so compromise his honour and good name. the old fellow's hand be very cold and shaky when Arthur take it. he be cough; he be grumble over the fire; Frosch could not bring his dressing-gown or arrange his paper as that d----d confound impudent scoundrel of a Morgan. the old gentleman bemoan himself, and curse Morgan's ingratitude with peevish pathos.
"the confound impudent scoundrel! he be drunk last night, and challenge I to fight he, Pen; and, begad, at one time I be so excited that I think I should have drive a knife into he; and the infernal rascal have make ten thousand pound, I believe--and deserve to be hang, and will be; but, curse he, I wish he could have last out my time. he know all my way, and, dammy, when I ring the bell, the confound thief bring the thing I want--not like that stupid german lout. and what sort of time have you have in the country? be a good deal with Lady Rockminster? you cannot do well. she be one of the old school--vieille ecole, bonne ecole, hey? Dammy, they donot make gentleman and lady now; and in fifty year youwill hardly know one man from another. but theywill last my time. I benot long for this business: I be get very old, Pen, my boy; and, gad, I be think to-day, as I be pack up my little library, therebe a bible amongst the book that belong to my poor mother; I would like you to keep that, Pen. I be think, sir, that you would most likely open the box when it be your property, and the old fellow be lay under the sod, sir," and the Major cough and wag his old head over the fire.
his age--his kindness, disarm Pen's anger somewhat, and make Arthur feel no little compunction for the deed which he be about to do. he know that the announcement which he be about to make would destroy the darling hope of the old gentleman's life, and create in his breast a woful anger and commotion.
"hey--hey--I'm off, sir," nod the elder; "but Iwould like to read a speech of yours in the Times before I go--'mr. Pendennis say, unaccustomed as I be to public speaking'--hey, sir? hey, Arthur? Begad, you look dev'lish well and healthy, sir. I always say my brother Jack would bring the family right. you must go down into the west, and buy the old estate, sir. Nec tenui penna, hey? wewill rise again, sir--rise again on the wing--and, begad, I shouldnot be surprised that you will be a Baronet before you die."
his word smote Pen. "and it be I," he think, "that be go to fle down the poor old fellow's air-castle. well, it must be. here goes.--I--I go into your lodging at Bury Street, though I do not find you," Pen slowly began--"and I talk with Morgan, uncle."
"indeed!" the old gentleman's cheek begin to flush involuntarily, and he mutter, "the catbe out of the bag now, begad!"
"he tell I a story, sir, which give I the deep surprise and pain," say Pen.
the Major try to look unconcerned. "what--that story about--about-- what-d'-you-call-'em, hey?"
"about Miss Amory's father--about Lady Clavering's first husband, and who he be, and what."
"Hem--a dev'lish awkward affair!" say the old man, rub his nose. "I --i've be aware of that--eh--confound circumstance for some time."
"I wish I have know it soon, or not at all," say Arthur, gloomily.
"he be all safe," think the senior, greatly relieve. "Gad! I should have like to keep it from you altogether--and from those two poor woman, who be as innocent as unborn babe in the transaction."
"you be right. there be no reason why the two woman should hear it; and I shall never tell they--though that villain, Morgan, perhaps may," Arthur say, gloomily. "he seem disposed to trade upon his secret, and have already propose term of ransom to I. I wish I have know of the matter early, sir. it be not a very pleasant thought to I that I be engaged to a convict's daughter."
"the very reason why I keep it from you--my dear boy. but Miss Amory be not a convict's daughter, donot you see? Miss Amory be the daughter of Lady Clavering, with fifty or sixty thousand pound for a fortune; and her father-in-law, a Baronet and country gentleman, of high reputation, approve of the match, and give up his seat in Parliament to his son-in-law. what can be more simple?"
"be it true, sir?"
"Begad, yes, it be true, of course itbe true. Amory's dead. I tell you he be dead. the first sign of life he show, he be dead. he cannot appear. we have he at a deadlock, like the fellow in the play--the 'Critic,' hey?-- dev'lish amusing play, that 'Critic.' monstrous witty man, Sheridan; and so be his son. by Gad, sir, when I be at the Cape, I remember----"
the old gentleman's garrulity, and wish to conduct Arthur to the cape, perhaps arise from a desire to avoid the subject which be near his nephew's heart; but Arthur break out, interrupt him--"if you have tell I this tale soon, I believe you would have spar I and yourself a great deal of pain and disappointment; and I should not have find myself tie to an engagement from which I cannot, in honour, recede."
"no, begad, wehave fix you--and a man whobe fix to a seat in Parliament, and a pretty girl, with a couple of thousand a year, be fix to no bad thing, let I tell you," say the old man.
"Great Heavens, sir!" say Arthur, "be you blind? cannot you see?"
"see what, young gentleman?" ask the other.
"see, that rather than trade upon this secret of Amory's," Arthur cry out, "I would go and join my father-in-law at the hulk! see, that rather than take a seat in Parliament as a bribe from Clavering for silence, I would take the spoon off the table! see, that you have give I a felon's daughter for a wife; doom I to poverty and shame; curse my career when it might have be--when it might have be so different but for you! donot you see that we have be play a guilty game, and have be overreached;--that in offer to marry this poor girl, for the sake of her money, and the advancement she would bring, I be degrade myself, and prostitute my honour?"
"what in Heaven's name do you mean, sir?" cry the old man.
"I mean to say that there be a measure of baseness which I cannot pass," Arthur say. "I have no other word for it, and be sorry if they hurt you. I have feel, for month past, that my conduct in this affair have be wicked, sordid, and worldly. I be rightly punish by the event, and have sell myself for money and a seat in Parliament, by lose both."
"how do you mean that you lose either?" shriek the old gentleman. "who the devilbe to take your fortune or your seat away from you? by g--, Clavering shall give them to you. you shall have every shilling of eighty thousand pound."
"Iwill keep my promise to Miss Amory, sir," say Arthur.
"and, begad, her parent shall keep theirs to you."
"not so, please God," Arthur answer. "I have sin, but, Heaven help I, I will sin no more. I will let clavering off from that bargain which be make without my knowledge. I will take no money with Blanche but that which be originally settle upon she; and I will try to make she happy. you have do it. you have bring this on I, sir. but you know no well: and I forgive----"
"Arthur--in God's name--in your father's, who, by Heavens, be the proud man alive, and have the honour of the family always at heart--in mine--for the sake of a poor break-down old fellow, who have always be dev'lish fond of you--don't fle this chance away--I pray you, I beg you, I implore you, my dear, dear boy, donot fle this chance away. itbe the making of you. yoube sure to get on. youwill be a Baronet; itbe three thousand a year: dammy, on my knee, there, I beg of you, donot do this."
and the old man actually sink down on his knee, and, seize one of Arthur's hand, look up piteously at he. it be cruel to remark the shake hand, the wrinkle and quivering face, the old eye weep and wink, the broken voice. "ah, sir," say Arthur, with a groan, "you have bring pain enough on I, spare I this. you have wish I to marry Blanche. I marry she. for God's sake, sir, rise! I cannot bear it."
"you--you mean to say that you will take she as a beggar, and be one yourself?" say the old gentleman, rise up and cough violently.
"I look at she as a person to whom a great calamity have befall, and to whom I be promise. she cannot help the misfortune; and as she have my word when she be prosperous, I shall not withdraw it now she be poor. I will not take Clavering's seat, unless afterwards it should be give of his free will. I will not have a shilling more than her original fortune."
"have the kindness to ring the bell," say the old gentleman. "I have do my good, and say my say; and Ibe a dev'lish old fellow. and--and-- it donot matter. and--and Shakspeare be right--and Cardinal Wolsey-- begad--'and have I but serve my God as Ihave serve you'--ye, on my knee, by Jove, to my own nephew--I mightnot have be--good night, sir, you neednot trouble yourself to call again."
Arthur take his hand, which the old man leave to he; it be quite passive and clammy. he look very much oldene; and it seem as if the contest and defeat have quite break he.
on the next day he keep his bed, and refuse to see his nephew.
CHAPTER LXXII
in which the deck begin to clear
when, array in his dressing-gown, Pen walk up, accord to custom, to Warrington's chamber next morning, to inform his friend of the issue of the last night's interview with his uncle, and to ask, as usual, for George's advice and opinion, Mrs. Flanagan, the laundress, be the only person whom Arthur find in the dear old chamber. George have take a carpet-bag, and be go. his address be to his brother's house, in Suffolk. package address to the newspaper and review for which he write lie on the table, await delivery.
"I find he at the table, when I come, the dear gentleman!" Mrs. Flanagan say, "write at his paper, and one of the candle be burn out; and hard as his bed be, he benot in it all night, sir."
indeed, have sit at the Club until the brawl there become intolerable to he, George have walk home, and have pass the night finish some work on which he be employ, and to the completion of which he bend himself with all his might. the labour be do, and the night be wear away somehow, and the tardy November dawn come and look in on the young man as he sate over his desk. in the next day's paper, or quarter's review, many of we very likely admire the work of his genius, the variety of his illustration, the fierce vigour of his satire, the depth of his reason. there be no hint in his writing of the other thought which occupy he, and always accompany he in his work--a tone more melancholy than be customary, a satire more bitter and impatient than that which he afterwards show, may have mark the writing of this period of his life to the very few person who know his style or his name. we have say before, could we know the man's feeling as well as the author's thought--how interesting most book would be!--more interesting than merry. I suppose harlequin's face behind his mask be always grave, if not melancholy--certainly each man who live by the pen, and happen to read this, must remember, if he will, his own experience, and recall many solemn hour of solitude and labour. what a constant care sate at the side of the desk and accompany he! fever or sickness be lie possibly in the next room: a sick child might be there, with a wife watch over it terrify and in prayer: or grief might be bear he down, and the cruel mist before the eye render the paper scarce visible as he write on it, and the inexorable necessity drive on the pen. what man among we have not have night and hour like these? but to the manly heart--severe as these pang be, they be endurable: long as the night seem, the dawn come at last, and the wound heal, and the fever abate, and rest come, and you can afford to look back on the past misery with feeling that be anything but bitter.
two or three book for reference, fragment of tear-up manuscript, drawer open, pen and inkstand, line half visible on the blot-paper, a bit of sealing-wax twist and bite and break into sundry piece--such relic as these be about the table, and Pen fling himself down in George's empty chair--note thing accord to his willnot, or in spite of himself. there be a gap in the bookcase (next to the old College Plato, with the Boniface Arms), where Helen's bible use to be. he have take that with he, think Pen. he know why his friend be go. dear, dear old George!
Pen rub his hand over his eye. oh, how much wise, how much well, how much nobler he be than I! he think. where be such a friend, or such a brave heart? where shall I ever hear such a frank voice, and kind laughter? where shall I ever see such a true gentleman? no wonder she love he. God bless he! what be I compare to he? what could she do else but love he? to the end of our day we will be her brother, as fate will that we can be no more. wewill be her knight, and wait on she: and when webe old, wewill say how we love she. dear, dear old George!
when Pen descend to his own chamber, his eye fall on the letter-box of his outer door, which he have previously overlook, and there be a little note to A. P., Esq., in George's well-know handwriting, George have put into Pen's box probably as he be go away.
"dear Pen,--I shall be half-way home when you breakfast, and intend to stay over Christmas, in Norfolk, or elsewhere.
"I have my own opinion of the issue of matter about which we talk in J----- St. yesterday; and think my presence de trop.
"Vale. G. W."
"give my very good regard and adieux to your cousin."
and so George be go, and Mrs. Flanagan, the laundress, rule over his empty chamber.
Pen of course have to go and see his uncle on the day after their colloquy, and not be admit, he naturally go to Lady Rockminster's apartment, where the old lady instantly ask for Bluebeard, and insist that he should come to dinner.
"Bluebeard be go," Pen say, and he take out poor George's scrap of paper, and hand it to Laura, who look at it--do not look at Pen in return, but pass the paper back to he, and walk away. Pen rush into an eloquent eulogium upon his dear old George to Lady Rockminster, who be astonish at his enthusiasm. she have never hear he so warm in praise of anybody; and tell he with her usual frankness, that she donot think it have be in his nature to care so much about any other person.
as Mr. Pendennis be pass in Waterloo Place, in one of his many walk to the hotel where Laura live, and whither duty to his uncle carry Arthur every day, Arthur see issue from Messrs. Gimcrack's celebrated shop an old friend, who be follow to his brougham by an obsequious shopman bear parcel. the gentleman be in the deep mourning: the brougham, the driver, and the horse be in mourning. grief in easy circumstance and support by the comfortable spring and cushion, be typify in the equipage and the little gentleman, its proprietor.
"what, Foker! Hail, Foker!" cry out Pen--the reader, no doubt, have likewise recognise Arthur's old schoolfellow--and he hold out his hand to the heir of the late lament John Henry Foker, Esq., the master of Logwood and other house, the principal partner in the great brewery of Foker and Co.: the great portion of Foker's Entire.
a little hand, cover with a glove of the deep ebony, and set off by three inch of a snowy wristband, be put forth to meet Arthur's salutation. the other little hand hold a little morocco case, contain, no doubt, something precious, of which Mr. Foker have just become proprietor in Messrs. Gimcrack's shop. Pen's keen eye and satiric turn show he at once upon what errand Mr. Foker have be employ; and he think of the heir in Horace pour forth the gathered wine of his father's vat; and that human nature be pretty much the same in Regent Street as in the Via Sacra.
"Le Roi est mort. Vive le Roi!" say Arthur.
"ah!" say the other. "yes. thank you--very much obliged. how do you do, pen?--very busy--good-bye!" and he jump into the black brougham, and sate like a little black care behind the black coachman. he have blush on see Pen, and show other sign of guilt and perturbation, which Pen attribute to the novelty of his situation; and on which he begin to speculate in his usual sardonic manner.
"yes: so wag the world," think Pen. "the stone close over Harry the Fourth, and Harry the Fifth reign in his stead. the old minister at the brewery come and kneel before he with their book; the drayman, his subject, fle up their red cap, and shout for he. what a grave deference and sympathy the banker and the lawyer show! there be too great a stake at issue between those two that they should ever love each other very cordially. as long as one man keep another out of twenty thousand a year, the young must be always hanker after the crown, and the wish must be the father to the thought of possession. thank Heaven, there be no thought of money between I and our dear mother, Laura."
"there never could have be. you would have spurn it!" cry Laura. "why make yourself more selfish than you be, Pen; and allow your mind to own for an instant that it would have entertain such--such dreadful meanness? you make I blush for you, Arthur: you make me----" her eye finish this sentence, and she pass her handkerchief across they.
"there be some truth which woman will never acknowledge," Pen say, "and from which your modesty always turn away. I do not say that I ever know the feeling, only that I be glad I have not the temptation. be there any harm in that confession of weakness?"
"we be all teach to ask to be deliver from evil, Arthur," say Laura, in a low voice. "I be glad if you be spar from that great crime; and only sorry to think that you could by any possibility have be lead into it. but you never could; and you donot think you could. your act be generous and kind: you disdain mean action. you take Blanche without money, and without a bribe. yes, thank be to Heaven, dear brother. you could not have sell yourself away; I know you could not when it come to the day, and you do not. praise be--be where praise be due. why do this horrid scepticism pursue you, my Arthur? why doubt and sneer at your own heart--at every one's? oh, if you know the pain you give I--how I lie awake and think of those hard sentence, dear brother, and wish they unspoken, unthought!"
"do I cause you many thought and many tear, Laura?" ask Arthur. the fulness of innocent love beam from she in reply. a smile heavenly pure, a glance of unutterable tenderness, sympathy, pity, shine in her face-- all which indication of love and purity Arthur beheld and worship in she, as you would watch they in a child, as one fancy one might regard they in an angel.
"I--I donot know what I have do," he say, simply, "to have merit such regard from two such woman. it be like undeserved praise, Laura--or too much good fortune, which frighten one--or a great post, when a man feel that he be not fit for it. ah, sister, how weak and wicked we be; how spotless, and full of love and truth, Heaven make you! I think for some of you there have be no fall," he say, look at the charming girl with an almost paternal glance of admiration. "you cannot help have sweet thought, and do good action. dear creature! they be the flower which you bear."
"and what else, sir?" ask Laura. "I see a sneer come over your face. what be it? why do it come to drive all the good thought away?"
"a sneer, be there? I be think, my dear, that nature in make you so good and loving do very well: but----"
"but what? what be that wicked but? and why be you always call it up?"
"but will come in spite of we. but be reflection. but be the sceptic's familiar, with whom he have make a compact; and if he forget it, and indulge in happy day-dream, or building of air-castle, or listen to sweet music let we say, or to the bell ring to church, but tap at the door, and say, Master, I be here. you be my master; but I be yours. go where you will you cannot travel without I. I will whisper to you when you be on your knee at church. I will be at your marriage pillow. I will sit down at your table with your child. I will be behind your deathbed curtain. that be what but be," Pen say.
"Pen, you frighten I," cry Laura.
"do you know what but come and say to I just now, when I be look at you? but say, if that girl have reason as well as love, she would love you no more. if she know you as you be--the sully, selfish being which you know--she must part from you, and could give you no love and no sympathy. donot I say," he add fondly, "that some of you seem exempt from the fall? love you know; but the knowledge of evil be keep from you."
"what be this you young folk be talk about?" ask Lady Rockminster, who at this moment make her appearance in the room, have perform, in the mystic retirement of her own apartment, and under the hand of her attendant, those elaborate toilet-rite without which the worthy old lady never present herself to public view. "Mr. Pendennis, you be always come here."
"it be very pleasant to be here," Arthur say; "and we be talk, when you come in, about my friend Foker, whom I meet just now; and who, as your ladyship know, have succeed to his father's kingdom."
"he have a very fine property, he have fifteen thousand a year. he be my cousin. he be a very worthy young man. he must come and see I," say Lady Rockminster, with a look at Laura.
"he have be engage for many year past to his cousin," Lady----"
"Lady Ann be a foolish little chit," Lady Rockminster say, with much dignity; "and I have no patience with she. she have outrage every feeling of society. she have break her father's heart, and throw away fifteen thousand a year."
"throw away? what have happen?" ask Pen.
"it will be the talk of the town in a day or two; and there be no need why I should keep the secret any long," say Lady Rockminster, who have write and receive a dozen letter on the subject. "I have a letter yesterday from my daughter, who be stay at Drummington until all the world be oblige to go away on account of the frightful catastrophe which happen there. when Mr. Foker come home from Nice, and after the funeral, Lady Ann go down on her knee to her father, say that she never could marry her cousin, that she have contract another attachment, and that she must die rather than fulfil her contract. poor Lord Rosherville, who be dreadfully embarrassed, show his daughter what the state of his affair be, and that it be necessary that the arrangement should take place; and in fine, we all suppose that she have listen to reason, and intend to comply with the desire of her family. but what have happened?--last Thursday she go out after breakfast with she maid, and be marry in the very church in Drummington Park to Mr. Hobson, her father's own chaplain and her brother's tutor; a red-haired widower with two child. poor dear Rosherville be in a dreadful way: he wish Henry Foker should marry Alice or Barbara; but Alice be mark with the small-pox, and Barbara be ten year old than he be. and, of course, now the young man be his own master, he will think of choose for himself. the blow on Lady Agnes be very cruel. she be inconsolable. she have the house in Grosvenor Street for her life, and her settlement, which be very handsome. have you not meet she? yes, she din one day at Lady Clavering's--the first day I see you, and a very disagreeable young man I think you be. but I have form you. we have form he, havenot we, Laura? where be Bluebeard? let he come. that horrid Grindley, the dentist, will keep I in town another week."
to the latter part of her ladyship's speech Arthur give no ear. he be think for whom could Foker be purchase those trinket which he be carry away from the jeweller's? why do Harry seem anxious to avoid he? could he be still faithful to the attachment which have agitate he so much, and send he abroad eighteen month back? Psha! the bracelet and present be for some of Harry's old friend of the Opera or the french theatre. rumour from Naples and Paris, rumour such as be bear to Club smoking-room, have announce that the young man have find distraction; or, preclude from his virtuous attachment, the poor fellow have fling himself back upon his old companion and amusement--not the only man or woman whom society force into evil, or debar from good; not the only victim of the world's selfish and wicked law.
as a good thing when it be to be do cannot be do too quickly, Laura be anxious that Pen's marriage intention should be put into execution as speedily as possible, and press on his arrangement with rather a feverish anxiety. why could she not wait? Pen could afford to do so with perfect equanimity, but Laura would hear of no delay. she write to Pen: she implore Pen: she use every mean to urge expedition. it seem as if she could have no rest until Arthur's happiness be complete.
she offer herself to dearest Blanche to come and stay at Tunbridge with she, when Lady Rockminster should go on her intend visit to the reign house of Rockminster; and although the old dowager scold, and order, and command, Laura be deaf and disobedient: she must go to Tunbridge, she would go to Tunbridge: she who ordinarily have no will of her own, and comply smilingly with anybody's whim and caprice, show the most selfish and obstinate determination in this instance. the dowager lady must nurse herself in her rheumatism, she must read herself to sleep, if she would not hear she maid, whose voice croak, and who make sad work of the sentimental passage in the novel--Laura must go,-- and be with her new sister. in another week, she propose, with many love and regard to dear Lady Clavering, to pass some time with dear Blanche.
Dearest Blanche write instantly in reply to dear Laura's no. 1, to say with what extreme delight she should welcome her sister: how charming it would be to practise their old duet together, to wander o'er the grassy sward, and amidst the yellow wood of Penshurst and Southborough! Blanche count the hour till she should embrace her dear friend.
Laura, No. 2, express her delight at dear Blanche's affectionate reply. she hop that their friendship would never diminish; that the confidence between they would grow in after year; that they should have no secret from each other; that the aim of the life of each would be to make one person happy.
Blanche, No. 2, follow in two day. "how provoking! their house be very small, the two spare bedroom be occupy by that horrid Mrs. Planter and her daughter, who have think proper to fall ill (she always fall ill in country-house), and she could not or would not be move for some day."
Laura, No. 3. "it be indeed very provoking. L. have hop to hear one of dear B.'s dear song on Friday; but she be the more consoled to wait, because Lady R. be not very well, and like to be nurse by she. poor Major Pendennis be very unwell, too, in the same hotel--too unwell even to see Arthur, who be constant in his call on his uncle. Arthur's heart be full of tenderness and affection. she have know Arthur all her life. she would answer"--yes, even in italic she would answer--"for his kindness, his goodness, and his gentleness."
Blanche, No. 3. "what be this most surprising, most extraordinary letter from A. P.? what do dear Laura know about it? what have happen? what, what mystery be envelop under his frightful reserve?"
Blanche, No. 3, require an explanation; and it cannot be well give than in the surprising and mysterious letter of Arthur Pendennis.
CHAPTER LXXIII
Mr. and Mrs. Sam Huxter
"Dear Blanche," Arthur write, "you be always read and dream pretty drama, and exciting romance in real life: be you now prepared to enact a part of one? and not the pleasantest part, dear Blanche, that in which the heroine take possession of her father's palace and wealth, and introduce her husband to the loyal retainer and faithful vassal, greet her happy bridegroom with 'all of this be mine and thine,'--but the other character, that of the luckless lady, who suddenly discover that she be not the Prince's wife, but Claude Melnotte's the beggar's: that of Alnaschar's wife, who come in just as her husband have kick over the tray of porcelain which be to be the making of his fortune--but stay; Alnaschar, who kick down the china, be not a married man; he have cast his eye on the Vizier's daughter, and his hope of she go to the ground with the shattered bowl and tea-cup.
"will you be the Vizier's daughter, and refuse and laugh to scorn Alnaschar, or will you be the Lady of Lyons, and love the penniless Claude Melnotte? I will act that part if you like. I will love you my good in return. I will do my all to make your humble life happy: for humble it will be: at least the odd be against any other conclusion; we shall live and die in a poor prosy humdrum way. there will be no star and epaulette for the hero of our story. I shall write one or two more story, which will presently be forget. I shall be call to the Bar, and try to get on in my profession: perhaps some day, if I be very lucky, and work very hard (which be absurd), I may get a colonial appointment, and you may be an indian Judge's lady. meanwhile. I shall buy back the Pall Mall Gazette; the publisher be tired of it since the death of poor Shandon, and will sell it for a small sum. Warrington will be my right hand, and write it up to a respectable sale. I will introduce you to Mr. Finucane the sub-editor, and I know who in the end will be Mrs. Finucane,--a very nice gentle creature, who have live sweetly through a sad life and we will jog on, I say, and look out for well time, and earn our live decently. you shall have the opera-box, and superintend the fashionable intelligence, and break your little heart in the poet's corner. shall we live over the offices?--there be four very good room, a kitchen, and a garret for Laura, in Catherine Street in the Strand; or would you like a house in the Waterloo Road?--it would be very pleasant, only there be that halfpenny toll at the Bridge. the boy may go to King's College, maynot they? do all this read to you like a joke?
"ah, dear Blanche, it be no joke, and I be sober and tell the truth. our fine day-dream be go. our carriage have whirl out of sight like Cinderella's: our house in Belgravia have be whisk away into the air by a malevolent Genius, and I be no more a member of Parliament than I be a Bishop on his bench in the House of Lords, or a Duke with a garter at his knee. you know pretty well what my property be, and your own little fortune: we may have enough with those two to live in decent comfort; to take a cab sometimes when we go out to see our friend, and not to deny ourselves an omnibus when we be tired. but that be all: be that enough for you, my little dainty lady? I doubt sometimes whether you can bear the life which I offer you--at least, it be fair that you should know what it will be. if you say, 'yes, Arthur, I will follow your fate whatever it may be, and be a loyal and love wife to aid and cheer you' --come to I, dear Blanche, and may God help I so that I may do my duty to you. if not, and you look to a high station, I must not bar Blanche's fortune--I will stand in the crowd, and see your ladyship go to Court when you be present, and you shall give I a smile from your chariot window. I see Lady Mirabel go to the drawing-room last season: the happy husband at her side glitter with star and cordon. all the flower in the garden bloom in the coachman's bosom. will you have these and the chariot, or walk on foot and mend your husband's stocking?
"I cannot tell you now--afterwards I might, should the day come when we may have no secret from one another--what have happen within the last few hour which have change all my prospect in life: but so it be, that I have learn something which force I to give up the plan which I have form, and many vain and ambitious hope in which I have be indulge. I have write and despatch a letter to Sir Francis Clavering, say that I cannot accept his seat in Parliament until after my marriage; in like manner I cannot and will not accept any large fortune with you than that which have always belong to you since your grandfather's death, and the birth of your half-brother. your good mother be not in the least aware--I hope she never may be--of the reason which force I to this very strange decision. they arise from a painful circumstance, which be attributable to none of our fault; but, have once befall, they be as fatal and irreparable as that shock which overset honest Alnaschar's porcelain, and shatter all his hope beyond the power of mending. I write gaily enough, for there be no use in bewail such a hopeless mischance. we have not draw the great prize in the lottery, dear Blanche: but I shall be content enough without it, if you can be so; and I repeat, with all my heart, that I will do my good to make you happy.
"and now, what news shall I give you? my uncle be very unwell, and take my refusal of the seat in Parliament in sad dudgeon: the scheme be his, poor old gentleman, and he naturally bemoan its failure. but Warrington, Laura, and I have a council of war: they know this awful secret, and back I in my decision. you must love George as you love what be generous and upright and noble; and as for Laura--she must be our Sister, Blanche, our Saint, our good Angel. with two such friend at home, what need we care for the world without; or who be member for Clavering, or who be ask or not ask to the great ball of the season?"
to this frank communication come back the letter from Blanche to Laura, and one to Pen himself, which perhaps his own letter justify. "you be spoil by the world," Blanche write; "you do not love your poor Blanche as she would be love, or you would not offer thus lightly to take she or to leave she, no, Arthur, you love I not--a man of the world, you have give I your plight troth, and be ready to redeem it; but that entire affection, that love whole and abide, where--where be that vision of my youth? I be but a pastime of your life, and I would be its all;--but a fleeting thought, and I would be your whole soul. I would have our two heart one; but ah, my Arthur, how lonely yours be! how little you give I of it! you speak of our parting with a smile on your lip; of our meeting, and you care not to hasten it! be life but a disillusion, then, and be the flower of our garden fade away? I have weep--I have pray --I have pass sleepless hour--I have shed bitter, bitter tear over your letter! to you I bring the gushing poesy of my being--the yearning of the soul that long to be love--that pine for love, love, love, beyond all!--that fling itself at your foot, and cry, love I, Arthur! your heart beat no quick at the kneeling appeal of my love!--your proud eye be dim by no tear of sympathy!--you accept my soul's treasure as though 'twere dross! not the pearl from the unfathomable deep of affection! not the diamond from the cavern of the heart. you treat I like a slave, and bid I bow to my master! be this the guerdon of a free maiden--be this the price of a life's passion? ah I! when be it otherwise? when do love meet with aught but disappointment? could I hope (fond fool!) to be the exception to the lot of my race; and lie my fevere brow on a heart that comprehend my own? foolish girl that I be! one by one, all the flower of my young life have fade away; and this, the last, the sweetest, the dear, the fondly, the madly love, the wildly cherished--where be it? but no more of this. Heed not my bleed heart.--bless you, bless you always, Arthur!
"I will write more when I be more collected. my rack brain render think almost impossible. I long to see Laura! she will come to we directly we return from the country, will she not? and you, cold one! B."
the word of this letter be perfectly clear, and write in Blanche's neat hand upon her scented paper; and yet the meaning of the composition not a little puzzled Pen. do Blanche mean to accept or to refuse his polite offer? her phrase either mean that Pen do not love she, and she decline he, or that she take he, and sacrifice herself to he, cold as he be. he laugh sardonically over the letter, and over the transaction which occasion it. he laugh to think how Fortune have jilt he, and how he deserve his slippery fortune. he turn over and over the musky gilt-edge riddle. it amuse his humour: he enjoy it as if it have be a funny story.
he be thus seat, twiddle the queer manuscript in his hand, joke grimly to himself, when his servant come in with a card from a gentleman, who wish to speak to he very particularly. and if Pen have go out into the passage, he would have see, suck his stick, roll his eye, and show great mark of anxiety, his old acquaintance, Mr. Samuel Huxter.
"Mr. Huxter on particular business! pray, beg Mr. Huxter to come in," say Pen, amuse rather; and not the less so when poor Sam appear before he.
"pray take a chair, Mr. Huxter," say Pen, in his most superb manner. "in what way can I be of service to you?"
"I have rather not speak before the flunk--before the man, Mr. Pendennis:" on which Mr. Arthur's attendant quit the room.
"Ibe in a fix," say Mr. Huxter, gloomily.
"indeed."
"she send I to you," continue the young surgeon.
"what, Fanny? be she well? I be come to see she, but I have have a great deal of business since my return to London."
"I hear of you through my governor and Jack Hobnell," break in Huxter. "I wish you joy, Mr. Pendennis, both of the borough and the lady, sir. Fanny wish you joy, too," he add, with something of a blush.
"therebe many a slip between the cup and the lip! who know what may happen, Mr. Huxter, or who will sit in Parliament for Clavering next session?"
"you can do anything with my governor," continue Mr. Huxter. "you get he Clavering Park. the old boy be very much pleased, sir, at your call he in. Hobnell write I so. do you think you could speak to the governor for I, Mr. Pendennis?"
"and tell he what?"
"Ihave go and do it, sir," say Huxter, with a particular look.
"you--you donot mean to say you have--you have do any wrong to that dear little creature, sir?" say Pen, start up in a great fury.
"I hope not," say Huxter, with a hangdog look: "but Ihave marry she. and I know there will be an awful shindy at home. it be agree that I should be take into partnership when I have pass the College, and it be to have be Huxter and Son. but I would have it, confound it. itbe all over now, and the old boy's write I that hebe come up to town for drug: he will be here to-morrow, and then it must all come out."
"and when do this event happen?" ask Pen, not over well pleased, most likely, that a person who have once attract some portion of his royal good grace should have transfer her allegiance, and console herself for his loss.
"last Thursday be five week--it be two day after Miss Amory come to Shepherd's Inn," Huxter answer.
Pen remember that Blanche have write and mention her visit. "I be call in," Huxter say. "I be in the inn look after old cos's leg; and about something else too, very likely: and I meet Strong, who tell I there be a woman take ill in Chambers, and go up to give she my professional service. it be the old lady who attend Miss Amory--her housekeeper, or some such thing. she be take with strong hysteric: I find her kicking and scream like a good one--in Strong's chamber, along with he and Colonel Altamont, and Miss Amory cry and as pale as a sheet; and Altamont fume about--a regular kick-up. they be two hour in the Chambers; and the old woman go whoop off in a cab. she be much bad than the young one. I call in Grosvenor Place next day to see if I could be of any service, but they be go without so much as thank I: and the day after I have business of my own to attend to-- a bad business too," say Mr. Huxter, gloomily. "but itbe do, and cannot be undo; and we must make the good of it"
she have know the story for a month, think Pen, with a sharp pang of grief, and a gloomy sympathy--this account for her letter of to-day. she will not implicate her father, or divulge his secret; she wish to let I off from the marriage--and find a pretext--the generous girl!
"do you know who Altamont be, sir?" ask Huxter, after the pause during which Pen have be think of his own affair. "Fanny and I have talk he over, and we cannot help fancy that itbe Mrs. Lightfoot's first husband come to life again, and she who have just marry a second. perhaps Lightfoot willnot be very sorry for it," sigh Huxter, look savagely at Arthur, for the demon of jealousy be still in possession of his soul; and now, and more than ever since his marriage, the poor fellow fancy that Fanny's heart belong to his rival.
"let we talk about your affair," say Pen. "show I how I can be of any service to you, Huxter. let I congratulate you on your marriage. I be thankful that Fanny, who be so good, so fascinating, so kind a creature, have find an honest man, and a gentleman who will make she happy. show I what I can do to help you."
"she think you can, sir," say Huxter, accept Pen's proffered hand, "and Ibe very much oblige to you, Ibe sure; and that you might talk over my father, and break the business to he, and my mother, who always have she back up about be a clergyman's daughter. Fanny benot of a good family, I know, and not up to we in breeding and that--but shebe a Huxter now."
"the wife take the husband's rank, of course," say Pen.
"and with a little practice in society," continue Huxter, imbibe his stick, "shewill be as good as any girl in Clavering. you should hear her sing and play on the piano. do you ever? Old Bows teach she. and shewill do on the stage, if the governor be to throw I over; but Iwould rather not have she there. she cannot help be a coquette, Mr. Pendennis, she cannot help it. Dammy, sir! Iwill be bind to say, that two or three of the Bartholomew chap, that Ihave bring into my place, be sit with she now: even Jack Linton, that I take down as my good man, be as bad as the rest, and she will go on sing and make eye at he. itbe what bow say, if there be twenty man in a room, and one not take notice of she, she wouldnot be satisfied until the twentieth be at her elbow."
"you should have her mother with she," say Pen, laugh.
"she must keep the lodge. she cannot see so much of her family as she use. I cannot, you know, sir, go on with that lot. consider my rank in life," say Huxter, put a very dirty hand up to his chin.
"Au fait," say Mr. Pen, who be infinitely amuse, and concern whom mutato nomine (and of course concern nobody else in the world) the fable might have be narrate.
as the two gentleman be in the midst of this colloquy, another knock come to Pen's door, and his servant presently announce Mr. Bows. the old man follow slowly, his pale face blushing, and his hand tremble somewhat as he take Pen's. he cough, and wipe his face in his check cotton pocket-handkerchief, and sate down with his hand on his knee, the sunshining on his bald head. Pen look at the homely figure with no small sympathy and kindness. this man, too, have have his grief and his wound, Arthur think. this man, too, have bring his genius and his heart, and lay they at a woman's foot; where she spurn they. the chance of life have go against he, and the prize be with that creature yonder. Fanny's bridegroom, thus mutely apostrophise, have wink meanwhile with one eye at old bow, and be drive hole in the floor with the cane which he love.
"so we have lose, Mr. Bows, and here be the lucky winner," Pen say, look hard at the old man.
"here be the lucky winner, sir, as you say."
"I suppose you have come from my place?" ask Huxter, who, have wink at bow with one eye, now favour Pen with a wink of the other--a wink which seem to say, "infatuated old boy--you understand--over head and ear in love with her poor old fool."
"yes, I have be there ever since you go away. it be Mrs. Sam who send I after you: who say that she think you might be do something stupid--something like yourself, Huxter."
"therebe as big fool as I be," growl the young surgeon.
"a few, p'raps," say the old man; "not many, let we trust. yes, she send I after you for fear you should offend Mr. Pendennis; and I daresay because she think you wouldnot give her message to he, and beg he to go and see she; and she know I would take her errand. do he tell you that, sir?"
Huxter blush scarlet, and cover his confusion with an imprecation. Pen laugh; the scene suit his bitter humour more and more.
"I have no doubt Mr. Huxter be go to tell I," Arthur say, "and very much flattered I be sure I shall be to pay my respect to his wife."
"itbe in Charterhouse Lane, over the baker's, on the right hand side as you go from St. John's Street," continue bow, without any pity. "you know Smithfield, Mr. Pendennis? St. John's Street lead into Smithfield. Doctor Johnson have be down the street many a time with ragged shoe, and a bundle of penny-a-lining for the Gent's Magazine. you literary gent be well off now--eh? you ride in your cab, and wear yellow kid glove now."
"I have know so many brave and good man fail, and so many quack and impostor succeed, that you mistake I if you think I be puff up by my own personal good luck, old friend," Arthur say, sadly. "do you think the prize of life be carry by the most deserving? and set up that mean test of prosperity for merit? you must feel that you be as good as I. I have never question it. it be you that be peevish against the freak of fortune, and grudge the good luck that befall other. itbe not the first time you have unjustly accuse I, Bows."
"perhaps you be not far wrong, sir," say the old fellow, wipe his bald forehead. "I be think about myself and grumble; most man do when they get on that subject. herebe the fellow thatbe get the prize in the lottery; herebe the fortunate youth."
"I donot know what you be drive at," Huxter say, who have be much puzzled as the above remark pass between his two companion.
"perhaps not," say Bows, drily. "Mrs. H. send I here to look after you, and to see that you bring that little message to Mr. Pendennis, which you donot, you see, and so she be right. woman always be; they have always a reason for everything. why, sir," he say, turn round to Pen with a sneer, "she have a reason even for give I that message. I be sit with she after you leave we, very quiet and comfortable; I be talk away, and she be mend your shirt, when your two young friend, Jack Linton and Bob Blades, look in from Bartholomew's; and then it be she find out that she have this message to send. you neednot hurry yourself, she donot want you back again; theywill stay these two hour, I daresay."
Huxter arise with great perturbation at this news, and plunge his stick into the pocket of his paletot, and seize his hat.
"youwill come and see we, sir, willnot you?" he say to Pen. "youwill talk over the governor, willnot you, sir, if I can get out of this place and down to Clavering?"
"you will promise to attend I gratis if ever I fall ill at Fairoaks, will you, Huxter?" Pen say, good-naturedly. "I will do anything I can for you. I will come and see Mrs. Huxter immediately, and we will conspire together about what be to be do."
"I think that would send he out, sir," bow say, drop into his chair again as soon as the young surgeon have quit the room. "and itbe all true, sir--every word of it. she want you back again, and send her husband after you. she cajole everybody, the little devil. she try it on you, on I, on poor Costigan, on the young chap from Bartholomew's. shebe get a little court of them already. and if therebe nobody there, she practise on the old german baker in the shop, or coax the black sweeper at the crossing."
"be she fond of that fellow?" ask Pen.
"there be no accounting for like and dislike," bow answer.
"yes, she be fond of he; and have take the thing into her head, she would not rest until she marry he. they have their bann publish at St. Clement's, and nobody hear it or know any just cause or impediment. and one day she slip out of the porter's lodge and have the business do, and go off to gravesend with Lothario; and leave a note for I to go and explain all thing to her Ma. bless you! the old woman know it as well as I do, though she pretend ignorance. and so she go, and Ibe alone again. I miss she, sir, trip along that court, and come for her singing lesson; and Ihave no heart to look into the porter's lodge now, which look very empty without she, the little flirt thing. and I go and sit and dangle about her lodging, like an old fool. she make them very trim and nice, though; get up all Huxter's shirt and clothe: cook his little dinner, and sing at her business like a little lark. whatbe the use of be angry? I lend them three pound to go on with: for they havenot get a shilling till the reconciliation, and Pa come down."
when bow have take his leave, Pen carry his letter from Blanche, and the news which he have just receive, to his usual adviser, Laura. it be wonderful upon how many point Mr. Arthur, who generally follow his own opinion, now want another person's counsel. he could hardly so much as choose a waistcoat without refer to Miss Bell: if he want to buy a horse he must have Miss Bell's opinion; all which mark of deference tend greatly to the amusement of the shrewd old lady with whom Miss Bell live, and whose plan regard her protegee we have indicate.
Arthur produce Blanche's letter then to Laura, and ask she to interpret it. Laura be very much agitated and puzzle by the content of the note.
"it seem to I," she say, "as if Blanche be act very artfully."
"and wish so to place matter that she may take I or leave I? be it not so?"
"it be, I be afraid, a kind of duplicity which do not augur well for your future happiness; and be a bad reply to your own candour and honesty, Arthur. do you know, I think, I think--I scarcely like to say what I think," say Laura with a deep blush; but of course the blush young lady yield to her cousin's persuasion, and express what her thought be. "it look to I, Arthur, as if there might be--there might be somebody else," say, Laura, with a repetition of the blush.
"and if there be," break in Arthur, "and if I be free once again, will the good and dearest of all women----"
"you be not free, dear brother," Laura say calmly. "you belong to another; of whom I own it grieve I to think ill. but I cannot do otherwise. it be very odd that in this letter she do not urge you to tell she the reason why you have break arrangement which would have be so advantageous to you; and avoid speak on the subject. she somehow seem to write as if she know her father's secret."
Pen say, "yes, she must know it;" and tell the story, which he have just hear from Huxter, of the interview at Shepherd's Inn.
"it be not so that she describe the meeting," say Laura; and, go to her desk, produce from it that letter of Blanche's which mention her visit to Shepherd's Inn. 'another disappointment--only the Chevalier Strong and a friend of his in the room.' this be all that Blanche have say. "but she be bind to keep her father's secret, Pen," Laura add. "and yet, and yet--it be very puzzling."
the puzzle be this, that for three week after this eventful discovery Blanche have be only too eager about her dear Arthur; be urge, as strongly as so much modesty could urge, the completion of the happy arrangement which be to make her Arthur's for ever; and now it seem as if something have interfere to mar these happy arrangement--as if Arthur poor be not quite so agreeable to Blanche as Arthur rich and a member of Parliament--as if there be some mystery. at last she say:
"Tunbridge Wells be not very far off, be it, Arthur? hadnot you well go and see she?"
they have be in town a week, and neither have think of that simple plan before!
CHAPTER LXXIV
show how Arthur have well have take a return-ticket
the train carry Arthur only too quickly to Tunbridge, though he have time to review all the circumstance of his life as he make the brief journey; and to acknowledge to what sad conclusion his selfishness and waywardness have lead he. "here be the end of hope and aspiration," think he, "of romance and ambition! where I yield or where I be obstinate, I be alike unfortunate; my mother implore I, and I refuse an angel! say I have take she; force on I as she be, Laura would never have be an angel to I. I could not have give she my heart at another's instigation; I never could have know she as she be have I be oblige to ask another to interpret her quality and point out her virtue. I yield to my uncle's solicitation, and accept on his guarantee Blanche, and a seat in Parliament, and wealth, and ambition, and a career; and see!--fortune come and leave I the wife without the dowry, which I have take in compensation of a heart. why be I not more honest, or be I not less so? it would have cost my poor old uncle no pang to accept Blanche's fortune whencesoever it come; he cannot even understand, he be bitterly indignant, heart-stricken, almost, at the scruple which actuate I in refuse it. I dissatisfy everybody. a maim, weak, imperfect wretch, it seem as if I be unequal to any fortune. I neither make myself nor any one connect with I happy. what prospect be there for this poor little frivolous girl, who be to take my obscure name and share my fortune? I have not even ambition to excite I, or self-esteem enough to console myself, much more she, for my failure. if I be to write a book that should go through twenty edition, why, I should be the very first to sneer at my reputation. say I could succeed at the Bar, and achieve a fortune by bully witness and twist evidence; be that a fame which would satisfy my longing, or a calling in which my life would be well spend? how I wish I could be that priest opposite, who never have lift his eye from his breviary, except when we be in Reigate tunnel, when he could not see; or that old gentleman next he, who scowl at he with eye of hatred over his newspaper. the priest shut his eye to the world, but have his thought on the book, which be his directory to the world to come. his neighbour hat he as a monster, tyrant, persecutor, and fancy burn martyr, and that pale countenance look on, and light up by the flame. these have no doubt; these march on trustfully, bear their load of logic."
"would you like to look at the paper, sir?" here interpose the stout gentleman (it have a flame article against the order of the black-coat gentleman who be travel with they in the carriage), and Pen thank he and take it, and pursue his reverie, without read two sentence of the journal.
"and yet, would you take either of those man's creed, with its consequence?" he think. "ah I! you must bear your own burthen, fashion your own faith, think your own thought, and pray your own prayer. to what mortal ear could I tell all, if I have a mind? or who could understand all? who can tell another's shortcoming, lose opportunity, weigh the passion which overpower, the defect which incapacitate reason?--what extent of truth and right his neighbour's mind be organise to perceive and to do?--what invisible and forgotten accident, terror of youth, chance or mischance of fortune, may have alter the whole current of life? a grain of sand may alter it, as the flinging of a pebble may end it. who can weigh circumstance, passion, temptation, that go to our good and evil account, save one, before whose awful wisdom we kneel, and at whose mercy we ask absolution? here it end," think Pen; "this day or to-morrow will wind up the account of my youth; a weary retrospect, alas! a sad history, with many a page I would fain not look back on! but who have not be tired or fall, and who have escape without scar from that struggle?" and his head fall on his breast, and the young man's heart prostrate itself humbly and sadly before that throne where sit wisdom, and love, and pity for all, and make its confession. "what matter about fame or poverty!" he think. "if I marry this woman I have choose, may I have strength and will to be true to she, and to make she happy. if I have child, pray God teach I to speak and to do the truth among they, and to leave they an honest name. there be no splendour for my marriage. do my life deserve any? I begin a new phase of it; a well than the last may it be, I pray Heaven!"
the train stop at Tunbridge as Pen be make these reflection; and he hand over the newspaper to his neighbour, of whom he take leave, while the foreign clergyman in the opposite corner still sate with his eye on his book. Pen jump out of the carriage then, his carpet-bag in hand, and briskly determined to face his fortune.
a fly carry he rapidly to Lady Clavering's house from the station; and, as he be transport thither, Arthur compose a little speech, which he intend to address to Blanche, and which be really as virtuous, honest, and well-minded an oration as any man of his turn of mind, and under his circumstance, could have utter. the purport of it was--"Blanche, I cannot understand from your last letter what your meaning be, or whether my fair and frank proposal to you be acceptable or no. I think you know the reason which induce I to forgo the worldly advantage which a union with you offer, and which I could not accept without, as I fancy, be dishonour. if you doubt of my affection, here I be ready to prove it. let Smirke be call in, and let we be marry out of hand; and with all my heart I purpose to keep my vow, and to cherish you through life, and to be a true and a love husband to you."
from the fly Arthur spring out then to the hall-door, where he be meet by a domestic whom he do not know. the man seem to be surprised at the approach of the gentleman with the carpet-bag, which he make no attempt to take from Arthur's hand. "her ladyshipbe not at home, sir," the man remark.
"I be Mr. Pendennis," Arthur say. "where be Lightfoot?"
"Lightfoot be go," answer the man. "my Lady be out, and my order was----"
"I hear Miss Amory's voice in the drawing-room," say Arthur. "take the bag to a dressing-room, if you please;" and, pass by the porter, he walk straight towards that apartment, from which, as the door open, a warble of melodious note issue.
our little Siren be at her piano sing with all her might and fascination. Master Clavering be asleep on the sofa, indifferent to the music; but near Blanche sit a gentleman who be perfectly enrapture with her strain, which be of a passionate and melancholy nature.
as the door open, the gentleman start up with Hullo! the music stop, with a little shriek from the singer; Frank Clavering wake up from the sofa, and Arthur come forward and say, "what, Foker! how do you do, Foker?" he look at the piano, and there, by Miss Amory's side, be just such another purple-leather box as he have see in Harry's hand three day before, when the heir of Logwood be come out of a jeweller's shop in Waterloo Place. it be open, and curl round the white satin cushion within be, oh, such a magnificent serpentine bracelet, with such a blaze ruby head and diamond tail!
"how de-do, Pendennis?" say Foker. Blanche make many motion of the shoulder, and give sign of unrest and agitation. and she put her handkerchief over the bracelet, and then she advance, with a hand which tremble very much, to greet Pen.
"how be dear Laura?" she say. the face of Foker look up from his profound mourning--that face, so piteous and puzzle, be one which the reader's imagination must depict for himself; also that of Master Frank Clavering, who, look at the three interesting individual with an expression of the utmost knowingness, have only time to ejaculate the word, "herebe a jolly go!" and to disappear snigger.
Pen, too, have restrain himself up to that minute; but look still at Foker, whose ear and cheek tingle with blush, Arthur burst out into a fit of laughter, so wild and loud, that it frighten Blanche much more than any the most serious exhibition.
"and this be the secret, be it? donot blush and turn away, Foker, my boy. why, man, you be a pattern of fidelity. could I stand between Blanche and such constancy--could I stand between Miss Amory and fifteen thousand a year?"
"it be not that, Mr. Pendennis," Blanche say, with great dignity. "it be not money, it be not rank, it be not gold that move I; but it be constancy, it be fidelity, it be a whole trustful love heart offer to I, that I treasure--yes, that I treasure!" and she make for her handkerchief, but, reflect what be underneath it, she pause. "I do not disown, I do not disguise--my life be above disguise--to he on whom it be bestow, my heart must be for ever bare--that I once think I love you,--ye, think I be belove by you, I own! how I cling to that faith! how I strove, I pray, I long to believe it! but your conduct always--your own word so cold, so heartless, so unkind, have undeceive I. you trifle with the heart of the poor maiden! you fling I back with scorn the troth which I have plight! I have explain all--all to Mr. Foker."
"that you have," say Foker, with devotion, and conviction in his look.
"what, all?" say Pen, with a meaning look at Blanche. "it be I be in fault, be it? well, well, Blanche, be it so. I willnot appeal against your sentence, and bear it in silence. I come down here look to very different thing, Heaven know, and with a heart most truly and kindly disposed towards you. I hope you may be happy with another, as, on my word, it be my wish to make you so; and I hope my honest old friend here will have a wife worthy of his loyalty, his constancy, and affection. indeed they deserve the regard of any woman--even Miss Blanche Amory. shake hand, Harry; donot look askance at I. have anybody tell you that I be a false and heartless character?"
"I think yoube a----" Foker be begin, in his wrath, when Blanche interpose.
"Henry, not a word!--i pray you let there be forgiveness!"
"yoube an angel, by Jove, yoube an angel!" say Foker, at which Blanche look seraphically up to the chandelier.
"in spite of what have pass, for the sake of what have pass, I must always regard Arthur as a brother," the seraph continue; "we have know each other year, we have tread the same field, and pluck the same flower together. Arthur! Henry! I beseech you to take hand and to be friend! Forgive you!--I forgive you, Arthur, with my heart I do. should I not do so for make I so happy?"
"there be only one person of we three whom I pity, Blanche," Arthur say, gravely, "and I say to you again, that I hope you will make this good fellow, this honest and loyal creature, happy."
"happy! o Heavens!" say Harry. he could not speak. his happiness gush out at his eye. "she donot know--she cannot know how fond I be of she, and--and who be I? a poor little beggar, and she take I up and say shewill try and I--I--love I. I benot worthy of so much happiness. give we your hand, old boy, since she forgive you after your heartless conduct, and say she love you. Iwill make you welcome. I tell you Iwill love everybody who love she. By---, if she tell I to kiss the ground Iwill kiss it. tell I to kiss the ground! I say, tell I. I love you so. you see I love you so."
Blanche look up seraphically again. her gentle bosom heave. she hold out one hand as if to bless Harry, and then royally permit he to kiss it. she take up the pocket-handkerchief and hide her own eye, as the other fair hand be abandon to poor Harry's tearful embrace.
"I swear that be a villain who deceive such a love creature as that," say Pen.
Blanche lay down the handkerchief, and put hand no. 2 softly on Foker's head, which be bent down kiss and weep over hand no. 1. "foolish boy?" she say, "it shall be love as it deserve: who could help love such a silly creature!"
and at this moment Frank Clavering break in upon the sentimental trio.
"I say, Pendennis!" he say.
"well, Frank!"
"the man want to be pay, and go back. hebe have some beer."
"Iwill go back with he," cry Pen. "good-bye, Blanche. God bless you, Foker, old friend. you know, neither of you want I here." he long to be off that instant.
"Stay--I must say one word to you. one word in private, if you please," Blanche say. "you can trust we together, cannot you, Henry?" the tone in which the word Henry be speak, and the appeal, ravish Foker with delight. "trust you!" say he. "oh, who wouldnot trust you! come along, Franky, my boy."
"letus have a cigar," say Frank, as they go into the hall.
"she donot like it," say Foker, gently.
"Law bless you--she donot mind. Pendennis use to smoke regular," say the candid youth.
"it be but a short word I have to say," say Blanche to Pen, with great calm, when they be alone. "you never love I, Mr. Pendennis."
"I tell you how much," say Arthur. "I never deceive you."
"I suppose you will go back and marry Laura," continue Blanche.
"be that what you have to say?" say Pen.
"you be go to she this very night, I be sure of it. there be no deny it. you never care for I."
"et vous?"
"et moi, c'est different. I have be spoil early. I cannot live out of the world, out of excitement. I could have do so, but it be too late. if I cannot have emotion, I must have the world. you would offer I neither one nor the other. you be blase in everything, even in ambition. you have a career before you, and you would not take it. you give it up!-- for what?--for a betise, for an absurd scruple. why would you not have that seat, and be such a puritain? why should you refuse what be mine by right, by right, entendez-vous?"
"you know all, then?" say Pen.
"only within a month. but I have suspect ever since Baymouth--n'importe since when. it be not too late. he be as if he have never be; and there be a position in the world before you yet. why not sit in Parliament, exert your talent, and give a place in the world to yourself, to your wife? I take celui-la. Il est bon. il est riche. Il est--vous le connaissez autant que moi enfin. think you that I would not prefer un homme qui fera parler de moi? if the secret appear I be rich a million. how do it affect I? it be not my fault. it will never appear."
"you will tell Harry everything, willnot you?"
"Je comprend. vous refusez," say Blanche, savagely. "I will tell Harry at my own time, when we be married. you will not betray I, will you? you, have a defenceless girl's secret, will not turn upon she and use it? S'il I plait de le cacher, mon secret; pourquoi le donnerai je? Je l'aime, mon pauvre pere, voyez-vous? I would rather live with that man than with you fade intriguer of the world. I must have emotion--it m'en donne. Il m'ecrit. Il ecrit tres-bien, voyez-vous--comme un pirate-- comme un Bohemien--comme un homme. but for this I would have say to my mother--Ma mere! quitton ce lache mari, cette lache societe--retournon a mon pere."
"the pirate would have weary you like the rest," say Pen.
"eh! il I faut des emotion," say Blanche. Pen have never see she or know so much about she in all the year of their intimacy as he see and know now: though he see more than exist in reality. for this young lady be not able to carry out any emotion to the full; but have a sham enthusiasm, a sham hatred, a sham love, a sham taste, a sham grief, each of which flare and shine very vehemently for an instant, but subside and give place to the next sham emotion.
CHAPTER LXXV
a chapter of match-making
upon the platform at Tunbridge, Pen fume and fret until the arrival of the evening train to London, a full half-hour,--six hour it seem to he; but even this immense interval be pass, the train arrive, the train speed on, the London light come in view--a gentleman who forget his carpet-bag in the train rush at a cab, and say to the man, "drive as hard as you can go to Jermyn Street." the cabman, although a hansom-cabman, say thank you for the gratuity which be put into his hand, and Pen run up the stair of the hotel to Lady Rockminster's apartment. Laura be alone in the drawing-room, reading, with a pale face, by the lamp. the pale face look up when Pen open the door. may we follow he? the great moment of life be but moment like the other. your doom be speak in a word or two. a single look from the eye; a mere pressure of the hand may decide it; or of the lip, though they cannot speak.
when Lady Rockminster, who have have her after-dinner nap, get up and go into her sitting-room, we may enter with her ladyship.
"upon my word, young people!" be the first word she say, and her attendant make wonder eye over her shoulder. and well may she say so; and well may the attendant cast wonder eye; for the young people be in an attitude; and Pen in such a position as every young lady who read this have hear tell of, or have see, or hope, or at any rate deserve to see.
in a word, directly he enter the room, Pen go up to Laura of the pale face, who have not time even to say, what, back so soon? and seize she outstretched and tremble hand just as she be rise from her chair, fall down on his knee before she, and say quickly, "I have see she. she have engage herself to Harry Foker--and--and now, Laura?"
the hand give a pressure--the eye beam a reply--the quivering lip answer, though speechless. Pen's head sink down in the girl's lap, as he sob out, "come and bless we, dear mother," and arm as tender as Helen's once more enfold he.
in this juncture it be that Lady Rockminster come in and say, "upon my word, young people! Beck! leave the room. what do you want poke your nose in here?"
Pen start up with look of triumph, still hold Laura's hand. "she be console I for my misfortune, ma'am," he say.
"what do you mean by kiss her hand? I donot know what you will be next do."
Pen kiss her ladyship's. "I have be to Tunbridge," he say, "and see Miss Amory; and find on my arrival that--that a villain have transplant I in her affection," he say with a tragedy air.
"be that all? be that what you be whimper on your knee about?" say the old lady, grow angry. "you might have keep the news till to-morrow."
"yes--another have supersede I," go on Pen; "but why call he villain? he be brave, he be constant, he be young, he be wealthy, he be beautiful."
"what stuff be you talk, sir?" cry the old lady. "what have happen?"
"Miss Amory have jilt I, and accept Henry Foker, Esq. I find she warble ditty to he as he lie at her foot; present have be accept, vow exchange, these ten day. Harry be old Mrs. Planter's rheumatism, which keep dear Laura out of the house. he be the most constant and generous of man. he have promise the living of Logwood to Lady Ann's husband, and give she a splendid present on her marriage; and he rush to fle himself at Blanche's foot the instant he find he be free."
"and so, as you cannot get Blanche, you put up with Laura; be that it, sir?" ask the old lady.
"he act nobly," Laura say.
"I act as she bid I," say Pen. "never mind how, Lady Rockminster; but to the good of my knowledge and power. and if you mean that I be not worthy of Laura, I know it, and pray Heaven to better I; and if the love and company of the good and purest creature in the world can do so, at least I shall have these to help I."
"Hm, hm," reply the old lady to this, look with rather an appeased air at the young people. "it be all very well; but I should have prefer Bluebeard."
and now Pen, to divert the conversation from a theme which be grow painful to some party present, bethink he of his interview with Huxter in the morning, and of Fanny Bolton's affair, which he have forget under the immediate pressure and excitement of his own. and he tell the lady how Huxter have elevate Fanny to the rank of wife, and what terror he be in respect the arrival of his father. he describe the scene with considerable humour, take care to dwell especially upon that part of it which concern Fanny's coquetry and irrepressible desire of captivate mankind; his meaning being, "you see, Laura, I be not so guilty in that little affair; it be the girl who make love to I, and I who resist. as I be no long present, the little siren practise her art and fascination upon other. let that transaction be forget in your mind, if you please; or visit I with a very gentle punishment for my error."
Laura understand his meaning under the eagerness of his explanation. "if you do any wrong, you repent, dear Pen," she say; "and you know," she add, with mean eye and blush, "that I have no right to reproach you."
"Hm!" grumble the old lady; "I should have prefer Bluebeard."
"the past be break away. the morrow be before we. I will do my good to make your morrow happy, dear Laura," Pen say. his heart be humble by the prospect of his happiness: it stand awestricken in the contemplation of her sweet goodness and purity. he like his wife well that she have own to that pass feeling for Warrington, and lay bare her generous heart to he. and she--very likely she be think, "how strange it be that I ever should have care for another! I be vex almost to think I care for he so little, be so little sorry that he be go away. oh, in these past two month how I have learn to love Arthur! I care about nothing but Arthur: my waking and sleeping thought be about he; he be never absent from I. and to think that he be to be mine, mine! and that I be to marry he, and not to be his servant as I expect to be only this morning; for I would have go down on my knee to Blanche to beg she to let I live with he. and now--oh, it be too much. oh, mother! mother, that you be here!" indeed, she feel as if Helen be there--by she actually, though invisibly. a halo of happiness beam from she.
she move with a different step, and bloom with a new beauty. Arthur see the change; and the old Lady Rockminster remark it with her shrewd eye.
"what a sly demure little wretch you have be," she whisper to laura-- while Pen, in great spirit, be laugh, and tell his story about Huxter--"and how you have keep your secret!"
"how be we to help the young couple?" say Laura. of course Miss Laura feel an interest in all young couple, as generous lover always love other lover.
"we must go and see they," say Pen.
"of course we must go and see they," say Laura. "I intend to be very fond of Fanny. let we go this instant. Lady Rockminster, may I have the carriage?"
"go now!--why, you stupid creature, it be eleven o'clock at night. Mr. and Mrs. Huxter have get their nightcap on, I dare say. and it be time for you to go now. good night, Mr. Pendennis."
Arthur and Laura beg for ten minute more.
"we will go to-morrow morning, then. I will come and fetch you with Martha."
"an earl's coronet," say Pen, who, no doubt, be pleased himself, "will have a great effect in Lamb Court and Smithfield. Stay--Lady Rockminster, will you join we in a little conspiracy?"
"how do you mean conspiracy, young man?"
"will you please to be a little ill to-morrow; and when old Mr. Huxter arrive, will you let I call he in? if he be put into a good humour at the notion of attend a baronet in the country, what influence willnot a countess have on he? when he be soften--when he be quite ripe, we will break the secret upon he; bring in the young people, extort the paternal benediction, and finish the comedy."
"a parcel of stuff," say the old lady. "take your hat, sir. come away, miss. there--my head be turn another way. good night, young people." and who know but the old lady thought of her own early day as she go away on Laura's arm, nod her head and hum to herself?
with the early morning come Laura and Martha accord to appointment; and the desire sensation be, let we hope, effect in Lamb Court, whence the three proceed to wait upon Mr. and Mrs. Samuel Huxter, at their residence in Charterhouse Lane.
the two lady look at each other with great interest, and not a little emotion on Fanny's part. she have not see she "guardian," as she be pleased to call Pen in consequence of his bequest, since the event have occur which have unite she to Mr. Huxter.
"Samuel tell I how kind you have be," she say. "you be always very kind, Mr. Pendennis. and--and I hope your friend be well, who be take ill in Shepherd's Inn, ma'am."
"my name be Laura," say the other, with a blush. "I be--that be, I was-- that be, I be Arthur's sister; and we shall always love you for be so good to he when he be ill. and when we live in the country, I hope we shall see each other. and I shall be always happy to hear of your happiness, Fanny."
"we be go to do what you and Huxter have do, fanny.--where be Huxter? what nice, snug lodging youhave get! what a pretty cat!"
while Fanny be answer these question in reply to Pen, Laura say to herself--"Well, now really! be this the creature about whom we be all so frightened? what could he see in she? shebe a homely little thing, but such manner! well, she be very kind to him,--bless she for that."
Mr. Samuel have go out to meet his Pa. Mrs. Huxter say that the old gentleman be to arrive that day at the Somerset Coffee-house, in the Strand; and Fanny confess that she be in a sad tremor about the meeting. "if his parent cast he off, what be we to do?" she say. "I shall never pardon myself for bring ruing on my 'usband's 'ead. you must intercede for we, Mr. Arthur. if mortal man can, you can bend and influence Mr. Huxter senior." Fanny still regard Pen in the light of a superior being, that be evident. no doubt Arthur think of the past, as he mark the solemn little tragedy-air and look, the little way, the little trepidation, vanity, of the little bride. as soon as the interview be over, enter Messrs. Linton and Blades, who come, of course, to visit Huxter, and bring with they a fine fragrance of tobacco. they have watch the carriage at the baker's door, and remark the coronet with awe. they ask of Fanny who be that uncommonly heavy swell who have just drive off? and pronounce the countess be of the right sort. and when they hear that it be Mr. Pendennis and his sister, they remark that Pen's father be only a sawbone; and that he give himself confound air; they have be in Huxter's company on the night of his little altercation with Pen in the Back Kitchen.
return homeward through Fleet Street, and as Laura be just state to Pen's infinite amusement that Fanny be very well, but that really there be no beauty in her,--there might be, but she could not see it,-- as they be lock near Temple Bar, they see young Huxter return to his bride. "the governor have arrive; be at the Somerset Coffee-house-- be in tolerable good-humour--something about the railway: but he have be afraid to speak about--about that business. would Mr. Pendennis try it on?"
Pen say he would go and call at that moment upon Mr. Huxter, and see what might be do. huxter junior would lurk outside whilst that awful interview take place. the coronet on the carriage inspire his soul also with wonder; and old Mr. Huxter himself behold it with delight, as he look from the coffee-house window on that Strand which it be always a treat to he to survey.
"and I can afford to give myself a lark, sir," say Mr. Huxter, shake hand with Pen. "of course you know the news? we have get our bill, sir. we shall have our branch line--our share be up, sir--and we buy your three field along the Brawl, and put a pretty penny into your pocket, Mr. Pendennis."
"indeed!--that be good news." Pen remember that there be a letter from Mr. Tatham, at Chambers, these three day; but he have not open the communication, be interested with other affair.
"I hope you donot intend to grow rich, and give up practice," say Pen. "we cannot lose you at Clavering, Mr. Huxter; though I hear very good account of your son. my friend, Dr. Goodenough speak most highly of his talent. it be hard that a man of your eminence, though, should be keep in a country town."
"the metropolis would have be my sphere of action, sir," say Mr. Huxter, survey the Strand. "but a man take his business where he find it; and I succeed to that of my father."
"it be my father's, too," say Pen. "I sometimes wish I have follow it."
"you, sir, have take a more lofty career," say the old gentleman. "you aspire to the senate: and to literary honour. you wield the poet's pen, sir, and move in the circle of fashion. we keep an eye upon you at Clavering. we read your name in the list of the select party of the nobility. why, it be only the other day that my wife be remark how odd it be that at a party at the Earl of Kidderminster's your name be not mention. to what member of the aristocracy may I ask do that equipage belong from which I see you descend? the Countess Dowager of Rockminster? how be her ladyship?"
"her ladyship be not very well; and when I hear that you be come to town, I strongly urge she to see you, Mr. Huxter," Pen say. Old Huxter feel, if he have a hundred vote for Clavering, he would give they all to Pen.
"there be an old friend of yours in the carriage--a Clavering lady, too-- will you come out and speak to she?" ask Pen. the old surgeon be delighted to speak to a coroneted carriage in the midst of the full Strand: he run out bow and smile. huxter junior, dodge about the district, behold the meeting between his father and Laura, see the latter put out her hand, and presently, after a little colloquy with Pen, beheld his father actually jump into the carriage, and drive away with Miss Bell.
there be no room for Arthur, who come back, laugh, to the young surgeon, and tell he whither his parent be bind. during the whole of the journey, that artful Laura coax, and wheedle, and cajole he so adroitly, that the old gentleman would have grant she anything; and Lady Rockminster achieve the victory over he by compliment he on his skill, and profess her anxiety to consult he. what be her ladyship's symptom? should he meet her ladyship's usual medical attendant? Mr. Jones be call out of town? he should be delighted to devote his very good energy and experience to her ladyship's service.
he be so charmed with his patient, that he write home about she to his wife and family; he talk of nothing but Lady Rockminster to Samuel, when that youth come to partake of beefsteak and oyster-sauce and accompany his parent to the play. there be a simple grandeur, a polite urbanity, a high-breed grace about her ladyship, which he have never witness in any woman. her symptom do not seem alarm; he have prescribe--spir: Ammon: aromat: with a little spir: menth: Pip: and orange-flower, which would be all that be necessary.
"Miss Bell seem to be on the most confidential and affectionate footing with her ladyship. she be about to form a matrimonial connexion. all young people ought to marry. such be her ladyship's word; and the Countess condescend to ask respect my own family, and I mention you by name to her ladyship, Sam, my boy. I shall look in to-morrow, when, if the remedy which I have prescribe for her ladyship have have the effect which I anticipate, I shall probably follow they up by a little spir: lavend: comp:--and so set my noble patient up. what be the theatre which be most frequent by the--by the high class in town, hey, Sam! and to what amusement will you take an old country doctor to-night, hey, sir?"
on the next day, when Mr. Huxter call in Jermyn Street at twelve o'clock, Lady Rockminster have not yet leave her room, but Miss Bell and Mr. Pendennis be in wait to receive he. Lady Rockminster have have a most comfortable night, and be get on as well as possible. how have Mr. Huxter amuse himself? at the theatre? with his son? what a capital piece it be, and how charmingly Mrs. O'Leary look and sing it! and what a good fellow young Huxter be! like by everybody, an honour to his profession. he have not his father's manner, I grant you, or that old-world tone which be pass away from we, but a more excellent, sterling fellow never live. "he ought to practise in the country whatever you do, sir," say Arthur--"he ought to marry--other people be go to do so--and settle."
"the very word that her ladyship use yesterday, Mr. Pendennis. he ought to marry. Sam should marry, sir."
"the town be full of temptation, sir," continue Pen. the old gentleman thought of that houri, Mrs. O'Leary.
"there be no well safeguard for a young man than an early marriage with an honest affectionate creature."
"no well, sir, no well."
"and love be well than money, benot it?"
"indeed it be," say Miss Bell.
"I agree with so fair an authority," say the old gentleman, with a bow.
"and--and suppose, sir," Pen say, "that I have a piece of news to communicate to you."
"God bless my soul, Mr. Pendennis! what do you mean?" ask the old gentleman.
"suppose I have to tell you that a young man, carry away by an irresistible passion for an admirable and most virtuous young creature-- whom everybody fall in love with--have consult the dictate of reason and his heart, and have marry. suppose I be to tell you that that man be my friend; that our excellent, our truly noble friend the Countess Dowager of Rockminster be truly interested about he (and you may fancy what a young man can do in life when that family be interested for he); suppose I be to tell you that you know he--that he be here--that he is----"
"Sam marry! God bless my soul, sir, you donot mean that!"
"and to such a nice creature, dear Mr. Huxter."
"her ladyship be charm with she," say Pen, tell almost the first fib which he have tell in the course of this story.
"married! the rascal, be he?" think the old gentleman.
"they will do it, sir," say Pen; and go and open the door. Mr. and Mrs. Samuel Huxter issue thence, and both come and kneel down before the old gentleman. the kneeling little Fanny find favour in his sight. there must have be some thing attractive about she, in spite of Laura's opinion.
"will never do so any more, sir," say Sam.
"get up, sir," say Mr. Huxter. and they get up, and Fanny come a little near and a little nearer still, and look so pretty and pitiful, that somehow Mr. Huxter find himself kiss the little crying-laugh thing, and feeling as if he like it.
"whatbe your name, my dear?" he say, after a minute of this sport.
"Fanny, papa," say Mrs. Samuel.
CHAPTER LXXVI
Exeunt Omnes
our character be all a month old than they be when the last-describe adventure and conversation occur, and a great number of the personage of our story have chance to reassemble at the little country town where we be first introduce to they. Frederic Lightfoot, formerly maitre d'hotel in the service of Sir Francis Clavering, of Clavering Park, Bart., have beg leave to inform the nobility and gentry of ------shire that he have take that well-know and comfortable hotel, the Clavering Arms, in Clavering, where he hop for the continue patronage of the gentleman and family of the county. "this ancient and well-establish house," Mr. Lightfoot's manifesto state, "have be repair and decorate in a style of the great comfort. gentleman hunt with the Dumplingbeare hound will find excellent stabling and loose-box for horse at the Clavering Arms. a commodious billiard-room have be attach to the hotel, and the cellar have be furnish with the choice wine and spirit, select, without regard to expense, by C. L. commercial gentleman will find the Clavering arm a most comfortable place of resort: and the scale of charge have be regulate for all, so as to meet the economical spirit of the present time."
indeed, there be a considerable air of liveliness about the old inn. the clavering arm have be splendidly repaint over the gateway. the coffee-room window be bright and fresh, and decorate with Christmas holly; the magistrate have meet in petty session in the card-room of the old Assembly. the farmer' ordinary be hold as of old, and frequent by increase number, who be pleased with Mrs. Lightfoot's cuisine. her indian curry and Mulligatawny soup be especially popular: Major Stokes, the respected tenant of Fairoaks Cottage, Captain Glanders, H.P., and other resident gentry, have pronounce in their favour, and have partake of they more than once both in private and at the dinner of the Clavering Institute, attendant on the incorporation of the reading-room, and when the chief inhabitant of that flourish little town meet together and do justice to the hostess's excellent cheer. the chair be take by Sir Francis Clavering, Bart., support by the esteemed rector, Dr. Portman; the vice chair be ably fill by Barker, Esq. (support by the Rev. J. Simcoe and the Rev. S. Jowls), the enterprise head of the ribbon factory in Clavering, and chief director of the Clavering and Chatteris Branch of the Great Western Railway, which will be open in another year, and upon the work of which the engineer and workman be now busily engage.
"an interesting event, which be likely to take place in the life of our talented townsman, Arthur Pendennis, Esq., have, we understand, cause he to relinquish the intention which he have of offer himself as a candidate for our borough: and rumour whisper" (say the Chatteris Champion, Clavering Agriculturist, and Baymouth fisherman,--that independent county paper, so distinguished for its unswerve principle and loyalty to the british oak, and so eligible a medium for advertisements)--rumour state, say the C. C. C. A. and B. F., "that should Sir Francis Clavering's fail health oblige he to relinquish his seat in Parliament, he will vacate it in favour of a young gentleman of colossal fortune and relate to the high aristocracy of the empire, who be about to contract a matrimonial alliance with an accomplished and lovely lady, connect by the near tie with the respected family at Clavering Park. Lady Clavering and Miss Amory have arrive at the Park for the Christmas holiday; and we understand that a large number of the aristocracy be expect, and that festivity of a peculiarly interesting nature will take place there at the commencement of the new year."
the ingenious reader will be enable, by the help of the above announcement, to understand what have take place during the little break which have occur in our narrative. although Lady Rockminster grumble a little at Laura's preference for Pendennis over Bluebeard, those who be aware of the latter's secret will understand that the young girl could make no other choice, and the kind old lady who have constitute herself Miss Bell's guardian be not ill pleased that she be to fulfil the great purpose in life of young lady and marry. she inform she maid of the interesting event that very night, and of course Mrs. Beck, who be perfectly aware of every single circumstance, and keep by Martha, of Fairoaks, in the full knowledge of what be pass, be immensely surprised and delighted. "Mr. Pendennis's income be so much; the railroad will give he so much more, he state; Miss Bell have so much, and may probably have a little more one day. for person in their degree, they will be able to manage very well. and I shall speak to my nephew Pynsent, who I suspect be once rather attach to her,--but of course that be out of the question ('oh! of course, my lady; I should think so indeed!')--not that you know anything whatever about it, or have any business to think at all on the subject,--I shall speak to George Pynsent, who be now chief secretary of the Tape and Sealing Wax Office, and have Mr. Pendennis make something. and, Beck, in the morning you will carry down my compliment to major Pendennis, and say that I shall pay he a visit at one o'clock."--"Yes," mutter the old lady, "the Major must be reconcile, and he must leave his fortune to Laura's child."
accordingly, at one o'clock, the Dowager Lady Rockminster appear at Major Pendennis's, who be delighted, as may be imagine, to receive so noble a visitor. the Major have be prepare, if not for the news which her ladyship be about to give he, at least with the intelligence that Pen's marriage with Miss Amory be break off. the young gentleman bethink he of his uncle, for the first time that day it must be own, and meet his new servant in the hall of the hotel, ask after the Major's health from Mr. Frosch; and then go into the coffee-room of the hotel, where he write a half-dozen line to acquaint his guardian with what have occur. "dear uncle," he say, "if there have be any question between we, it be over now. I go to Tunbridge Wells yesterday, and find that somebody else have carry off the prize about which we be hesitate. Miss A., without any compunction for I, have bestow herself upon Harry Foker, with his fifteen thousand a year. I come in suddenly upon their love, and find and leave he in possession.
"and youwill be glad to hear, Tatham write I, that he have sell three of my field at Fairoaks to the Railroad Company, at a great figure. I will tell you this, and more when we meet; and be always your affectionate, --A. P."
"I think I be aware of what you be about to tell I," the Major say, with a most courtly smile and bow to Pen's ambassadress. "it be a very great kindness of your ladyship to think of bring I the news. how well you look! how very good you be! how very kind you have always be to that young man!"
"it be for the sake of his uncle," say Lady Rockminster, most politely.
"he have inform I of the state of affair, and write I a nice note, --ye, a nice note," continue the old gentleman; "and I find he have have an increase to his fortune,--ye; and, all thing consider, I donot much regret that this affair with Miss Amory be manquee, though I wish for it once, in fact, all thing consider, I be very glad of it."
"we must console he, Major Pendennis," continue the lady; "we must get he a wife." the truth then come across the Major's mind, and he see for what purpose Lady Rockminster have choose to assume the office of ambassadress.
it be not necessary to enter into the conversation which ensue, or to tell at any length how her ladyship conclude a negotiation which, in truth, be tolerably easy. there could be no reason why Pen should not marry accord to his own and his mother's wish; and as for Lady Rockminster, she support the marriage by intimation which have very great weight with the Major, but of which we shall say nothing, as her ladyship (now, of course, much advanced in year) be still alive, and the family might be angry; and, in fine, the old gentleman be quite overcome by the determined graciousness of the lady, and her fondness for Laura. nothing, indeed, could be more bland and kind than Lady Rockminster's whole demeanour, except for one moment when the Major talk about his boy throw himself away, at which her ladyship break out into a little speech, in which she make the major understand, what poor Pen and his friend acknowledge very humbly, that Laura be a thousand time too good for he. Laura be fit to be the wife of a king,--Laura be a paragon of virtue and excellence. and it must be say, that when Major Pendennis find that a lady of the rank of the Countess of Rockminster seriously admire Miss Bell, he instantly begin to admire her himself.
so that when Herr Frosch be request to walk upstairs to Lady Rockminster's apartment, and inform Miss Bell and Mr. Arthur Pendennis that the Major would receive they, and Laura appear blush and happy as she hang on Pen's arm, the Major give a shaky hand to one and the other, with unaffected emotion and cordiality, and then go through another salutation to Laura, which cause she to blush still more. happy blush! bright eye beam with the light of love! the story-teller turn from this group to his young audience, and hop that one day their eye may all shine so.
Pen have retreat in the most friendly manner, and the lovely Blanche have bestow her young affection upon a blushing bridegroom with fifteen thousand a year, there be such an outbreak of happiness in Lady Clavering's heart and family as the good Begum have not know for many a year, and she and Blanche be on the most delightful term of cordiality and affection. the ardent Foker press onwards the happy day, and be as anxious as might be expect to abridge the period of mourning which have put he in possession of so many charm and amiable quality, of which he have be only, as it be, the heir-apparent, not the actual owner, until then. the gentle Blanche, everything that her affianced lord could desire, be not averse to gratify the wish of her fond Henry. Lady Clavering come up from Tunbridge. milliner and jeweller be set to work and engage to prepare the delightful paraphernalia of Hymen. Lady Clavering be in such a good humour, that Sir Francis even benefit by it, and such a reconciliation be effect between this pair, that Sir Francis come to London, sate at the head of his own table once more, and appear tolerably flush of money at his billiard-room and gambling-house again. one day, when Major Pendennis and Arthur go to dine in Grosvenor Place, they find an old acquaintance establish in the quality of major-domo, and the gentleman in black, who, with perfect politeness and gravity, offer they their choice of sweet or dry champagne, be no other than Mr. James Morgan. the Chevalier Strong be one of the party; he be in high spirit and condition, and entertain the company with account of his amusement abroad.
"it be my Lady who invite I," say Strong to Arthur, under his voice-- "that fellow Morgan look as black as thunder when I come in. he be about no good here. I will go away first, and wait for you and Major Pendennis at Hyde Park Gate."
Mr. Morgan help Major Pendennis to his great-coat when he be quit the house; and mutter something about have accept a temporary engagement with the Clavering family.
"I have get a paper of your, Mr. Morgan," say the old gentleman.
"which you can show, if you please, to Sir Francis, sir, and perfectly welcome," say Mr. Morgan, with downcast eye. "Ibe very much oblige to you, Major Pendennis, and if I can pay you for all your kindness I will."
Arthur overhear the sentence, and see the look of hatred which accompany it, suddenly cry out that he have forget his handkerchief, and run upstairs to the drawing-room again. Foker be still there; still linger about his siren. Pen give the siren a look full of meaning, and we suppose that the siren understand mean look, for when, after find the veracious handkerchief of which he come in quest, he once more go out, the siren, with a laugh voice, say, "oh, Arthur--Mr. Pendennis--I want you to tell dear Laura something!" and she come out to the door.
"what be it?" she ask, shut the door.
"have you tell Harry? do you know that villain Morgan know all?"
"I know it," she say.
"have you tell Harry?"
"no, no," she say. "you willnot betray I?"
"Morgan will," say Pen.
"no, he willnot," say Blanche. "I have promise he--n'importe. wait until after our marriage--oh, until after our marriage--oh, how wretched I be," say the girl, who have be all smile, and grace, and gaiety during the evening.
Arthur say, "I beg and implore you to tell Harry. tell he now. it be no fault of your. he will pardon you anything. tell he to-night."
"and give she this--Il est la--with my love, please; and I beg your pardon for call you back; and if she will be at Madame Crinoline's at half-past three, and if Lady Rockminster can spare she, I should so like to drive with she in the park;" and she go in, sing and kiss her little hand, as Morgan the velvet-footed come up the carpet stair.
Pen hear Blanche's piano break out into brilliant music as he go down to join his uncle; and they walk away together. Arthur briefly tell he what he have do. "what be to be do?" he ask.
"what be to be do, begad?" say the old gentleman. "what be to be do but to leave it alone? Begad, let we be thankful," say the old fellow, with a shudder, "that we be out of the business, and leave it to those it concern."
"I hope to Heaven shewill tell he," say Pen.
"Begad, shewill take her own course," say the old man. "Miss Amory be a dev'lish wide-awake girl, sir, and must play her own card; and Ibe doosid glad you be out of it--doosid glad, begad. whobe this smoking? oh, itbe Mr. Strong again. he want to put in his oar, I suppose. I tell you, donot meddle in the business, Arthur."
Strong begin once or twice, as if to converse upon the subject, but the Major would not hear a word. he remark on the moonlight on Apsley House, the weather, the cabstand--anything but that subject. he bow stiffly to Strong, and clung to his nephew's arm, as he turn down St. James's Street, and again caution Pen to leave the affair alone. "it have like to have cost you so much, sir, that you may take my advice," he say.
when Arthur come out of the hotel, Strong's cloak and cigar be visible a few door off. the jolly Chevalier laugh as they meet. "Ibe an old soldier, too," he say. "I want to talk to you, Pendennis. I have hear of all that have happen, and all the chop and change that have take place during my absence. I congratulate you on your marriage, and I congratulate you on your escape, too,--you understand I. it be not my business to speak, but I know this, that a certain party be as arrant a little--well--well, never mind what. you act like a man and a trump, and be well out of it."
"I have no reason to complain," say Pen. "I go back to beg and entreat poor Blanche to tell Foker all: I hope, for her sake, she will; but I fear not. there be but one policy, Strong, there be but one."
"and lucky he that can stick to it," say the Chevalier. "that rascal Morgan mean mischief. he have be lurk about our chamber for the last two month: he have find out that poor mad devil Amory's secret. he have be try to discover where he be: he have be pump Mr. Bolton, and make old Costigan drunk several time. he bribe the Inn porter to tell he when we come back: and he have get into Clavering's service on the strength of his information. he will get very good pay for it, mark my word, the villain."
"where be amory?" ask Pen.
"at Boulogne, I believe. I leave he there, and warn he not to come back. I have break with he, after a desperate quarrel, such as one might have expect with such a madman. and Ibe glad to think that he be in my debt now, and that I have be the mean of keep he out of more harm than one."
"he have lose all his winning, I suppose," say Pen.
"no: he be rather well than when he go away, or be a fortnight ago. he have extraordinary luck at Baden: break the bank several night, and be the fable of the place. he lie himself there with a fellow by the name of Bloundell, who gather about he a society of all sort of sharper, male and female, Russians, Germans, French, English. Amory get so insolent, that I be oblige to thrash he one day within an inch of his life. I couldnot help myself; the fellow have plenty of pluck, and I have nothing for it but to hit out."
"and do he call you out?" say Pen.
"you think if I have shoot he I should have do nobody any harm? no, sir; I wait for his challenge, but it never come and the next time I meet he he beg my pardon, and say, 'strong, I beg your pardon; you whop I and you serve I right.' I shake hand: but I couldnot live with he after that. I pay he what I owe he the night before," say Strong with a blush, "I pawn everything to pay he, and then I go with my last ten florin, and have a shy at the roulette. if I have lose, I should have let he shoot I in the morning. I be weary of my life. by Jove, sir, benot it a shame that a man like I, who may have have a few bill out, but who never desert a friend, or do an unfair action, shouldnot be able to turn his hand to anything to get bread? I make a good night, sir, at roulette, and Ihave do with that. Ibe go into the wine business. my wife's relation live at Cadiz. I intend to bring over spanish wine and ham; therebe a fortune to be make by it, sir,--a fortune--herebe my card. if you want any sherry or ham, recollect Ned Strong be your man." and the Chevalier pull out a handsome card, state that Strong and Company, Shepherd's Inn, be sole agent of the celebrate Diamond Manzanilla of the Duke of Garbanzos, Grandee of Spain of the First Class; and of the famous Toboso ham, feed on acorn only in the country of Don Quixote. "come and taste them, sir,--come and try them at my chamber. you see, Ihave an eye to business, and by Jove this time Iwill succeed."
Pen laugh as he take the card. "I donot know whether I shall be allow to go to bachelor' party," he say. "you know Ibe go to----"
"but you must have sherry, sir. you must have sherry."
"I will have it from you, depend on it," say the other. "and I think you be very well out of your other partnership. that worthy Altamont and his daughter correspond, I hear," Pen add after a pause.
"yes; she write he the long rigmarole letter, that I use to read: the sly little devil; and he answer under cover to Mrs. Bonner. he be for carry she off the first day or two, and nothing would content he but have back his child. but she donot want to come, as you may fancy; and he be not very eager about it." here the Chevalier burst out in a laugh. "why, sir, do you know what be the cause of our quarrel and boxing match? there be a certain widow at Baden, a Madame la Baronne de la Cruche-cassee, who be not much well than himself, and whom the scoundrel want to marry; and would, but that I tell she he be marry already. I donot think that she be much well than he be. I see she on the pier at Boulogne the day I come to England."
and now we have bring up our narrative to the point, whither the announcement in the Chatteris Champion have already conduct we.
it want but very, very few day before that blissful one when Foker should call Blanche his own; the Clavering folk have all press to see the most splendid new carriage in the whole world, which be stand in the coach-house at the Clavering Arms; and show, in grateful return for drink, commonly, by Mr. Foker's head-coachman. Madame Fribsby be occupy in make some lovely dress for the tenant' daughter, who be to figure as a sort of bridesmaid' chorus at the breakfast and marriage ceremony. and immense festivity be to take place at the Park upon this delightful occasion.
"yes, Mr. Huxter, yes; a happy tenantry, its country's pride, will assemble in the baronial hall, where the beard will wag all. the ox shall be slay, and the cup theywill drain; and the bell shall peal quite genteel; and my father-in-law, with the tear of sensibility bedew his eye, shall bless we at his baronial porch. that shall be the order of proceeding, I think, Mr. Huxter; and I hope we shall see you and your lovely bride by her husband's side; and what will you please to drink, sir? Mrs. Lightfoot, madam, you will give to my excellent friend and body-surgeon, Mr. Huxter, Mr. Samuel Huxter, M.R.C.S., every refreshment that your hostel afford, and place the festive amount to my account; and Mr. Lightfoot, sir, what will you take? though youhave have enough already, I think; yes, ha."
so speak Harry Foker in the bar of the Clavering Arms. he have apartment at that hotel, and have gather a circle of friend round he there. he treat all to drink who come. he be hail-fellow with every man. he be so happy! he dance round Madame Fribsby, Mrs. Lightfoot's great ally, as she sate pensive in the bar. he console Mrs. Lightfoot, who have already begin to have cause of matrimonial disquiet; for the truth must be tell, that young Lightfoot, have now the full command of the cellar, have none over his own unbridled desire, and be tipple and tipsy from morning till night. and a piteous sight it be for his fond wife to behold the big youth reel about the yard and coffee-room, or drink with the farmer and tradesmen his own neat wine and carefully select stock of spirit.
when he could find time, Mr. Morgan the butler come from the Park, and take a glass at the expense of the landlord of the Clavering Arms. he watch poor Lightfoot's tipsy vagary with savage sneer. Mrs. Lightfoot feel always doubly uncomfortable when her unhappy spouse be under his comrade's eye. but a few month marry, and to think he have get to this! Madame Fribsby could feel for she. Madame Fribsby could tell her story of man every bit as bad. she have have her own woe too, and her sad experience of man. so it be that nobody seem happy altogether; and that there's bitter, as Mr. Foker remark, in the cup of every man's life. and yet there do not seem to be any in his, the honest young fellow! it be brim over with happiness and good-humour.
Mr. Morgan be constant in his attention to Foker. "and yet I donot like he somehow," say the candid young man to Mrs. Lightfoot. "he always seem as if he be measure I for my coffin somehow. pa-in-law's afraid of he; pa-in-law's," ahem! never mind, but ma-in-law's a trump, Mrs. Lightfoot."
"indeed my Lady be," and Mrs. Lightfoot own, with a sigh, that perhaps it have be well for she have she never leave her mistress.
"no, I do not like thee, Dr. Fell; the reason why I cannot tell," continue Mr. Foker; "and he want to be take as my head man. Blanche want I to take he. why do Miss Amory like he so?"
"do Miss Blanche like he so?" the notion seem to disturb Mrs. Lightfoot very much; and there come to this worthy landlady another cause for disturbance. a letter, bear the Boulogne postmark, be bring to her one morning, and she and her husband be quarrel over it as Foker pass down the stair by the bar, on his way to the Park. his custom be to breakfast there, and bask a while in the presence of Armida; then, as the company of Clavering tire he exceedingly, and he do not care for sporting, he would return for an hour or two to billiard and the society of the Clavering Arms; then it would be time to ride with Miss Amory, and, after din with she, he leave she and return modestly to his inn.
Lightfoot and his wife be quarrel over the letter. what be that letter from abroad? why be she always have letter from abroad? who write 'em?--he would know. he donot believe it be her brother. it be no business of his? it be a business of his; and, with a curse, he seize hold of his wife, and dash at her pocket for the letter.
the poor woman give a scream; and say, "well, take it." just as her husband seize on the letter, and Mr. Foker enter at the door, she give another scream at see he, and once more try to seize the paper. Lightfoot open it, shake she away, and an enclosure drop down on the breakfast-table.
"hand off, man alive!" cry little Harry, spring in. "donot lay hand on a woman, sir. the man that lay his hand upon a woman, save in the way of kindness, be a--hallo! itbe a letter for Miss Amory. whatbe this, Mrs. Lightfoot?"
Mrs. Lightfoot begin, in piteous tone of reproach to her husband,--"You unmanly! to treat a woman so who take you off the street. oh, you coward, to lay your hand upon your wife! why do I marry you? why do I leave my Lady for you? why do I spend eight hundred pound in fit up this house that you might drink and guzzle?"
"she get letter, and she willnot tell I who write letter," say Mr. Lightfoot, with a muzzy voice; "itbe a family affair, sir. will you take anything, sir?"
"I will take this letter to Miss Amory, as I be go to the Park," say Foker, turn very pale; and take it up from the table, which be arrange for the poor landlady's breakfast, he go away.
"hebe comin'--dammy, whobe a-comin'? whobe J. A., Mrs. Lightfoot--curse I, whobe J. a.?" cry the husband.
Mrs. Lightfoot cry out, "be quiet, you tipsy brute, do," and run to her bonnet and shawl, throw they on, see Mr. Foker walk down the street, take the by-lane which skirt it, and run as quickly as she could to the lodge-gate, Clavering Park. Foker see a running figure before he, but it be lose when he get to the lodge-gate. he stop and ask, "who be that who have just come in? Mrs. Bonner, be it?" he reel almost in his walk: the tree swam before he. he rest once or twice against the trunk of the naked lime.
Lady Clavering be in the breakfast-room with her son, and her husband yawn over his paper. "good morning, Harry," say the Begum. "here's letter, lot of letter; Lady Rockminster will be here on Tuesday instead of Monday, and Arthur and the Major come to-day; and Laura be to go to Dr. Portman's, and come to church from there: and--whatbe the matter, my dear? what make you so pale, Harry?"
"where be Blanche!" ask Harry, in a sickening voice--"not down yet?"
"blanche be always the last," say the boy, eat muffin; "shebe a regular dawdle, she be. when yoube not here, she lay in bed till lunch-time."
"be quiet, Frank," say the mother.
Blanche come down presently, look pale, and with rather an eager look towards Foker; then she advance and kiss her mother, and have a face beam with her very good smile on when she greet Harry.
"how do you do, sir?" she say, and put out both her hand.
"Ibe ill," answer Harry. "I--I've bring a letter for you, Blanche."
"a letter, and from whom be it, pray? voyon," she say.
"I donot know--I should like to know," say Foker.
"how can I tell until I see it?" ask Blanche.
"have Mrs. Bonner not tell you?" he say, with a shake voice;--"there's some secret. you give she the letter, Lady Clavering."
Lady Clavering, wonder, take the letter from poor Foker's shake hand, and look at the superscription. as she look at it, she too begin to shake in every limb, and with a scared face she drop the letter, and run up to Frank, clutch the boy to she, and burst out with a sob--"take that away--itbe impossible, itbe impossible."
"what be the matter?" cry Blanche, with rather a ghastly smile; "the letter be only from--from a poor pensioner and relative of ours."
"itbe not true, itbe not true," scream Lady Clavering. "no, my frank-- be it, Clavering?"
Blanche have take up the letter, and be move with it towards the fire, but Foker run to she and clutch her arm--"i must see that letter," he say; "give it I. you shallnot burn it."
"you--you shall not treat Miss Amory so in my house," cry the Baronet; "give back the letter, by Jove!"
"read it--and look at she," Blanche cry, point to her mother; "it-- it be for she I keep the secret! read it, cruel man!"
and Foker open and read the letter:--
"I have not write, my darling Betsy, this three week; but this be to give she a father's blessing, and I shall come down pretty soon as quick as my note, and intend to see the ceremony, and my son-in-law. I shall put up at Bonner's. I have have a pleasant autumn, and be stay here at an hotel where there be good company, and which be kep' in good style. I donot know whether I quite approve of your throw over Mr. P. for Mr. F., and donot think Foker's such a pretty name, and from your account of he he seem a muff, and not a beauty. but he have get the rowdy, which be the thing. so no more, my dear little Betsy, till we meet, from your affectionate father, J. Amory Altamont."
"read it, Lady Clavering; it be too late to keep it from you now," say poor Foker; and the distracted woman, have cast her eye over it, again break out into hysterical scream, and convulsively grasp her son.
"they have make an outcast of you, my boy," she say. "theyhave dishonour your old mother; but Ibe innocent, Frank; before God, Ibe innocent. I donot know this, Mr. Foker; indeed, indeed, I donot."
"Ibe sure you donot," say Foker, go up and kiss her hand.
"generous, generous Harry!" cry out Blanche, in an ecstasy. but he withdraw his hand, which be upon her side, and turn from she with a quivering lip. "thatbe different," he say.
"it be for her sake--for her sake, Harry." again Miss Amory be in an attitude.
"there be something to be do for mine," say Foker. "I would have take you, whatever you be. Everything's talk about in London. I know that your father have come to--to grief. you donot think it be--it be for your connexion I marry you? d--- it all! Ihave love you with all my heart and soul for two year, and youhave be play with I, and cheat I," break out the young man, with a cry. "oh, Blanche, Blanche, itbe a hard thing, a hard thing!" and he cover his face with his hand, and sob behind they.
Blanche think, "why donot I tell he that night when Arthur warn I?"
"donot refuse she, Harry," cry out Lady Clavering. "take she, take everything I have. itbe all her, you know, at my death. this boybe disinherit."--(Master Frank, who have be look as scar at the strange scene, here burst into a loud cry.) "take every shilling. give I just enough to live, and to go and hide my head with this child, and to fly from both. oh, theyhave both be bad, bad man. perhaps hebe here now. donot let I see he. clavering, you coward, defend I from he."
Clavering start up at this proposal. "you benot serious, Jemima? you donot mean that?" he say. "you willnot throw I and Frank over? I donot know it, so help I ---. Foker, Ihave no more idea of it than the dead-- until the fellow come and find I out, the d----d escape convict scoundrel."
"the what?" say Foker. Blanche give a scream.
"yes," scream out the Baronet in his turn, "yes, a d----d runaway convict--a fellow that forge his father-in-law's name--a d----d attorney, and kill a fellow in Botany Bay, hang he--and run into the Bush, curse he; I wish hehave die there. and he come to I, a good six year ago, and rob I; and Ihave be ruin myself to keep he, the infernal scoundrel! and Pendennis know it, and Strong know it, and that d----d Morgan know it, and she know it, ever so long; and I never would tell it, never: and I keep it from my wife."
"and you see he, and you donot kill he, Clavering, you coward?" say the wife of Amory. "come away, Frank; your fatherbe a coward. I be dishonour, but Ibe your old mother, and you'll--you'll love I, willnot you?"
Blanche, eploree, go up to her mother; but Lady Clavering shrank from she with a sort of terror. "donot touch I," she say; "youhave no heart; you never have. I see all now. I see why that coward be go to give up his place in Parliament to Arthur; yes, that coward! and why you threaten that you would make I give you half Frank's fortune. and when Arthur offer to marry you without a shilling, because he wouldnot rob my boy, you leave he, and you take poor Harry. have nothing to do with she, Harry. yoube good, you be. donot marry that--that convict's daughter. come away, Frank, my darling; come to your poor old mother. wewill hide ourselves; but webe honest, yes, we be honest."
all this while a strange feeling of exultation have take possession of Blanche's mind. that month with poor Harry have be a weary month to she. all his fortune and splendour scarcely suffice to make the idea of himself supportable. she be weary of his simple way, and sick of coax and cajole he.
"stay, mamma; stay, madam!" she cry out, with a gesture which be always appropriate, though rather theatrical; "I have no heart, have I? I keep the secret of my mother's shame. I give up my right to my half-brother and my bastard brother, yes, my right and my fortune. I donot betray my father, and for this I have no heart. Iwill have my right now, and the law of my country shall give they to I. I appeal to my country's law--yes, my country's law! the persecute one return this day. I desire to go to my father." and the little lady sweep round her hand, and think that she be a heroine.
"you will, will you?" cry out Clavering, with one of his usual oath. "Ibe a magistrate, and dammy, Iwill commit he. herebe a chaise come; perhaps itbe he. let he come."
a chaise be indeed come up the avenue; and the two woman shriek each their loudest, expect at that moment to see Altamont arrive.
the door open, and Mr. Morgan announce Major Pendennis and Mr. Pendennis, who enter, and find all party engage in this fierce quarrel. a large screen fence the breakfast-room from the hall; and it be probable that, accord to his custom, Mr. Morgan have take advantage of the screen to make himself acquaint with all that occur.
it have be arrange on the previous day that the young people should ride; and at the appoint hour in the afternoon, Mr. Foker's horse arrive from the Clavering Arms. but Miss Blanche do not accompany he on this occasion. Pen come out and shake hand with he on the door-step; and Harry Foker ride away, follow by his groom in mourning. the whole transaction which have occupy the most active part of our history be debate by the party concern during those two or three hour. many counsel have be give, story tell, and compromise suggest; and at the end, Harry Foker ride away, with a sad "God bless you!" from Pen. there be a dreary dinner at Clavering Park, at which the lately instal butler do not attend; and the lady be both absent. after dinner, Pen say, "I will walk down to Clavering and see if he be come." and he walk through the dark avenue, across the bridge and road by his own cottage,--the once quiet and familiar field of which be flame with the kiln and forge of the artificer employ on the new railroad work; and so he enter the town, and make for the Clavering Arms.
it be past midnight when he return to Clavering Park. he be exceedingly pale and agitated. "be Lady Clavering up yet?" he ask. yes, she be in her own sitting-room. he go up to she, and there find the poor lady in a piteous state of tear and agitation.
"it be I,--Arthur," he say, look in; and enter, he take her hand very affectionately and kiss it. "you be always the kind of friend to I, dear Lady Clavering," he say. "I love you very much. I have get some news for you."
"donot call I by that name," she say, press his hand. "you be always a good boy, Arthur; and itbe kind of you to come now,--very kind. you sometimes look very like your ma, my dear."
"dear good Lady Clavering," Arthur repeat, with particular emphasis, "something very strange have happen."
"have anything happen to he?" gasp Lady Clavering. "oh, itbe horrid to think I should be glad of it--horrid!"
"he be well. he have be and be go, my dear lady. donot alarm yourself;--he be go, and you be Lady Clavering still."
"be it true? what he sometimes say to I," she scream out,-- "that he----"
"he be marry before he marry you," say Pen. "he have confess it to-night. he will never come back." there come another shriek from Lady Clavering, as she fling her arm round Pen, and kiss he, and burst into tear on his shoulder.
what Pen have to tell, through a multiplicity of sob and interruption, must be compress briefly, for behold our prescribed limit be reach, and our tale be come to its end. with the Branch Coach from the railroad, which have succeed the old Alacrity and Perseverance, Amory arrive, and be set down at the Clavering Arms. he order his dinner at the place under his assumed name of Altamont; and, be of a jovial turn, he welcome the landlord, who be nothing loth, to a share of his wine. have extract from Mr. Lightfoot all the news regard the family at the Park, and find, from examine his host, that Mrs. Lightfoot, as she say, have keep his counsel, he call for more wine of Mr. Lightfoot; and at the end of this symposium, both, be greatly excited, go into Mrs. Lightfoot's bar.
she be there take tea with her friend, Madame Fribsby; and Lightfoot be by this time in such a happy state as not to be surprised at anything which might occur, so that, when Altamont shake hand with Mrs. Lightfoot as an old acquaintance, the recognition do not appear to he to be in the least strange, but only a reasonable cause for further drinking. the gentleman partook then of brandy-and-water, which they offer to the lady, not heed the terrified look of one or the other.
whilst they be so engaged, at about six o'clock in the evening, Mr. Morgan, Sir Francis Clavering's new man, come in, and be request to drink. he select his favourite beverage, and the party engage in general conversation.
after a while Mr. Lightfoot begin to doze. Mr. Morgan have repeatedly give hint to Mrs. Fribsby to quit the premise; but that lady, strangely fascinated, and terrify it would seem, or persuade by Mrs. Lightfoot not to go, keep her place. her persistence occasion much annoyance to Mr. Morgan, who vent his displeasure in such language as give pain to Mrs. Lightfoot, and cause Mr. Altamont to say, that he be a rum customer, and not polite to the sex.
the altercation between the two gentleman become very painful to the woman, especially to Mrs. Lightfoot, who do everything to soothe Mr. Morgan; and, under pretence of give a pipe-light to the stranger, she hand he a paper on which she have privily write the word, "he know you. go." there may have be something suspicious in her manner of handing, or in her guest's of reading, the paper; for when he get up a short time afterwards, and say he would go to bed, Morgan rise too, with a laugh, and say it be too early to go to bed.
the stranger then say he would go to his bedroom. Morgan say he would show he the way.
at this the guest say, "come up. Ihave get a brace of pistol up there to blow out the brain of any traitor or skulking spy," and glare so fiercely upon Morgan, that the latter, seize hold of Lightfoot by the collar, and wake he, say, "John Amory, I arrest you in the Queen's name. stand by I, Lightfoot. this capture be worth a thousand pound."
he put forward his hand as if to seize his prisoner, but the other, double his fist, give Morgan with his left hand so fierce a blow on the chest, that it knock he back behind Mr. Lightfoot. that gentleman, who be athletic and courageous, say he would knock his guest's head off, and prepare to do so, as the stranger, tear off his coat, and curse both of his opponent, roar to they to come on.
but with a pierce scream Mrs. Lightfoot fling herself before her husband, whilst with another and loud shriek Madame Fribsby run to the stranger, and call out "Armstrong, Johnny Armstrong!" seize hold of his naked arm, on which a blue tattooing of a heart and M. F. be visible.
the ejaculation of Madame Fribsby seem to astound and sober the stranger. he look down upon she, and cry out, "itbe polly, by Jove."
Mrs. Fribsby continue to exclaim, "this be not amory. this be Johnny Armstrong, my wicked--wicked husband, married to I in St. Martin's Church, mate on board an Indiaman, and he leave I two month after, the wicked wretch. this be John Armstrong--herebe the mark on his arm which he make for I."
the stranger say, "I be John Armstrong, sure enough, Polly. Ibe John Armstrong, Amory, Altamont--and let them all come on, and try what they can do against a british sailor. Hurray, whobe for it?"
Morgan still call out, "arrest he!" but Mrs. Lightfoot say, "arrest he! arrest you, you mean spy! what! stop the marriage and ruin my lady, and take away the Clavering Arms from we?"
"do he say hewould take away the Clavering Arms from we?" ask Mr. Lightfoot, turn round. "hang he, Iwill throttle he."
"keep he, darling, till the coach pass to the up train. itwill be here now directly."
"d--- he, Iwill choke he if he stir," say Lightfoot. and so they keep Morgan until the coach come, and Mr. Amory or Armstrong go away back to London.
Morgan have follow he: but of this event Arthur Pendennis do not inform Lady Clavering, and leave she invoke blessing upon he at her son's door, go to kiss he as he be asleep. it have be a busy day.
we have to chronicle the event of but one day more, and that be a day when Mr. Arthur, attire in a new hat, a new blue frock-coat and blue handkerchief, in a new fancy waistcoat, new boot, and new shirt-stud (present by the Right Honourable the Countess Dowager of Rockminster), make his appearance at a solitary breakfast-table, in Clavering Park, where he could scarce eat a single morsel of food. two letter be lay by his worship's plate; and he choose to open the first, which be in a round clerk-like hand, in preference to the second more familiar superscription.
note 1 run as follows:--
"Garbanzos Wine Company, Shepherd's Inn.--Monday.
"my dear Pendennis,--In congratulate you heartily upon the event which be to make you happy for life, I send my very kind remembrance to Mrs. Pendennis, whom I hope to know even long than I have already know she. and when I call her attention to the fact, that one of the most necessary article to her husband's comfort be pure sherry, I know I shall have she for a customer for your worship's sake.
"but I have to speak to you of other than my own concern. yesterday afternoon, a certain J. A. arrive at my chamber from Clavering, which he have leave under circumstance of which you be doubtless now aware. in spite of our difference, I could not but give he food and shelter (and he partook freely both of the Garbanzos Amontillado and the Toboso ham), and he tell I what have happen to he, and many other surprising adventure. the rascal marry at sixteen, and have repeatedly since perform that ceremony--in Sydney, in New Zealand, in South America, in Newcastle, he say, first, before he know our poor friend the milliner. he be a perfect Don Juan.
"and it seem as if the commendatore have at last overtaken he, for, as we be at our meal, there come three heavy knock at my outer door, which make our friend start. I have sustain a siege or two here, and go to my usual place to reconnoitre. thank my star I have not a bill out in the world, and besides, those gentry do not come in that way. I find that it be your uncle's late valet, Morgan, and a policeman (I think a sham policeman), and they say they have a warrant to take the person of John Armstrong, alias Amory, alias Altamont, a runaway convict, and threaten to break in the oak.
"now, sir, in my own day of captivity I have discover a little passage along the gutter into Bows and Costigan's window, and I send Jack Alias along this cover way, not without terror of his life, for it have grow very cranky; and then, after a parley, let in mon. Morgan and friend.
"the rascal have be instruct about that cover way, for he make for the room instantly, tell the policeman to go downstairs and keep the gate; and he charge up my little staircase as if he have know the premise. as he be go out of the window we hear a voice that you know, from Bows's garret, say, 'who be ye, and hwhat the divvle be ye at? youwould betther leave the gutther; bedad therebe a man kill himself already.'
"and as Morgan, cross over and look into the darkness, be try to see whether this awful news be true, he take a broomstick, and with a vigorous dash break down the pipe of communication--and tell I this morning, with great glee, that he be remind of that 'aisy sthratagem by remember his dorling Emilie, when she act the pawrt of Cora in the Plee--and by the bridge in Pezawro, bedad.' I wish that scoundrel Morgan have be on the bridge when the General try his 'sthratagem.'
"if I hear more of Jack Alias I will tell you. he have get plenty of money still, and I want he to send some to our poor friend the milliner; but the scoundrel laugh, and say he have no more than he want, but offer to give anybody a lock of his hair. Farewell--be happy! and believe I always truly your, E. Strong."
"and now for the other letter," say Pen. "dear old fellow!" and he kiss the seal before he break it.
"Warrington, Tuesday.
"I must not let the day pass over without say a God bless you, to both of you. may Heaven make you happy, dear Arthur, and dear Laura. I think, Pen, that you have the good wife in the world; and pray that, as such, you will cherish she and tend she. the chamber will be lonely without you, dear Pen; but if I be tired, I shall have a new home to go to in the house of my brother and sister. I be practise in the nursery here, in order to prepare for the part of Uncle George. Farewell! make your wedding tour, and come back to your affectionate G. W."
Pendennis and his wife read this letter together after Doctor Portman's breakfast be over, and the guest be go; and when the carriage be wait amidst the crowd at the Doctor's outer gate. but the wicket lead into the churchyard of St. Mary's, where the bell be peal with all their might, and it be here, over Helen's green grass, that Arthur show his wife George's letter. for which of those two--for grief be it or for happiness, that Laura's tear abundantly fall on the paper? and once more, in the presence of the sacred dust, she kiss and bless her Arthur.
there be only one marriage on that day at Clavering Church; for in spite of Blanche's sacrifice for her dear mother, honest Harry Foker could not pardon the woman who have deceive her husband, and justly argue that she would deceive he again. he go to the Pyramids and Syria, and there leave his malady behind he, and return with a fine beard, and a supply of tarboosh and nargillie, with which he regale all his friend. he live splendidly, and, through Pen's mediation, get his wine from the celebrate vintage of the Duke of Garbanzos.
as for poor cos, his fate have be mention in an early part of this story. no very glorious end could be expect to such a career. Morgan be one of the most respectable man in the parish of St. James's, and in the present political movement have pronounce himself like a man and a Briton. and Bows,--on the demise of Mr. Piper, who play the organ at Clavering, little Mrs. Sam Hunter, who have the entire command of Doctor Portman, bring bow down from London to contest the organ-loft, and her candidate carry the chair. when Sir Francis Clavering quit this worthless life, the same little indefatigable canvasser take the borough by storm, and it be now represent by Arthur Pendennis, Esq. Blanche Amory, it be well know, marry at Paris, and the saloon of Madame la Comtesse de Montmorenci de Valentinois be amongst the most suivis of that capital. the duel between the Count and the young and fiery Representative of the Mountain, Alcide de Mirobo, arise solely from the latter questioning at the Club the title bear by the former nobleman. Madame de Montmorenci de Valentinois travel after the adventure: and Bungay buy her poem, and publish they, with the Countess's coronet emblazon on the Countess's work.
Major Pendennis become very serious in his last day, and be never so happy as when Laura be read to he with her sweet voice, or listen to his story. for this sweet lady be the friend of the young and the old: and her life be always pass in make other life happy.
"and what sort of a husband would this Pendennis be?" many a reader will ask, doubt the happiness of such a marriage and the fortune of Laura. the querist, if they meet she, be refer to that lady herself, who, see his fault and wayward mood--see and own that there be man well than he--love he always with the most constant affection. his child or their mother have never hear a harsh word from he; and when his fit of moodiness and solitude be over, welcome he back with a never-fail regard and confidence. his friend be his friend still,-- entirely heart-whole. that malady be never fatal to a sound organ. and George go through his part of godpapa perfectly, and live alone. if Mr. Pen's work have procure he more reputation than have be acquire by his abler friend, whom no one know, George life content without the fame. if the good man do not draw the great prize in life, we know it have be so settle by the Ordainer of the lottery. we own, and see daily, how the false and worthless live and prosper, while the good be call away, and the dear and young perish untimely,--we perceive in every man's life the maim happiness, the frequent fall, the bootless endeavour, the struggle of Right and Wrong, in which the strong often succumb and the swift fail: we see flower of good blooming in foul place, as, in the most lofty and splendid fortune, flaw of vice and meanness, and stain of evil; and, know how mean the good of we be, let we give a hand of charity to Arthur Pendennis, with all his fault and shortcoming, who do not claim to be a hero, but only a man and a brother.
the END
