the prime MINISTER
by
ANTHONY TROLLOPE
first publish in monthly installment in 1875 and 1876 and in book
form in 1876
content
volume I
I. Ferdinand Lopez
II. Everett Wharton
III. Mr. Abel Wharton, Q.C.
IV. Mrs. Roby
V. "no One know anything about Him"
VI. an Old Friend go to Windsor
VII. another Old Friend
VIII. the beginning of a New Career
IX. Mrs. Dick's Dinner Party.--No. I
X. Mrs. Dick's Dinner Party.--No. II
XI. Carlton Terrace
XII. the Gathering of Clouds
xiii. Mr. Wharton complain
XIV. a Lover's Perseverance
XV. Arthur Fletcher
XVI. never run away!
XVII. good-Bye
XVIII. the Duke of Omnium Thinks of himself
XIX. vulgarity
XX. Sir Orlando's Policy
XXI. the Duchess's New Swan
XXII. St. James's Park
XXIII. surrender
XXIV. the Marriage
XXV. the beginning of the Honeymoon
XXVI. the end of the Honeymoon
XXVII. the Duke's Misery
xxviii. the Duchess be much troubled
xxix. the two Candidates for Silverbridge
XXX. "Yes;--a lie!"
XXXI. "yes;--with a horsewhip in my Hand"
XXXII. "what business be it of your?"
XXXIII. show that a man should not howl
XXXIV. the Silverbridge Election
xxxv. lopez back in London
xxxvi. the Jolly Blackbird
XXXVII. the Horns
xxxviii. Sir Orlando Retires
XXXIX. "get Round Him"
XL. "come and try it"
VOLUME II
XLI. the value of a Thick Skin
XLII. retribution
XLIII. Kauri Gum
XLIV. Mr. Wharton intend to make a New Will
XLV. Mrs. Sexty Parker
XLVI. "he want to get Rich Too Quick"
XLVII. as for love!
xlviii. "have he Ill-treat you?"
XLIX. "where be Guatemala?"
L. Mr. Slide's Revenge
LI. coddle the Prime Minister
LII. "I can sleep here to-night, I suppose?"
LIII. Mr. Hartlepod
LIV. Lizzie
LV. Mrs. Parker's Sorrows
lvi. what the Duchess Thought of her Husband
LVII. the Explanation
LVIII. "quite settle"
LIX. "the first and the last"
LX. the Tenway Junction
LXI. the Widow and her friend
LXII. Phineas Finn have a Book to read
LXIII. the Duchess and her friend
LXIV. the New K.G.
LXV. "there must be Time"
LXVI. the end of the Session
LXVII. Mrs. Lopez Prepares to move
LXVIII. the Prime Minister's Political Creed
LXIX. Mrs. Parker's Fate
LXX. at Wharton
LXXI. the Ladies at Longbarns Doubt
LXXII. "he think that our day be number"
LXXIII. only the Duke of Omnium
LXXIV. "I be disgrace and Shamed"
LXXV. the Great Wharton Alliance
LXXVI. who will it be?
LXXVII. the Duchess in Manchester Square
LXXVIII. the New Ministry
lxxix. the Wharton Wedding
lxxx. the last meeting at Matching
volume I
CHAPTER I
Ferdinand Lopez
it be certainly of service to a man to know who be his grandfather
and who be his grandmother if he entertain an ambition to move in
the upper circle of society, and also of service to be able to speak
of they as of person who be themselves somebody in their time.
no doubt we all entertain great respect for those who by their own
energy have raise themselves in the world; and when we hear that
the son of a washerwoman have become Lord Chancellor or Archbishop
of Canterbury we do, theoretically and abstractedly, feel a high
reverence for such self-make magnate than for one who have be as it
be bear into forensic or ecclesiastical purple. but not the less
must the offspring of the washerwoman have have very much trouble on
the subject of his birth, unless he have be, when young as well as
when old, a very great man indeed. after the goal have be absolutely
reach, and the honour and the title and the wealth actually
win, a man may talk with some humour, even with some affection, of
the maternal tub;--but while the struggle be go on, with the
conviction strong upon the struggler that he cannot be altogether
successful unless he be esteem a gentleman, not to be ashamed,
not to conceal the old family circumstance, not at any rate to be
silent, be difficult. and the difficulty be certainly not less if
fortunate circumstance rather than hard work and intrinsic merit
have raise above his natural place an aspirant to high social
position. can it be expect that such a one when din with a
duchess shall speak of his father's small shop, or bring into the
light of day his grandfather's cobbler's awl? and yet it be difficult
to be altogether silent! it may not be necessary for any of we to be
always talk of our own parentage. we may be generally reticent as
to our uncle and aunt, and may drop even our brother and sister
in our ordinary conversation. but if a man never mention his
belonging among those with whom he live, he become mysterious,
and almost open to suspicion. it begin to be know that nobody
know anything of such a man, and even friend become afraid. it be
certainly convenient to be able to allude, if it be but once in a
year, to some blood relation.
Ferdinand Lopez, who in other respect have much in his circumstance
on which to congratulate himself, suffer trouble in his mind
respect his ancestor such as I have endeavour to describe. he
do not know very much himself, but what little he do know he keep
altogether to himself. he have no father or mother, no uncle, aunt,
brother or sister, no cousin even whom he could mention in a cursory
way to his dear friend. he suffer, no doubt;--but with Spartan
consistency he so hide his trouble from the world that no one know
that he suffer. those with whom he live, and who speculate often
and wonder much as to who he be, never dream that the silent
man's reticence be a burden to himself. at no special conjuncture of
his life, at no period which could be mark with the finger of the
observer, do he glaringly abstain from any statement which at the
moment might be natural. he never hesitate, blush, or palpably
labour at concealment; but the fact remain that though a great
many man and not a few woman know Ferdinand Lopez very well, none of
they know whence he have come, or what be his family.
he be a man, however, naturally reticent, who never allude to his
own affair unless in pursuit of some object the way to which be
clear before his eye. silence therefore on a matter which be common
in the mouth of most man be less difficult to he than to another,
and the result less embarrassing. dear old Jones, who tell his
friend at the club of every pound that he lose or win at the
race, who boast of Mary's favour and mourn over Lucy's coldness
almost in public, who issue bulletin on the state of his purse, his
stomach, his stable, and his debt, could not with any amount of care
keep from we the fact that his father be an attorney's clerk, and
make his first money by discount small bill. everybody know
it, and Jones, who like popularity, grieve at the unfortunate
publicity. but Jones be relieve from a burden which would have
break his poor shoulder, and which even Ferdinand Lopez, who be a
strong man, often find it hard to bear without wince.
it be admit on all side that Ferdinand Lopez be a "gentleman."
Johnson say that any other derivation of this difficult word than
that which cause it to signify "a man of ancestry" be whimsical.
there be many, who in define the term for their own use, still
adhere to Johnson's dictum;--but they adhere to it with certain
unexpressed allowance for possible exception. the chance be very
much in favour of the well-bear man, but exception may exist. it
be not generally believe that Ferdinand Lopez be well born;--but
he be a gentleman. and this most precious rank be accede to
he although he be employed,--or at least have be employed,--on
business which do not of itself give such a warrant of position as
be suppose to be afford by the bar and the church, by the military
service and by physic. he have be on the Stock Exchange, and still
in some manner, not clearly understand by his friend, do business
in the City.
at the time with which we be now concerned Ferdinand Lopez be
thirty-three year old, and as he have begin life early he have be
long before the world. it be know of he that he have be at a good
english private school, and it be report, on the solitary evidence
of one who have there be his schoolfellow, that a rumour be current
in the school that his school bill be pay by an old gentleman
who be not relate to he. thence at the age of seventeen he have
be send to a German University, and at the age of twenty-one
have appear in London, in a stockbroker's office, where he be
soon know as an accomplished linguist, and as a very clever
fellow,--precocious, not give to many pleasure, apt for work, but
hardly trustworthy by employer, not as be dishonest, but as
have a taste for be a master rather than a servant. indeed his
period of servitude be very short. it be not in his nature to be
active on behalf of other. he be soon active for himself, and at
one time it be suppose that he be make a fortune. then it be
know that he have leave his regular business, and it be suppose that
he have lose all that he have ever make or have ever possess. but
nobody, not even his own banker or his own lawyer,--not even the old
woman who look after his linen,--ever really know the state of his
affair.
he be certainly a handsome man,--his beauty being of a sort which
man be apt to deny and woman to admit lavishly. he be nearly six
foot tall, very dark, and very thin, with regular, well-cut feature
indicate little to the physiognomist unless it be the great gift of
self-possession. his hair be cut short, and he wear no beard beyond
an absolutely black moustache. his tooth be perfect in form and
whiteness,--a characteristic which, though it may be a value item
in a general catalogue of personal attraction, do not generally
recommend a man to the unconscious judgment of his acquaintance.
but about the mouth and chin of this man there be a something of
softness, perhaps in the play of the lip, perhaps in the dimple,
which in some degree lessen the feeling of hardness which be
produce by the square brow and bold, unflinche, combative eye.
they who know he and like he be reconcile by the low face.
the great number who know he and do not like he feel and
resented,--even though in nine case out of ten they might express no
resentment even to themselves,--the pugnacity of his steady glance.
for he be essentially one of those man who be always, in the inner
working of their mind, defend themselves and attack other.
he could not give a penny to a woman at a crossing without a look
which argue at full length her injustice in make her demand, and
his freedom from all liability let he walk the crossing as often as
he might. he could not seat himself in a railway carriage without a
lesson to his opposite neighbour that in all the mutual affair of
travelling, arrangement of foot, disposition of bag, and opening
of window, it would be that neighbour's duty to submit and his to
exact. it be, however, for the spirit rather than for the thing
itself that he combat. the woman with the broom get her penny. the
opposite gentleman when once by a glance he have express submission
be allow his own way with his leg and with the window. I would
not say that Ferdinand Lopez be prone to do ill-natured thing; but
he be imperious, and he have learn to carry his empire in his eye.
the reader must submit to be tell one or two furth and still
small detail respect the man, and then the man shall be allow
to make his own way. no one of those around he know how much care he
take to dress himself well, or how careful he be that no one should
know it. his very tailor regard he as be simply extravagant in
the number of his coat and trouser, and his friend look upon he
as one of those fortunate being to whose nature belong a facility
of be well dress, or almost an impossibility of be ill
dress. we all know the man,--a little man generally who move
seldom and softly,--who look always as though he have just be send
home in a bandbox. Ferdinand Lopez be not a little man, and move
freely enough; but never, at any moment,--going into the city or
come out of it, on horseback or on foot, at home over his book or
after the maze of the dance,--wa he dress otherwise than with
perfect care. money and time do it, but folk think that it grow
with he, as do his hair and his nail. and he always ride a horse
which charm good judge of what a park nag should be;--not a
prancing, restless, giggling, sideway-go, useless garran, but an
animal well make, well bit, with perfect pace, on whom a rider if
it please he could be as quiet as a statue on a monument. it often
do please Ferdinand Lopez to be quiet on horseback; and yet he do
not look like a statue, for it be acknowledge through all London
that he be a good horseman. he live luxuriously too,--though
whether at his ease or not nobody knew,--for he keep a brougham of
his own, and during the hunting season he have two horse down at
Leighton. there have once be a belief abroad that he be ruin, but
they who interest themselves in such matter have find out,--or at
any rate believe that they have find out,--that he pay his tailor
regularly: and now there prevail an opinion that Ferdinand Lopez
be a monied man.
it be know to some few that he occupy room in a flat at
Westminster,--but to very few exactly where the room be situate.
among all his friend no one be know to have enter they. in a
moderate way he be give to hospitality,--that be to infrequent but,
when the occasion come, to graceful hospitality. some club, however,
or tavern, or perhaps, in the summer, some river bank would be choose
as the scene of these festivity. to a few,--if, as suggest,
amidst summer flower on the water's edge to man and woman mixed,--he
would be a courtly and efficient host; for he have the rare gift of
do such thing well.
hunting be over, and the east wind be still blow, and a great
portion of the London world be out of town take its Easter
holiday, when, on an unpleasant morning, Ferdinand Lopez travel
into the city by the Metropolitan railway from Westminster Bridge. it
be his custom to go thither when he do go,--not daily like a man of
business, but as chance might require, like a capitalist or a man of
pleasure,--in his own brougham. but on this occasion he walk down
to the river side, and then walk from the Mansion House into a
dingy little court call Little Tankard Yard, near the Bank of
England, and go through a narrow dark long passage get into a
little office at the back of a building, in which there sit at a desk
a greasy gentleman with a new hat on one side of his head, who might
perhaps be about forty year old. the place be very dark, and the
man be turn over the leaf of a ledger. a stranger to city
way might probably have say that he be idle, but he be no doubt
fill his mind with that erudition which would enable he to earn
his bread. on the other side of the desk there be a little boy
copying letter. these be Mr. Sextus parker,--commonly call Sexty
Parker,--and his clerk. Mr. Parker be a gentleman very well know
and at the present moment favourably esteem on the Stock Exchange.
"what, lopez!" say he. "Uncommon glad to see you. what can I do for
you?"
"just come inside,--will you?" say lopez. now within Mr. Parker's
very small office there be a small office in which there be
a safe, a small rickety Pembroke table, two chair, and an old
washing-stand with a tumbled towel. Lopez lead the way into this
sanctum as though he know the place well, and Sexty Parker follow
he.
"beastly day, benot it?" say Sexty.
"yes,--a nasty east wind."
"cut one in two, with a hot sun at the same time. one ought to
hybernate at this time of the year."
"then why donot you hybernate?" say lopez.
"business be too good. thatbe about it. a man have to stick to it when
it do come. everybody cannot do like you;--give up regular work,
and make a well thing of an hour now and an hour then, just as it
please you. I shouldnot dare go in for that kind of thing."
"I donot suppose you or any one else know what I go in for," say
Lopez, with a look that indicate offence.
"nor donot care," say sexty;--"only hope itbe something good for
your sake." Sexty Parker have know Mr. Lopez well, now for some
year, and be an overbearing man himself,--somewhat even of a
bully if the truth be spoken,--and by no mean apt to give way unless
hard press, have often try his "hand" on his friend, as he himself
would have say. but I doubt whether he could remember any instance
in which he could congratulate himself on success. he be try his
hand again now, but do it with a falter voice, have catch a
glance of his friend's eye.
"I dare say not," say lopez. then he continue without change his
voice or the nature of the glance of his eye, "Iwill tell you what I
want you to do now. I want your name to this bill for three month."
Sexty Parker open his mouth and his eye, and take the bit of paper
that be tender to he. it be a promissory note for L750, which,
if sign by he, would at the end of the specify period make he
liable for that sum be it not otherwise pay. his friend Mr. Lopez
be indeed apply to he for the assistance of his name in raise
a loan to the amount of the sum name. this be a kind of favour
which a man should ask almost on his knees,--and which, if so ask,
Mr. Sextus Parker would certainly refuse. and here be Ferdinand
Lopez ask it,--whom Sextus Parker have latterly regard as an
opulent man,--and ask it not at all on his knee, but, as one
might say, at the muzzle of a pistol. "accommodation bill!" say
Sexty. "why, you benot hard up; be you?"
"Ibe not go just at present to tell you much about my affair, and
yet I expect you to do what I ask you. I donot suppose you doubt my
ability to raise l750."
"oh, dear, no," say Sexty, who have be look at and who have not
borne the inspection well.
"and I donot suppose you would refuse I even if I be hard up, as
you call it." there have be affair before between the two man in
which Lopez have probably be the strong, and the memory of they,
add to the inspection which be still go on, be heavy upon poor
Sexty.
"oh, dear, no;--I benot think of refuse. I suppose a fellow may
be a little surprised at such a thing."
"I donot know why you need be surprised, as such thing be very
common. I happen to have take a share in a loan a little beyond my
immediate mean, and therefore want a few hundred. there be no one I
can ask with a well grace than you. if you ain't--afraid about it,
just sign it."
"oh, I benot afraid," say Sexty, take his pen and write his name
across the bill. but even before the signature be finish, when
his eye be take away from the face of his companion and fix upon
the disagreeable piece of paper beneath his hand, he repent of
what he be do. he almost arrest his signature half-way. he do
hesitate, but have not pluck enough to stop his hand. "it do seem to
be a d----d odd transaction all the same," he say as he lean back
in his chair.
"itbe the commonest thing in the world," say lopez pick up
the bill in a leisurely way, fold it and put it into his
pocket-book. "have our name never be together on a bit of paper
before?"
"when we both have something to make by it."
"youhave nothing to make and nothing to lose by this. good day and
many thanks;--though I donot think so much of the affair as you seem
to do." then Ferdinand Lopez take his departure and Sexty Parker be
leave alone in his bewilderment.
"by George,--that's queer," he say to himself. "whowould have think
of Lopez be hard up for a few hundred pound? but it must be all
right. he wouldnot have come in that fashion, if it havenot be all
right. I oughtnot to have do it though! a man ought never to do
that kind of thing;--never,--never!" and Mr. Sextus Parker be much
discontent with himself, so that when he get home that evening to
the wife of his bosom and his little family at Ponders End, he by
no mean make himself agreeable to they. for that sum of L750 sit
upon his bosom as he eat his supper, and lie upon his chest as he
slept,--like a nightmare.
CHAPTER II
Everett Wharton
on that same day Lopez din with his friend Everett Wharton at a
new club call the Progress, of which they be both member. the
Progress be certainly a new club, have as yet be open hardly
more than three year; but still it be old enough to have see many
of the hope of its early youth become dim with age and inaction.
for the Progress have intend to do great thing for the liberal
party,--or rather for political liberality in general,--and have in
truth do little or nothing. it have be get up with considerable
enthusiasm, and for a while certain fiery politician have believe
that through the instrumentality of this institution man of genius,
and spirit, and natural power, but without wealth,--meaning always
themselves,--would be supply with sure seat in Parliament and
a probable share in the Government. but no such result have be
achieve. there have be a want of something,--some deficiency feel
but not yet defined,--which have hitherto be fatal. the young man
say it be because no old stager who know the way of pull the
wire would come forward and put the club in the proper groove. the
old man say it be because the young man be pretentious puppy.
it be, however, not to be doubt that the party of Progress have
become slack, and that the liberal politician of the country,
although a special new club have be open for the furtherance
of their view, be not at present make much way. "what we
want be organization," say one of the lead young man. but the
organization be not as yet forthcoming.
the club, nevertheless, go on its way, like other club, and man
din and smoke and play billiard and pretend to read. some few
energetic member still hop that a good day would come in which
their grand idea might be realised,--but as regard the member
generally, they be content to eat and drink and play billiard. it
be a fairly good club,--with a sprinkling of liberal lordling, a
couple of dozen of member of Parliament who have be make to believe
that they would neglect their party duty unless they pay their
money, and the usual assortment of barrister, attorney, city
merchant and idle man. it be good enough at any rate for Ferdinand
Lopez, who be particular about his dinner, and have an opinion of his
own about wine. he have be hear to assert that, for real quiet
comfort, there be not a club in London equal to it; but his hearer
be not aware that in past day he have be blackball at the
T---- and the G----. these be accident which Lopez have a gift of
keep in the background. his present companion, Everett Wharton,
have, as well as himself, be an original member;--and Wharton have
be one of those who have hop to find in the club a step-stone
to high political life, and who now talk often with idle energy of
the need of organization.
"for myself," say lopez, "I can conceive no vainer object of
ambition than a seat in the British Parliament. what do any man
gain by it? the few who be successful work very hard for little
pay and no thanks,--or nearly equally hard for no pay and as little
thank. the many who fail sit idly for hour, undergo the weary
task of listen to platitude, and enjoy in return the now
absolutely valueless privilege of have M.P. write on their
letter."
"somebody must make law for the country."
"I donot see the necessity. I think the country would do uncommonly
well if it be to know that no old law would be alter or new law
make for the next twenty year."
"you wouldnot have repeal the corn law?"
"there be no corn law to repeal now."
"nor modify the income tax?"
"I would modify nothing. but at any rate, whether law be to be
alter or to be leave, it be a comfort to I that I need not put my
finger into that pie. there be one benefit indeed in be in the
House."
"you cannot be arrest."
"well;--that, as far as it go; and one other. it assist a man in
get a seat as the director of certain company. People be still
such ass that they trust a Board of Directors make up of member
of Parliament, and therefore of course member be make welcome. but
if you want to get into the House why donot you arrange it with your
father, instead of wait for what the club may do for you?"
"my father wouldnot pay a shilling for such a purpose. he be never
in the House himself."
"and therefore despise it."
"a little of that, perhaps. no man ever work hard than he do,
or, in his way, more successfully; and have see one after another
of his junior become member of Parliament, while he stick to the
attorney, there be perhaps a little jealousy about it."
"from what I see of the way you live at home, I should think your
father would do anything for you,--with proper management. there be
no doubt, I suppose, that he could afford it?"
"my father never in his life say anything to I about his own money
affair, though he say a great deal about mine. no man ever be
close than my father. but I believe that he could afford almost
anything."
"I wish I have such a father," say Ferdinand Lopez. "I think that I
should succeed in ascertain the extent of his capability, and in
make some use of they too."
Wharton nearly ask his friend,--almost summon courage to ask
him,--whether his father have do much for he. they be very
intimate; and on one subject, in which Lopez be much interested,
their confidence have be very close. but the young and the weak
man of the two could not quite bring himself to the point of make
an inquiry which he think would be disagreeable. Lopez have never
before, in all their intercourse, hint at the possibility of his
have or have have filial aspiration. he have be as though he
have be create self-sufficient, independent of mother's milk
or father's money. now the question might have be ask almost
naturally. but it be not ask.
Everett Wharton be a trouble to his father,--but not an agonizing
trouble, as be some son. his fault be not of a nature to rob his
father's cup of all its sweetness and to bring his grey hair with
sorrow to the grave. Old Wharton have never have to ask himself whether
he should now, at length, let his son fall into the low abyss,
or whether he should yet again struggle to put he on his leg,
again forgive he, again pay his debt, again endeavour to forget
dishonour, and place it all to the score of thoughtless youth. have it
be so, I think that, if not on the first or second fall, certainly
on the third, the young man would have go into the abyss; for Mr.
Wharton be a stern man, and capable of come to a clear conclusion
on thing that be near and even dear to himself. but Everett
Wharton have simply show himself to be inefficient to earn his own
bread. he have never decline even to do this,--but have simply be
inefficient. he have not declare either by word or action that
as his father be a rich man, and as he be an only son, he would
therefore do nothing. but he have try his hand thrice, and in
each case, after but short trial, have assure his father and his
friend that the thing have not suit he. leave Oxford without a
degree,--for the reading of the school do not suit him,--he have
go into a banking-house, by no mean as a mere clerk, but with
an expressed proposition from his father, back by the assent of
a partner, that he should work his way up to wealth and a great
commercial position. but six month teach he that banking be "an
abomination," and he at once go into a course of read with a
barrister. he remain at this till he be called,--for a man may be
call with very little continuous work. but after he be call the
solitude of his chamber be too much for he, and at twenty-five
he find that the Stock Exchange be the mart in the world for such
talent and energy as he possess. what be the nature of his
failure during the year that he go into the city, be know only to
himself and his father,--unless Ferdinand Lopez know something of it
also. but at six-and-twenty the Stock Exchange be also abandon;
and now, at eight-and-twenty, Everett Wharton have discover that a
parliamentary career be that for which nature and his special genius
have intend he. he have probably suggest this to his father, and
have meet with some cold rebuff.
Everett Wharton be a good-look, manly fellow, six foot high, with
broad shoulder, with light hair, wear a large silky bushy beard,
which make he look old than his year, who neither by his speech
nor by his appearance would ever be take for a fool, but who show
by the very action of his body as well as by the play of his face,
that he lack firmness of purpose. he certainly be no fool. he have
read much, and, though he generally forgot what he read, there be
leave with he from his reading certain nebulous light, beget by
other man's thinking, which enable he to talk on most subject. it
cannot be say of he that he do much think for himself;--but
he think that he think. he believe of himself that he have go
rather deep into politic, and that he be entitle to call many
statesmen ass because they do not see the thing which he see.
he have the great question of labour, and all that refer to union,
strike, and lock-out, quite at his finger' end. he know how the
Church of England should be disestablish and recompose. he be
quite clear on question of finance, and see to a "t" how progress
should be make towards communism, so that no violence should disturb
that progress, and that in the due course of century all desire
for personal property should be conquer and annihilate by a
philanthropy so general as hardly to be account a virtue. in the
meantime he could never contrive to pay his tailor's bill regularly
out of the allowance of l400 a year which his father make he, and
be always dream of the comfort of a handsome income.
he be a popular man certainly,--very popular with woman, to whom
he be always courteous, and generally like by man, to whom he be
genial and good-natured. though he be not himself aware of the fact,
he be very dear to his father, who in his own silent way almost
admire and certainly like the openness and guileless freedom of
a character which be very opposite to his own. the father, though
he have never say a word to flatter the son, do in truth give his
offspring credit for great talent than he possess, and, even when
appear to scorn they, would listen to the young man's diatribe
almost with satisfaction. and Everett be very dear also to a sister,
who be the only other live member of this branch of the Wharton
family. much will be say of she in these page, and it be hop that
the reader may take an interest in her fate. but here, in speak of
the brother, it may suffice to say, that the sister, who be endow
with infinitely fine gift than his, do give credit to the somewhat
pretentious claim of her less noble brother.
indeed it have be perhaps a misfortune with Everett Wharton that
some people have believe in him,--and a further misfortune that some
other have think it worth their while to pretend to believe in he.
among the latter might probably be reckon the friend with whom he
be now din at the Progress. a man may flatter another, as lopez
occasionally do flat Wharton, without preconcerted falsehood. it
suit one man to be well with another, and the one learn gradually
and perhaps unconsciously the way to take advantage of the foible
of the other. now it be most material to Lopez that he should stand
well with all the member of the Wharton family, as he aspire to
the hand of the daughter of the house. of her regard he have already
think himself nearly sure. of the father's sanction to such a
marriage he have reason to be almost more than doubtful. but the
brother be his friend,--and in such circumstance a man be almost
justify in flatter a brother.
"Iwill tell you what it be, lopez," say Wharton, as they stroll out
of the club together, a little after ten o'clock, "the man of the
present day willnot give themselves the trouble to occupy their mind
with matter which have, or should have, real interest. Pope know all
about it when he say that 'the proper study of mankind be man.' but
people donot read Pope now, or if they do they donot take the trouble
to understand he."
"man be too busy make money, my dear fellow."
"thatbe just it. moneybe a very nice thing."
"very nice," say lopez.
"but the search after it be debase. if a man could make money for
four, or six, or even eight hour a day, and then wash his mind of
the pursuit, as a clerk in an office wash the copy and ledger
out of his mind, then--"
"he would never make money in that way,--and keep it."
"and therefore the whole thing be debase. a man cease to care
for the great interest of the world, or even to be aware of their
existence, when his whole soul be in spanish bond. they want to
make a banker of I, but I find that it would kill I."
"it would kill I, I think, if I have to confine myself to spanish
bond."
"you know what I mean. you at any rate can understand I, though I
fear you be too far go to abandon the idea of make a fortune."
"I would abandon it to-morrow if I could come into a fortune ready
make. a man must at any rate eat."
"yes;--he must eat. but I be not quite sure," say Wharton
thoughtfully, "that he need think about what he eat."
"unless the beef be send up without horse radish!" it have happen
that when the two man sit down to their dinner the insufficient
quantity of that vegetable supply by the steward of the club have
be all consume, and Wharton have complain of the grievance.
"a man have a right to that for which he have pay," say Wharton, with
mock solemnity, "and if he pass over laches of that nature without
observation he do an injury to humanity at large. Ibe not go to
be catch in a trap, you know, because I like horse radish with my
beef. well, I cannot go far out of my way, as I have a deal of
read to do before I court my Morpheus. if youwill take my advice
youwill go straight to the governor. whatever Emily may feel I donot
think shewill say much to encourage you unless you go about it after
that fashion. she have prim notion of her own, which perhaps be not
after all so much amiss when a man want to marry a girl."
"God forbid that I should think that anything about your sister be
amiss!"
"I donot think there be much myself. woman be generally
superficial,--but some be honestly superficial and some dishonestly.
Emily at any rate be honest."
"stop half a moment." then they saunter arm in arm down the broad
pavement lead from Pall Mall to the Duke of York's column. "I wish
I could make out your father more clearly. he be always civil to I,
but he have a cold way of look at I which make I think I be not
in his good book."
"he be like that to everybody."
"I never seem to get beyond the skin with he. you must have hear
he speak of I in my absence?"
"he never say very much about anybody."
"but a word would let I know how the land lie. you know I well
enough to be aware that I be the last man to be curious as to what
other think of I. indeed I do not care about it as much as a man
should do. I be utterly indifferent to the opinion of the world at
large, and would never object to the company of a pleasant person
because the pleasant person abuse I behind my back. what I value
be the pleasantness of the man and not his liking or dislike for
myself. but here the dear aim of my life be concern, and I might
be guide either this way or that, to my great advantage, by know
whether I stand well or ill with he."
"you have din three time within the last three month in
Manchester Square, and I donot know any other man,--certainly no
other young man,--who have have such strong proof of intimacy from my
father."
"yes, and I know my advantage. but I have be there as your friend,
not as his."
"he donot care twopence about my friend. I want to give Charlie
Skate a dinner, but my father wouldnot have he at any price."
"Charlie Skate be out at elbow, and bet at billiard. I be
respectable,--or at any rate your father think so. your father be
more anxious about you than you be aware of, and wish to make his
house pleasant to you as long as he can do so to your advantage. as
far as you be concerned he rather approve of I, fancy that
my turn for make money be strong than my turn for spend it.
nevertheless, he look upon I as a friend of yours rather than his
own. though he have give I three dinner in three months,--and I own
the greatness of his hospitality,--i donot suppose he ever say a
word in my favour. I wish I know what he do say."
"he say he know nothing about you."
"oh;--thatbe it, be it? then he can know no harm. when next he say
so ask he of how many of the man who dine at his house he can say as
much. good night;--i willnot keep you any long. but I can tell you
this;--if between we we can manage to handle he rightly, you may get
your seat in Parliament and I may get my wife;--that be, of course,
if she will have I."
then they part, but Lopez remain in the pathway, walk up
and down by the side of the old military club, think of thing.
he certainly know his friend, the young Wharton, intimately,
appreciate the man's good quality, and be fully aware of
the man's weakness. by his question he have extract quite enough
to assure himself that Emily's father would be adverse to his
proposition. he have not feel much doubt before, but now he be
certain. "he donot know much about I," he say, muse to himself.
"well, no; he doesn't;--and there benot very much that I can tell
he. of course hebe wise,--as wisdom go. but then, wise man do do
foolish thing at interval. the discreetest of city banker be
talk out of their money; the most scrupulous of matron be talk
out of their virtue; the most experienced of statesman be talk out
of their principle. and who can really calculate chance? man who
lead forlorn hope generally push through without be wounded;--and
the fifth or sixth heir come to a title." so much he say, palpably,
though to himself, with his inner voice. then,--impalpably, with no
even inner voice,--he ask himself what chance he might have of
prevail with the girl herself; and he almost venture to tell
himself that in that direction he need not despair.
in very truth he love the girl and reverence she, believe she to
be well and high and nobler than other human beings,--as a man
do when he be in love; and so believe, he have those doubt as to
his own success which such reverence produce.
CHAPTER III
Mr. Abel Wharton, Q.C.
Lopez be not a man to let grass grow under his foot when he have
anything to do. when he be tired of walk backwards and forwards
over the same bit of pavement, subject all the while to a cold east
wind, he go home and think of the same matter while he lie in
bed. even be he to get the girl's assurance of love, without the
father's consent he might find himself far from his object than
ever. Mr. Wharton be a man of old fashion, who would think himself
ill-use and his daughter ill-use, and who would think also that
a general offence would have be commit against good social
manner, if his daughter be to be ask for her hand without his
previous consent. should he absolutely refuse,--why then the battle,
though it would be a desperate battle, might perhaps be fight with
other strategy; but, give to the matter his good consideration,
Lopez think it expedient to go at once to the father. in do this
he would have no silly tremor. whatever he might feel in speak
to the girl, he have sufficient self-confidence to be able to ask the
father, if not with assurance, at any rate without trepidation. it
be, he think, probable that the father, at the first attack, would
neither altogether accede, or altogether refuse. the disposition of
the man be averse to the probability of an absolute reply at the
first moment. the lover imagine that it might be possible for he to
take advantage of the period of doubt which would thus be create.
Mr. Wharton be and have for a great many year be a barrister
practising in the Equity Courts,--or rather in one Equity Court, for
throughout a life's work now extend to nearly fifty year, he have
hardly ever go out of the single Vice-Chancellor's Court which be
much well know by Mr. Wharton's name than by that of the less
eminent judge who now sit there. his have be a very peculiar, a very
toilsome, but yet probably a very satisfactory life. he have begin his
practice early, and have work in a stuff gown till he be nearly
sixty. at that time he have amass a large fortune, mainly from his
profession, but partly also by the careful use of his own small
patrimony and by his wife's money. man know that he be rich, but
no one know the extent of his wealth. when he submit to take a
silk gown, he declare among his friend that he do so as a step
preparatory to his retirement. the altered method of work would not
suit he at his age, nor,--as he said,--would it be profitable. he
would take his silk as an honour for his decline year, so that he
might become a bencher at his Inn. but he have now be work for
the last twelve or fourteen year with his silk gown,--almost as hard
as in young day, and with pecuniary result almost as serviceable;
and though from month to month he declare his intention of take
no fresh brief, and though he do now occasionally refuse work,
still he be there with his mind as clear as ever, and with his body
apparently as little affect by fatigue.
Mr. Wharton have not marry till he be forty, and his wife have now
be two year dead. he have have six children,--of whom but two be
now leave to make a household for his old age. he have be nearly
fifty when his young daughter be bear, and be therefore now an
old father of a young child. but he be one of those man who, as
in youth they be never very young, so in age be they never very
old. he could still ride his cob in the park jauntily; and do so
carefully every morning in his life, after an early cup of tea and
before his breakfast. and he could walk home from his chamber every
day, and on Sundays could do the round of the park on foot. twice a
week, on Wednesdays and Saturdays, he din at that old law club, the
Eldon, and play whist after dinner till twelve o'clock. this be
the great dissipation and, I think, the chief charm of his life. in
the middle of August he and his daughter usually go for a month
to Wharton Hall in Herefordshire, the seat of his cousin Sir Alured
wharton;--and this be the one duty of his life which be a burthen
to he. but he have be make to believe that it be essential to his
health, and to his wife's, and then to his girl's health, that he
should every summer leave town for a time,--and where else be he to
go? Sir Alured be a relation and a gentleman. Emily like Wharton
Hall. it be the proper thing. he hat Wharton Hall, but then he do
not know any place out of London that he would not hate bad. he
have once be induce to go up the Rhine, but have never repeat the
experiment of foreign travel. Emily sometimes go abroad with her
cousin, during which period it be suppose that the old lawyer
spend a good deal of his time at the Eldon. he be a spare, thin,
strongly make man, with spare light brown hair, hardly yet grizzle,
with small grey whisker, clear eye, bushy eyebrow, with a long
ugly nose, on which young barrister have be hear to declare that
you might hang a small kettle, and with considerable vehemence of
talk when he be oppose in argument. for, with all his well-know
coolness of temper, Mr. Wharton could become very hot in an argument,
when the nature of the case in hand require heat. on one subject
all who know he be agree. he be a thorough lawyer. many doubt
his eloquence, and some declare that he have know well the extent
of his own power in abstain from seek the high honour of
his profession; but no one doubt his law. he have once write a
book,--on the mortgage of stock in trade; but that have be in early
life, and he have never since dabble in literature.
he be certainly a man of whom man be generally afraid. at the
whist-table no one would venture to scold he. in the court no one
ever contradict he. in his own house, though he be very quiet,
the servant dread to offend he, and be attentive to his
slight behest. when he condescend to ride with any acquaintance
in the park, it be always acknowledge that old Wharton be to
regulate the pace. his name be Abel, and all his life he have be
know as able Abe;--a silent, far-see, close-fiste, just old man,
who be not, however, by any mean deficient in sympathy either with
the suffering or with the joy of humanity.
it be Easter time and the court be not sit, but Mr. Wharton
be in his chamber as a matter of course at ten o'clock. he know no
real homely comfort elsewhere,--unless at the whist-table at the
Eldon. he eat and drank and sleep in his own house in Manchester
Square, but he could hardly be say to live there. it be not
there that his mind be awake, and that the power of the man be
exercise. when he come up from the dining-room to join his daughter
after dinner he would get she to sing he a song, and would then seat
himself with a book. but he never read in his own house, invariably
fall into a sweet and placid slumber, from which he be never
disturb till his daughter kiss he as she go to bed. then
he would walk about the room, and look at his watch, and shuffle
uneasily through half-an-hour till his conscience allow he to take
himself to his chamber. he be a man of no pursuit in his own house.
but from ten in the morning till five, or often till six, in the
evening, his mind be active in some work. it be not now all law,
as it use to be. in the drawer of the old piece of furniture which
stand just at the right hand of his own arm-chair there be various
book hide away, which he be sometimes ashamed to have see by
his clients,--poetry and novel and even fairy tale. for there be
nothing Mr. Wharton could not read in his chamber, though there be
nothing that he could read in his own house. he have a large pleasant
room in which to sit, look out from the ground floor of Stone
building on to the garden belong to the Inn,--and here, in the
centre of the metropolis, but in perfect quiet as far as the outside
world be concern, he have live and still live his life.
at about noon on the day follow that on which Lopez have make his
sudden swoop on Mr. Parker and have then din with Everett Wharton,
he call at Stone Buildings and be show into the lawyer's room.
his quick eye at once discover the book which Mr. Wharton half
hide away, and see upon it Mr. Mudie's suspicious ticket. barrister
certainly never get their law book from Mudie, and Lopez at once
know that his hop-for father-in-law have be read a novel. he
have not suspect such weakness, but argue well from it for the
business he have in hand. there must be a soft spot to be find about
the heart of an old lawyer who spend his morning in such occupation.
"how do you do, sir?" say Mr. Wharton rise from his seat. "I hope
I see you well, sir." though he have be read a novel his tone
and manner be very cold. Lopez have never be in Stone Buildings
before, and be not quite sure that he might not have commit some
offence in come there. "take a seat, Mr. Lopez. be there anything I
can do for you in my way?"
there be a great deal that could be do "in his way" as
father;--but how be it to be introduce and the case make clear?
Lopez do not know whether the old man have as yet ever suspect
such a feeling as that which he now intend to declare. he have
be intimate at the house in Manchester Square, and have certainly
ingratiate himself very closely with a certain Mrs. Roby, who have
be Mrs. Wharton's sister and constant companion, who live in
Berkeley Street, close round the corner from Manchester Square, and
spend very much of her time with Emily Wharton. they be together
daily, as though Mrs. Roby have assume the part of a second mother,
and Lopez be well aware that Mrs. Roby know of his love. if there
be real confidence between Mrs. Roby and the old lawyer, the old
lawyer must know it also;--but as to that Lopez feel that he be in
the dark.
the task of speak to an old father be not unpleasant when the
lover know that he have be smile upon, and, in fact, approve for
the last six month. he be go to be pat on the back, and make
much of, and receive into the family. he be to be tell that his
Mary or his Augusta have be the good daughter in the world and will
therefore certainly be the good wife, and he himself will probably on
that special occasion be speak of with unqualified praise,--and all
will be pleasant. but the subject be one very difficult to broach
when no previous light have be throw on it. Ferdinand Lopez,
however, be not the man to stand shiver on the brink when a
plunge be necessary,--and therefore he make his plunge. "Mr.
Wharton, I have take the liberty to call upon you here, because I
want to speak to you about your daughter."
"about my daughter!" the old man's surprise be quite genuine. of
course when he have give himself a moment to think, he know what must
be the nature of his visitor's communication. but up to that moment
he have never mix his daughter and Ferdinand Lopez in his thought
together. and now, the idea have come upon he, he look at the
aspirant with severe and unpleasant eye. it be manifest to the
aspirant that the first flash of the thing be painful to the father.
"yes, sir. I know how great be my presumption. but, yet, have
venture, I will hardly say to entertain a hope, but to have come to
such a state that I can only be happy by hop, I have think it
good to come to you at once."
"do she know anything of this?"
"of my visit to you? nothing."
"of your intentions;--of your suit generally? be I to understand that
this have any sanction from she?"
"none at all."
"have you tell she anything of it?"
"not a word. I come to ask you for your permission to address she."
"you mean that she have no knowledge whatever of your--your preference
for she."
"I cannot say that. it be hardly possible that I should have learn
to love she as I do without some consciousness on her part that it be
so."
"what I mean be, without any beating about the bush,--have you be
make love to she?"
"who be to say in what make love consist, Mr. Wharton?"
"D---- it, sir, a gentleman know. a gentleman know whether he have
be play on a girl's feeling, and a gentleman, when he be ask
as I have ask you, will at any rate tell the truth. I donot want
any definition. have you be make love to she?"
"I think, Mr. Wharton, that I have behave like a gentleman; and that
you will acknowledge at least so much when you come to know exactly
what I have do and what I have not do. I have endeavour to
commend myself to your daughter, but I have never speak a word of
love to she."
"do Everett know of all this?"
"yes."
"and have he encourage it?"
"he know of it, because he be my most intimate friend. whoever the
lady might have be, I should have tell he. he be attach to I,
and would not, I think, on his own account, object to call I his
brother. I speak to he yesterday on the matter very plainly, and he
tell I that I ought certainly to see you first. I quite agree with
he, and therefore I be here. there have certainly be nothing in his
conduct to make you angry, and I do not think that there have be
anything in mine."
there be a dignity of demeanour and a quiet assured courage which
have its effect upon the old lawyer. he feel that he could not storm
and talk in ambiguous language of what a "gentleman" would or
would not do. he might disapprove of this man altogether as a
son-in-law,--and at the present moment he think that he did,--but
still the man be entitle to a civil answer. how be lover to
approach the lady of their love in any manner more respectful than
this? "Mr. Lopez," he say, "you must forgive I if I say that you
be comparatively a stranger to we."
"that be an accident which would be easily cure if your will in that
direction be as good as mine."
"but, perhaps, it benot. one have to be explicit in these matter.
a daughter's happiness be a very serious consideration,--and some
people, among whom I confess that I be one, consider that like should
marry like. I should wish to see my daughter marry,--not only in my
own sphere, neither high nor lower,--but with some one of my own
class."
"I hardly know, Mr. Wharton, whether that be intend to exclude I."
"Well,--to tell you the truth I know nothing about you. I donot know
who your father was,--whether he be an Englishman, whether he be
a Christian, whether he be a protestant,--not even whether he be
a gentleman. these be question which I should not dream of ask
under any other circumstances;--would be matter with which I should
have no possible concern, if you be simply an acquaintance. but
when you talk to a man about his daughter--!"
"I acknowledge freely your right of inquiry."
"and I know nothing of your means;--nothing whatever. I understand
that you live as a man of fortune, but I presume that you earn your
bread. I know nothing of the way in which you earn it, nothing of the
certainty or amount of your mean."
"those thing be of course matter for inquiry; but may I presume
that you have no objection which satisfactory answer to such
question may not remove?"
"I shall never willingly give my daughter to any one who be not the
son of an english gentleman. it may be a prejudice, but that be my
feeling."
"my father be certainly not an english gentleman. he be a
Portuguese." in admit this, and in thus subject himself at
once to one clearly-state ground of objection,--the objection be
one which, though admit, carry with itself neither fault nor
disgrace,--lopez feel that he have get a certain advantage. he could
not get over the fact that he be the son of a portuguese parent, but
by admit that openly he think he might avoid present discussion
on matter which might, perhaps, be more disagreeable, but to which
he need not allude if the accident of his birth be to be take by
the father as settle the question. "my mother be an english lady,"
he add, "but my father certainly be not an Englishman. I never
have the common happiness of know either of they. I be an orphan
before I understand what it be to have a parent."
this be say with a pathos which for the moment stop the
expression of any further harsh criticism from the lawyer. Mr.
Wharton could not instantly repeat his objection to a parentage
which be matter for such melancholy reflection; but he feel at the
same time that as he have luckily land himself on a positive and
undeniable ground of objection to a match which be distasteful to
he, it would be unwise for he to go to other matter in which he
might be less successful. by do so, he would seem to abandon the
ground which he have already make good. he think it probable that
the man might have an adequate income, and yet he do not wish
to welcome he as a son-in-law. he think it possible that the
portuguese father might be a portuguese nobleman, and therefore
one whom he would be drive to admit to have be in some sort a
gentleman;--but yet this man who be now in his presence and whom
he continue to scan with the close observation, be not what he
call a gentleman. the foreign blood be prove, and that would
suffice. as he look at Lopez he think that he detect jewish
sign, but he be afraid to make any allusion to religion, lest Lopez
should declare that his ancestor have be note as Christians since
St. James first preach in the Peninsula.
"I be educate altogether in England," continue lopez, "till I be
send to a german university in the idea that the language of the
continent be not generally well learn in this country. I can never
be sufficiently thankful to my guardian for do so."
"I dare say;--I dare say. french and German be very useful. I have a
prejudice of my own in favour of Greek and Latin."
"but I rather fancy I pick up more greek and Latin at Bohn than I
should have get here, have I stick to nothing else."
"I dare say;--I dare say. you may be an Admirable Crichton for what I
know."
"I have not intend to make any boast, sir, but simply to vindicate
those who have the care of my education. if you have no objection
except that found on my birth, which be an accident--"
"when one man be a peer and another a ploughman, that be an accident.
one donot find fault with the ploughman, but one donot ask he to
dinner."
"but my accident," say Lopez smile, "be one which you would hardly
discover unless you be tell. have I call myself Talbot you would
not know but that I be as good an Englishman as yourself."
"a man of course may be take in by falsehood," say the lawyer.
"if you have no other objection than that raise, I hope you will
allow I to visit in Manchester Square."
"there may be ten thousand other objection, Mr. Lopez, but I
really think that the one be enough. of course I know nothing of
my daughter's feeling. I should imagine that the matter be as
strange to she as it be to I. but I cannot give you anything like
encouragement. if I be ever to have a son-in-law I should wish to
have an english son-in-law. I do not even know what your profession
be."
"I be engage in foreign loan."
"very precarious I should think. a sort of gambling; benot it?"
"it be the business by which many of the great mercantile house
in the city have be make."
"I dare say;--I dare say;--and by which they come to ruin. I have the
great respect in the world for mercantile enterprise, and have
have as much to do as most man with mercantile question. but I benot
sure that I wish to marry my daughter in the City. of course itbe all
prejudice. I willnot deny that on general subject I can give as much
latitude as any man; but when one's own hearth be attacked--"
"surely such a proposition as mine, Mr. Wharton, be no attack!"
"in my sense it be. when a man propose to assault and invade the
very kernel of another man's heart, to share with he, and indeed to
take from he, the very dearest of his possession, to become part
and parcel with he either for infinite good or infinite evil, then a
man have a right to guard even his prejudice as precious bulwark."
Mr. Wharton as he say this be walk about the room with his hand
in his trowser pocket. "I have always be for absolute toleration
in matter of religion,--have always advocate admission of roman
Catholics and Jews into Parliament, and even to the Bench. in
ordinary life I never question a man's religion. it be nothing to I
whether he believe in Mahomet, or have no belief at all. but when a
man come to I for my daughter--"
"I have always belong to the Church of England," say Ferdinand
Lopez.
"Lopez be at any rate a bad name to go to a protestant church with,
and I donot want my daughter to bear it. I be very frank with you,
as in such a matter man ought to understand each other. personally
I have like you well enough and have be glad to see you at my
house. Everett and you have seem to be friend, and I have have no
objection to make. but marry into a family be a very serious thing
indeed."
"no man feel that more strongly than I do, Mr. Wharton."
"there have well be an end of it."
"even though I should be happy enough to obtain her favour?"
"I cannot think that she care about you. I donot think it for a
moment. you say you havenot speak to she, and I be sure shebe not
a girl to throw herself at a man's head. I donot approve it, and I
think it have well fall to the ground. it must fall to the ground."
"I wish you would give I a reason."
"because you be not english."
"but I be english. my father be a foreigner."
"it donot suit my idea. I suppose I may have my own idea about my
own family, Mr. Lopez? I feel perfectly certain that my child will do
nothing to displease I, and this would displease I. if we be to
talk for an hour I could say nothing far."
"I hope that I may be able to present thing to you in an aspect so
alter," say Lopez as he prepare to take his leave, "as to make
you change your mind."
"possibly;--possibly," say Wharton, "but I do not think it probable.
good morning to you, sir. if I have say anything that have seem
to be unkind, put it down to my anxiety as a father and not to my
conduct as a man." then the door be close behind his visitor, and
Mr. Wharton be leave walk up and down his room alone. he be by
no mean satisfied with himself. he feel that he have be rude and
at the same time not decisive. he have not explain to the man as
he would wish to have do, that it be monstrous and out of the
question that a daughter of the Whartons, one of the old family
in England, should be give to a friendless Portuguese,--a probable
jew,--about whom nobody know anything. then he remember that soon
or later his girl would have at least L60,000, a fact of which no
human being but himself be aware. would it not be well that somebody
should be make aware of it, so that his girl might have the chance
of suitor preferable to this swarthy son of Judah? he begin to be
afraid, as he think of it, that he be not manage his matter
well. how would it be with he if he should find that the girl be
really in love with this swarthy son of Judah? he have never inquire
about his girl's heart, though there be one to whom he hop that
his girl's heart might some day be give. he almost make up his mind
to go home at once, so anxious be he. but the prospect of have to
spend an entire afternoon in Manchester Square be too much for he,
and he remain in his chamber till the usual hour.
lopez, as he return from Lincoln's Inn, westward to his club,
be, on the whole, content with the interview. he have expect
opposition. he have not think that the cherry would fall easily into
his mouth. but the conversation generally have not take those turn
which he have think would be most detrimental to he.
CHAPTER IV
Mrs. Roby
Mr. Wharton, as he walk home, remember that Mrs. Roby be to dine
at his house on that evening. during the remainder of the day, after
the departure of lopez, he have be unable to take his mind from the
consideration of the proposition make to he. he have try the novel,
and he have try Huggins _v._ the Trustees of the Charity of St.
Ambox, a case of undeniable importance in which he be engage on the
part of Huggins, but neither be sufficiently powerful to divert his
thought. throughout the morning he be imagine what he would say
to Emily about this lover of hers,--in what way he would commence
the conversation, and how he would express his own opinion should
he find that she be in any degree favourable to the man. should
she altogether ignore the man's pretension, there would be no
difficulty. but if she hesitated,--if, as be certainly possible, she
should show any partiality for the man, then there would be a knot
which would require untie. Hitherto the intercourse between the
father and daughter have be simple and pleasant. he have give she
everything she ask for, and she have obey he in all the very
few matter as to which he have demand obedience. question of
discipline, as far as there have be any discipline, have generally
be leave to Mrs. Roby. Mrs. Roby be to dine in Manchester Square
to-day, and perhaps it would be well that he should have a few word
with Mrs. Roby before he speak to his daughter.
Mrs. Roby have a husband, but Mr. Roby have not be ask to dine
in the Square on this occasion. Mrs. Roby din in the Square very
often, but Mr. Roby very seldom,--not probably above once a year, on
some special occasion. he and Mr. Wharton have married sister, but
they be quite unlike in character and have never become friend.
Mrs. Wharton have be nearly twenty year young than her husband;
Mrs. Roby have be six or seven year young than her sister;
and Mr. Roby be a year or two young than his wife. the two man
therefore belong to different period of life, Mr. Roby at the
present time be a florid youth of forty. he have a moderate
fortune, inherit from his mother, of which he be sufficiently
careful; but he love race, and read sporting paper; he be
addict to hunting and billiard; he shoot pigeon, and,--so Mr.
Wharton have declare calumniously more than once to an intimate
friend,--had not an h in his vocabulary. the poor man do drop an
aspirate now and again; but he know his defect and strove hard, and
with fair average success, to overcome it. but Mr. Wharton do not
love he, and they be not friend. perhaps neither do Mrs. Roby
love he very ardently. she be at any rate almost always willing to
leave her own house to come to the Square, and on such occasion Mr.
Roby be always willing to dine at the Nimrod, the club which it
delight he to frequent.
Mr. Wharton, on enter his own house, meet his son on the staircase.
"do you dine at home to-day, Everett?"
"well, sir; no, sir. I donot think I do. I think I half promise to
dine with a fellow at the club."
"donot you think youwould make thing meet more easily about the end of
the year if you din oftener here, where you have nothing to pay,
and less frequently at the club, where you pay for everything?"
"but what I should save you would lose, sir. thatbe the way I look at
it."
"then I advise you to look at it the other way, and leave I to
take care of myself. come in here, I want to speak to you." Everett
follow his father into a dingy back parlour, which be fit up
with book shelf and be generally call the study, but which be
gloomy and comfortless because it be seldom use. "I have have your
friend Lopez with I at my chamber to-day. I donot like your friend
lopez."
"I be sorry for that, sir."
"he be a man as to whom I should wish to have a good deal of evidence
before I would trust he to be what he seem to be. I dare say hebe
clever."
"I think hebe more than clever."
"I dare say;--and well instruct in some respect."
"I believe he to be a thorough linguist, sir."
"I dare say. I remember a waiter at an hotel in Holborn who could
speak seven language. itbe an accomplishment very necessary for a
Courier or a Queen's Messenger."
"you donot mean to say, sir, that you disregard foreign language?"
"I have say nothing of the kind. but in my estimation they donot
stand in the place of principle, or a profession, or birth, or
country. I fancy there have be some conversation between you about
your sister."
"certainly there have."
"a young man should be very chary how he speak to another man, to a
stranger, about his sister. a sister's name should be too sacred for
club talk."
"club talk! good heaven, sir; you donot think that I have speak of
Emily in that way? there benot a man in London have a high respect
for his sister than I have for mine. this man, by no mean in a light
way but with all seriousness, have tell I that he be attach to
emily; and I, believe he to be a gentleman and well to do in the
world, have refer he to you. can that have be wrong?"
"I donot know how hebe 'to do', as you call it. I havenot ask, and
I donot mean to ask. but I doubt his be a gentleman. he be not an
english gentleman. what be his father?"
"I havenot the least idea."
"or his mother?"
"he have never mention she to I."
"nor his family; nor anything of their antecedent? he be a man
fall out of the moon. all that be nothing to we as pass
acquaintance. between man such ignorance should I think bar absolute
intimacy;--but that may be a matter of taste. but it should be hold
to be utterly antagonistic to any such alliance as that of marriage.
he seem to be a friend of your. you have well make he understand
that it be quite out of the question. I have tell he so, and you have
well repeat it." so say, Mr. Wharton go upstairs to dress, and
Everett, have receive his father's instruction, go away to the
club.
when Mr. Wharton reach the drawing-room, he find Mrs. Roby alone,
and he at once resolve to discuss the matter with she before he
speak to his daughter. "Harriet," he say abruptly, "do you know
anything of one Mr. Lopez?"
"Mr. Lopez! oh yes, I know he."
"do you mean that he be an intimate friend?"
"as friend go in London, he be. he come to our house, and I think
that he hunt with Dick." Dick be Mr. Roby.
"thatbe a recommendation."
"well, Mr. Wharton, I hardly know what you mean by that," say Mrs.
Roby, smile. "I donot think, my husband will do Mr. Lopez any harm;
and I be sure Mr. Lopez willnot do my husband any."
"I dare say not. but thatbe not the question. Roby can take care of
himself."
"quite so."
"and so I dare say can Mr. Lopez." at this moment emily enter the
room. "my dear," say her father, "I be speak to your aunt. would
you mind go downstairs and wait for we? tell they we shall be
ready for dinner in ten minute." then Emily pass out of the room,
and Mrs. Roby assume a grave demeanour. "the man we be speak
of have be to I and have make an offer for Emily." as he say this
he look anxiously into his sister-in-law's face, in order that
he might tell from that how far she favour the idea of such a
marriage,--and he think that he perceive at once that she be
not averse to it. "you know it be quite out of the question," he
continue.
"I donot know why it should be out of the question. but of course
your opinion would have great weight with Emily."
"great weight! Well;--I should hope so. if not, I do not know
whose opinion be to have weight. in the first place the man be a
foreigner."
"oh, no;--he be English. but if he be a foreigner: many english
girl marry foreigner."
"my daughter shall not;--not with my permission. you have not
encourage he, I hope."
"I have not interfere at all," say Mrs. Roby. but this be a lie.
Mrs. Roby have interfere. Mrs. Roby, in discuss the merit and
character of the lover with the young lady, have always lend herself
to the lover's aid,--and have condescend to accept from the lover
various present which she could hardly have take have she be
hostile to he.
"and now tell I about herself. have she see he often?"
"why, Mr. Wharton, he have din here, in the house, over and over
again. I think that you be encourage he."
"Heavens and earth!"
"of course she have see he. when a man dine at a house he be bind
to call. of course he have called,--I donot know how often. and she
have meet he round the corner."--"Round the corner," in Manchester
Square, mean Mrs. Roby's house in Berkeley Street.--"Last Sunday
they be at the Zoo together. Dick get they ticket. I think you
know all about it."
"do you mean that my daughter go to the Zoological Gardens alone
with this man?" the father ask in dismay.
"Dick be with they. I should have go, only I have a headache. do
you not know she go?"
"yes;--i hear about the Gardens. but I hear nothing of the man."
"I think, Mr. Wharton, you be all in his favour."
"I be not at all in his favour. I dislike he particularly. for
anything I know he may have sell pencil about the street like any
other Jew-boy."
"he go to church just as you do,--that be, if he go anywhere;
which I dare say he do about as often as yourself, Mr. Wharton."
now Mr. Wharton, though he be a thorough and perhaps a bigote
member of the Church of England, be not fond of go to church.
"do you mean to tell I," he say, press his hand together, and
look very seriously into his sister-in-law's face; "do you mean to
tell I that she--like he?"
"yes;--i think she do like he."
"you donot mean to say--shebe in love with he?"
"she have never tell I that she be. young lady be shy of make
such assertion as to their own feeling before the due time for
do so have come. I think she prefer he to anybody else; and that
be he to propose to herself, she would give he her consent to go
to you."
"he shall never enter this house again," say Mr. Wharton
passionately.
"you must arrange that with she. if you have so strong an objection
to he, I wonder that you should have have he here at all."
"how be I to know? God bless my soul!--just because a man be
allow to dine here once or twice! upon my word, itbe too bad!"
"Papa, willnot you and aunt come down to dinner?" say Emily, open
the door gently. then they go down to dinner, and during the meal
nothing be say about Mr. Lopez. but they be not very merry
together, and poor Emily feel sure that her own affair have be
discuss in a troublesome manner.
CHAPTER V
"no one know anything about Him"
neither at dinner, on that evening at Manchester Square, nor after
dinner, as long as Mrs. Roby remain in the house, be a word say
about Lopez by Mr. Wharton. he remain long than usual with his
bottle of port wine in the dining-room; and when he go upstairs,
he sit himself down and fall asleep, almost without a sign. he do
not ask for a song, nor do Emily offer to sing. but as soon as Mrs.
Roby be gone,--and Mrs. Roby go home, round the corner, somewhat
early than usual,--then Mr. Wharton wake up instantly and make
inquiry of his daughter.
there have, however, be a few word speak on the subject between
Mrs. Roby and her niece which have serve to prepare Emily for what
be come. "Lopez have be to your father," say Mrs. Roby, in a
voice not specially encouraging for such an occasion. then she pause
a moment; but her niece say nothing, and she continue, "yes,--and
your father have be blame me,--as if I have do anything! if he
do not mean you to choose for yourself, why donot he keep a close
look-out?"
"I havenot choose any one, Aunt Harriet."
"Well;--to speak fairly, I think you have; and I have nothing to say
against your choice. as young man go, I think Mr. Lopez be as good
as the good of they. I donot know why you shouldnot have he. of
course youwill have money, but then I suppose he make a large income
himself. as to Mr. Fletcher, you donot care a bit about he."
"not in that way, certainly."
"no doubt your papa will have it out with you just now; so you have
well make up your mind what you will say to he. if you really like
the man, I donot see why you shouldnot say so, and stick to it. he
have make a regular offer, and girl in these day be not expect
to be their father's slave." Emily say nothing far to her aunt
on that occasion, but find that she must in truth "have it out"
with her father presently, give herself up to reflection. it might
probably be the case that the whole condition of her future life
would depend on the way in which she might now "have it out" with her
father.
I would not wish the reader to be prejudice against Miss Wharton by
the not unnatural feeling which may perhaps be feel in regard to the
aunt. Mrs. Roby be pleased with little intrigue, be addict to
the amusement of foster love affair, be fond of be think
to be useful in such matter, and be not averse to have present
give to she. she have marry a vulgar man; and, though she have not
become like the man, she have become vulgar. she be not an eligible
companion for Mr. Wharton's daughter,--a matter as to which the
father have not give himself proper opportunity of learn the
fact. an aunt in his close neighbourhood be so great a comfort
to him,--so ready and so natural an assistance to he in his
difficulty! but Emily Wharton be not in the least like her aunt,
nor have Mrs. Wharton be at all like Mrs. Roby. no doubt the contact
be dangerous. Injury have perhaps already be do. it may be that
some slight soil have already mar the pure white of the girl's
natural character. but if so, the stain be as yet too impalpable to
be visible to ordinary eye.
Emily Wharton be a tall, fair girl, with grey eye, rather exceed
the average proportion as well as height of woman. her feature
be regular and handsome, and her form be perfect; but it be by
her manner and her voice that she conquer, rather than by she
beauty,--by those gift and by a clearness of intellect join with
that feminine sweetness which have its most frequent foundation in
self-denial. those who know she well, and have become attach to she,
be apt to endow she with all virtue, and to give her credit for
a loveliness which stranger do not find on her face. but as we do
not light up our house with our bright lamp for all comer,
so neither do she emit from her eye their bright spark till
special occasion for such shining have arise. to those who be
allow to love she no woman be more lovable. there be innate in
she an appreciation of her own position as a woman, and with it a
principle of self-denial as a human being, which it be beyond the
power of any Mrs. Roby to destroy or even to defile by small stain.
like other girl she have be teach to presume that it be her
destiny to be marry, and like other girl she have think much
about her destiny. a young man generally regard it as his destiny
either to succeed or to fail in the world, and he think about that.
to he marriage, when it come, be an accident to which he have hardly
as yet give a thought. but to the girl the matrimony which be or
be not to be her destiny contain within itself the only success
or failure which she anticipate. the young man may become Lord
Chancellor, or at any rate earn his bread comfortably as a county
court judge. but the girl can look forward to little else than the
chance of have a good man for her husband;--a good man, or if she
taste lie in that direction, a rich man. Emily Wharton have doubtless
thought about these thing, and she sincerely believe that she have
find the good man in Ferdinand Lopez.
the man, certainly, be one strangely endow with the power of
create a belief. when go to Mr. Wharton at his chamber he have
not intend to cheat the lawyer into any erroneous idea about his
family, but he have resolve that he would so discuss the question of
his own condition, which would probably be raise, as to leave upon
the old man's mind an unfounded conviction that in regard to money
and income he have no reason to fear question. not a word have be
say about his money or his income. and Mr. Wharton have feel himself
bind to abstain from allusion to such matter from an assured
feeling that he could not in that direction plant an endure
objection. in this way Lopez have carry his point with Mr. Wharton.
he have convince Mrs. Roby that among all the girl's attraction the
great attraction for he be the fact that she be Mrs. Roby's
niece. he have make Emily herself believe that the one strong passion
of his life be his love for she, and this he have do without ever
have ask for her love. and he have even take the trouble to
allure Dick, and have listen to and have talk whole page out of
_Bell's life_. on his own behalf it must be acknowledge that he
do love the girl, as well perhaps as he be capable of love any
one;--but he have find out many particular as to Mr. Wharton's money
before he have allow himself to love she.
as soon as Mrs. Roby have gather up her knitting, and declare, as
she always do on such occasion, that she could go round the corner
without have any one to look after she, Mr. Wharton begin. "emily,
my dear, come here." then she come and sit on a footstool at his
foot, and look up into his face. "do you know what I be go to
speak to you about, my darling?"
"yes, papa; I think I do. it be about--Mr. Lopez."
"your aunt have tell you, I suppose. yes; it be about Mr. Lopez. I
have be very much astonished to-day by Mr. Lopez,--a man of whom I
have see very little and know less. he come to I to-day and ask
for my permission--to address you." she sit perfectly quiet, still
look at he, but she do not say a word. "of course I do not give
he permission."
"why of course, papa?"
"because he be a stranger and a foreigner. would you have wish I
to tell he that he might come?"
"yes, papa." he be sit on a sofa and shrink back a little from
she as she make this free avowal. "in that case I could have judge
for myself. I suppose every girl would like to do that."
"but should you have accept he?"
"I think I should have consult you before I do that. but I should
have wish to accept he. Papa, I do love he. I have never say so
before to any one. I would not say so to you now, if he have
not--speak to you as he have do."
"emily, it must not be."
"why not, papa? if you say it shall not be so, it shall not. I
will do as you bid I." then he put out his hand and caress she,
stroke down her hair. "but I think you ought to tell I why it must
not be,--as I do love he."
"he be a foreigner."
"but be he? and why should not a foreigner be as good as an
Englishman? his name be foreign, but he talk English and live as an
Englishman."
"he have no relative, no family, no belonging. he be what we call an
adventurer. marriage, my dear, be a most serious thing."
"yes, papa, I know that."
"one be bind to be very careful. how can I give you to a man I know
nothing about,--an adventurer? what would they say in Herefordshire?"
"I donot know why they should say anything, but if they do I
shouldnot much care."
"I should, my dear. I should care very much. one be bind to think
of one's family. suppose it should turn out afterwards that he
be--disreputable!"
"you may say that of any man, papa."
"but when a man have connexion, a father and mother, or uncle
and aunt, people that everybody know about, then there be some
guarantee of security. do you ever hear this man speak of his
father?"
"I donot know that I ever do."
"or his mother,--or his family? donot you think that be suspicious?"
"I will ask he, papa, if you wish."
"no, I would have you ask he nothing. I would not wish that there
should be opportunity for such asking. if there have be intimacy
between you, such information should have come naturally,--as a thing
of course. you have make he no promise?"
"oh no, papa."
"nor speak to he--of your regard for he?"
"never;--not a word. nor he to me,--except in such word as one
understand even though they say nothing."
"I wish he have never see you."
"be he a bad man, papa?"
"who know? I cannot tell. he may be ever so bad. how be one to know
whether a man be bad or good when one know nothing about he?" at
this point the father get up and walk about the room. "the long and
the short of it be that you must not see he any more."
"do you tell he so?"
"yes;--well; I donot know whether I say exactly that, but I tell he
that the whole thing must come to an end. and it must. luckily it
seem that nothing have be say on either side."
"but, papa--; be there to be no reason?"
"havenot I give reason? I will not have my daughter encourage an
adventurer,--a man of whom nobody know anything. that be reason
sufficient."
"he have a business, and he live with gentleman. he be Everett's
friend. he be well educated;--oh, so much well than most man that
one meet. and he be clever. Papa, I wish you know he well than
you do."
"I do not want to know he well."
"be not that prejudice, papa?"
"my dear emily," say Mr. Wharton, strive to wax into anger that he
might be firm against she, "I donot think that it become you to ask
your father such a question as that. you ought to believe that it be
the chief object of my life to do the good I can for my child."
"I be sure it be."
"and you ought to feel that, as I have have a long experience in the
world, my judgment about a young man might be trust."
that be a statement which Miss Wharton be not prepared to admit.
she have already profess herself willing to submit to her father's
judgment, and do not now by any mean contemplate rebellion against
parental authority. but she do feel that on a matter so vital to she
she have a right to plead her cause before judgment should be give,
and she be not slow to assure herself, even as this interview go
on, that her love for the man be strong enough to entitle she to
assure her father that her happiness depend on his reversal of the
sentence already pronounce. "you know, papa, that I trust you," she
say. "and I have promise you that I will not disobey you. if you
tell I that I be never to see Mr. Lopez again, I will not see he."
"you be a good girl. you be always a good girl."
"but I think that you ought to hear I." then he stand still with his
hand in his trowser pocket look at she. he do not want to hear
a word, but he feel that he would be a tyrant if he refuse. "if you
tell I that I be not to see he, I shall not see he. but I shall be
very unhappy. I do love he, and I shall never love any one else in
the same way."
"that be nonsense, Emily. there be Arthur Fletcher."
"I be sure you will never ask I to marry a man I do not love, and
I shall never love Arthur Fletcher. if this be to be as you say, it
will make I very, very wretched. it be right that you should know
the truth. if it be only because Mr. Lopez have a foreign name--"
"it benot only that; no one know anything about he, or where to
inquire even."
"I think you should inquire, papa, and be quite certain before you
pronounce such a sentence against I. it will be a crush blow."
he look at she, and see that there be a fix purpose in her
countenance of which he have never before see similar sign. "you
claim a right to my obedience, and I acknowledge it. I be sure you
believe I when I promise not to see he without your permission."
"I do believe you. of course I believe you."
"but if I do that for you, papa, I think that you ought to be very
sure, on my account, that I havenot to bear such unhappiness for
nothing. youwill think about it, papa,--will you not, before you quite
decide?" she lean against he as she speak, and he kiss she.
"good night, now, papa. you will think about it?"
"I will. I will. of course I will."
and he begin the process of think about it immediately,--before
the door be close behind she. but what be there to think about?
nothing that she have say alter in the least his idea about the
man. he be as convince as ever that unless there be much to
conceal there would not be so much concealment. but a feeling begin
to grow upon he already that his daughter have a mode of plead
with he which he would not ultimately be able to resist. he have the
power, he know, of put an end to the thing altogether. he have
only to say resolutely and unchangeably that the thing shouldnot
be, and it wouldnot be. if he could steel his heart against his
daughter's sorrow for, say, a twelvemonth, the victory would be win.
but he already begin to fear that he lack the power to steel his
heart against his daughter.
CHAPTER VI
An Old Friend go to Windsor
"and what be they go to make you now?"
this question be ask of her husband by a lady with whom perhaps
the reader of this volume may have already form some acquaintance.
chronicle of her early life have be write, at any rate
copiously. the lady be the Duchess of Omnium, and her husband be of
course the Duke. in order that the nature of the question ask by
the duchess may be explain, it must be state that just at this
time the political affair of the nation have get themselves tie up
into one of those truly desperate knot from which even the wisdom
and experience of septuagenarian statesman can see no unravelment.
the head of party be at a standstill. in the House of Commons
there be, so to say, no majority on either side. the mind of
member be so astray that, accord to the good calculation that
could be make, there would be a majority of about ten against any
possible Cabinet. there would certainly be a majority against either
of those well-try but, at this moment, little-trust Prime
Ministers, Mr. Gresham and Mr. Daubeny. there be certain man,
nominally belong to this or to the other party, who would
certainly within a week of the nomination of a Cabinet in the House,
oppose the Cabinet which they ought to support. Mr. Daubeny have
be in power,--nay, be in power, though he have twice resign. Mr.
Gresham have be twice send for to Windsor, and have on one occasion
undertake and on another have refuse to undertake to form a
Ministry. Mr. Daubeny have try two or three combination, and have
be at his wit' end. he be no doubt still in power,--could appoint
bishop, and make peer, and give away ribbon. but he couldnot pass
a law, and certainly continue to hold his present uncomfortable
position by no will of his own. but a Prime Minister cannot escape
till he have succeed in find a successor; and though the
successor be find and consent to make an attempt, the old
unfortunate cannot be allow to go free when that attempt be show
to be a failure. he have not absolutely give up the key of his
box, and no one will take they from he. even a sovereign can
abdicate; but the Prime Minister of a constitutional government
be in bond. the reader may therefore understand that the Duchess
be ask her husband what place among the political ruler of
the country have be offer to he by the last aspirant to the
leadership of the Government.
but the reader should understand more than this, and may perhaps do
so, if he have ever see those former chronicle to which allusion
have be make. the Duke, before he become a duke, have hold very
high office, have be Chancellor of the Exchequer. when he be
transfer, perforce, to the House of Lords, he had,--as be not
uncommon in such cases,--accepte a low political station. this have
displease the Duchess, who be ambitious both on her own behalf and
that of her lord,--and who think that a Duke of Omnium should be
nothing in the government if not at any rate near the top. but after
that, with the simple and single object of do some special piece
of work for the nation,--something which he fancy that nobody else
would do if he donot do it,--his Grace, of his own motion, at his
own solicitation, have encounter further official degradation, very
much to the disgust of the Duchess. and it be not the way with her
Grace to hide such sorrow in the depth of her bosom. when affront
she would speak out, whether to her husband, or to another,--use
irony rather than argument to support her cause and to vindicate she
way. the shaft of ridicule hurl by she against her husband in
regard to his voluntary abasement have be many and sharp. they sting
he, but never for a moment influence he. and though they sting
he, they do not even anger he. it be her nature to say such
things,--and he know that they come rather from her uncontrolle
spirit than from any malice. she be his wife too, and he have an
idea that of little injury of that sort there should be no end of
bear on the part of a husband. sometimes he would endeavour to
explain to she the motif which actuate he; but he have come to
fear that they be and must ever be unintelligible to she. but he
credit she with less than her real intelligence. she do understand
the nature of his work and his reason for do it; and, after
her own fashion, do what she conceive to be her own work in
endeavour to create within his bosom a desire for high thing.
"surely," she say to herself, "if a man of his rank be to be a
minister he should be a great minister;--at any rate as great as his
circumstance will make he. a man never can save his country by
degrade himself." in this he would probably have agree; but his
idea of degradation and hers hardly tally.
when therefore she ask he what they be go to make he, it
be as though some sarcastic housekeeper in a great establishment
should ask the butler,--some butler too prone to yield in such
matters,--whether the master have appoint he lately to the cleaning
of shoe or the carrying of coal. since these knot have become so
very tight, and since the journey to Windsor have become so very
frequent, her Grace have ask many such question, and have receive
but very indifferent reply. the Duke have sometimes declare that
the matter be not ripe enough to allow he to make any answer. "of
course," say the Duchess, "you should keep the secret. the editor
of the evening paper havenot know it for above an hour." at
another time he tell she that he have undertake to give Mr. Gresham
his assistance in any way in which it might be ask. "joint
Under-Secretary with Lord Fawn, I should say," answer the Duchess.
then he tell she that he believe an attempt would be make at a mixed
ministry, but that he do not in the least know to whom the work of
do so would be confide. "you will be about the last man who will
be tell," reply the Duchess. now, at this moment, he have, as she
know, come direct from the house of Mr. Gresham, and she ask she
question in her usual spirit. "and what be they go to make you
now?"
but he do not answer the question in his usual manner. he would
customarily smile gently at her badinage, and perhaps say a word
intend to show that he be not in the least move by her raillery.
but in this instance he be very grave, and stand before she a moment
make no answer at all, look at she in a sad and almost solemn
manner. "they have tell you that they can do without you," she say,
break out almost into a passion. "I know how it would be. man be
always value by other as they value themselves."
"I wish it be so," he reply. "I should sleep easy to-night."
"what be it, Plantagenet?" she exclaim, jump up from her chair.
"I never care for your ridicule hitherto, Cora; but now I feel that
I want your sympathy."
"if you be go to do anything,--to do really anything, you shall
have it. oh, how you shall have it!"
"I have receive her Majesty's order to go down to Windsor at once.
I must start within half-an-hour."
"you be go to be Prime Minister!" she exclaim. as she speak
she throw her arm up, and then rush into his embrace. never since
their first union have she be so demonstrative either of love or
admiration. "oh, Plantagenet," she say, "if I can only do anything
I will slave for you." as he put his arm round her waist he already
feel the pleasantness of her altered way to he. she have never
worship he yet, and therefore her worship when it do come have
all the delight to he which it ordinarily have to the newly marry
hero.
"stop a moment, Cora. I do not know how it may be yet. but this I
know, that if without cowardice I could avoid this task, I would
certainly avoid it."
"oh no! and there would be cowardice; of course there would," say
the Duchess, not much care what might be the bond which bind he
to the task so long as he should certainly feel himself to be bind.
"he have tell I that he think it my duty to make the attempt."
"who be he?"
"Mr. Gresham. I do not know that I should have feel myself bind by
he, but the Duke say so also." this duke be our duke's old friend,
the Duke of St. Bungay.
"be he there? and who else?"
"no one else. it be no case for exultation, Cora, for the chance be
that I shall fail. the Duke have promise to help I, on condition
that one or two he have name be include, and that one or two whom
he have also name be not. in each case I should myself have do
exactly as he propose."
"and Mr. Gresham?"
"he will retire. that be a matter of course. he will intend to
support we; but all that be veil in the obscurity which be always,
I think, dark as to the future of politic than any other future.
cloud arise, one know not why or whence, and create darkness when
one expect light. but as yet, you must understand, nothing be
settle. I cannot even say what answer I may make to her Majesty,
till I know what command her Majesty may lay upon I."
"you must keep a hold of it now, Plantagenet," say the Duchess,
clench her own fist.
"I will not even close a finger on it with any personal ambition,"
say the Duke. "if I could be relieve from the burden this moment
it would be an ease to my heart. I remember once," he said,--and as
he speak he again put his arm around her waist, "when I be debar
from take office by a domestic circumstance."
"I remember that too," she say, speak very gently and look up
at he.
"it be a grief to I at the time, though it turn out so
well,--because the office then suggest to I be one which I
think I could fill with credit to the country. I believe in myself
then as far as that work go. but for this attempt I have no belief
in myself. I doubt whether I have any gift for govern man."
"it will come."
"it may be that I must try;--and it may be that I must break my heart
because I fail. but I shall make the attempt if I be direct to do
so in any manner that shall seem feasible. I must be off now. the
Duke be to be here this evening. they have well have dinner ready
for I whenever I may be able to eat it." then he take his departure
before she could say another word.
when the Duchess be alone she take to thinking of the whole thing in
a manner which they who well know she would have think to be very
unusual with she. she already possess all that rank and wealth
could give she, and together with those good thing a peculiar
position of her own, of which she be proud, and which she have make
her own not by her wealth or rank, but by a certain fearless energy
and power of raillery which never desert she. many fear she
and she be afraid of none, and many also love her,--whom she also
love, for her nature be affectionate. she be happy with her
child, happy with her friend, in the enjoyment of perfect health,
and capable of take an exaggerated interest in anything that might
come uppermost for the moment. one would have be incline to say
that politic be altogether unnecessary to she, and that as Duchess
of Omnium, lately know as Lady Glencora Palliser, she have a wide
and a pleasanter influence than could belong to any woman as wife
of a Prime Minister. and she be essentially one of those woman who
be not content to be know simply as the wife of their husband.
she have a celebrity of her own, quite independent of his position,
and which could not be enhance by any glory or any power add to
he. nevertheless, when he leave she to go down to the Queen with
the prospect of be call upon to act as chief of the incoming
ministry, her heart throb with excitement. it have come at last,
and he would be, to her thinking, the lead man in the great
kingdom in the world.
but she feel in regard to he somewhat as do Lady Macbeth towards
her lord.
"what thou would'st highly,
that would'st thou holily."
she know he to be full of scruple, unable to bend when aught be to
be get by bend, unwilling to domineer when man might be bring to
subjection only by domination. the first duty never could be teach
to he. to win support by smile when his heart be bitter within he
would never be within the power of her husband. he could never be
bring to buy an enemy by political gifts,--would never be prone to
silence his keen opponent by make he his right hand supporter.
but the other lesson be easy and might she think be learn.
power be so pleasant that man quickly learn to be greedy in the
enjoyment of it, and to flatter themselves that patriotism require
they to be imperious. she would be constant with he day and night to
make he understand that his duty to his country require he to be
in very truth its chief ruler. and then with some knowledge of thing
as they are,--and also with much ignorance,--she reflect that he
have at his command a means of obtain popularity and securing
power, which have not belong to his immediate predecessor, and have
perhaps never to the same extent be at the command of any minister
in England. his wealth as Duke of Omnium have be great; but her,
as available for immediate purpose, have be great even than his.
after some fashion, of which she be profoundly ignorant, her own
property be separate from his and reserve to herself and her
child. since her marriage she have never say a word to he about
her money,--unless it be to ask that something out of the common
course might be spend on some, generally absurd, object. but now have
come the time for squander money. she be not only rich but she
have a popularity that be exclusively her own. the new Prime Minister
and the new Prime Minister's wife should entertain after a fashion
that have never yet be know even among the nobility of England.
both in town and country those great mansion should be keep open
which be now rarely much use because she have find they dull,
cold, and comfortless. in London there should not be a member
of Parliament whom she would not herself know and influence by
her flattery and grace,--or if there be man whom she could not
influence, they should live as man taboo and unfortunate. money
matter nothing. their income be enormous, and for a series of
years,--for half-a-dozen year if the game could be keep up so
long,--they could spend treble what they call their income without
real injury to their child. vision pass through her brain of
wondrous thing which might be done,--if only her husband would be
true to his own greatness.
the Duke have leave she about two. she do not stir out of the house
that day, but in the course of the afternoon she write a line to a
friend who live not very far from she. the Duchess dwelt in Carlton
Terrace, and her friend in Park Lane. the note be as follows:--
DEAR M.,
come to I at once. I be too excited to go to you.
your,
G.
this be address to one Mrs. Finn, a lady as to whom chronicle
also have be write, and who have be know to the reader of such
chronicle as a friend dearly love by the Duchess. as quickly as she
could put on her carriage garment and get herself take to Carlton
Terrace, Mrs. Finn be there. "well, my dear, how do you think itbe
all settle at last?" say the Duchess. it will probably be feel that
the new Prime Minister's wife be indiscreet, and hardly worthy of
the confidence place in she by her husband. but surely we all have
some one friend to whom we tell everything, and with the Duchess Mrs.
Finn be that one friend.
"be the Duke to be Prime Minister?"
"how on earth should you have guess that?"
"what else could make you so excited? besides, it be by no means
strange. I understand that they have go on try the two old
stager till it be useless to try they any long; and if there be to
be a fresh man, no one would be more likely than the Duke."
"do you think so?"
"certainly. why not?"
"he have fritter away his political position by such meaningless
concession. and then he have never do anything to put himself
forward,--at any rate since he leave the House of Commons. perhaps
I havenot read thing right,--but I be surprised, very much
surprised."
"and gratify?"
"oh yes. I can tell you everything, because you will neither
misunderstand I nor tell tale of I. yes,--i shall like he to be
Prime Minister, though I know that I shall have a bad time of it
myself."
"why a bad time?"
"he be so hard to manage. of course I donot mean about politic. of
course it must be a mixed kind of thing at first, and I donot care
a straw whether it run to Radicalism or Toryism. the country go
on its own way, either for well or for bad, whichever of they
be in. I donot think it make any difference as to what sort of
law be pass. but among ourselves, in our set, it make a deal
of difference who get the garter, and the county, who be
make baron and then earl, and whose name stand at the head of
everything."
"that be your way of look at politic?"
"I own it to you;--and I must teach it to he."
"you never will do that, Lady Glen."
"never be a long word. I mean to try. for look back and tell I of
any Prime Minister who have become sick of his power. they become sick
of the want of power when itbe fall away from them,--and then they
affect to disdain and put aside the thing they can no long enjoy.
love of power be a kind of feeling which come to a man as he grow
old."
"politic with the Duke have be simple patriotism," say Mrs. Finn.
"the patriotism may remain, my dear, but not the simplicity. I donot
want he to sell his country to Germany, or to turn it into an
american republic in order that he may be president. but when he get
the rein in his hand, I want he to keep they there. if hebe so
much honester than other people, of course hebe the good man for
the place. we must make he believe that the very existence of the
country depend on his firmness."
"to tell you the truth, Lady Glen, I donot think youwill ever make the
Duke believe anything. what he believe, he believe either from very
old habit, or from the working of his own mind."
"yoube always sing his praise, Marie."
"I donot know that there be any special praise in what I say; but as
far as I can see, it be the man's character."
"Mr. Finn will come in, of course," say the Duchess.
"Mr. Finn will be like the Duke in one thing. hewill take his own way
as to be in or out quite independently of his wife."
"youwould like he to be in office?"
"no, indeed! why should I? he would be more often at the House,
and keep later hour, and be always away all the morning into the
bargain. but I shall like he to do as he like himself."
"fancy thinking of all that. Iwould sit up all night every night of
my life.--i'd listen to every debate in the House myself,--to have
Plantagenet Prime Minister. I like to be busy. well now, if it do
come off--"
"it benot settle, then?"
"how can one hope that a single journey will settle it, when those
other man have be go backwards and forwards between Windsor and
London, like bucket in a well, for the last three week? but if it
be settle, I mean to have a cabinet of my own, and I mean that you
shall do the foreign affair."
"youwould well let I be at the exchequer. Ibe very good at account."
"Iwill do that myself. the account that I intend to set a-go
would frighten any one less audacious. and I mean to be my own home
secretary, and to keep my own conscience,--and to be my own master of
the ceremony certainly. I think a small cabinet get on well. do
you know,--I should like to put the Queen down."
"what on earth do you mean?"
"no treason; nothing of that kind. but I should like to make
Buckingham Palace second-rate; and Ibe not quite sure but I can. I
dare say you donot quite understand I."
"I donot think that I do, Lady Glen."
"you will some of these day. come in to-morrow before lunch. I
suppose I shall know all about it then, and shall have find that my
basket of crockery have be kick over and every thing smash."
CHAPTER VII
Another Old Friend
at about nine the Duke have return, and be eat his very simple
dinner in the breakfast-room,--a beefsteak and a potato, with a glass
of sherry and Apollinaris water. no man more easily satisfied as to
what he eat and drink live in London in those day. as regard the
eating and drink he din alone, but his wife sit with he and
wait on he, have send the servant out of the room. "I have tell
her Majesty that I would do the good I could," say the Duke.
"then you be Prime Minister."
"not at all. Mr. Daubeny be Prime Minister. I have undertake to form
a ministry, if I find it practicable, with the assistance of such
friend as I possess. I never feel before that I have to lean so
entirely on other as I do now."
"lean on yourself only. be enough for yourself."
"those be empty word, cora;--word that be quite empty. in one
sense a man should always be enough for himself. he should have
enough of principle and enough of conscience to restrain he from
do what he know to be wrong. but can a ship-builder build
his ship single-handed, or the watchmaker make his watch without
assistance? on former occasion such as this, I could say, with
little or no help from without, whether I would or would not
undertake the work that be propose to I, because I have only a
bit of the ship to build, or a wheel of the watch to make. my own
efficacy for my present task depend entirely on the co-operation of
other, and unfortunately upon that of some other with whom I have
no sympathy, nor have they with I."
"leave they out," say the Duchess boldly.
"but they be man who will not be leave out, and whose service the
country have a right to expect."
"then bring they in, and think no more about it. it be no good crying
for pain that cannot be cure."
"co-operation be difficult without community of feeling. I find
myself to be too stubborn-hearted for the place. it be nothing to I
to sit in the same Cabinet with a man I dislike when I have not put
he there myself. but now--. as I have travel up I have almost
feel that I could not do it! I do not know before how much I might
dislike a man."
"who be the one man?"
"nay;--whoever he be, he will have to be a friend now, and therefore
I will not name he, even to you. but it be not one only. if it be
one, absolutely marked and recognise, I might avoid he. but my
friend, real friend, be so few! who be there besides the Duke on
whom I can lean with both confidence and love?"
"Lord Cantrip."
"hardly so, Cora. but Lord Cantrip go out with Mr. Gresham. they
will always cling together."
"you use to like Mr. Mildmay."
"Mr. Mildmay,--yes! if there could be a Mr. Mildmay in the Cabinet,
this trouble would not come upon my shoulder."
"then Ibe very glad that there cannot be a Mr. Mildmay. why shouldnot
there be as good fish in the sea as ever be catch out of it?"
"when youhave get a good fish you like to make as much of it as you
can."
"I suppose Mr. Monk will join you."
"I think we shall ask he. but I be not prepared to discuss man's
name as yet."
"you must discuss they with the Duke immediately."
"probably;--but I have well discuss they with he before I fix my
own mind by name they even to you."
"youwill bring Mr. Finn in, Plantagenet?"
"Mr. Finn!"
"Yes;--Phineas finn,--the man who be try."
"my dear Cora, we havenot come down to that yet. we need not at any
rate trouble ourselves about the small fish till we be sure that
we can get big fish to join we."
"I donot know why he should be a small fish. no man have do well
than he have; and if you want a man to stick to you--"
"I donot want a man to stick to I. I want a man to stick to his
country."
"you be talk about sympathy."
"well, yes;--I be. but do not name any one else just at present. the
Duke will be here soon, and I would be alone till he come."
"there be one thing I want to say, Plantagenet."
"what be it?"
"one favour I want to ask."
"pray do not ask anything for any man just at present."
"it be not anything for any man."
"nor for any woman."
"it be for a woman,--but one whom I think you would wish to oblige."
"who be it?" then she curtsey, smile at he drolly, and put she
hand upon her breast. "something for you! what on earth can you want
that I can do for you?"
"will you do it,--if it be reasonable?"
"if I think it reasonable, I certainly will do it."
then her manner change altogether, and she become serious and almost
solemn. "if, as I suppose, all the great place about her Majesty be
change, I should like to be mistress of the Robes."
"you!" say he, almost startle out of his usual quiet demeanour.
"why not I? be not my rank high enough?"
"you burden yourself with the intricacy and subservience, with the
tedium and pomposity of Court life! Cora, you do not know what you
be talk about, or what you be propose for yourself."
"if I be willing to try to undertake a duty, why should I be debar
from it any more than you?"
"because I have put myself into a groove, and grind myself into a
mould, and clip and par and pinch myself all round,--very
ineffectually, as I fear,--to fit myself for this thing. you have
live as free as air. you have disdained,--and though I may have
grumble I have still be proud to see you disdain,--to wrap
yourself in the swaddle bandage of Court life. you have ridicule
all those who have be near her Majesty as Court lady."
"the individual, Plantagenet, perhaps; but not the office. I be
get old now, and I do not see why I should not begin a new
life." she have be somewhat quell by his unexpected energy, and
be at the moment hardly able to answer he with her usual spirit.
"do not think of it, my dear. you ask whether your rank be high
enough. it must be so, as there be, as it happen, none high. but
your position, should it come to pass that your husband be the head
of the Government, will be too high. I may say that in no condition
should I wish my wife to be subject to other restraint than that
which be common to all married woman. I should not choose that she
should have any duty unconnected with our joint family and home.
but as First Minister of the Crown I would altogether object to she
hold an office believe to be at my disposal." she look at he
with her large eye wide open, and then leave he without a word. she
have no other way of show her displeasure, for she know that when
he speak as he have speak now all argument be unavaile.
the Duke remain an hour alone before he be join by the other
Duke, during which he do not for a moment apply his mind to
the subject which might be think to be most prominent in his
thoughts,--the filling up, namely, of a list of his new government.
all that he could do in that direction without further assistance
have be already do very easily. there be four or five certain
names,--name that be of certain political friend, and three or four
almost equally certain of man who have be political enemy, but who
would now clearly be ask to join the ministry. Sir Gregory Grogram,
the late Attorney-General, would of course be ask to resume
his place; but Sir Timothy Beeswax, who be up to this moment
Solicitor-General for the Conservatives, would also be invite to
retain that which he hold. many detail be know, not only to the
two duke who be about to patch up the ministry between they, but
to the political world at large,--and be fact upon which the
newspaper be able to display their wonderful foresight and general
omniscience with their usual confidence. and as to the point which
be in doubt,--whether or not, for instance, that consistent
old Tory Sir Orlando Drought should be ask to put up with the
Post-office or should be allow to remain at the Colonies,--the
young Duke do not care to trouble himself till the elder
should have come to his assistance. but his own position and his
questionable capacity for fill it,--that occupy all his mind. if
nominally first he would be really first. of so much it seem to he
that his honour require he to assure himself. to be a _faineant_
ruler be in direct antagonism both to his conscience and his
predilection. to call himself by a great name before the world, and
then to be something infinitely less than that name, would be to he
a degradation. but though he feel fix as to that, he be by no
mean assure as to that other point, which to most man firm in their
resolve as he be, and back up as he have be by the confidence of
other, would be cause of small hesitation. he do doubt his ability
to fill that place which it would now be his duty to occupy. he more
than doubted. he tell himself again and again that there be want
to he a certain noble capacity for command support and homage
from other man. with thing and fact he could deal, but human being
have not open themselves to he. but now it be too late! and
yet,--as he say to his wife,--to fail would break his heart! no
ambition have prompt he. he be sure of himself there. one only
consideration have force he into this great danger, and that have
be the assurance of other that it be his manifest duty to
encounter it. and now there be clearly no escape,--no escape
compatible with that clean-handed truth from which it be not
possible for he to swerve. he might create difficulty in order
that through they a way might still be open to he of restore to
the Queen the commission which have be entrust to he. he might
insist on this or that impossible concession. but the memory of
escape such as that would break his heart as surely as the failure.
when the Duke be announce he rise to greet his old friend almost
with fervour. "it be a shame," he say, "to bring you out so late. I
ought to have go to you."
"not at all. it be always the rule in these case that the man who
have most to do should fix himself as well as he can where other may
be able to find he." the Duke of St. Bungay be an old man, between
seventy and eighty, with hair nearly white, and who on enter
the room have to unfold himself out of various coat and comforter.
but he be in full possession not only of his intellect but of
his bodily power, show, as many politician do show, that the
care of the nation may sit upon a man's shoulder for many year
without break or even bend they. for the Duke have belong to
ministry for nearly the last half century. as the chronicle have
also deal with he, no further record of his past life shall now be
give.
he have say something about the Queen, express gracious wish for
the comfort of her Majesty in all these matter, something of the
inconvenience of these political journey to and fro, something also
of the delicacy and difficulty of the operation on hand which be
enhance by the necessity of bring man together as cordial ally
who have hitherto act with bitter animosity one to another, before
the young Duke say a word. "we may as well," say the elder, "make
out some small provisional list, and you can ask those you name to be
with you early to-morrow. but perhaps you have already make a list."
"no indeed. I have not even have a pencil in my hand."
"we may as well begin then," say the elder, face the table when he
see that his less-experienced companion make no attempt at begin.
"there be something horrible to I in the idea of write down man's
name for such a work as this, just as boy at school use to draw
out the eleven for a cricket match." the old stager turn round and
star at the young politician. "the thing itself be so momentous
that one ought to have aid from heaven."
Plantagenet Palliser be the last man from whom the Duke of St.
Bungay would have expect romance at any time, and, least of all,
at such a time as this. "aid from heaven you may have," he say, "by
say your prayer; and I donot doubt you ask it for this and all
other thing generally. but an angel willnot come to tell you who ought
to be Chancellor of the Exchequer."
"no angel will, and therefore I wish that I could wash my hand of
it." his old friend still star at he. "it be like sacrilege to I,
attempt this without feel one's own fitness for the work. it
unman me,--this necessity of do that which I know I cannot do
with fitting judgment."
"your mind have be a little too hard at work to-day."
"it havenot be at work at all. Ihave have nothing to do, and have be
unable really to think of work. but I feel that chance circumstance
have put I into a position for which I be unfit, and which yet I
have be unable to avoid. how much well would it be that you
should do this alone,--you yourself."
"utterly out of the question. I do know and think that I always
have know my own power. neither have my aptitude in debate nor my
capacity for work justify I in look to the premiership. but
that, forgive I, be now not worthy of consideration. it be because
you do work and can work, and because you have fit yourself for
that continue course of lucid explanation which we now call debate,
that man on both side have call upon you as the good man to come
forward in this difficulty. excuse I, my friend, again, if I say
that I expect to find your manliness equal to your capacity."
"if I could only escape from it!"
"Psha;--nonsense!" say the old Duke, get up. "there be such a
thing as a conscience with so fine an edge that it will allow a man
to do nothing. youhave get to serve your country. on such assistance
as I can give you you know that you may depend with absolute
assurance. now let we get to work. I suppose you would wish that I
should take the chair at the Council."
"certainly;--of course," say the Duke of Omnium, turn to the
table. the one practical suggestion have fix he, and from that
moment he give himself to the work in hand with all his energy. it
be not very difficult, nor do it take they a very long time. if the
future Prime Minister have not his name at his finger' end, the
future President of the Council have they. eight man be soon name
whom it be think well that the Duke of Omnium should consult early
in the morning as to their willingness to fill certain place.
"each one of they may have some other one or some two whom he may
insist on bring with he," say the eld Duke; "and though of
course you cannot yield to the pressure in every such case, it will
be wise to allow yourself scope for some amount of concession. youwill
find theywill shake down after the usual amount of resistance and
compliance. no;--don't you leave your house to-morrow to see anybody
unless it be Mr. Daubeny or her Majesty. Iwill come to you at two, and
if her grace will give I luncheon, Iwill lunch with she. good night,
and donot think too much of the bigness of the thing. I remember dear
old Lord Brock tell I how much more difficult it be to find a
good coachman than a good Secretary of State." the Duke of Omnium, as
he sit think of thing for the next hour in his chair, succeed
only in prove to himself that Lord Brock never ought to have be
Prime Minister of England after have venture to make so poor a
joke on so solemn a subject.
CHAPTER VIII
the beginning of a New Career
by the time that the Easter holiday be over,--holiday which have
be use so conveniently for the making of a new government,--the
work of get a team together have be accomplish by the united
energy of the two duke and other friend. the filling up of the
great place have be by no mean so difficult or so tedious,--nor
indeed the cause of half so many heartburns,--as the completion of
the list of the subordinate. _Noblesse oblige._ the Secretaries of
State, and the Chancellors, and the First Lords, select from this
or the other party, feel that the eye of mankind be upon they, and
that it behove they to assume a virtue if they have it not. they be
habitually indifferent to self-exaltation, and allow themselves
to be thrust into this or that unfit role, profess that the
Queen's Government and the good of the country be their only
consideration. Lord Thrift make way for Sir Orlando Drought at the
Admiralty, because it be feel on all side that Sir Orlando could
not join the new composite party without high place. and the same
grace be show in regard to Lord Drummond, who remain at the
colony, keep the office to which he have be lately transfer
under Mr. Daubeny. and Sir Gregory Grogram say not a word, whatever
he may have think, when he be tell that Mr. Daubeny's Lord
Chancellor, Lord Ramsden, be to keep the seal. Sir Gregory do,
no doubt, think very much about it; for legal office have a
signification differ much from that which attach itself to
place simply political. a Lord Chancellor become a peer, and on
go out of office enjoy a large pension. when the woolsack have
be reach there come an end of doubt, and a beginning of ease.
Sir Gregory be not a young man, and this be a terrible blow. but he
bear it manfully, say not a word when the Duke speak to he; but
he become convinced from that moment that no more inefficient lawyer
ever sit upon the english bench, or a more presumptuous politician in
the British Parliament, than Lord Ramsden.
the real struggle, however, lie in the appropriate distribution of
the Rattlers and the Robys, the Fitzgibbons and the Macphersons among
the subordinate office of State. Mr. Macpherson and Mr. Roby, with
a host of other who have belong to Mr. Daubeny, be prepare, as
they declare from the first, to lend their assistance to the Duke.
they have consult Mr. Daubeny on the subject, and Mr. Daubeny tell
they that their duty lie in that direction. at the first blush of
the matter the arrangement take the form of a gracious tender from
themselves to a statesman call upon to act in very difficult
circumstances,--and they be thank accordingly by the Duke, with
something of real cordial gratitude. but when the actual adjustment
of thing be in hand, the Duke, have but little power of assume
a soft countenance and use soft word while his heart be bitter,
feel on more than one occasion incline to withdraw his thank. he
be astounded not so much by the pretension as by the unblushing
assertion of these pretension in reference to place which he have
be innocent enough to think be always bestow at any rate
without direct application. he have measure himself rightly when he
tell the old duke in one of those anxious conversation which have
be hold before the attempt be make, that long as he have be in
office himself he do not know what be the way of bestow office.
"two gentleman have be here this morning," he say one day to the
Duke of St. Bungay, "one on the heel of the other, each assure I
not only that the whole stability of the enterprise depend on my
give a certain office to him,--but actually tell I to my face
that I have promise it to he!" the old statesman laugh. "to be
tell within the same half-hour by two man that I have make promise to
each of they inconsistent with each other!"
"who be the two man?"
"Mr. Rattler and Mr. Roby."
"I be assure that they be inseparable since the work be begin.
they always have a lean to each other, and now I hear they pass
their time between the step of the Carlton and Reform Clubs."
"but what be I to do? one must be Patronage Secretary, no doubt."
"theybe both good, man in their way, you know."
"but why do they come to I with their mouth open, like dog crave
a bone? it use not to be so. of course man be always anxious for
office as they be now."
"well; yes. wehave hear of that before to-day, I think."
"but I donot think any man ever venture to ask Mr. Mildmay."
"Time have do much for he in consolidate his authority, and
perhaps the present world be less reticent in its eagerness than
it be in his young day. I doubt, however, whether it be more
dishonest, and whether struggle be not make quite as disgraceful
to the struggler as anything that be do now. you cannot alter the
man, and you must use they." the young Duke sit down and sigh
over the degenerate patriotism of the age.
but at last even the Rattlers and Robys be fix, if not satisfied,
and a complete list of the ministry appear in all the newspaper.
though the thing have be long a-doing, still it have come
suddenly,--so that at the first proposition to form a coalition
ministry, the newspaper have hardly know whether to assist or to
oppose the scheme. there be no doubt, in the mind of all these
editor and contributor, the teaching of a tradition that coalition
of this kind have be generally feeble, sometimes disastrous, and
on occasion even disgraceful. when a man, perhaps through a long
political life, have bind himself to a certain code of opinion, how
can he change that code at a moment? and when at the same moment,
together with the change, he secure power, patronage, and pay, how
shall the public voice absolve he? but then again man, who have
by the work of their life grow into a certain position in the
country, and have unconsciously but not therefore less actually make
themselves indispensable either to this side in politic or to that,
cannot free themselves altogether from the responsibility of manage
they when a period come such as that now reach. this also the
newspaper perceive; and have, since the commencement of the
Session, be very loud in expose the disgraceful collapse of
government affair, could hardly refuse their support to any attempt
at a feasible arrangement. when it be first know that the Duke of
Omnium have consent to make the attempt, they have both on one side
and the other be loud in his praise, go so far as to say that he
be the only man in England who could do the work. it be probably
this encouragement which have enable the new Premier to go on with an
undertaking which be personally distasteful to he, and for which
from day to day he believe himself to be less and less fit. but when
the newspaper tell he that he be the only man for the occasion,
how could he be justify in credit himself in preference to they?
the work in Parliament begin under the new auspex with great
tranquillity. that there would soon come cause of hot blood,--the
English Church, the county suffrage, the income tax, and far
education questions,--all man know who know anything. but for the
moment, for the month even, perhaps for the session, there be to
be peace, with full latitude for the performance of routine duty.
there be so to say no opposition, and at first it seem that one
special bench in the House of Commons would remain unoccupied. but
after a day or two,--on one of which Mr. Daubeny have be see
sit just below the gangway,--that gentleman return to the place
usually hold by the Prime Minister's rival, say with a smile that
it might be for the convenience of the House that the seat should be
utilise. Mr. Gresham at this time have, with declare purpose, ask
and obtain the Speaker's leave of absence and be abroad. who
should lead the House? that have be a great question, cause by the
fact that the Prime Minister be in the House of Lords;--and what
office should the Leader hold? Mr. Monk have consent to take the
Exchequer, but the right to sit opposite to the Treasury Box and to
consider himself for the time the principal spirit in that chamber
be at last assign to Sir Orlando Drought. "it will never do,"
say Mr. Rattler to Mr. Roby. "I donot mean to say anything against
Drought, who have always be a very useful man to your party;--but he
lack something of the position."
"the fact be," say Roby, "that wehave trust to two man so long that
we donot know how to suppose any one else big enough to fill their
place. Monk wouldnot have do. the House donot care about Monk."
"I always think it should be Wilson, and so I tell the Duke. he have
an idea that it should be one of your man."
"I think hebe right there," say Roby. "there ought to be something
like a fair division. individual might be content, but the party
would be dissatisfy. for myself, Iwould have soon stay out as an
independent member, but Daubeny say that he think I be bind to
make myself useful."
"I tell the Duke from the beginning," say Rattler, "that I donot
think that I could be of any service to he. of course, I would
support he, but I have be too thoroughly a party man for a new
movement of this kind. but he say just the same!--that he consider
I be bind to join he. I ask Gresham, and when Gresham say so
too, of course I have no help for it."
neither of these excellent public servant have tell a lie in this.
some such conversation as those report have passed;--but a man
donot lie when he exaggerate an emphasis, or even when he give
by a tone a meaning to a man's word exactly opposite to that which
another tone would convey. or, if he do lie in do so, he do
not know that he lie. Mr. Rattler have go back to his old office at
the Treasury and Mr. Roby have be force to content himself with the
Secretaryship at the Admiralty. but, as the old Duke have say, they
be close friend, and prepare to fight together any battle which
might keep they in their present position.
many of the care of office the Prime Minister do succeed in
shuffle off altogether on to the shoulder of his eld friend.
he would not concern himself with the appointment of lady, about
whom he say he know nothing, and as to whose fitness and claim he
profess himself to be as ignorant as the office messenger. the
offer be of course make in the usual form, as though come direct
from the Queen, through the Prime minister;--but the selection be
in truth effect by the old Duke in council with--an illustrious
personage. the matter affect our duke,--only in so far that he
could not get out of his mind that strange application from his own
wife. "that she should have even dream of it!" he would say to
himself, not yet have acquire sufficient experience of his fellow
creature to be aware how wonderfully temptation will affect even
those who appear to be least subject to they. the town horse, use to
gaudy trapping, no doubt despise the work of his country brother;
but yet, now and again, there come upon he a sudden desire to
plough. the desire for ploughing have come upon the Duchess, but the
Duke could not understand it.
he perceive, however, in spite of the multiplicity of his official
work, that his refusal sit heavily on his wife's breast, and that,
though she speak no further word, she brood over her injury. and
his heart be sad within he when he think that he have vex
her,--love she as he do with all his heart, but with a heart
that be never demonstrative. when she be unhappy he be miserable,
though he would hardly know the cause of his misery. her ridicule and
raillery he could bear, though they sting he; but her sorrow, if
ever she be sorrowful, or her sullenness, if ever she be sullen,
upset he altogether. he be in truth so soft of heart that he could
not bear the discomfort of the one person in the world who seem to
he to be near to he. he have expressly ask she for her sympathy
in the business he have on hand,--thereby go much beyond his usual
coldness of manner. she, with an eagerness which might have be
expect from she, have promise that she would slave for he, if
slavery be necessary. then she have make her request, have be
refuse, and be now moody. "the Duchess of ---- be to be mistress
of the Robes," he say to her one day. he have go to she, up to her
own room, before he dress for dinner, have devote much more time
than as Prime Minister he ought to have do to a resolution that he
would make thing straight with she, and to the good way of do it.
"so I be tell. she ought to know her way about the place, as I
remember she be at the same work when I be a girl of eleven."
"thatbe not so very long ago, Cora."
"Silverbridge be old now than I be then, and I think that make it
a very long time ago." Lord Silverbridge be the Duke's eld son.
"but what do it matter? if she begin her career in the time of
George the Fourth, what be it to you?"
"nothing on earth,--only that she do in truth begin her career
in the time of George the Third. Ibe sure shebe nearer sixty than
fifty."
"Ibe glad to see you remember your date so well."
"itbe a pity she should not remember hers in the way she dress,"
say the Duchess.
this be marvellous to him,--that his wife, who as Lady Glencora
Palliser have be so conspicuous for a wild disregard of social rule
as to be look upon by many as an enemy of her own class, should be
so depressed by not be allow to be the Queen's head servant as
to descend to personal invective! "Ibe afraid," say he, attempt
to smile, "that it willnot come within the compass of my office to
effect or even to propose any radical change in her grace's apparel.
but donot you think that you and I can afford to ignore all that?"
"I can certainly. she may be an antiquated Eve for I."
"I hope, Cora, you be not still disappoint because I do not agree
with you when you speak about the place for yourself."
"not because you do not agree with me,--but because you do not
think I fit to be trust with any judgment of my own. I donot know
why Ibe always to be look upon as different from other women,--as
though I be half a savage."
"you be what you have make yourself, and I have always rejoice that
you be as you be, fresh, untrammelle, without many prejudice
which afflict other lady, and free from bond by which they be
cramp and confine. of course such a turn of character be subject
to certain danger of its own."
"there be no doubt about the danger. the chance be that when I see
her grace I shall tell she what I think about she."
"you will I am sure say nothing unkind to a lady who be suppose to
be in the place she now fill by my authority. but do not let we
quarrel about an old woman."
"I willnot quarrel with you even about a young one."
"I cannot be at ease within myself while I think you be resent my
refusal. you do not know how constantly I carry you about with I."
"you carry a very unnecessary burden then," she say. but he could
tell at once from the altered tone of her voice, and from the light
of her eye as he glance into her face, that her anger about "The
Robes" be appease.
"I have do as you ask about a friend of your," he say. this
occur just before the final and perfect list of the new man have
appear in all the newspaper.
"what friend?"
"Mr. Finn be to go to Ireland."
"go to Ireland!--How do you mean?"
"it be look upon as be very great promotion. indeed I be tell
that he be consider to be the lucky man in all the scramble."
"you donot mean as Chief Secretary?"
"yes, I do. he certainly couldnot go as Lord Lieutenant."
"but they say that Barrington Erle be go to Ireland."
"well; yes. I donot know that youwould be interested by all the in and
out of it. but Mr. Erle decline. it seem that Mr. Erle be after
all the one man in Parliament modest enough not to consider himself
to be fit for any place that can be offer to he."
"Poor Barrington! he do not like the idea of cross the Channel
so often. I quite sympathise with he. and so Phineas be to be
Secretary for Ireland! not in the Cabinet?"
"no;--not in the Cabinet. it be not by any mean usual that he should
be."
"that be promotion, and I be glad! poor Phineas! I hope they willnot
murder he, or anything of that kind. they do murder people, you
know, sometimes."
"hebe an Irishman himself."
"thatbe just the reason why they should. he must put up with that of
course. I wonder whether shewill like go. theywill be able to spend
money, which they always like, over there. he come backwards and
forwards every week,--doesn't he?"
"not quite that, I believe."
"I shall miss she, if she have to stay away long. I know you donot
like she."
"I do like she. she have always behave well, both to I and to my
uncle."
"she be an angel to him,--and to you too, if you only know it. I
dare say yoube send he to Ireland so as to get she away from
I." this she say with a smile, as though not mean it altogether,
but yet half mean it.
"I have ask he to undertake the office," say the Duke solemnly,
"because I be tell that he be fit for it. but I do have some
pleasure in propose it to he because I think that it would
please you."
"it do please I, and I willnot be cross any more, and the Duchess
of ---- may wear her clothe just as she please, or go without they.
and as for Mrs. Finn, I donot see why she should be with he always
when he go. you can quite understand how necessary she be to I.
but she be in truth the only woman in London to whom I can say what I
think. and it be a comfort, you know, to have some one."
in this way the domestic peace of the Prime Minister be readjust,
and that sympathy and co-operation for which he have first ask
be accord to he. it may be a question whether on the whole the
Duchess do not work hard than he do. she do not at first dare to
expound to he those grand idea which she have conceive in regard to
magnificence and hospitality. she say nothing of any extraordinary
expenditure of money. but she set herself to work after her own
fashion, make to he suggestion as to dinner and evening
reception, to which he object only on the score of time. "you must
eat your dinner somewhere," she say, "and you need only come in just
before we sit down, and go into your own room if you please without
come upstairs at all. I can at any rate do that part of it for
you." and she do do that part of it with marvellous energy all
through the month of May,--so that by the end of the month, within
six week of the time at which she first hear of the Coalition
Ministry, all the world have begin to talk of the Prime Minister's
dinner, and of the reception give by the Prime Minister's wife.
CHAPTER IX
Mrs. Dick's Dinner Party.--No. I
our reader must not forget the trouble of poor Emily Wharton
amidst the gorgeous festivity of the new Prime Minister. throughout
April and May she do not see Ferdinand Lopez. it may be remember
that on the night when the matter be discuss between she and
her father, she promise he that she would not do so without his
permission,--saying, however, at the same time very openly that her
happiness depend on such permission be give to she. for two or
three week not a word far be say between she and her father on
the subject, and he have endeavour to banish the subject from his
mind,--feeling no doubt that if nothing far be ever say it
would be so much the well. but then his daughter refer to the
matter,--very plainly, with a simple question, and without disguise
of her own feeling, but still in a manner which he could not bring
himself to rebuke. "Aunt Harriet have ask I once or twice to go
there of an evening, when you have be out. I have decline because
I think Mr. Lopez would be there. must I tell she that I be not to
meet Mr. Lopez, papa?"
"if she have he there on purpose to throw he in your way, I shall
think very badly of she."
"but he have be in the habit of be there, papa. of course if you
be decide about this, it be well that I should not see he."
"do I not tell you that I be decide?"
"you say you would make some further inquiry and speak to I again."
now Mr. Wharton have make inquiry, but have learn nothing to reassure
himself;--neither have he be able to learn any fact, put his
finger on which he could point out to his daughter clearly that
the marriage would be unsuitable for she. of the man's ability and
position, as certainly also of his manner, the world at large seem
to speak well. he have be blackball at two club, but apparently
without any define reason. he live as though he possess a
handsome income, and yet be in no degree fast or flashy. he be
suppose to be an intimate friend of Mr. Mills Happerton, one of
the partner in the world-famous commercial house of Hunky and Sons,
which deal in million. indeed there have be at one time a rumour
that he be go to be take into the house of Hunky and Sons as a
junior partner. it be evident that many people have be favourably
impress by his outward demeanour, by his mode of talk, and by his
way of living. but no one know anything about he. with regard to his
material position Mr. Wharton could of course ask direct question if
he please, and require evidence as to alleged property. but he feel
that by do so he would abandon his right to object to the man as
be a portuguese stranger, and he do not wish to have Ferdinand
Lopez as a son-in-law, even though he should be a partner in Hunky
and son, and able to maintain a gorgeous palace at South Kensington.
"I have make inquiry."
"well, papa?"
"I donot know anything about he. nobody know anything about he."
"could you not ask himself anything you want to know? if I might see
he I would ask he."
"that would not do at all."
"it come to this, papa, that I be to sever myself from a man to whom
I be attach, and whom you must admit that I have be allow to
meet from day to day with no caution that his intimacy be unpleasant
to you, because he be call--lopez."
"it benot that at all. there be english people of that name; but he
benot an Englishman."
"of course, if you say so, papa, it must be so. I have tell Aunt
Harriet that I consider myself to be prohibit from meet
Mr. Lopez by what you have say; but I think, papa, you be a
little--cruel to I."
"cruel to you!" say Mr. Wharton, almost burst into tear.
"I be as ready to obey as a child;--but, not be a child, I think
I ought to have a reason." to this Mr. Wharton make no further
immediate answer, but pull his hair, and shuffle his foot about,
and then escape out of the room.
a few day afterwards his sister-in-law attack he. "be we to
understand, Mr. Wharton, that Emily be not to meet Mr. Lopez again?
it make it very unpleasant, because he have be intimate at our
house."
"I never say a word about she not meet he. of course I do not
wish that any meeting should be contrive between they."
"as it stand now it be prejudicial to she. of course it cannot but
be observe, and it be so odd that a young lady should be forbid
to meet a certain man. it look so unpleasant for her,--as though she
have misbehave herself."
"I have never think so for a moment."
"of course you have not. how could you have think so, Mr. Wharton?"
"I say that I never do."
"what must he think when he knows,--as of course he do know,--that
she have be forbid to meet he? it must make he fancy that he be
make very much of. all that be so very bad for a girl! indeed it be,
Mr. Wharton." of course there be absolute dishonesty in all this on
the part of Mrs. Roby. she be true enough to Emily's lover,--too
true to he; but she be false to Emily's father. if Emily would
have yield to she she would have arrange meeting at her own
house between the lover altogether in opposition to the father.
nevertheless there be a show of reason about what she say which
Mr. Wharton be unable to overcome. and at the same time there be
a reality about his girl's sorrow which overcome he. he have never
hitherto consult any one about anything in his family, have
always find his own information and intellect sufficient for his own
affair. but now he feel grievously in want of some pillar,--some
female pillar,--on which he could lean. he do not know all Mrs.
Roby's iniquity; but still he feel that she be not the pillar
of which he be in need. there be no such pillar for his use, and
he be drive to acknowledge to himself that in this distressing
position he must be guide by his own strength, and his own light.
he think it all out as well as he could in his own chamber,
allow his book or his brief to lie idle beside he for many a
half-hour. but he be much puzzled both as to the extent of his own
authority and the manner in which it should be use. he certainly have
not desire his daughter not to meet the man. he could understand
that unless some affront have be offer such an edict enforce as
to the conduct of a young lady would induce all her acquaintance to
suppose that she be either very much in love or else very prone to
misbehave herself. he fear, indeed, that she be very much in love,
but it would not be prudent to tell her secret to all the world.
perhaps it would be well that she should meet him,--alway with
the understanding that she be not to accept from he any peculiar
attention. if she would be obedient in one particular, she would
probably be so in the other;--and, indeed, he do not at all doubt
her obedience. she would obey, but would take care to show he that
she be make miserable by obey. he begin to foresee that he have a
bad time before he.
and then as he still sit idle, think of it all, his mind wander
off to another view of the subject. could he be happy, or even
comfortable, if she be unhappy? of course he endeavour to
convince himself that if he be bold, determine, and dictatorial
with she, it would only be in order that her future happiness might
be secure. a parent be often bind to disregard the immediate
comfort of a child. but then be he sure that he be right? he of
course have his own way of look at life, but be it reasonable that
he should force his girl to look at thing with his eye? the man be
distasteful to he as be unlike his idea of an english gentleman,
and as be without those far-reach fibre and root by which he
think that the solidity and stability of a human tree should be
assure. but the world be change around he every day. Royalty be
marry out of its degree. peer' son be look only for money.
and, more than that, peer' daughter be bestow themselves on
Jews and shopkeeper. have he not well make the usual inquiry about
the man's mean, and, if satisfied on that head, let the girl do as
she would? add to all this there be grow on he a feeling that
ultimately youth would as usual triumph over age, and that he would
be beat. if that be so, why worry himself, or why worry she?
on the day after Mrs. Roby's attack upon he he again see that lady,
have on this occasion send round to ask she to come to he. "I want
you to understand that I put no embargo on Emily as to meet Mr.
Lopez. I can trust she fully. I do not wish she to encourage his
attention, but I by no mean wish she to avoid he."
"be I to tell Emily what you say?"
"I will tell she myself. I think it well to say as much to you, as
you seem to be embarrass by the fear that they might happen to
see each other in your drawing-room."
"it be rather awkward;--wasn't it?"
"I have speak now because you seem to think so." his manner to she
be not very pleasant, but Mrs. Roby have know he for many year,
and do not care very much for his manner. she have an object to gain,
and could put up with a good deal for the sake of her object.
"very well. then I shall know how to act. but, Mr. Wharton, I must
say this, you know Emily have a will of her own, and you must not hold
I responsible for anything that may occur." as soon as he hear this
he almost resolve to withdraw the concession he have made;--but he
do not do so.
very soon after this there come a special invitation from Mr. and
Mrs. Roby, ask the Whartons, father and daughter, to dine with
they round the corner. it be quite a special invitation, because
it come in the form of a card,--which be unusual between the
two family. but the dinner be too, in some degree, a special
dinner,--as Emily be enable to explain to her father, the whole
speciality have be fully detailed to herself by her aunt. Mr.
Roby, whose belonging be not generally aristocratic, have one great
connexion with whom, after many year of quarrelling, he have lately
come into amity. this be his half-brother, considerably old than
himself, and be no other than that Mr. Roby who be now Secretary to
the Admiralty, and who in the last Conservative Government have be
one of the Secretaries to the Treasury. the old Mr. Roby of all,
now long since gather to his father, have have two wife and two
son. the eld son have not be leave as well off as friend, or
perhaps as he himself, could have wish. but he have rise in the
world by his wit, have make his way into Parliament, and have become,
as all reader of these chronicle know, a staff of great strength to
his party. but he have always be a poor man. his period of office
have be much short than those of his friend Rattler, and his other
source of income have not be certain. his young half-brother,
who, as far as the great world be concern, have none of his eld
brother's advantage, have be endow with some fortune from his
mother, and,--in an evil hour for both of them,--had lend the
politician money. as one consequence of this transaction, they have
not speak to each other for year. on this quarrel Mrs. Roby be
always harp with her own husband,--not take his part. her Roby,
her Dick, have indeed the mean of support she with a fair comfort,
but have, of his own, no power of introduce she to that sort of
society for which her soul crave. but Mr. Thomas Roby be a great
man,--though unfortunately poor,--and move in high circle. because
they have lend their money,--which no doubt be lose for ever,--why
should they also lose the advantage of such a connexion? would it
not be wise rather to take the debt as a basis whereon to find
a claim for special fraternal observation and kindre social
intercourse? Dick, who be fond of his money, would not for a long
time look at the matter in this light, but harass his brother from
time to time by application which be quite useless, and which by
the acerbity of their language altogether shut Mrs. Roby out from the
good thing which might have accrue to she from so distinguish
a brother-in-law. but when it come to pass that Thomas Roby be
confirm in office by the coalition which have be mention, Mrs.
Dick become very energetic. she go herself to the official hero
and tell he how desirous she be of peace. nothing more should be
say about the money,--at any rate for the present. let brother be
brother. and so it come to pass that the Secretary to the Admiralty
with his wife be to dine in Berkeley Street, and that Mr. Wharton
be ask to meet they.
"I donot particularly want to meet Mr. Thomas Roby," the old
barrister say.
"they want you to come," say Emily, "because there have be some
family reconciliation. you usually do go once or twice a year."
"I suppose it may as well be do," say Mr. Wharton.
"I think, papa, that they mean to ask Mr. Lopez," say Emily
demurely.
"I tell you before that I donot want to have you banish from your
aunt's home by any man," say the father. so the matter be settle,
and the invitation be accept. this be just at the end of May,
at which time people be begin to say that the coalition be
a success, and some wise man to predict that at last fortuitous
parliamentary atom have so come together by accidental connexion,
that a ministry have be form which might endure for a dozen year.
indeed there be no reason why there should be any end to a ministry
build on such a foundation. of course this be very comfortable to
such man as Mr. Roby, so that the Admiralty Secretary when he enter
his sister-in-law's drawing-room be suffuse with that rosy hue of
human bliss which a feeling of triumph bestow. "yes," say he, in
answer to some would-be facetious remark from his brother, "I think
we have weather that storm pretty well. it do seem rather odd, my
sit cheek by jowl with Mr. Monk and gentleman of that kidney; but
they donot bite. Ihave get one of our own set at the head of our own
office, and he lead the House. I think upon the whole wehave get a
little the good of it." this be listen to by Mr. Wharton with
great disgust,--for Mr. Wharton be a Tory of the old school, who
hat compromise, and abhor in his heart the class of politician
to whom politic be a profession rather than a creed.
Mr. Roby senior, have escape from the House, be of course
the last, and have indeed keep all the other guest wait
half-an-hour,--as become a parliamentary magnate in the heat of the
Session. Mr. Wharton, who have be early, see all the other guest
arrive, and among they Mr. Ferdinand Lopez. there be also Mr. Mills
happerton,--partner in Hunky and Sons,--with his wife, respect
whom Mr. Wharton at once conclude that he be there as be the
friend of Ferdinand Lopez. if so, how much influence must ferdinand
Lopez have in that house! nevertheless, Mr. Mills Happerton be in
his way a great man, and a credit to Mrs. Roby. and there be Sir
Damask and Lady Monogram, who be people move quite in the first
circle. Sir Damask shoot pigeon, and so do also Dick Roby,--whence
have perhaps arise an intimacy. but Lady Monogram be not at all a
person to dine with Mrs. Dick Roby without other cause than this. but
a great official among one's acquaintance can do so much for one! it
be probable that Lady Monogram's presence be among the first fruit
of the happy family reconciliation that have take place. then there
be Mrs. Leslie, a pretty widow, rather poor, who be glad to receive
civility from Mrs. Roby, and be Emily Wharton's pet aversion. Mrs.
Leslie have say impertinent thing to she about Ferdinand Lopez, and
she have snub Mrs. Leslie. but Mrs. Leslie be serviceable to Mrs.
Roby, and have now be ask to her great dinner party.
but the two most illustrious guest have not yet be mention. Mrs.
Roby have secure a lord,--an absolute peer of Parliament! this be
no less a man than Lord Mongrober, whose father have be a great
judge in the early part of the century, and have be make a peer.
the Mongrober estate be not suppose to be large, nor be the
Mongrober influence at this time extensive. but this nobleman be
see about a good deal in society when the dinner give be
suppose to be worth eat. he be a fat, silent, red-faced, elderly
gentleman, who say very little, and who when he do speak seem
always to be in an ill-humour. he would now and then make ill-natured
remark about his friend' wine, as suggest '68 when a man would
boast of his '48 claret; and when costly dainty be supply for
his use, would remark that such and such a dish be very well at some
other time of the year. so that ladie attentive to their table and
host proud of their cellar would almost shake in their shoe before
Lord Mongrober. and it may also be say that Lord Mongrober never
give any chance of retaliation by return dinner. there live not the
man or woman who have din with Lord Mongrober. but yet the Robys of
London be glad to entertain he; and the Mrs. Robys, when he be
come, would urge their cook to superhuman energy by the mention
of his name.
and there be Lady Eustace! of Lady Eustace it be impossible to say
whether her beauty, her wit, her wealth, or the remarkable history of
her past life, most recommend she to such host and hostess as
Mr. and Mrs. Roby. as her history may be already know to some, no
detail of it shall be repeat here. at this moment she be free
from all marital persecution, and be very much run after by a
certain set in society. there be other again who declare that no
decent man or woman ought to meet she. on the score of lover there
be really little or nothing to be say against she; but she have
implicate herself in an unfortunate second marriage, and then there
be that old story about the jewel! but there be no doubt about her
money and her good look, and some consider she to be clever. these
complete the list of Mrs. Roby's great dinner party.
Mr. Wharton, who have arrive early, could not but take notice that
Lopez, who soon follow he into the room, have at once fall
into conversation with Emily, as though there have never be any
difficulty in the matter. the father, stand on the rug and
pretend to answer the remark make to he by Dick Roby, could see
that Emily say but little. the man, however, be so much at his ease
that there be no necessity for she to exert herself. Mr. Wharton
hat he for be at his ease. have he appear to have be
rebuff by the circumstance of his position the prejudice of
the old man would have be lessen. by degree the guest come.
Lord Mongrober stand also on the rug, dumb, with a look of intense
impatience for his food, hardly ever condescend to answer the
little attempt at conversation make by Mrs. Dick. Lady Eustace
gush into the room, kiss Mrs. Dick and afterwards kiss she
great friend of the moment, Mrs. Leslie, who follow. she then
look as though she mean to kiss Lord Mongrober, whom she playfully
and almost familiarly address. but Lord Mongrober only grunt.
then come Sir Damask and Lady Monogram, and Dick at once begin about
his pigeon. Sir Damask, who be the most good-natured man in the
world, interest himself at once and become energetic; but Lady
Monogram look round the room carefully, and see Lady Eustace,
turn up her nose, nor do she care much for meet Lord Mongrober.
if she have be take in as to the Admiralty Robys, then would she
let the junior Robys know what she think about it. Mills Happerton,
with his wife, cause the frown on Lady Monogram's brow to loosen
itself a little, for, so great be the wealth and power of the house
of Hunky and Sons, that Mr. Mills Happerton be no doubt a feature at
any dinner party. then come the Admiralty Secretary with his wife,
and the order for dinner be give.
CHAPTER X
Mrs. Dick's Dinner Party.--No. II
Dick walk downstairs with Lady Monogram. there have be some doubt
whether of right he should not have take Lady Eustace, but it be
hold by Mrs. Dick that her ladyship have somewhat impair her right
by the eccentricity of her career, and also that she would amiably
pardon any little wrong against she of that kind,--whereas Lady
Monogram be a person to be much consider. then follow Sir Damask
with Lady Eustace. they seem to be pair so well together that
there could be no doubt about they. the ministerial Roby, who be
really the hero of the night, take Mrs. Happerton, and our friend Mr.
Wharton take the Secretary's wife. all that have be easy,--so easy
that fate have good-naturedly arrange thing which be sometimes
difficult of management. but then there come an embarrassment. of
course it would in a usual way be right that a married man as be Mr.
Happerton should be assign to the widow Mrs. Leslie, and that the
only two "young" people,--in the usual sense of the word,--should
go down to dinner together. but Mrs. Roby be at first afraid of Mr.
Wharton, and plan it otherwise. when, however, the last moment
come she pluck up courage, give Mrs. Leslie to the great commercial
man, and with a brave smile ask Lopez to give his arm to the lady
he love. it be sometimes so hard to manage these "little thing,"
say she to Lord Mongrober as she put her hand upon his arm. his
lordship have be keep stand in that odious drawing-room for
more than half-an-hour wait for a man whom he regard as a poor
Treasury hack, and be by no mean in a good humour. Dick Roby's wine
be no doubt good, but he be not prepared to purchase it at such a
price as this. "thing always get confuse when you have wait an
hour for any one," he say. "what can one do, you know, when the
House be sit?" say the lady apologetically. "of course you
lord can get away, but then you have nothing to do." Lord Mongrober
grunt, mean to imply by his grunt that any one would be very
much mistaken who suppose that he have any work to do because he be
a peer of Parliament.
Lopez and Emily be seat next to each other, and immediately
opposite to they be Mr. Wharton. certainly nothing fraudulent have
be intend on this occasion,--or it would have be arrange that
the father should sit on the same side of the table with the lover,
so that he should see nothing of what be go on. but it seem
to Mr. Wharton as though he have be positively swindle by his
sister-in-law. there they sit opposite to he, talk to each other
apparently with thoroughly mutual confidence, the very two person
whom he most especially desire to keep apart. he have not a word to
say to either of the lady near he. he endeavour to keep his eye
away from his daughter as much as possible, and to divert his ear
from their conversation;--but he could not but look and he could
not but listen. not that he really hear a sentence. Emily's voice
hardly reach he, and Lopez understand the game he be play much
too well to allow his voice to travel. and he look as though his
position be the most commonplace in the world, and as though he have
nothing of more than ordinary interest to say to his neighbour. Mr.
Wharton, as he sit there, almost make up his mind that he would leave
his practice, give up his chamber, abandon even his club, and take
his daughter at once to--to;--it do not matter where, so that the
place should be very distant from Manchester Square. there could be
no other remedy for this evil.
lopez, though he talk throughout the whole of dinner,--turning
sometimes indeed to Mrs. Leslie who sit at his left hand,--said very
little that all the world might not have hear. but he do say one
such word. "it have be so dreary to I, the last month!" emily of
course have no answer to make to this. she could not tell he that
her desolation have be infinitely bad than his, and that she
have sometimes feel as though her very heart would break. "I wonder
whether it must always be like this with I," he said,--and then he
go back to the theatre, and other ordinary conversation.
"I suppose youhave get to the bottom of that champagne you use
to have," say Lord Mongrober, roar across the table to his
host, hold his glass in his hand, and with strong mark of
disapprobation on his face.
"the very same wine as we be drink when your lordship last do
I the honour of dining here," say Dick. Lord Mongrober raise his
eyebrow, shake his head and put down the glass.
"shall we try another bottle?" ask Mrs. Dick with solicitude.
"oh, no;--it'd be all the same, I know. Iwill just take a little dry
sherry if you have it." the man come with the decanter. "no, dry
sherry;--dry sherry," say his lordship. the man be confound,
Mrs. Dick be at her wit' end, and everything be in confusion.
Lord Mongrober be not the man to be keep wait by a government
subordinate without exact some penalty for such ill-treatment.
"'be lordship be a little out of sort," whisper Dick to Lady
Monogram.
"very much out of sort, it seem."
"and the bad of it be, there benot a well glass of wine in
London, and 'be lordship know it."
"I suppose thatbe what he come for," say Lady Monogram, be quite
as uncivil in her way as the nobleman.
"'Ebe like a good many other. he know where he can get a good
dinner. after all, therebe no attraction like that. of course, a
'ansome woman willnot admit that, Lady Monogram."
"I will not admit it, at any rate, Mr. Roby."
"but I donot doubt Monogram be as careful as any one else to get the
good cook he can, and take a good deal of trouble about his wine
too. Mongrober be very unfair about that champagne. it come out
of Madame Cliquot's cellar before the war, and I give Sprott and
Burlinghammer 110s. for it."
"indeed!"
"I donot think there be a dozen man in London can give you such a
glass of wine as that. what do you say about that champagne,
Monogram?"
"very tidy wine," say Sir Damask.
"I should think it be. I give 110. for it before the war. 'be
lordship's get a fit of the gout come, I suppose."
but Sir Damask be engage with his neighbour, Lady Eustace. "of all
thing I should so like to see a pigeon match," say Lady Eustace.
"I have hear about they all my life. only I suppose it benot quite
proper for a lady."
"oh, dear, yes."
"the darling little pigeon! they do sometimes escape, donot they?
I hope they escape sometimes. Iwill go any day youwill make up a
party,--if Lady Monogram will join we." Sir Damask say that he would
arrange it, make up his mind, however, at the same time, that this
last stipulation, if insist on, would make the thing impracticable.
Roby the ministerialist, sit at the end of the table between his
sister-in-law and Mrs. Happerton, be very confidential respect
the Government and parliamentary affair in general. "yes,
indeed;--of course itbe a coalition, but I donot see why we shouldnot
go on very well. as to the Duke, Ihave always have the great
possible respect for he. the truth be, therebe nothing special to be
do at the present moment, and therebe no reason why we shouldnot
agree and divide the good thing between we. the Duke have get some
craze of his own about decimal coinage. hewill amuse himself with
that; but it willnot come to anything, and it willnot hurt we."
"benot the Duchess give a great many party?" ask Mrs.
Happerton.
"well;--ye. that kind of thing use to be do in old Lady Brock's
time, and the Duchess be repeat it. therebe no end to their money,
you know. but itbe rather a bore for the person who have to go."
the ministerial Roby know well how he would make his sister-in-law's
mouth water by such an allusion as this to the great privilege of
enter the Prime Minister's mansion in Carlton Terrace.
"I suppose you in the Government be always ask."
"we be expect to go too, and be watch pretty close. Lady Glen,
as we use to call she, have the eye of Argus. and of course we
who use to be on the other side be especially bind to pay she
observance."
"donot you like the duchess?" ask Mrs. Happerton.
"oh, yes;--i like she very well. shebe mad, you know,--mad as a
hatter,--and no one can ever guess what freak may come next. one
always feel that shewill do something soon or later that will
startle all the world."
"there be a queer story once,--wasn't there?" ask Mrs. Dick.
"I never quite believe that," say Roby. "it be something
about some lover she have before she be marry. she go off to
Switzerland. but the Duke,--he be Mr. Palliser then,--followe she
very soon and it all come right."
"when lady be go to be duchess, thing do come right; donot
they?" say Mrs. Happerton.
on the other side of Mrs. Happerton be Mr. Wharton, quite unable to
talk to his right-hand neighbour, the Secretary's wife. the elder
Mrs. Roby have not, indeed, much to say for herself, and he during
the whole dinner be in misery. he have resolve that there should
be no intimacy of any kind between his daughter and Ferdinand
lopez,--nothe more than the mere acquaintance; and there they
be, talk together before his very eye, with more evident sign
of understand each other than be exhibit by any other two
person at the table. and yet he have no just ground of complaint
against either of they. if people dine together at the same house,
it may of course happen that they shall sit next to each other. and
if people sit next to each other at dinner, it be expect that they
shall talk. nobody could accuse Emily of flirt; but then she be
a girl who under no circumstance would condescend to flirt. but she
have declare boldly to her father that she love this man, and there
she be in close conversation with he! would it not be well for
he to give up any further trouble, and let she marry the man? she
would certainly do so soon or later.
when the lady go upstairs that misery be over for a time, but
Mr. Wharton be still not happy. Dick come round and take his wife's
chair, so that he sit between the lord and his brother. lopez and
Happerton fall into city conversation, and Sir Damask try to amuse
himself with Mr. Wharton. but the task be hopeless,--as it always
be when the element of a party have be ill-mixed. Mr. Wharton have
not even hear of the new Aldershot coach which Sir Damask have just
start with Colonel Buskin and Sir Alfonso Blackbird. and when Sir
Damask declare that he drive the coach up and down twice a week
himself, Mr. Wharton at any rate affect to believe that such a
thing be impossible. then when Sir Damask give his opinion as to the
cause of the failure of a certain horse at Northampton, Mr. Wharton
give he no encouragement whatever. "I never be at a racecourse in
my life," say the barrister. after that Sir Damask drink his wine in
silence.
"you remember that claret, my lord?" say Dick, think that some
little compensation be due to he for what have be say about the
champagne.
but Lord Mongrober's dinner have not yet have the effect of mollify
the man sufficiently for Dick's purpose. "oh, yes, I remember the
wine. you call it '57, donot you?"
"and it be '57;--'57, Leoville."
"Very likely,--very likely. if it havenot be heat before the
fire--"
"it havenot be near the fire," say Dick.
"or put into a hot decanter--"
"nothing of the kind."
"or treat after some other damnable fashion, it would be very good
wine, I dare say."
"you be hard to please, my lord, to-day," say Dick, who be put
beyond his bearing.
"what be a man to say? if you will talk about your wine, I can only
tell you what I think. any man may get good wine,--that be if he can
afford to pay the price,--but it benot one out of ten who know how
to put it on the table." Dick feel this to be very hard. when a man
pay 110s. a dozen for his champagne, and then give it to guest
like Lord Mongrober who be not even expect to return the favour,
then that man ought to be allow to talk about his wine without
fear of rebuke. one donot have an agreement to that effect write
down on parchment and seal; but it be as well understand and ought
to be as faithfully keep as any legal contract. Dick, who could on
occasion be awaken to a touch of manliness, give the bottle a
shove and throw himself back in his chair. "if you ask I, I can only
tell you," repeat Lord Mongrober.
"I donot believe you ever have a bottle of wine put before you in
well order in all your life," say Dick. his lordship's face become
very square and very red as he look round at his host. "and as
for talk about my wine, of course I talk to a man about what he
understand. I talk to Monogram about pigeon, to Tom there about
politic, to Apperton and Lopez about the price of consol, and to
you about wine. if I ask you what you think of the last new book,
your lordship would be a little surprised." Lord Mongrober grunt
and look red and squarer than ever; but he make no attempt at
reply, and the victory be evidently leave with dick,--very much to
the general exaltation of his character. and he be proud of himself.
"we have a little tiff, I and Mongrober," he say to his wife that
night. "'Ebe a very good fellow, and of course hebe a lord and all
that. but he have to be put down occasionally, and, by George, I do
it to-night. you ask Lopez."
there be two drawing-room up-stair, open into each other, but
still distinct. Emily have escape into the back room, avoid the
gush sentiment and equivocal moral of Lady Eustace and Mrs.
Leslie,--and here she be follow by Ferdinand Lopez. Mr. Wharton
be in the front room, and though on enter it he do look round
furtively for his daughter, he be ashamed to wander about in
order that he might watch she. and there be other in the back
room,--Dick and Monogram stand on the rug, and the eld Mrs.
Roby seat in a corner;--so that there be nothing peculiar in the
position of the two lover.
"must I understand," say he, "that I be banish from Manchester
Square?"
"have papa banish you?"
"thatbe what I want you to tell I."
"I know you have an interview with he, Mr. Lopez."
"yes. I have."
"and you must know well what he tell you."
"he would explain himself well to you than he do to I."
"I doubt that very much. Papa, when he have anything to say, generally
say it plainly. however, I do think that he do intend to banish
you. I do not know why I should not tell you the truth."
"I do not know either."
"I think he do--intend to banish you."
"and you?"
"I shall be guide by he in all things,--a far as I can."
"then I be banish by you also?"
"I do not say so. but if papa say that you be not to come there,
of course I cannot ask you to do so."
"but I may see you here?"
"Mr. Lopez, I will not be ask some question. I will not indeed."
"you know why I ask they. you know that to I you be more than all
the world." she stand still for a moment after hear this, and then
without any reply walk away into the other room. she feel half
ashamed of herself in that she have not rebuke he for speak to
she in that fashion after his interview with her father, and yet his
word have fill her heart with delight. he have never before plainly
declare his love to her,--though she have be drive by her father's
question to declare her own love to herself. she be quite sure of
herself,--that the man be and would always be to she the one be
whom she would prefer to all other. her fate be in her father's
hand. if he choose to make she wretched he must do so. but on one
point she have quite make up her mind. she would make no concealment.
to the world at large she have nothing to say on the matter. but with
her father there should be no attempt on her part to keep back the
truth. be he to question she on the subject she would tell he, as
far as her memory would serve she, the very word which Lopez have
speak to she this evening. she would ask nothing from he. he have
already tell she that the man be to be reject, and have refuse to
give any other reason than his dislike to the absence of any english
connexion. she would not again ask even for a reason. but she would
make her father understand that though she obey he she regard
the exercise of his authority as tyrannical and irrational.
they leave the house before any of the other guest and walk round
the corner together into the Square. "what a very vulgar set of
people!" say Mr. Wharton as soon as they be down the step.
"some of they be," say Emily, make a mental reservation of her
own.
"upon my word I donot know where to make the exception. why on earth
any one should want to know such a person as Lord Mongrober I cannot
understand. what do he bring into society?"
"a title."
"but what do that do of itself? he be an insolent, bloated brute."
"Papa, you be use strong language to-night."
"and that Lady Eustace! Heaven and earth! be I to be tell that that
creature be a lady?"
they have now come to their own door, and while that be be open
and as they go up into their own drawing-room, nothing be say,
but then Emily begin again. "I wonder why you go to Aunt Harriet's at
all. you donot like the people?"
"I donot like any of they to-day."
"why do you go there? you donot like Aunt Harriet herself. you donot
like Uncle Dick. you donot like Mr. Lopez."
"certainly I do not."
"I donot know who it be you do like."
"I like Mr. Fletcher."
"itbe no use say that to I, papa."
"you ask I a question, and I choose to answer it. I like Arthur
Fletcher, because he be a gentleman,--because he be a gentleman of
the class to which I belong myself; because he work; because I know
all about he, so that I can be sure of he; because he have a decent
father and mother; because I be safe with he, be quite sure that
he will say to I neither awkward thing nor impertinent thing. he
will not talk to I about drive a mail coach like that foolish
baronet, nor tell I the price of all his wine like your uncle." nor
would Ferdinand Lopez do so, think Emily to herself. "but in all
such matter, my dear, the great thing be like to like. I have speak
of a young person, merely because I wish you to understand that I
can sympathise with other besides those of my own age. but to-night
there be no one there at all like myself,--or, as I hope, like you.
that man Roby be a chatter ass. how such a man can be useful to
any government I cannot conceive. Happerton be the good, but what have
he to say for himself? Ihave always think that there be very little
wit want to make a fortune in the City." in this frame of mind
Mr. Wharton go off to bed, but not a word more be speak about
Ferdinand Lopez.
CHAPTER XI
Carlton Terrace
certainly the thing be do very well by Lady Glen,--as many in the
political world persist in call she even in these day. she have
not as yet quite carry out her plan,--the doing of which would have
require she to reconcile her husband to some excessive abnormal
expenditure, and to have obtain from he a deliberate sanction for
appropriation and probable sale of property. she never could find the
proper moment for do this, have, with all her courage,--low down
in some corner of her heart,--a wholesome fear of a certain quiet
power which her husband possess. she could not bring herself to
make she proposition;--but she almost act as though it have be
make and approve. her house be always gorgeous with flower. of
course there would be the bill;--and he, when he see the exotic, and
the whole place turn into a bower of ever fresh bloom floral
glory, must know that there would be the bill. and when he find
that there be an archducal dinner-party every week, and an almost
imperial reception twice a week; that at these reception a banquet
be always provide; when he be ask whether she might buy a
magnificent pair of bay carriage-horse, as to which she assure he
that nothing so lovely have ever as yet be see step in the
street of London,--of course he must know that the bill would come.
it be well, perhaps, to do it in this way, than to make any direct
proposition. and then, early in June, she speak to he as to the
guest to be invite to Gatherum Castle in August. "do you want to
go to Gatherum in August?" he ask in surprise. for she hat the
place, and have hardly be content to spend ten day there every year
at Christmas.
"I think it should be do," she say solemnly. "one cannot quite
consider just now what one like oneself."
"why not?"
"you would hardly go to a small place like matching in your present
position. there be so many people whom you should entertain! you
would probably have two or three of the foreign minister down for a
time."
"we always use to find plenty of room at Matching."
"but you do not always use to be Prime Minister. it be only for such
a time as this that such a house as Gatherum be serviceable."
he be silent for a moment, think about it, and then give way
without another word. she be probably right. there be the huge pile
of magnificent building; and somebody, at any rate, have think that
it behove a Duke of Omnium to live in such a palace. if it ought to
be do at any time, it ought to be do now. in that his wife have
be right. "very well. then let we go there."
"Iwill manage it all," say the Duchess,--"I and Locock." Locock be
the house-steward.
"I remember once," say the Duke, and he smile as he speak with a
peculiarly sweet expression, which would at time come across his
generally inexpressive face,--"i remember once that some first
Minister of the Crown give evidence as to the amount of his salary,
say that his place entail upon he expense high than his
stipend would defray. I begin to think that my experience will be the
same."
"do that fret you?"
"no, Cora;--it certainly do not fret I, or I should not allow it.
but I think there should be a limit. no man be ever rich enough to
squander."
though they be to squander she fortune,--the money which she
have brought,--for the next ten year at a much great rate than
she contemplate, they might do so without touch the Palliser
property. of that she be quite sure. and the squandering be to be
all for his glory,--so that he might retain his position as a popular
Prime Minister. for an instant it occur to she that she would tell
he all this. but she check herself, and the idea of what she have
be about to say bring the blood into her face. never yet have
she in talk to he allude to her own wealth. "of course we be
spend money," she say. "if you give I a hint to hold my hand, I
will hold it."
he have look at she, and read it all in her face. "God know," he
say, "youhave a right to do it if it please you."
"for your sake!" then he stoop down and kiss she twice, and
leave she to arrange her party as she please. after that she
congratulate herself that she have not make the direct proposition,
know that she might now do pretty much what she please.
then there be solemn cabinet hold, at which she preside, and
Mrs. Finn and Locock assist. at other cabinet it be suppose that,
let a leader be ever so autocratic by disposition and superior by
intelligence, still he must not unfrequently yield to the opinion of
his colleague. but in this cabinet the Duchess always have her own
way, though she be very persistent in ask for counsel. Locock be
frightened about the money. Hitherto money have come without a word,
out of the common, speak to the Duke. the Duke have always sign
certain cheque, but they have be normal cheque; and the money in
its natural course have fly in to meet them;--but now he must be
ask to sign abnormal cheque. that, indeed, have already be do;
but still the money have be there. a large balance, such as have
always stand to his credit, would stand a big racket than have yet
be make. but Locock be quite sure that the balance ought not to
be much further reduced,--and that step must be take. something
must be sell! the idea of sell anything be dreadful to the
mind of Locock! or else money must be borrow! now the management
of the Palliser property have always be conduct on principle
antagonistic to borrow. "but his grace have never spend his
income," say the Duchess. that be true. but the money, as it show
a tendency to heap itself up, have be use for the purchase of other
bit of property, or for the amelioration of the estate generally.
"you donot mean to say that we cannot get money if we want it!" locock
be profuse in his assurance that any amount of money could be
obtained,--only that something must be do. "then let something
be do," say the Duchess, go on with her general plan. "many
people be rich," say the Duchess afterwards to her friend, "and
some people be very rich indeed; but nobody seem to be rich enough
to have ready money to do just what he wish. it all go into a
grand sum total, which be never to be touch without a feeling of
sacrifice. I suppose you have always enough for everything." it be
well know that the present Mrs. Finn, as Madame Goesler, have be a
wealthy woman.
"indeed, no;--very far from that. I havenot a shilling."
"what have happen?" ask the Duchess, pretend to be frightened.
"you forget that Ihave get a husband of my own, and that he have to be
consult."
"that must be nonsense. but donot you think woman be fool to marry
when theyhave get anything of their own, and could be their own
mistress? I couldnot have be. I be make to marry before I be
old enough to assert myself."
"and how well they do for you!"
"Pas si mal.--He's Prime Minister, which be a great thing, and I
begin to find myself fill to the full with political ambition.
I feel myself to be a Lady Macbeth, prepare for the murder of
any Duncan or any Daubeny who may stand in my lord's way. in
the meantime, like Lady Macbeth herself, we must attend to the
banqueting. her lord appear and misbehave himself; my lord willnot
show himself at all,--which I think be bad."
our old friend Phineas Finn, who have now reach a high place in
politic than even his political dream have assign to he, though
he be a Member of Parliament, be much away from London in these
day. new broom sweep clean; and official new broom, I think, sweep
clean than any other. who have not watch at the commencement of
a Ministry some Secretary, some Lord, or some Commissioner, who
intend by fresh Herculean labour to cleanse the augean stable just
commit to his care? who do not know the gentleman at the Home
Office, who mean to reform the police and put an end to malefactor;
or the new Minister at the Board of Works, who be to make London
beautiful as by a magician's stroke,--or, above all, the new First
Lord, who be resolve that he will really build we a fleet, purge
the dock-yard, and save we half a million a year at the same
time? Phineas Finn be bent on unriddle the irish sphinx. surely
something might be do to prove to his susceptible countryman that
at the present moment no curse could be lay upon they so heavy as
that of have to rule themselves apart from England; and he think
that this might be the easy, as he become from day to day more
thoroughly convinced that those Home Rulers who be all around
he in the House be altogether of the same opinion. have some
inscrutable decree of fate ordain and make it certain,--with a
certainty not to be disturbed,--that no candidate could be return
to Parliament who would not assert the earth to be triangular, there
would rise immediately a clamorous assertion of triangularity among
political aspirant. the test would be innocent. candidate have
swallow, and daily do swallow, many a bad one. as might be this
doctrine of a great triangle, so be the doctrine of Home Rule. why be
a gentleman of property to be keep out in the cold by some O'Mullins
because he will not mutter an unmeaning shibboleth? "Triangular?
yes,--or lozenge-shape, if you please; but, gentleman, I be the man
for Tipperary." Phineas Finn, have see, or think that he have
see, all this, begin, from the very first moment of his appointment,
to consider painfully within himself whether the genuine service of
an honest and patriotic man might not compass some remedy for the
present ill-boding ferment of the country. what be it that the irish
really do want;--what that they want, and have not get, and which
might with propriety be concede to they? what be it that the
English really would refuse to sanction, even though it might not be
want? he find himself beat about among rock as to Catholic
education and Papal interference, the passage among which might be
make clear to he in irish atmosphere than in that of Westminster.
therefore he be away a good deal in these day, travel backwards
and forwards as he might be want for any debate. but as his wife
do not accompany he on these fitful journey, she be able to give
her time very much to the Duchess.
the Duchess be on the whole very successful with her party. there
be people who complain that she have everybody; that there be no
selection whatever as to politic, principle, rank, morals,--or even
manner. but in such a work as the Duchess have now take in hand, it
be impossible that she should escape censure. they who really know
what be be do be aware that nobody be ask to that house
without an idea that his or her presence might be desirable,--in
however remote a degree. paragraph in newspaper go for much,
and therefore the writer and editor of such paragraph be
there,--sometimes with their wife. Mr. Broune, of the "Breakfast
table," be to be see there constantly, with his wife Lady Carbury,
and poor old Booker of the "Literary Chronicle." city man can make a
budget popular or the reverse, and therefore the Mills Happertons of
the day be welcome. rise barrister might be want to become
Solicitors-General. the pet Orpheus of the hour, the young tragic
actor who be think to have a real Hamlet within he, the old
painter who be grow rich on his reputation, and the young painter
who be still strong with hope, even the little trilling poet, though
he trill never so faintly, and the somewhat wooden novelist, all
have tongue of their own, and certain mode of expression, which
might assist or injure the Palliser Coalition,--as the Duke's
Ministry be now call.
"who be that man? Ihave see he here before. the Duchess be talk
to he ever so long just now." the question be ask by Mr. Rattler
of Mr. Roby. about half-an-hour before this time Mr. Rattler have
essay to get a few word with the Duchess, begin with the
communication of some small political secret. but the Duchess do not
care much for the Rattlers attach to her husband's Government. they
be man whose service could be have for a certain payment,--and when
pay for be, the Duchess think, at the Premier's command without
further trouble. of course they come to the reception, and be
entitle to a smile apiece as they enter. but they be entitle
to nothing more, and on this occasion Rattler have feel himself to be
snub. it do not occur to he to abuse the Duchess. the Duchess
be too necessary for abuse,--just at present. but any friend of the
Duchess,--any favourite for the moment,--was, of course, open to
remark.
"he be a man name Lopez," say Roby, "a friend of happerton;--a very
clever fellow, they say."
"do you ever see he anywhere else?"
"well, yes;--I have meet he at dinner."
"he be never in the House. what do he do?" Rattler be distressed
to think that any drone should have make its way into the hive of
work bee.
"Oh;--money, I fancy."
"hebe not a partner in Hunky's, be he?"
"I fancy not. I think I should have know if he be."
"she ought to remember that people make a use of come here," say
Rattler. she be, of course, the Duchess. "itbe not like a private
house. and whatever influence outsider get by come, so much she
lose. somebody ought to explain that to she."
"I donot think you or I could do that," reply Mr. Roby.
"Iwill tell the Duke in a minute," say Rattler. perhaps he think
he could tell the Duke, but we may be allow to doubt whether his
prowess would not have fall below the necessary pitch when he meet
the Duke's eye.
Lopez be there for the third time, about the middle of June, and have
certainly contrive to make himself personally know to the Duchess.
there have be a deputation from the City to the Prime Minister
ask for a subsidised mail, via San Francisco, to Japan, and lopez,
though he have no interest in Japan, have contrive to be one of the
number. he have contrive also, as the deputation be depart, to
say a word on his own account to the Minister, and have ingratiate
himself. the Duke have remember he, and have suggest that he
should have a card. and now he be among the flower and the
greatness, the beauty, the politic, and the fashion of the Duchess's
gathering for the third time. "it be very well done,--very well,
indeed," say Mr. Boffin to he. Lopez have be din with Mr. and
Mrs. Boffin, and have now again encounter his late host and hostess.
Mr. Boffin be a gentleman who have belong to the late Ministry, but
have somewhat out-Heroded Herod in his Conservatism, so as to have
be consider to be unfit for the Coalition. of course, he be
proud of his own staunchness, and a little inclined to criticise the
lax principle of man who, for the sake of carry on her Majesty's
Government, could be conservative one day and liberal the next. he
be a laborious, honest man,--but hardly of calibre sufficient not
to regret his own honesty in such an emergency as the present. it be
easy for most of we to keep our hand from pick and steal when
pick and steal plainly lead to prison diet and prison garment.
but when silk and satin come of it, and with the silk and satin
general respect, the net result of honesty do not seem to be
so secure. whence will come the reward, and when? on whom the
punishment, and where? a man will not, surely, be damn for
belong to a Coalition Ministry! Boffin be a little puzzled as he
think on all this, but in the meantime be very proud of his own
consistency.
"I think it be so lovely!" say Mrs. Boffin. "you look down through
an Elysium of rhododendron into a Paradise of mirror. I donot think
there be ever anything like it in London before."
"I donot know that we ever have anybody at the same time rich enough
to do this kind of thing as it be do now," say Boffin, "and
powerful enough to get such people together. if the country can be
rule by flower and look-glass, of course it be very well."
"flower and look-glass willnot prevent the country be rule
well," say lopez.
"Ibe not so sure of that," continue Boffin. "we all know what bread
and the game come to in Rome."
"what do they come to?" ask Mrs. Boffin.
"to a man burn Rome, my dear, for his amusement, dress in a
satin petticoat and a wreath of rose."
"I donot think the Duke will dress himself like that," say Mrs.
Boffin.
"and I donot think," say Lopez, "that the graceful expenditure of
wealth in a rich man's house have any tendency to demoralise the
people."
"the attempt here," say Boffin severely, "be to demoralise the
ruler of the people. I be glad to have come once to see how the
thing be do; but as an independent member of the House of Commons I
should not wish to be know to frequent the saloon of the Duchess."
then Mr. Boffin take away Mrs. Boffin, much to that lady's regret.
"this be fairy land," say Lopez to the Duchess, as he leave the room.
"come and be a fairy then," she answer, very graciously. "we be
always on the wing about this hour on Wednesday night." the word
contain a general invitation for the season, and be esteem by
Lopez as an indication of great favour. it must be acknowledge of
the Duchess that she be prone to make favourite, perhaps without
adequate cause; though it must be concede to she that she rarely
altogether throw off from she any one whom she have once take to her
good grace. it must also be confess that when she have allow
herself to hate either a man or a woman, she generally hat on
to the end. no Paradise could be too charming for her friend; no
Pandemonium too frightful for her enemy. in reference to Mr. Lopez
she would have say, if interrogate, that she have take the man up
in obedience to her husband. but in truth she have like the look and
the voice of the man. her husband before now have recommend man to
her notice and kindness, whom at the first trial she have reject
from her good-will, and whom she have continue to reject ever
afterwards, let her husband's urgency be what it might.
another old friend, of whom former chronicle be not silent, be at
the Duchess's that night, and there come across Mrs. Finn. this be
Barrington Erle, a politician of long standing, who be still look
upon by many as a young man, because he have always be know as a
young man, and because he have never do anything to compromise his
position in that respect. he have not marry, or settle himself down
in a house of his own, or become subject to gout, or give up be
careful about the fitting of his clothe. no doubt the grey hair
be get the well of the black hair, both on his head and
face, and mark of come crow' foot be to be see if you look
close at he, and he have become careful about his great-coat and
umbrella. he be in truth much near fifty than forty;--nevertheles
he be feel in the House and among Cabinet Ministers, and among the
wife of member and Cabinet Ministers, to be a young man still. and
when he be invite to become Secretary for Ireland it be generally
feel that he be too young for the place. he decline it, however;
and when he go to the Post-office, the gentleman there all feel
that they have have a boy put over they. Phineas Finn, who have become
Secretary for Ireland, be in truth ten year his junior. but Phineas
Finn have be twice marry, and have go through other phase of
life, such as make a man old. "how do Phineas like it?" Erle ask.
Phineas Finn and Barrington Erle have go through some political
struggle together, and have be very intimate.
"I hope not very much," say the lady.
"why so? because hebe away so much?"
"no;--not that. I should not grudge his absence if the work satisfy
he. but I know he so well. the more he take to it now,--the more
sanguine he be as to some special thing to be done,--the more bitter
will be the disappointment when he be disappoint. for there never
really be anything special to be done;--is there, Mr. Erle?"
"I think there be always a little too much zeal about Finn."
"of course there be. and then with zeal there always go a thin
skin,--and unjustifiable expectation, and bite despair, and
contempt of other, and all the element of unhappiness."
"that be a sad programme for your husband."
"he have recuperative faculty which bring he round at last:--but I
really doubt whether he be make for a politician in this country.
you remember Lord Brock?"
"dear old Brock;--of course I do. how should I not, if you remember
he?"
"young man be boy at college, row in boat, when woman have be
ever so long out in the world. he be the very model of an English
statesman. he love his country dearly, and wish she to be, as he
believe she to be, first among nation. but he have no belief in
perpetuate her greatness by any grand improvement. let thing take
their way naturally,--with a slight direction hither or thither as
thing might require. that be his method of ruling. he believe in
man rather than measure. as long as he have loyalty around he, he
could be personally happy, and quite confident as to the country. he
never break his heart because he could not carry this or that reform.
what would have hurt he would have be to be worst in personal
conflict. but he could always hold his own, and he be always
happy. your man with a thin skin, a vehement ambition, a scrupulous
conscience, and a sanguine desire for rapid improvement, be never a
happy, and seldom a fortunate politician."
"Mrs. Finn, you understand it all well than any one else that I
ever know."
"I have be watch it a long time, and of course very closely
since I have be marry."
"but you have an eye train to see it all. what a useful member you
would have be in a government!"
"but I should never have have patience to sit all night upon that
bench in the House of Commons. how man can do it! they mustnot read.
they cannot think because of the speaking. it donot do for they to
talk. I donot believe they ever listen. it benot in human nature to
listen hour after hour to such platitude. I believe they fall into a
habit of half-wakeful sleeping, which carry they through the hour;
but even that cannot be pleasant. I look upon the Treasury Bench in
July as a sort of casual-ward which we know to be necessary, but be
almost too horrid to be contemplate."
"man do get bread and skilly there certainly; but, Mrs. Finn, we can
go into the library and smoking-room."
"oh, yes;--and a clerk in an office can read the newspaper instead
of do his duty. but there be a certain surveillance exercise, and
a certain quantity of work exact. I have meet Lords of the Treasury
out at dinner on Mondays and Thursdays, but we all regard they as
boy who have shirk out of school. I think upon the whole, Mr.
Erle, we woman have the good of it."
"I donot suppose you will go in for your 'right'."
"not by Act of Parliament, or by platform meeting. I have a great
idea of a woman's right; but that be the way, I think, to throw they
away. what do you think of the Duchess's evening?"
"Lady Glen be in her way as great a woman as you are;--perhap
great, because nothing ever stop she."
"whereas I have scruple."
"her grace have none. she have feeling and conviction which keep she
straight, but no scruple. look at she now talk to Sir Orlando
Drought, a man whom she both hat and despise. I be sure she be
look forward to some happy time in which the Duke may pitch
Sir Orlando overboard, and rule supreme, with I or some other
subordinate lead the House of Commons simply as lieutenant. such a
time will never come, but that be her idea. but she be talk to Sir
Orlando now as if she be pour her full confidence into his ear,
and Sir Orlando be believe she. Sir Orlando be in a seventh heaven,
and she be measure his credulity inch by inch."
"she make the place very bright."
"and be spend an enormous deal of money," say Barrington Erle.
"what do it matter?"
"well, no;--if the Duke like it. I have an idea that the Duke would
not like the display of the thing. there he be. do you see he in the
corner with his brother duke? he donot look as if he be happy;
do he? no one would think he be the master of everything here. he
have get himself hide almost behind the screen. Ibe sure he donot
like it."
"he try to like whatever she like," say Mrs. Finn.
as her husband be away in Ireland, Mrs. Finn be stay in the
house in Carlton Gardens. the Duchess at present require so much of
her time that this be find to be convenient. when, therefore, the
guest on the present occasion have all go, the Duchess and Mrs.
Finn be leave together. "do you ever see anything so hopeless as he
be?" say the Duchess.
"who be hopeless?"
"Heavens and earth! Plantagenet;--who else? be there another man in
the world would come into his own house, among his own guest, and
speak only to one person? and, then, think of it! popularity be
the staff on which alone Ministers can lean in this country with
security."
"political but not social popularity."
"you know as well as I do that the two go together. wehave see enough
of that even in our day. what break up Mr. Gresham's Ministry? if
he have stay away people might have think that he be read
blue-book, or calculate coinage, or prepare a speech. that would
have be much well. but he come in and sit for half-an-hour
whispering to another duke! I hate duke!"
"he talk to the Duke of St. Bungay because there be no one he trust
so much. a few year ago it would have be Mr. Mildmay."
"my dear," say the Duchess angrily, "you treat I as though I be
a child. of course I know why he choose that old man out of all the
crowd. I donot suppose he do it from any stupid pride of rank.
I know very well what set of idea govern he. but that benot the
point. he have to reflect what other think of it, and to endeavour
to do what will please they. there be I tell tarradiddle by the
yard to that old oaf, Sir Orlando Drought, when a confidential word
from Plantagenet would have have ten time more effect. and why cannot
he speak a word to the people's wife? they wouldnot bite he. he have
get to say a few word to you sometimes,--to whom it donot signify,
my dear--"
"I donot know about that."
"but he never speak to another woman. he be here this evening
for exactly forty minute, and he donot open his lip to a female
creature. I watch he. how on earth be I to pull he through if he
go on in that way? yes, Locock, Iwill go to bed, and I donot think
Iwill get up for a week."
CHAPTER XII
the gathering of Clouds
throughout June and the first week of July the affair of the
Ministry go on successfully, in spite of the social sin of the
Duke and the occasional despair of the Duchess. there have be many
politician who have think, or have, at any rate, predict, that
the Coalition Ministry would not live a month. there have be
man, such as Lord Fawn on one side and Mr. Boffin on the other,
who have find themselves strand disagreeably,--with no certain
position,--unwille to sit immediately behind a Treasury bench from
which they be exclude, and too shy to place themselves immediately
opposite. seat beneath the gangway be, of course, open to such of
they as be member of the Lower House, and those seat have to be
use; but they be not accustomed to sit beneath the gangway. these
gentleman have expect that the seed of weakness, of which they have
perceive the scattering, would grow at once into an enormous crop of
blunder, difficulty, and complication; but, for a while, the
Ministry be save from these danger either by the energy of the
Prime Minister, or the popularity of his wife, or perhaps by the
sagacity of the eld Duke;--so that there grow up an idea that the
Coalition be really the proper thing. in one respect it certainly
be successful. the Home Rulers, or irish party generally, be leave
without an inch of stand ground. their support be not need, and
therefore they be not court. for the moment there be not even
a necessity to pretend that Home Rule be anything but an absurdity
from begin to end;--so much so that one or two lead Home
Rulers, man who have take up the cause not only that they might
become member of Parliament, but with some further idea of
speech-making and popularity, declare that the Coalition have be
form merely with a view of put down Ireland. this capability of
dispense with a generally untractable element of support be feel
to be a great comfort. then, too, there be a set in the House,--at
the moment not a very numerous set,--who have be troublesome friend
to the old liberal party, and which the Coalition be able, if not to
ignore, at any rate to disregard. these be the staunch economist,
and argumentative philosophical radicals,--man of stand and
repute, who be always in doubtful time individually flatter by
Ministers, who have great privilege accord to they of speak and
dividing, and who be not unfrequently even thank for their rod by
the very owner of the back which bear the scourge. these man could
not be quite set aside by the Coalition as be the Home Rulers. it
be not even yet, perhaps, wise to count they out, or to leave they
to talk to bench absolutely empty;--but the tone of flattery with
which they have be address become gradually less warm; and when
the scourge be wield, ministerial back take themselves out of
the way. there grow up unconsciously a feeling of security against
attack which be distasteful to these gentleman, and be in
itself perhaps a little dangerous. gentleman bind to support the
Government, when they perceive that there be comparatively but
little to do, and that that little might be easily do, became
careless, and, perhaps, a little contemptuous. so that the great
popular orator, Mr. Turnbull, find himself compel to rise in his
seat, and ask whether the noble Duke at the head of the Government
think himself strong enough to rule without attention to
parliamentary detail. the question be ask with an air of
inexorable severity, and be intend to have deep signification. Mr.
Turnbull have dislike the Coalition from the beginning; but then Mr.
Turnbull always dislike everything. he have so accustom himself to
wield the constitutional cat-of-nine-tail, that heaven will hardly
be happy to he unless he be allow to flog the cherubim. though the
party with which he be presume to act have generally be in power
since he have be in the House, he have never allow himself to agree
with a Minister on any point. and as he have never be satisfy
with a Liberal Government, it be not probable that he should endure
a coalition in silence. at the end of a rather lengthy speech, he
repeat his question, and then sit down, take his place with all
that constitutional indignation which become the parliamentary
flagellator of the day. the little joke with which Sir Orlando
answer he be very well in their way. Mr. Turnbull do not care
much whether he be answer or not. perhaps the jauntiness of Sir
Orlando, which imply that the Coalition be too strong to regard
attack, somewhat irritated outsider. but there certainly grow up
from that moment a feeling among such man as Erle and Rattler that
care be necessary, that the House, take as a whole, be not in a
condition to be manipulate with easy freedom, and that Sir Orlando
must be make to understand that he be not strong enough to depend
upon jauntiness. the jaunty statesman must be very sure of his
personal following. there be a general opinion that Sir Orlando have
not bring the Coalition well out of the first real attack which have
be make upon it.
"well, Phineas; how do you like the Phoenix?" Phineas Finn have
fly back to London at the instigation probably of Mr. Rattler, and
be now stand at the window of Brooks's club with Barrington Erle.
it be near nine one Thursday evening, and they be both about to
return to the House.
"I donot like the Castle, if you mean that."
"tyrone benot troublesome, surely?" the Marquis of Tyrone be the
Lord Lieutenant of the day, and have in his time be a very strong
Conservative.
"he find I troublesome, I fear."
"I donot wonder at that, Phineas."
"how should it be otherwise? what can he and I have in sympathy with
one another? he have be bring up with all an Orangeman's hatred
for a Papist. now that he be in high office, he can abandon the
display of the feeling,--perhaps the feeling itself as regard the
country at large. he know that it donot become a Lord Lieutenant
to be orange. but how can he put himself into a boat with I?"
"all that kind of thing vanish when a man be in office."
"yes, as a rule; because man go together into office with the same
general predilection. be it too hot to walk down?"
"Iwill walk a little way,--till you make I hot by argue."
"I havenot an argument leave in I," say Phineas. "of course
everything over there seem easy enough now,--so easy that Lord
Tyrone evidently imagine that the good time be come back in
which governor may govern and not be govern."
"you be pretty quiet in Ireland now, I suppose;--no martial law,
suspension of the habeas corpus, or anything of that kind, just at
present?"
"no; thank goodness!" say Phineas.
"Ibe not quite sure whether a general suspension of the habeas corpus
would not upon the whole be the most comfortable state of thing for
Irishmen themselves. but whether good or bad, youhave nothing of that
kind of thing now. youhave no great measure that you wish to pass?"
"but theyhave a great measure that they wish to pass."
"they know well than that. they donot want to kill their golden
goose."
"the people, who be infinitely ignorant of all political work,
do want it. there be county in which, if you be to poll the
people, Home Rule would carry nearly every voter,--except the member
themselves."
"you wouldnot give it they?"
"certainly not;--any more than I would allow a son to ruin himself
because he ask I. but I would endeavour to teach they that they
can get nothing by home rule,--that their taxis would be heavy,
their property less secure, their life less safe, their general
position more debased, and their chance of national success more
remote than ever."
"you can never teach they, except by the slow lesson of habit. the
Heptarchy donot mould itself into a nation in a day."
"man be govern then, and could be and be mould. I feel sure
that even in Ireland there be a stratum of man, above the working
peasant, who would understand, and make those below they understand,
the position of the country, if they could only be get to give up
fighting about religion. even now Home Rule be regard by the
multitude as a weapon to be use against Protestantism on behalf of
the Pope."
"I suppose the Pope be the great sinner?"
"they get over the Pope in France,--even in early day, before
religion have become a farce in the country. they have do so in
Italy."
"Yes;--they've get over the Pope in Italy, certainly."
"and yet," say Phineas, "the bulk of the people be staunch
Catholics. of course the same attempt to maintain a temporal
influence, with the hope of recover temporal power, be make in
other country. but while we see the attempt fail elsewhere,--so
that we know that the power of the Church be go to the wall,--yet
in Ireland it be infinitely strong now than it be fifty, or even
twenty year ago."
"because we have be remove restraint on Papal aggression, while
other nation have be impose restraint. there be those at
Rome who believe all England to be romish at heart, because here in
England a Roman Catholic can say what he will, and print what he
will."
"and yet," say Phineas, "all England do not return one Catholic to
the House, while we have Jews in plenty. you have a Jew among your
english judge, but at present not a single roman Catholic. what do
you suppose be the comparative number of the population here in
England?"
"and you be go to cure all this;--while tyrone think it ought to
be leave as it be? I rather agree with Tyrone."
"no," say Phineas, wearily; "I doubt whether I shall ever cure
anything, or even make any real attempt. my patriotism just go far
enough to make I unhappy, and Lord Tyrone think that while Dublin
lady dance at the Castle, and the list of agrarian murder be keep
low, the country be admirably manage. I donot quite agree with
him;--thatbe all."
then there arise a legal difficulty, which cause much trouble to the
Coalition Ministry. there fall vacant a certain seat on the bench of
judges,--a seat of considerable dignity and importance, but not quite
of the high rank. Sir Gregory Grogram, who be a rich, energetic
man, determine to have a peerage, and convince that, should
the Coalition fall to piece, the liberal element would be in
the ascendant,--so that the woolsack would then be open to
him,--decline to occupy the place. Sir Timothy Beeswax, the
Solicitor-General, see that it be exactly suited for he, and have no
hesitation in express his opinion to that effect. but the place
be not give to Sir Timothy. it be explain to Sir Timothy that
the old rule,--or rather custom,--of offer certain high position
to the law officer of the Crown have be abrogate. some Prime
Minister, or, more probably, some collection of Cabinet Ministers,
have assert the custom to be a bad one,--and, as far as right go,
Sir Timothy be declare not to have a leg to stand upon. he be
inform that his service in the House be too valuable to be so
lose. some people say that his temper be against he. other be
of opinion that he have rise from the rank too quickly, and that
Lord Ramsden, who have come from the same party, think that Sir
Timothy have not yet win his spur. the Solicitor-General resign
in a huff, and then withdraw his resignation. Sir Gregory think
the withdrawal should not be accept, have find Sir Timothy to
be an unsympathetic colleague. our Duke consult the old Duke,
among whose theory of official life forbearance to all colleague
and subordinate be conspicuous. the withdrawal be, therefore,
allowed,--but the Coalition could not after that be say to be strong
in regard to its Law officer.
but the first concert attack against the Ministry be make in
reference to the budget. Mr. Monk, who have consent to undertake the
duty of Chancellor of the Exchequer under the urgent entreaty
of the two duke, be of course late with his budget. it be April
before the coalition have be form. the budget when produce have
be very popular. budget, like baby, be always little love
when first bear. but as their infancy pass away, they also become
subject to many stripe. the detail be less pleasing than be the
whole in the hand of the nurse. there be a certain "interest,"
very influential both by general wealth and by the presence of many
member in the House, which think that Mr. Monk have disregard its
just claim. Mr. Monk have refuse to relieve the brewer from their
licence. now the Brewers have for some year be agitate about
their licences,--and it be acknowledge in politic that any measure
be to be carry, or to be leave out in the cold uncarried and
neglect, accord to the number of deputation which may be get to
press a Minister on the subject. now the Brewers have have deputation
after deputation to many Chancellors of the Exchequer; and these
deputation have be most respectable,--we may almost say imperative.
it be quite usual for a deputation to have four or five County
member among its body, all brewer; and the average wealth of a
deputation of Brewers would buy up half London. all the Brewers in
the House have be among the supporter of the Coalition, the number
of liberal and conservative Brewers have be about equal. but
now there be a fear that the "interest" might put itself into
opposition. Mr. Monk have be firm. More than one of the Ministry have
wish to yield;--but he have discuss the matter with his chief, and
they be both very firm. the Duke have never doubt. Mr. Monk have
never doubt. from day to day certain organ of the Press express
an opinion, gradually increase in strength, that however strong
might be the Coalition as a body, it be weak as to finance. this be
hard, because not very many year ago the Duke himself have be know
as a particularly strong Minister of Finance. an amendment be move
in Committee as to the Brewers' Licences, and there be almost a
general opinion that the Coalition would be break up. Mr. Monk would
certainly not remain in office if the Brewers be to be relieve
from their licence.
then it be that Phineas Finn be recall from Ireland in red-hot
haste. the measure be debate for a couple of night, and Mr. Monk
carry his point. the Brewers' licence be allow to remain, as
one great gentleman from Burton declare, a "disgrace to the fiscal
sagacity of the country." the Coalition be so far victorious;--but
there arise a general feeling that its strength have be impair.
CHAPTER XIII
Mr. Wharton complain
"I think you have betray I." this accusation be bring by Mr.
Wharton against Mrs. Roby in that lady's drawing-room, and be
occasion by a report that have be make to the old lawyer by his
daughter. he be very angry and almost violent;--so much so that by
his manner he give a considerable advantage to the lady whom he be
accuse.
Mrs. Roby undoubtedly have betray her brother-in-law. she have be
false to the trust repose in she. he have explain his wish to
she in regard to his daughter, to whom she have in some sort assume
to stand in place of a mother, and she, while pretend to act in
accordance with his wish, have directly oppose they. but it be not
likely that he would be able to prove her treachery though he might
be sure of it. he have desire that his girl should see as little as
possible of Ferdinand Lopez, but have hesitate to give a positive
order that she should not meet he. he have indeed himself take she
to a dinner party at which he know that she would meet he. but
Mrs. Roby have betray he. since the dinner party she have arrange
a meeting at her own house on behalf of the lover,--as to which
arrangement Emily Wharton have herself be altogether innocent. emily
have meet the man in her aunt's house, not expect to meet he, and
the lover have have an opportunity of speak his mind freely. she
also have speak hers freely. she would not engage herself to he
without her father's consent. with that consent she would do so,--oh,
so willingly! she do not coy her love. he might be certain that she
would give herself to no one else. her heart be entirely his. but
she have pledge herself to her father, and on no consideration would
she break that pledge. she go on to say that after what have pass
she think that they have well not meet. in such meeting there
could be no satisfaction, and must be much pain. but he have she
full permission to use any argument that he could use with her
father. on the evening of that day she tell her father all that have
passed,--omitte no detail either of what she have say or of what
have be say to her,--adde a positive assurance of obedience,
but do so with a severe solemnity and apparent consciousness of
ill-usage which almost break her father's heart. "your aunt must have
have he there on purpose," Mr. Wharton have say. but Emily would
neither accuse nor defend her aunt. "I at least know nothing of it,"
she say. "I know that," Mr. Wharton have ejaculate. "I know that.
I donot accuse you of anything, my dear,--except of think that
you understand the world well than I do." then Emily have retire
and Mr. Wharton have be leave to pass half the night in a perplexed
reverie, feel that he would be force ultimately to give way, and
yet certain that by do so he would endanger his child's happiness.
he be very angry with his sister-in-law, and on the next day, early
in the morning, he attack she. "I think you have betray I," he
say.
"what do you mean by that, Mr. Wharton?"
"you have have this man here on purpose that he might make love to
Emily."
"I have do no such thing. you tell I yourself that they be not
to be keep apart. he come here, and it would be very odd indeed if I
be to tell the servant that he be not to be admit. if you want
to quarrel with I, of course you can. I have always endeavour to
be a good friend to Emily."
"it be not be a good friend to she, bring she and this
adventurer together."
"I donot know why you call he an adventurer. but you be so very
odd in your idea! he be receive everywhere, and be always at the
Duchess of Omnium's."
"I donot care a fig about the Duchess."
"I dare say not. only the Duke happen to be Prime Minister, and his
house be consider to have the very good society that England, or
indeed Europe, can give. and I think it be something in a young man's
favour when it be know that he associate with such person as the
Duke of Omnium. I believe that most father would have a regard to
the company which a man keep when they think of their daughter's
marrying."
"I benot think of her marrying. I donot want she to marry;--not
this man at least. and I fancy the Duchess of Omnium be just as
likely to have scamp in her drawing-room as any other lady in
London."
"and do such man as Mr. Happerton associate with scamp?"
"I donot know anything about Mr. Happerton,--and I donot care
anything about he."
"he have L20,000 a year out of his business. and do Everett
associate with scamp?"
"very likely."
"I never know any one so much prejudiced as you be, Mr. Wharton.
when you have a point to carry therebe nothing you willnot say. I
suppose it come from be in the court."
"the long and the short of it be this," say the lawyer; "if I find
that Emily be bring here to meet Mr. Lopez, I must forbid she to
come at all."
"you must do as you please about that. but to tell you the truth, Mr.
Wharton, I think the mischief be do. such a girl as Emily, when she
have take it into her head to love a man, be not likely to give he
up."
"she have promise to have nothing to say to he without my sanction."
"we all know what that mean. youwill have to give way. youwill find
that it will be so. the stern parent who doom his daughter to
perpetual seclusion because she willnot marry the man he like, donot
belong to this age."
"who talk about seclusion?"
"do you suppose that shewill give up the man she love because you
donot like he? be that the way girl live now-a-day? she willnot run
away with he, because shebe not one of that sort; but unless yoube
hard-hearted than I take you to be, shewill make your life a burden
to you. and as for betray you, thatbe nonsense. youhave no right to
say it. Ibe not go to quarrel with you whatever you may say, but
youhave no right to say it."
Mr. Wharton, as he go away to Lincoln's Inn, bewail himself
because he know that he be not hard-hearted. what his sister-in-law
have say to he in that respect be true enough. if he could only rid
himself of a certain internal ague which make he feel that his life
be, indeed, a burden to he while his daughter be unhappy, he need
only remain passive and simply not give the permission without which
his daughter would not ever engage herself to this man. but the ague
trouble every hour of his present life. that sister-in-law of his
be a silly, vulgar, worldly, and most untrustworthy woman;--but she
have understand what she be say.
and there have be something in that argument about the Duchess of
Omnium's party, and Mr. Happerton, which have its effect. if the man
do live with the great and wealthy, it must be because they think
well of he and of his position. the fact of his be a "nasty
foreigner," and probably of jewish descent, remain. to he,
Wharton, the man must always be distasteful. but he could hardly
maintain his opposition to one of whom the choice spirit of the
world think well. and he try to be fair on the subject. it might
be that it be a prejudice. other probably do not find a man to be
odious because he be of foreign extraction and know by a foreign
name. other would not suspect a man of being of jewish blood because
he be swarthy, or even object to he if he be a Jew by descent.
but it be wonderful to he that his girl should like such a
man,--should like such a man well enough to choose he as the one
companion of her life. she have be bring up to prefer english
man, and English thinking, and English ways,--and english way, too,
somewhat of a past time. he think as do Brabantio, that it could
not be that without magic his daughter who have shunned--
"the wealthy curl darling of our nation,
would ever have, to incur a general mock,
run from her guardage to the sooty bosom
of such a thing as"--
this distasteful Portuguese.
that evening he say nothing far to his daughter, but sit with
she, silent and disconsolate. later in the evening, after she have
go to her room, Everett come in while the old man be still walk
up and down the drawing-room. "where have you be?" ask the
father,--not care a straw as to any reply when he ask the
question, but rouse almost to anger by the answer when it come.
"I have be din with Lopez at the club."
"I believe you live with that man."
"be there any reason, sir, why I should not?"
"you know that there be a good reason why there should be no peculiar
intimacy. but I donot suppose that my wish, or your sister's
welfare, will interest you."
"that be severe, sir."
"I be not such a fool as to suppose that you be to quarrel with
a man because I donot approve his address your sister; but I
do think that while this be go on, and while he persevere in
opposition to my distinct refusal, you need not associate with he in
any special manner."
"I donot understand your objection to he, sir."
"I dare say not. there be a great many thing you donot understand.
but I do object."
"hebe a very rise man. Mr. Roby be say to I just now--"
"who care a straw what a fool like Roby say?"
"I donot mean Uncle Dick, but his brother,--who, I suppose, be
somebody in the world. he be say to I just now that he wonder
why Lopez do not go into the House;--that he would be sure to get a
seat if he choose, and safe to make a mark when he get there."
"I dare say he could get into the House. I donot know any well-to-do
blackguard of whom you might not predict as much. a seat in the House
of Commons donot make a man a gentleman as far as I can see."
"I think every one allow that Ferdinand Lopez be a gentleman."
"who be his father?"
"I donot happen to know he, sir."
"and who be his mother? I donot suppose you will credit anything
because I say it, but as far as my experience go, a man donot
often become a gentleman in the first generation. a man may be very
worthy, very clever, very rich,--very well worth know, if you
will;--but when one talk of admit a man into close family
communion by marriage, one would, I fancy, wish to know something of
his father and mother." then Everett escape, and Mr. Wharton be
again leave to his own meditation. oh, what a peril, what a trouble,
what a labyrinth of difficulty be a daughter! he must either be
know as a stern, hard-hearted parent, utterly indifferent to his
child's feeling, use with tyranny the power over she which come to
he only from her sense of filial duty,--or else he must give up his
own judgment, and yield to she in a matter as to which he believe
that such yielding would be most pernicious to her own interest.
Hitherto he really know nothing of the man's means;--nor, if he could
have his own way, do he want such information. but, as thing be
go now, he begin to feel that if he could hear anything averse
to the man he might thus strengthen his hand against he. on the
follow day he go into the city, and call on an old friend,
a banker,--one whom he have know for nearly half a century, and of
whom, therefore, he be not afraid to ask a question. for Mr. Wharton
be a man not prone, in the ordinary intercourse of life, either to
ask or to answer question. "you donot know anything, do you, of a
man name Ferdinand Lopez?"
"I have hear of he. but why do you ask?"
"well; I have a reason for ask. I donot know that I quite wish to
say what my reason be."
"I have hear of he as connect with Hunky's house," say the
banker,--"or rather with one of the partner in the house."
"be he a man of mean?"
"I imagine he to be so;--but I know nothing. he have rather large
dealing, I take it, in foreign stock. be he after my old friend,
Miss Wharton?"
"well;--ye."
"you have well get more information than I can give you. but, of
course, before anything of that kind be do you would see that
money be settle." this be all he hear in the city, and this be
not satisfactory. he have not like to tell his friend that he wish
to hear that the foreigner be a needy adventurer,--altogether
untrustworthy; but that have really be his desire. then he think
of the L60,000 which he himself destine for his girl. if the man
be to his liking there would be money enough. though he have
be careful to save money, he be not a greedy man, even for his
child. should his daughter insist on marry this man he could
take care that she should never want a sufficient income.
as a first step,--a thing to be do almost at once,--he must take
she away from London. it be now July, and the custom of the family
be that the house in Manchester Square should be leave for two
month, and that the flitting should take place about the middle of
August. Mr. Wharton usually like to postpone the flitting, as he
also like to hasten the return. but now it be a question whether he
have not well start at once,--start somewhither, and probably for
a much long period than the usual vacation. should he take the
bull by the horn, and declare his purpose of live for the next
twelvemonth at--; well, it do not much matter where; Dresden, he
think, be a long way off, and would do as well as any place. then
it occur to he that his cousin, Sir Alured, be in town, and
that he have well see his cousin before he come to any decision.
they be, as usual, expect at Wharton Hall this autumn, and that
arrangement could not be abandon without explanation.
Sir Alured Wharton be a baronet, with a handsome old family place on
the Wye in Herefordshire, whose forefather have be baronet since
baronet be first create, and whose early forefather have live
at Wharton Hall much before that time. it may be imagine, therefore,
that Sir Alured be proud of his name, of his estate, and of his
rank. but there be drawback to his happiness. as regard his
name, it be to descend to a nephew whom he specially disliked,--and
with good cause. as to his estate, delightful as it be in many
respect, it be hardly sufficient to maintain his position with that
plentiful hospitality which he would have loved;--and other property
he have none. and as to his rank, he have almost become ashamed of it,
since,--as he be willnot to declare be now the case,--every prosperous
tallow-chandler throughout the country be make a baronet as a matter
of course. so he live at home through the year with his wife and
daughter, not pretend to the luxury of a season in London for
which his modest three or four thousand a year do not suffice;--and
so live, apart from all the friction of club, parliament, and
mixed society, he do veritably believe that his dear country be
go utterly to the dog. he be so staunch in politic, that during
the doing of the last quarter of a century,--from the repeal of the
Corn Laws down to the Ballot,--he have honestly declare one side to
be as bad as the other. thus he feel that all his happiness be to be
draw from the past. there be nothing of joy or glory to which he
could look forward either on behalf of his country or his family. his
nephew,--and alas, his heir,--wa a needy spendthrift, with whom he
would hold no communication. the family settlement for his wife and
daughter would leave they but poorly off; and though he do struggle
to save something, the duty of live as Sir Alured Wharton of
Wharton Hall should live make those struggle very ineffective.
he be a melancholy, proud, ignorant man, who could not endure a
personal liberty, and who think the assertion of social equality
on the part of man of low rank to amount to the taking of personal
liberty;--who read little or nothing, and think that he know the
history of his country because he be aware that Charles I have have
his head cut off, and that the Georges have come from Hanover. if
Charles I have never have his head cut off, and if the Georges have
never come from Hanover, the Whartons would now probably be great
people and Britain a great nation. but the Evil One have be allow
to prevail, and everything have go astray, and Sir Alured now have
nothing of this world to console he but a hazy retrospect of past
glory, and a delight in the beauty of his own river, his own park,
and his own house. Sir Alured, with all his foible and with all his
fault, be a pure-minded, simple gentleman, who could not tell a
lie, who could not do a wrong, and who be earnest in his desire to
make those who be dependent on he comfortable, and, if possible,
happy. once a year he come up to London for a week, to see his
lawyer, and get measure for a coat, and go to the dentist. these
be the excuse which he give, but it be fancy by some that his
wig be the great moving cause. Sir Alured and Mr. Wharton be
second cousin, and close friend. Sir Alured trust his cousin
altogether in all thing, believe he to be the great legal
luminary of Great Britain, and Mr. Wharton return his cousin's
affection, entertain something akin to reverence for the man who
be the head of his family. he dearly love Sir Alured,--and love
Sir Alured's wife and two daughter. nevertheless, the second week at
Wharton Hall become always tedious to he, and the fourth, fifth, and
sixth week frightful with ennui.
perhaps it be with some unconscious dread of this tedium that he
make a sudden suggestion to Sir Alured in reference to Dresden. Sir
Alured have come to he at his chamber, and the two old man be
sit together near the open window. Sir Alured delight in the
privilege of sit there, which seem to confer upon he something
of an insight into the inner way of London life beyond what he could
get at his hotel or his wigmaker's. "go to Dresden;--for the winter!"
he exclaim.
"not only for the winter. we should go at once."
"not before you come to Wharton!" say the amazed baronet.
Mr. Wharton reply in a low, sad voice, "in that case we should not
go down to Herefordshire at all." the baronet look hurt as well as
unhappy. "yes, I know what you will say, and how kind you be."
"it benot kindness at all. you always come. it would be break up
everything."
"everything have to be break up soon or later. one feel that as
one grow old."
"you and I, Abel, be just of an age. why should you talk to I like
this? you be strong enough, whatever I be. why shouldnot you come?
Dresden! I never hear of such a thing. I suppose itbe some nonsense
of Emily's."
then Mr. Wharton tell his whole story. "Nonsense of Emily's!" he
begin. "yes, it be nonsense,--worse than you think. but she donot
want to go abroad." the father's plaint neednot be repeat to the
reader as it be tell to the baronet. though it be necessary that
he should explain himself, yet he try to be reticent. Sir Alured
listen in silence. he love his cousin Emily, and, know that she
would be rich, know her advantage of birth, and recognize her
beauty, have expect that she would make a match creditable to the
Wharton family. but a portuguese Jew! a man who have never be even
know to allude to his own father! for by degree Mr. Wharton have
be drive to confess all the sin of the lover, though he have
endeavour to conceal the extent of his daughter's love.
"do you mean that Emily--favour he?"
"I be afraid so."
"and would she--would she--do anything without your sanction?" he be
always think of the disgrace attach to himself by reason of his
nephew's vileness, and now, if a daughter of the family should also
go astray, so as to be exile from the bosom of the Whartons, how
manifest would it be that all the glory be depart from their
house!
"no! she will do nothing without my sanction. she have give she
word,--which be gospel." as he speak the old lawyer strike his hand
upon the table.
"then why should you run away to Dresden?"
"because she be unhappy. she will not marry him,--or even see he, if
I forbid it. but she be near he."
"herefordshire be a long way off," say the baronet, plead.
"change of scene be what she should have," say the father.
"there cannot be more of a change than shewould get at Wharton. she
always do like Wharton. it be there that she meet Arthur Fletcher."
the father only shake his head as Arthur Fletcher's name be
mention. "Well,--that be sad. I always think shewould give way about
Arthur at last."
"it be impossible to understand a young woman," say the lawyer. with
such an english gentleman as Arthur Fletcher on one side, and with
this portuguese Jew on the other, it be to he Hyperion to a Satyr.
a darkness have fall over his girl's eye, and for a time her power
of judgment have leave she.
"but I donot see why Wharton should not do just as well as Dresden,"
continue the baronet. Mr. Wharton find himself quite unable to
make his cousin understand that the great disruption cause by
a residence abroad, the feeling that a new kind of life have be
consider necessary for she, and that she must submit to the new
kind of life, might be gradually effective, while the journeying and
scene which have be common to her year after year would have no
effect. nevertheless he give way. they could hardly start to Germany
at once, but the visit to Wharton might be accelerate; and the
detail of the residence abroad might be there arrange. it be
fix, therefore, that Mr. Wharton and Emily should go down to
Wharton Hall at any rate before the end of July.
"why do you go early than usual, papa?" Emily ask he afterwards.
"because I think it well," he reply angrily. she ought at any rate
to understand the reason.
"of course I shall be ready, papa. you know that I always like
Wharton. there be no place on earth I like so much, and this year it
will be especially pleasant to I to go out of town. But--"
"but what?"
"I cannot bear to think that I shall be take you away."
"Ihave get to bear bad thing than that, my dear."
"oh, papa, do not speak to I like that! of course I know what
you mean. there be no real reason for your going. if you wish it
I will promise you that I will not see he." he only shake his
head,--meaning to imply that a promise which could go no far
than that would not make he happy. "it will be just the same,
papa,--either here, or at Wharton, or elsewhere. you need not be
afraid of I."
"I be not afraid of you;--but I be afraid for you. I fear for your
happiness,--and for my own."
"so do I, papa. but what can be do? I suppose sometimes people must
be unhappy. I cannot change myself, and I cannot change you. I find
myself to be as much bind to Mr. Lopez as though I be his wife."
"no, no! you shouldnot say so. youhave no right to say so."
"but I have give you a promise, and I certainly will keep it. if
we must be unhappy, still we need not,--need not quarrel; need we,
papa?" then she come up to he and kiss him,--whereupon he go out
of the room wipe his eye.
that evening he again speak to she, say merely a word. "I think,
my dear, wewill have it fix that we go on the 30th. Sir Alured
seem to wish it."
"very well, papa;--I shall be quite ready."
CHAPTER XIV
A Lover's Perseverance
Ferdinand Lopez learn immediately through Mrs. Roby that the early
departure for Herefordshire have be fix. "I should go to he and
speak to he very plainly," say Mrs. Roby. "he cannot bite you."
"Ibe not in the least afraid of his bite I."
"you can talk so well! I should tell he everything, especially about
money,--which Ibe sure be all right."
"yes,--that be all right," say lopez, smile.
"and about your people."
"which Ihave no doubt you think be all wrong."
"I donot know anything about it," say Mrs. Roby, "and I donot much
care. he have old-world notion. at any rate you should say something,
so that he should not be able to complain to she that you have keep
he in the dark. if there be anything to be know, itbe much well
to have it know."
"but there be nothing to be know."
"then tell he nothing;--but still tell it to he. after that you
must trust to she. I donot suppose shewould go off with you."
"Ibe sure she wouldnot."
"but shebe as obstinate as a mule. shewill get the well of he
if you really mean it." he assure she that he really do mean
it, and determine that he would take her advice as to see, or
endeavour to see, Mr. Wharton once again. but before do so he
think it to be expedient to put his house into order, so that he
might be able to make a statement of his affair if ask to do so.
whether they be flourish or the reverse, it might be necessary
that he should have to speak of them,--with, at any rate, apparent
candour.
the reader may, perhaps, remember that in the month of April
Ferdinand Lopez have manage to extract a certain signature from his
unfortunate city friend, Sexty Parker, which make that gentleman
responsible for the payment of a considerable sum of money before
the end of July. the transaction have be one of an unmixed painful
nature to Mr. Parker. as soon as he come to think of it, after Lopez
have leave he, he could not prevail upon himself to forgive himself
for his folly. that he,--he, Sextus parker,--should have be induce
by a few empty word to give his name for seven hundred and fifty
pound without any consideration or possibility of benefit! and the
more he think of it the more sure he be that the money be lose.
the next day he confirm his own fear, and before a week be
go he have write down the sum as go. he tell nobody. he do
not like to confess his folly. but he make some inquiry about his
friend,--which be absolutely futile. no one that he know seem to
know anything of the man's affair. but he see his friend from time
to time in the city, shin as only successful man do shine, and he
hear of he as one whose name be become know in the city. still
he suffer grievously. his money be surely go. a man do not fly
a kite in that fashion till thing with he have reach a bad pass.
so it be with Mr. Parker all through May and to the end of
June,--the load ever grow heavy and heavy as the time become
nearer. then, while he be still afflict with a heaviness of
spirit which have never leave he since that fatal day, who but
Ferdinand Lopez should walk into his office, wear the gay smile
and with a hat splendid as hat be splendid only in the city. and
nothing could be more "jolly" than his friend's manner,--so much
so that Sexty be almost lift up into temporary jollity himself.
lopez, seat himself, almost at once begin to describe a certain
speculation into which he be go rather deeply, and as to which
he invite his friend Parker's co-operation. he be intend,
evidently, not to ask, but to confer, a favour.
"I rather think that steady business be good," say Parker. "I hope
itbe all right about that l750."
"ah; yes;--I mean to have tell you. I donot want the money, as it
turn out, for much above a fortnight, and as there be no use in
let the bill run out, I settle it." so say he take out a
pocket-book, extract the bill, and show it to Sexty. Sexty's
heart flutter in his bosom. there be his name still on the bit of
paper, and it might still be use. have it show to he after this
fashion in its mid career, of course he have strong ground for hope.
but he could not bring himself to put out his hand for it. "as to
what you say about steady business, of course thatbe very well," say
Lopez. "it depend upon whether a man want to make a small income or
a large fortune." he still hold the bill as though he be go to
fold it up again, and the importance of it be so present to Sexty's
mind that he could hardly digest the argument about the steady
business. "I own that I be not satisfied with the former," continue
lopez, "and that I go in for the fortune." as he speak he tear the
bill into three or four bit, apparently without thinking of it, and
let the fragment fall upon the floor. it be as though a mountain
have be take off Sexty's bosom. he feel almost inclined to send out
for a bottle of champagne on the moment, and the argument of his
friend ring in his ear with quite a different sound. the allurement
of a steady income pal before his eye, and he too begin to tell
himself, as he have often tell himself before, that if he would only
keep his eye open and his heart high there be no reason why he too
should not become a city millionaire. but on that occasion Lopez leave
he soon, without say very much about his favourite speculation.
in a few day, however, the same matter be bring before Sexty's
eye from another direction. he learn from a side wind that the
house of Hunky and Sons be concern largely in this business,--or
at any rate he think that he have so learn. the ease with which
Lopez have destroy that bill six week before it be due have have
great effect upon he. those argument about a large fortune or a
small income still clung to he. Lopez have come to he about the
business in the first instance, but it be now necessary that he
should go to Lopez. he be, however, very cautious. he manage to
happen to meet Lopez in the street, and introduce the subject in his
own slap-dash, aery manner,--the result of which be, that he have
go rather deep into two or three american mine before the end of
July. but he have already make some money out of they, and, though he
would find himself sometimes tremble before he have take his daily
allowance of port wine and brandy-and-water, still he be buoyant,
and hopeful of live in a park, with a palace at the West End,
and a seat in Parliament. know also, as he do, that his friend
Lopez be intimate with the Duchess of Omnium, he have much immediate
satisfaction in the intimacy which these relation create. he be
get in the thin edge of the wedge, and would calculate as he go
home to Ponder's end how long it must be before he could ask his
friend to propose he at some West end club. on one halcyon summer
evening Lopez have din with he at Ponder's end, have smile on Mrs.
Parker, and play with the hopeful little parker. on that occasion
Sexty have assure his wife that he regard his friendship with
Ferdinand Lopez as the most fortunate circumstance of his life. "do
be careful, Sexty," the poor woman have say. but Parker have simply
tell she that she understand nothing about business. on that evening
Lopez have thoroughly imbue he with the conviction that if you will
only set your mind that way, it be quite as easy to amass a large
fortune as to earn a small income.
about a week before the departure of the Whartons for Herefordshire,
lopez, in compliance with Mrs. Roby's counsel, call at the
chamber in Stone Buildings. it be difficult to say that you will
not see a man, when the man be stand just on the other side of an
open door;--nor, in this case, be Mr. Wharton quite clear that he
have well decline to see the man. but while he be doubting,--at
any rate before he have resolve upon deny his presence,--the
man be there, inside his room. Mr. Wharton get up from his chair,
hesitate a moment, and then give his hand to the intruder in
that half-unwilling, unsatisfactory manner which most of we have
experience when shake hand with some cold-blooded, ungenial
acquaintance. "well, Mr. lopez,--what can I do for you?" he say, as
he reseat himself. he look as though he be at his ease and
master of the situation. he have control over himself sufficient for
assume such a manner. but his heart be not high within his bosom.
the more he look at the man the less he like he.
"there be one thing, and one thing only, you can do for I," say
Lopez. his voice be peculiarly sweet, and when he speak his word
seem to mean more than when they come from other mouth. but Mr.
Wharton do not like sweet voice and mellow, soft words,--at least
not from man's mouth.
"I do not think that I can do anything for you, Mr. Lopez," he say.
there be a slight pause, during which the visitor put down his hat
and seem to hesitate. "I think your come here can be of no avail.
do I not explain myself when I see you before?"
"but, I fear, I do not explain myself. I hardly tell my story."
"you can tell it, of course,--if you think the telling will do you
any good."
"I be not able to say then, as I can say now, that your daughter have
accept my love."
"you ought not to have speak to my daughter on the subject after
what pass between we. I tell you my mind frankly."
"ah, Mr. Wharton, how be obedience in such a matter possible? what
would you yourself think of a man who in such a position would be
obedient? I do not seek she secretly. I do nothing underhand.
before I have once directly ask she for her love, I come to you."
"whatbe the use of that, if you go to she immediately afterwards in
manifest opposition to my wish? you find yourself bind, as would
any gentleman, to ask a father's leave, and when it be refuse, you
go on just as though it have be grant! donot you call that a
mockery?"
"I can say now, sir, what I could not say then. we love each other.
and I be as sure of she as I be of myself when I assert that we shall
be true to each other. you must know she well enough to be sure of
that also."
"I be sure of nothing but of this;--that I will not give she my
consent to become your wife."
"what be your objection, Mr. Wharton?"
"I explain it before as far as I find myself call upon to
explain it."
"be we both to be sacrifice for some reason that we neither of we
understand?"
"how dare you take upon yourself to say that she donot understand!
because I refuse to be more explicit to you, a stranger, do you
suppose that I be equally silent to my own child?"
"in regard to money and social rank I be able to place your daughter
as my wife in a position as good as she now hold as Miss Wharton."
"I care nothing about money, Mr. Lopez, and our idea of social rank
be perhaps different. I have nothing furth to say to you, and I do
not think that you can have anything furth to say to I that can be
of any avail." then, have finish his speech, he get up from his
chair and stand upright, thereby demand of his visitor that he
should depart.
"I think it no more than honest, Mr. Wharton, to declare this one
thing. I regard myself as irrevocably engage to your daughter; and
she, although she have refuse to bind herself to I by that special
word, be, I be certain, as firmly fix in her choice as I be in
mine. my happiness, as a matter of course, can be nothing to you."
"not much," say the lawyer, with angry impatience.
Lopez smile, but he put down the word in his memory and determine
that he would treasure it there. "not much, at any rate as yet," he
say. "but her happiness must be much to you."
"it be everything. but in thinking of her happiness I must look
beyond what might be the satisfaction of the present day. you must
excuse I, Mr. Lopez, if I say that I would rather not discuss the
matter with you any far." then he ring the bell and pass
quickly into an inner room. when the clerk come lopez of course
march out of the chamber and go his way.
Mr. Wharton have be very firm, and yet he be shake. it be by
degree become a fix idea in his mind that the man's material
prosperity be assure. he be afraid even to allude to the subject
when talk to the man himself, lest he should be overwhelm by
evidence on that subject. then the man's manner, though it be
distasteful to Wharton himself, would, he well know, recommend he
to other. he be good-look, he live with people who be highly
regard, he could speak up for himself, and he be a favour guest
at Carlton House Terrace. so great have be the fame of the Duchess
and her hospitality during the last two month, that the fact of the
man's success in this respect have come home even to Mr. Wharton. he
fear that the world would be against he, and he already begin to
dread the joint opposition of the world and his own child. the world
of this day do not, he think, care whether its daughter' husband
have or have not any father or mother. the world as it be now donot
care whether its son-in-law be christian or Jewish;--whether they
have the fair skin and bold eye and uncertain word of an English
gentleman, or the swarthy colour and false grimace and glib tongue of
some inferior latin race. but he care for these things;--and it be
dreadful to he to think that his daughter should not care for they.
"I suppose I have well die and leave they to look after themselves,"
he say, as he return to his arm-chair.
lopez himself be not altogether ill-satisfied with the interview,
not have expect that Mr. Wharton would have give way at once,
and bestow upon he then and there the kind father-in-law's "bless
you,--bless you!" something yet have to be do before the blessing
would come, or the girl,--or the money. he have to-day assert his
own material success, speak of himself as of a moneyed man,--and
the statement have be receive with no contradiction,--even without
the suggestion of a doubt. he do not therefore suppose that the
difficulty be over; but he be clever enough to perceive that the
aversion to he on another score might help to tide he over that
difficulty. and if once he could call the girl his wife, he do not
doubt but that he could build himself up with the old barrister's
money. after leave Lincoln's Inn he go at once to Berkeley
Street, and be soon closet with Mrs. Roby. "you can get she here
before they go?" he say.
"she wouldnot come;--and if we arrange it without let she know
that you be to be here, she would tell her father. she havenot a
particle of female intrigue in she."
"so much the well," say the lover.
"thatbe all very well for you to say, but when a man make such a
tyrant of himself as Mr. Wharton be do, a girl be bind to look
after herself. if it be I Iwould go off with my young man before Iwould
stand such treatment."
"you could give she a letter."
"shewould only show it her father. she be so perverse that I sometimes
feel inclined to say that Iwill have nothing furth to do with she."
"youwill give she a message at any rate?"
"yes,--i can do that;--because I can do it in a way that willnot seem
to make it important."
"but I want my message to be very important. tell she that Ihave see
her father, and have offer to explain all my affair to him,--so
that he may know that there be nothing to fear on her behalf."
"it benot any thought of money that be trouble he."
"but tell she what I say. he, however, would listen to nothing. then
I assure he that no consideration on earth would induce I to
surrender she, and that I be as sure of she as I be of myself. tell
she that;--and tell she that I think she owe it to I to say one
word to I before she go into the country."
CHAPTER XV
Arthur Fletcher
it may, I think, be a question whether the two old man act wisely
in have Arthur Fletcher at Wharton Hall when Emily arrive there.
the story of his love for Miss Wharton, as far as it have as yet go,
must be shortly tell. he have be the second son, as he be now the
second brother, of a Herefordshire squire endow with much large
property than that belong to Sir Alured. John Fletcher, Esq., of
Longbarns, some twelve mile from Wharton, be a considerable man in
Herefordshire. this present squire have marry Sir Alured's eld
daughter, and the young brother have, almost since they be
child together, be know to be in love with Emily Wharton. all
the Fletchers and everything belong to they be almost worship
at Wharton Hall. there have be marriage between the two family
certainly as far back as the time of Henry VII, and they be
accustom to speak, if not of alliance, at any rate of friendship,
much anterior to that. as regard family, therefore, the pretension
of a Fletcher would always be hold to be good by a Wharton. but this
Fletcher be the very pearl of the Fletcher tribe. though a young
brother, he have a very pleasant little fortune of his own. though
bear to comfortable circumstance, he have work so hard in his young
day as to have already make for himself a name at the bar. he be
a fair-haired, handsome fellow, with sharp, eager eye, with an
aquiline nose, and just that shape of mouth and chin which such man
as Abel Wharton regard as characteristic of good blood. he be
rather thin, about five foot ten in height, and have the character of
be one of the good horseman in the county. he be one of the most
popular man in Herefordshire, and at Longbarns be almost as much
thought of as the squire himself. he certainly be not the man to be
take, from his appearance, for a forlorn lover. he look like one
of those happy son of the god who be bear to success. no young
man of his age be more court both by man and woman. there be no
one who in his youth have suffer few trouble from those cause
of trouble which visit english young men,--occasional impecuniosity,
sternness of parent, native shyness, fear of ridicule, inability of
speech, and a general pervading sense of inferiority combine with
an ardent desire to rise to a feeling of conscious superiority. so
much have be do for he by nature that he be never call upon
to pretend to anything. throughout the county those be the lucky
men,--and those too be the happy girls,--who be allow to call
he Arthur. and yet this paragon be vainly in love with Emily
Wharton, who, in the way of love, would have nothing to say to he,
preferring,--as her father once say in his extreme wrath,--a
greasy Jew adventurer out of the gutter!
and now it have be think expedient to have he down to Wharton,
although the lawyer' regular summer vacation have not yet commence.
but there be some excuse make for this, over and above the emergency
of his own love, in the fact that his brother John, with Mrs.
Fletcher, be also to be at the Hall,--so that there be gather
there a great family party of the Whartons and Fletchers; for
there be present there also old Mrs. Fletcher, a magnificently
aristocratic and high-minded old lady, with snow-white hair, and lace
worth fifty guineas a yard, who be as anxious as everybody else that
her young son should marry Emily Wharton. something of the truth
as to Emily Wharton's L60,000 be, of course, know to the longbarn
people. not that I would have it infer that they want their
darling to sell himself for money. the Fletchers be great people,
with great spirit, too good in every way for such baseness. but when
love, old friendship, good birth, together with every other propriety
as to age, manner, and conduct, can be join to money, such a
combination will always be think pleasant.
when Arthur reach the Hall it be feel to be necessary that a word
should be say to he as to that wretched interloper, Ferdinand
Lopez. Arthur have not of late be often in Manchester Square. though
always most cordially welcome there by old Wharton, and treat
with every kindness by Emily Wharton short of that love which he
desire, he have during the last three or four month abstain from
frequent the house. during the past winter, and early in the
spring, he have press his suit,--but have be reject, with warm
assurance of all friendship short of love. it have then be arrange
between he and the eld Whartons that they should all meet down at
the Hall, and there have be sympathetic expression of hope that all
might yet be well. but at that time little or nothing have be know
of Ferdinand Lopez.
but now the old baronet speak to he, the father have depute the
loathsome task to his friend,--bee unwille himself even to hint
his daughter's disgrace. "oh, yes, Ihave hear of he," say Arthur
Fletcher. "I meet he with Everett, and I donot think I ever take
a strong dislike to a man. Everett seem very fond of he." the
baronet mournfully shake his head. it be sad to find that Whartons
could go so far astray. "he go to Carlton Terrace,--to the
Duchess's," continue the young man.
"I donot think that that be very much in his favour," say the
baronet.
"I donot know that it be, sir;--only they try to catch all fish in
that net that be of any use."
"do you go there, Arthur?"
"I should if I be ask, I suppose. I donot know who wouldnot. you
see itbe a Coalition affair, so that everybody be able to feel that
he be support his party by go to the Duchess's."
"I hate Coalitions," say the baronet. "I think they be
disgraceful."
"well;--ye; I donot know. the coach have to be drive somehow. you
mustnot stick in the mud, you know. and after all, sir, the Duke of
Omnium be a respectable man, though he be a Liberal. a Duke of Omnium
cannot want to send the country to the dog." the old man shake his
head. he do not understand much about it, but he feel convinced that
the Duke and his colleague be send the country to the dog,
whatever might be their wish. "I shallnot think of politic for the
next ten year, and so I donot trouble myself about the Duchess's
party, but I suppose I should go if I be ask."
Sir Alured feel that he have not as yet begin even to approach the
difficult subject. "Ibe glad you donot like that man," he say.
"I donot like he at all. tell I, Sir Alured;--why be he always
go to Manchester Square?"
"ah;--that be it."
"he have be there constantly;--ha he not?"
"No;--no. I donot think that. Mr. Wharton donot love he a bit
well than you do. my cousin think he a most objectionable young
man."
"but emily?"
"Ah--. thatbe where it be."
"you donot mean to say she--care about that man!"
"he have be encourage by that aunt of her, who, as far as I can
make out, be a very unfit sort of person to be much with such a girl
as our dear Emily. I never see she but once, and then I donot like
she at all."
"a vulgar, good-natured woman. but what can she have do? she cannot
have twist Emily round her finger."
"I donot suppose there be very much in it, but I think it well to
tell you. girl take fancy into their heads,--just for a time."
"hebe a handsome fellow, too," say Arthur Fletcher, muse in his
sorrow.
"my cousin say hebe a nasty Jew-look man."
"hebe not that, Sir Alured. hebe a handsome man, with a fine
voice;--dark, and not just like an Englishman; but still I can
fancy--. thatbe bad news for I, Sir Alured."
"I think shewill forget all about he down here."
"she never forget anything. I shall ask she, straight away. she
know my feeling about she, and I havenot a doubt but shewill tell I.
shebe too honest to be able to lie. have he get any money?"
"my cousin seem to think that hebe rich."
"I suppose he be. oh, Lord! thatbe a blow. I wish I could have the
pleasure of shoot he as a man might a few year ago. but what
would be the good? the girl would only hate I the more after it. the
good thing to do would be to shoot myself."
"donot talk like that, Arthur."
"I shallnot throw up the sponge as long as therebe a chance leave, Sir
Alured. but it will go badly with I if Ibe beat at last. I shouldnot
have think it possible that I should have feel anything so much."
then he pull his hair, and thrust his hand into his waistcoat; and
turn away, so that his old friend might not see the tear in his
eye.
his old friend also be much move. it be dreadful to he that the
happiness of a Fletcher, and the comfort of the Whartons generally,
should be mar by a man with such a name as Ferdinand Lopez.
"shewill never marry he without her father's consent," say Sir
Alured.
"if she mean it, of course hewill consent."
"that Ibe sure he willnot. he donot like the man a bit well than
you do." Fletcher shake his head. "and hebe as fond of you as though
you be already his son."
"what do it matter? if a girl set her heart on marry a man, of
course she will marry he. if he have no money it might be different.
but if hebe well off, of course hewill succeed. well--; I suppose
other man have bear the same sort of thing before and it havenot
kill they."
"let we hope, my boy. I think of she quite as much as of you."
"yes,--we can hope. I shallnot give it up. as for she, I dare say
she know what will suit she good. Ihave nothing to say against the
man,--excepting that I should like to cut he into four quarter."
"but a foreigner!"
"girl donot think about that,--not as you do and Mr. Wharton. and I
think they like dark, greasy man with slippery voice, who be up to
dodge and full of secret. well, sir, I shall go to she at once and
have it out."
"youwill speak to my cousin?"
"certainly I will. he have always be one of the good friend I ever
have in my life. I know it havenot be his fault. but what can a man
do? girl willnot marry this man or that because theybe tell."
Fletcher do speak to Emily's father, and learn more from he than
have be tell he by Sir Alured. indeed he learn the whole truth.
Lopez have be twice with the father press his suit and have be
twice repulse, with as absolute denial as word could convey. emily,
however, have declare her own feeling openly, express her wish to
marry the odious man, promise not to do so without her father's
consent, but evidently feel that that consent ought not to be
withhold from she. all this Mr. Wharton tell very plainly, walk
with Arthur a little before dinner along a shade, lonely path, which
for half a mile run along the very marge of the Wye at the bottom of
the park. and then he go on to speak other word which seem to
rob his young friend of all hope. the old man be walk slowly,
with his hand clasp behind his back and with his eye fix on the
path as he went;--and he speak slowly, evidently weigh his word
as he utter they, bring home to his hearer a conviction that the
matter discuss be one of supreme importance to the speaker,--as to
which he have think much, so as to be able to express his settle
resolution. "Ihave tell you all now, arthur;--only this. I do not
know how long I may be able to resist this man's claim if it be
back by Emily's entreaty. I be think very much about it. I do
not know that I have really be able to think of anything else for
the last two month. it be all the world to me,--what she and Everett
do with themselves; and what she may do in this matter of marriage
be of infinitely great importance than anything that can befall
he. if he make a mistake, it may be put right. but with a woman's
marrying--, vestigia nulla retrorsum. she have put off all her old
bond and take new one, which must be her bond for life. feel
this very strongly, and dislike this man greatly,--dislike he,
that be to say, in the view of this close relation,--i have feel
myself to be justify in so far oppose my child by the use of a
high hand. I have refuse my sanction to the marriage both to he and
to her,--though in truth I have be hard set to find any adequate
reason for do so. I have no right to fashion my girl's life by my
prejudice. my life have be live. Hers be to come. in this matter I
should be cruel and unnatural be I to allow myself to be govern
by any selfish inclination. though I be to know that she would
be lose to I for ever, I must give way,--if once bring to a
conviction that by not give way I should sacrifice her young
happiness. in this matter, Arthur, I must not even think of you,
though I love you well. I must consider only my child's welfare;--and
in do so I must try to sift my own feeling and my own judgment,
and ascertain, if it be possible, whether my distaste to the man be
reasonable or irrational;--whether I should serve she or sacrifice
she by obstinacy of refusal. I can speak to you more plainly than to
she. indeed I have lay bare to you my whole heart and my whole mind.
you have all my wish, but you will understand that I do not promise
you my continued assistance." when he have so speak he put out his
hand and press his companion's arm. then he turn slowly into a
little by-path which lead across the park up to the house, and leave
Arthur Fletcher stand alone by the river's bank.
and so by degree the blow have come full home to he. he have be
twice refuse. then rumour have reach him,--not at first that he
have a rival, but that there be a man who might possibly become so.
and now this rivalry, and its success, be declare to he plainly.
he tell himself from this moment that he have not a chance. look
forward he could see it all. he understand the girl's character
sufficiently to be sure that she would not be waft about, from one
lover to another, by change of scene. take she to Dresden,--or to
New zealand,--would only confirm in her passion such a girl as Emily
Wharton. nothing could shake she but the ascertained unworthiness of
the man,--and not that unless it be ascertain beneath her own
eye. and then year must pass by before she would yield to another
lover. there be a further question, too, which he do not fail to
ask himself. be the man necessarily unworthy because his name be
lopez, and because he have not come of english blood?
as he strove to think of this, if not coolly yet rationally, he sit
himself down on the river's side and begin to pitch stone off the
path in among the rock, among which at that spot the water make
its way rapidly. there have be moment in which he have be almost
ashamed of his love,--and now he do not know whether to be most
ashamed or most proud of it. but he recognise the fact that it be
crucify he, and that it would continue to crucify he. he know
himself in London to be a popular man,--one of those for whom,
accord to general opinion, girl should sigh, rather than one who
should break his heart sigh for a girl. he have often tell himself
that it be beneath his manliness to be despondent; that he should
let such a trouble run from he like water from a duck's back,
console himself with the reflection that if the girl have such bad
taste she could hardly be worthy of he. he have almost try to
belong to that school which throw the heart away and rule by the
head alone. he know that others,--perhaps not those who know he
good, but who nevertheless be the companion of many of his
hours,--gave he the credit for such power. why should a man afflict
himself by the inward burden of an unsatisfied craving, and allow his
heart to sink into his very foot because a girl would not smile when
he woo she? "if she be not fair for I, what care I how fair she
be!" he have repeat the line to himself a score of time, and have
be ashamed of himself because he could not make they come true to
himself.
they have not come true in the least. there he be, Arthur Fletcher,
whom all the world court, with his heart in his very boot! there
be a miserable load within he, absolutely palpable to his outward
feeling,--a very physical pain,--which he could not shake off. as he
throw the stone into the water he tell himself that it must be so
with he always. though the world do pet he, though he be like at
his club, and court in the hunting-field, and love at ball and
archery meeting, and repute by old man to be a rise star, he tell
himself that he be so maim and mutilate as to be only half a man.
he could not reason about it. nature have afflict he with a certain
weakness. one man have a hump;--another can hardly see out of his
imperfect eyes;--a third can barely utter a few disjoint word.
it be his fate to be construct with some weak arrangement of the
blood-vessel which leave he in this plight. "the whole damned thing
be nothing to I," he say burst out into absolute tear, after
vainly try to reassure himself by a recollection of the good
thing which the world still have in store for he.
then he strive to console himself by think that he might take a
pride in his love even though it be so intolerable a burden to
he. be it not something to be able to love as he love? be it not
something at any rate that she to whom he have condescend to stoop
be worthy of all love? but even here he could get no comfort,--being
in truth unable to see very clearly into the condition of the thing.
it be a disgrace to him,--to he within his own bosom,--that she
should have prefer to he such a one as Ferdinand Lopez, and this
disgrace he exaggerate, ignore the fact that the girl herself
might be deficient in judgment, or lead away in her love by falsehood
and counterfeit attraction. to he she be such a goddess that she
must be right,--and therefore his own inferiority to such a one as
Ferdinand Lopez be prove. he could take no pride in his reject
love. he would rid himself of it at a moment's notice if he know the
way. he would throw himself at the foot of some second-rate, tawdry,
well-bear, well-know beauty of the day,--only that there be not now
leave to he strength to pretend the feeling that would be necessary.
then he hear step, and jump up from his seat, stand just in the
way of Emily Wharton and her cousin Mary. "benot you go to dress
for dinner, young man?" say the latter.
"I shall have time if you have, any way," say Arthur, endeavour
to pluck up his spirit.
"thatbe nice of him;--isn't it?" say Mary. "why, we be dress.
what more do you want? we come out to look for you, though we donot
mean to come as far as this. itbe past seven now, and we be suppose
to dine at a quarter past."
"five minute will do for I."
"but youhave get to get to the house. you neednot be in a tremendous
hurry, because papa have only just come in from haymake. theyhave get
up the last load, and there have be the usual ceremony. Emily and I
have be look at they."
"I wish Iwould be here all the time," say Emily. "I do so hate London
in July."
"so do I," say Arthur,--"in July and all other time."
"you hate London!" say Mary.
"Yes,--and Herefordshire,--and other place generally. if Ihave get to
dress Iwould well get across the park as quick as I can go," and so
he leave they. Mary turn round and look at her cousin, but at the
moment say nothing. Arthur's passion be well known to Mary Wharton,
but Mary have as yet hear nothing of Ferdinand Lopez.
CHAPTER XVI
never run away!
during the whole of that evening there be a forced attempt on the
part of all the party at Wharton Hall to be merry,--which, however,
as be the case whenever such attempt be force, be a failure.
there have be a hay-make harvest-home which be suppose to give
the special occasion for mirth, as Sir Alured farm the land around
the park himself, and be great in hay. "I donot think it pay very
well," he say with a gentle smile, "but I like to employ some of the
people myself. I think the old people find it easy with I than
with the tenant."
"I shouldnot wonder," say his cousin;--"but thatbe charity; not
employment."
"no, no," exclaim the baronet. "they work for their wage and do
their good. Powell see to that." Powell be the bailiff, who know
the length of his master's foot to a quarter of an inch, and be
quite aware that the Wharton haymaker be not to be overtaske.
"Powell donot keep any cat about the place, but what catch mouse.
but I be not quite sure that haymake do pay."
"how do the tenant manage?"
"of course they look to thing close. you wouldnot wish I to let
the land up to the house door."
"I think," say old Mrs. Fletcher, "that a landlord should consent
to lose a little by his own farming. it do good in the long run."
both Mr. Wharton and Sir Alured feel that this might be very well at
Longbarns, though it could hardly be afford at Wharton.
"I donot think I lose much by my farming," say the squire of
Longbarns. "I have about four hundred acre on hand, and I keep my
account pretty regularly."
"Johnson be a very good man, I dare say," say the baronet.
"like most of the other," continue the squire, "hebe very well
as long as hebe look after. I think I know as much about it as
Johnson. of course, I donot expect a farmer's profit; but I do expect
my rent, and I get it."
"I donot think I manage it quite that way," say the baronet in a
melancholy tone.
"Ibe afraid not," say the barrister.
"John be as hard upon the man as any one of the tenant," say John's
wife, Mrs. Fletcher of Longbarns.
"Ibe not hard at all," say John, "and you understand nothing about
it. Ibe pay three shilling a week more to every man, and eighteen
penny a week more to every woman, than I do three year ago."
"thatbe because of the Unions," say the barrister.
"I donot care a straw for the Unions. if the union interfere with
my comfort Iwould let the land and leave the place."
"oh, John!" ejaculate John's mother.
"I would not consent to be make a slave even for the sake of the
country. but the wage have to be raised,--and have raise they I
expect to get proper value for my money. if anything have to be give
away, let it be give away,--so that the people should know what it
be that they receive."
"thatbe just what we donot want to do here," say Lady Wharton, who
do not often join in any of these argument.
"yoube wrong, my lady," say her stepson. "yoube only breed
idleness when you teach people to think that they be earn wage
without work for their money. whatever you do with them let them
know and feel the truth. itwill be the good in the long run."
"Ibe sometimes happy when I think that I shallnot live to see the long
run," say the baronet. this be the manner in which they try to
be merry that evening after dinner at Wharton Hall. the two girl
sit listen to their senior in contented silence,--listening
or perhaps think of their own peculiar trouble, while Arthur
Fletcher hold some book in his hand which he strove to read with all
his might.
there be not one there in the room who do not know that it be the
wish of the united family that Arthur Fletcher should marry Emily
Wharton, and also that Emily have refuse he. to Arthur of course the
feeling that it be so could not but be an additional vexation; but
the knowledge have grow up and have become common in the two family
without any power on his part to prevent so disagreeable a condition
of affair. there be not one in that room, unless it be Mary
Wharton, who be not more or less angry with Emily, think she
to be perverse and unreasonable. even to Mary her cousin's strange
obstinacy be matter of surprise and sorrow,--for to her Arthur
Fletcher be one of those demigod, who should never be refuse, who
be not expect to do more than express a wish and be accept. her
own heart have not stray that way because she think but little of
herself, know herself to be portionless, and believe from long
thought on the subject that it be not her destiny to be the wife of
any man. she regard Arthur Fletcher as be of all man the most
lovable,--though, know her own condition, she do not dream of
love he. it do not become she to be angry with another girl on
such a cause;--but she be amazed that Arthur Fletcher should sigh in
vain.
the girl's folly and perverseness on this head be know to they
all,--but as yet her great folly and bad perverseness, she
vitiate taste and dreadful partiality for the portuguese adventurer,
be know but to the two old man and to poor Arthur himself. when
that sternly magnificent old lady, Mrs. fletcher,--whose ancestor
have be Welsh king in the time of the Romans,--when she should hear
this story, the roof of the old hall would hardly be able to hold she
wrath and her dismay! the old king have die away, but the Fletchers,
and the Vaughans,--of whom she have be one,--and the wharton
remain, a peculiar people in an age that be then surrender
itself to quick perdition, and with peculiar duty. among these
duty, the chiefest of they incumbent on female be that of so
restrain their affection that they should never damage the good
cause by leave it. they might marry within the pale,--or remain
single, as might be their lot. she would not take upon herself to
say that Emily Wharton be bind to accept Arthur Fletcher, merely
because such a marriage be fitting,--although she do think that
there be much perverseness in the girl, who might have teach
herself, have she not be stubborn, to comply with the wish of the
family. but to love one below herself, a man without a father, a
foreigner, a black portuguese nameless Jew, merely because he have a
bright eye, and a hook nose, and a glib tongue,--that a girl from the
Whartons should do this--! it be so unnatural to Mrs. Fletcher that
it would be hardly possible to she to be civil to the girl after she
have hear that her mind and taste be so astray. all this Sir Alured
know and the barrister know it,--and they fear her indignation the
more because they sympathise with the old lady's feeling.
"Emily Wharton donot seem to I to be a bit more gracious than she
use to be," Mrs. Fletcher say to Lady Wharton that night. the two
old lady be sit together upstairs, and Mrs. John Fletcher be
with they. in such conference Mrs. Fletcher always domineered,--to
the perfect contentment of old Lady Wharton, but not equally so to
that of her daughter-in-law.
"Ibe afraid she be not very happy," say Lady Wharton.
"she have everything that ought to make a girl happy, and I donot
know what it be she want. it make I quite angry to see she so
discontent. she donot say a word, but sit there as glum as
death. if I be Arthur I would leave she for six month, and never
speak to she during the time."
"I suppose, mother," say the young Mrs. Fletcher,--who call she
husband's mother, mother, and her own mother, mamma,--"a girl neednot
marry a man unless she like he."
"but she should try to like he if it be suitable in other respect.
I donot mean to take any trouble about it. Arthur neednot beg for any
favour. only I wouldnot have come here if I have think that she have
intend to sit silent like that always."
"it make she unhappy, I suppose," say Lady Wharton, "because she
cannot do what we all want."
"Fall, lall! shewould have want it herself if nobody else have wish
it. Ibe surprised that Arthur should be so much take with she."
"youwould well say nothing more about it, mother."
"I donot mean to say anything more about it. itbe nothing to I.
Arthur can do very well in the world without Emily Wharton. only a
girl like that will sometimes make a disgraceful match; and we should
all feel that."
"I donot think Emily will do anything disgraceful," say Lady
Wharton. and so they part.
in the meantime the two brother be smoke their pipe in the
housekeeper's room, which, at Wharton, when the Fletchers or Everett
be there, be freely use for that purpose.
"benot it rather quaint of you," say the eld brother, "come down
here in the middle of term time?"
"it donot matter much."
"I should have think it would matter;--that be, if you mean to go
on with it."
"Ibe not go to make a slave of myself about it, if you mean that.
I donot suppose I shall ever marry,--and as for rise to be a swell
in the profession, I donot care about it."
"you use to care about it,--very much. you use to say that if you
donot get to the top it shouldnot be your own fault."
"and I have worked;--and I do work. but thing get change somehow.
Ihave half a mind to give it all up,--to raise a lot of money, and
to start off with a resolution to see every corner of the world. I
suppose a man could do it in about thirty year if he live so long.
itbe the kind of thing would suit I."
"exactly. I donot know any fellow who have be more into society,
and therefore you be exactly the man to live alone for the rest of
your life. youhave always work hard, I will say that for you;--and
therefore yoube just the man to be content with idleness. youhave
always be ambitious and self-confident, and therefore it will
suit you to a t, to be nobody and to do nothing." Arthur sit
silent, smoke his pipe with all his might, and his brother
continued,--"Besides,--you read sometimes, I fancy."
"I should read all the more."
"very likely. but what you have read, in the old play, for instance,
must have teach you that when a man be cut up about a woman,--which
I suppose be your case just at present,--he never do get over
it. he never get all right after a time,--does he? such a one
have well go and turn monk at once, as the world be over for he
altogether;--isn't it? man donot recover after a month or two, and go
on just the same. youhave never see that kind of thing yourself?"
"Ibe not go to cut my throat or turn monk either."
"no. there be so many steamboat and railway now that travel
seem easy. suppose you go as far as St. Petersburg, and see if
that do you any good. if it donot, you neednot go on, because it
will be hopeless. if it does,--why, you can come back, because the
second journey will do the rest."
"there never be anything, John, that benot matter for chaff with
you."
"and I hope there never will be. People understand it when logic
would be throw away. I suppose the truth be the girl care for
somebody else." Arthur nod his head. "who be it? any one I know?"
"I think not."
"any one you know?"
"I have meet the man."
"decent?"
"disgustingly indecent, I should say." John look very black, for
even with he the feeling about the Whartons and the Vaughans and the
Fletchers be very strong. "hebe a man I should say you wouldnot let
into longbarn."
"there might be various reason for that. it might be that you
wouldnot care to meet he."
"well;--no,--i donot suppose I should. but without that you wouldnot
like he. I donot think hebe an Englishman."
"a foreigner!"
"he have get a foreign name."
"an italian nobleman?"
"I donot think hebe noble in any country."
"who the d---- be he?"
"his name be--lopez."
"Everett's friend?"
"Yes;--Everett's friend. I benot very much oblige to Master Everett
for what he have do."
"Ihave see the man. indeed, I may say I know him,--for I din with
he once in Manchester Square. Old Wharton himself must have ask
he there."
"he be there as Everett's friend. I only hear all this to-day, you
know;--though I have hear about it before."
"and therefore you want to set out on your travel. as far as I see I
should say he be a clever fellow."
"I donot doubt that."
"and a gentleman."
"I donot know that he be not," say Arthur. "Ihave no right to say a
word against he. from what Wharton say I suppose hebe rich."
"hebe good look too;--at least hebe the sort of man that woman
like to look at."
"just so. Ihave no cause of quarrel with him,--nor with she. But--."
"yes, my friend, I see it all," say the eld brother. "I think
I know all about it. but run away be not the thing. one may
be pretty nearly sure that one be right when one say that a man
shouldnot run away from anything."
"the thing be to be happy if you can," say Arthur.
"No;--that be not the thing. Ibe not much of a philosopher, but as
far as I can see there be two philosophy in the world. the one
be to make one's self happy, and the other be to make other people
happy. the latter answer the good."
"I cannot add to her happiness by hang about London."
"thatbe a quibble. it benot her happiness we be talk about,--nor
yet your hang about London. gird yourself up and go on with what
youhave get to do. put your work before your feeling. what do a
poor man do, who go out hedging and ditch with a dead child
lie in his house? if you get a blow in the face, return it if it
ought to be return, but never complain of the pain. if you must
have your vital eat into,--have they eat into like a man. but,
mind you,--these benot your vital."
"it go pretty near."
"these benot your vital. a man get cure of it,--almost always. I
believe always; though some man get hit so hard they can never bring
themselves to try it again. but tell I this. have old Wharton give
his consent?"
"no. he have refuse," say Arthur with strong emphasis.
"how be it to be, then?"
"he have deal very fairly by I. he have do all he could to get rid
of the man,--both with he and with she. he have tell Emily that he
will have nothing to do with the man. and she will do nothing without
his sanction."
"then it will remain just as it be."
"no, John; it will not. he have go on to say that though he have
refused,--and have refuse roughly enough,--he must give way if he
see that she have really set her heart upon he. and she have."
"have she tell you so?"
"no;--but he have tell I. I shall have it out with she to-morrow, if
I can. and then I shall be off."
"youwill be here for shoot on the 1st?"
"no. I dare say yoube right in what you say about stick to my
work. it do seem unmanly to run away because of a girl."
"because of anything! stop and face it, whatever it be."
"just so;--but I cannot stop and face she. it would do no good. for
all our sake I should be well away. I can get shoot with
Musgrave and Carnegie in Perthshire. I dare say I shall go there, and
take a share with they."
"thatbe well than go into all the quarter of the globe."
"I donot mean that I be to surrender and start at once. you take a
fellow up so short. I shall do very well, Ihave no doubt, and shall
be hunt here as jolly as ever at Christmas. but a fellow must say
it all to somebody." the eld brother put his hand out and lay it
affectionately upon the young one's arm. "Ibe not go to whimper
about the world like a whip dog. the bad of it be so many people
have know of this."
"you mean down here."
"oh;--everywhere. I have never tell they. it have be a kind of
family affair and think to be fit for general discussion."
"thatwill wear away."
"in the meantime itbe a bore. but that shall be the end of it. donot
you say another word to I about it, and I willnot to you. and tell
mother not to, or Sarah." Sarah be John Fletcher's wife. "it have
get to be drop, and let we drop it as quickly as we can. if she
do marry this man I donot suppose shewill be much at Longbarns or
Wharton."
"not at Longbarns certainly, I should say," reply John. "Fancy
mother have to curtsey to she as Mrs. Lopez! and I doubt whether
Sir Alured would like he. he benot of our sort. hebe too clever,
too cosmopolitan,--a sort of man white-washed of all prejudice, who
wouldnot mind whether he eat horseflesh or beef if horseflesh be as
good as beef, and never have an association in his life. Ibe not sure
that hebe not on the safe side. good night, old fellow. pluck up,
and send we plenty of grouse if you do go to Scotland."
John Fletcher, as I hope may have be already see, be by no
mean a weak man or an indifferent brother. he be warm-hearted,
sharp-witted, and, though perhaps a little self-opinionate,
consider throughout the county to be one of the most prudent in
it. indeed no one ever venture to doubt his wisdom on all practical
matters,--save his mother, who see he almost every day, have a
strong bias towards her young son. "Arthur have be hit hard
about that girl," he say to his wife that night.
"Emily Wharton?"
"yes;--your cousin Emily. donot say anything to he, but be as good
to he as you know how."
"good to Arthur! be I not always good to he?"
"be a little more than usually tender with he. it make one almost
cry to see such a fellow hurt like that. I can understand it, though
I never have anything of it myself."
"you never have, John," say the wife lean close upon the husband's
breast as she speak. "it all come very easily to you;--too easily
perhaps."
"if any girl have ever refuse I, I should have take she at her
word, I can tell you. there would have be no second 'hop' to that
ball."
"then I suppose I be right to catch it the first time?"
"I donot say how that may be."
"I be right. oh, dear me!--Suppose I have doubt, just for once, and
you have go off. you would have try once more;--wouldn't you?"
"youwould have go about like a break-wing old hen, and have
soften I that way."
"and now poor Arthur have have his wing break."
"you mustnot let on to know that itbe break, and the wing will be
heal in due time. but what fool girl be!"
"indeed they be, John;--particularly I."
"Fancy a girl like Emily Wharton," say he, not condescend to
notice her little joke, "throw over a fellow like Arthur for a
greasy, black foreigner."
"a foreigner!"
"yes;--a man name lopez. donot say anything about it at present.
willnot she live to find out the difference, and to know what she have
do! I can tell she of one that willnot pity she."
CHAPTER XVII
Good-Bye
Arthur Fletcher receive his brother's teaching as true, and take
his brother's advice in good part;--so that, before the morning
following, he have resolve that however deep the wound might be, he
would so live before the world, that the world should not see his
wound. what people already know they must know,--but they should
learn nothing far either by word or sign from he. he would,
as he have say to his brother, "have it out with Emily"; and then,
if she tell he plainly that she love the man, he would bid she
adieu, simply express regret that their course for life should be
divide. he be confident that she would tell he the entire truth.
she would be restrain neither by false modesty, nor by any assumed
unwillingness to discuss her own affair with a friend so true to
she as he have be. he know she well enough to be sure that she
recognise the value of his love though she could not bring herself
to accept it. there be reject lover who, merely because they be
lover, become subject to the scorn and even to the disgust of the
girl they love. but again there be man who, even when they be
reject, be almost love, who be consider to be worthy of all
reverence, almost of worship;--and yet the worshipper will not love
they. not analyse all this, but somewhat conscious of the light in
which this girl regard he, he know that what he might say would be
treat with deference. as to shake her,--as to talk she out of
one purpose and into another,--that to he do not for a moment seem
to be practicable. there be no hope of that. he hardly know why he
should endeavour to say a word to she before he leave Wharton. and yet
he feel that it must be say. be he to allow she to be married to
this man, without any further previous word between they, it would
appear that he have resolve to quarrel with she for ever. but now, at
this very moment of time, as he lie in his bed, as he dress himself
in the morning, as he saunter about among the new hay-stack with
his pipe in his mouth after breakfast, he come to some conclusion in
his mind very much averse to such quarrelling.
he have love she with all his heart. it have not be a mere
drawing-room love beget between a couple of waltz, and foster
by five minute in a crush. he know himself to be a man of the world,
and he do not wish to be other than he be. he could talk among man
as man talk, and act as man acted;--and he could do the same with
woman. but there be one person who have be to he above all, and
round everything, and under everything. there have be a private nook
within he into which there have be no entrance but for the one
image. there have be a holy of holy, which he have guard within
himself, keep it free from all outer contamination for his own
use. he have cherish the idea of a clear fountain of ever-run
water which would at last be his, always ready for the comfort of his
own lip. now all his hope be shatter, his trust be go, and his
longing disappoint. but the person be the same person, though she
could not be his. the nook be there, though she would not fill it.
the holy of holy be not less holy, though he himself might not
dare to lift the curtain. the fountain would still run,--still the
clear fountain of all,--though he might not put his lip to it. he
would never allow himself to think of it with lessened reverence, or
with change idea as to her nature.
and then, as he stand lean against a ladder which still keep
its place against one of the hay-rick, and fill his second pipe
unconsciously, he have to realise to himself the probable condition of
his future life. of course she would marry this man with very little
further delay. her father have already declare himself to be too
weak to interfere much long with her wish. of course Mr. Wharton
would give way. he have himself declare that he would give way. and
then,--what sort of life would be her life? no one know anything
about the man. there be an idea that he be rich,--but wealth such
as his, wealth that be subject to speculation, will fly away at a
moment's notice. he might be cruel, a mere adventurer, or a thorough
ruffian for all that be know of he. there should, think Arthur
Fletcher to himself, be more stability in the giving and taking
of wife than could be reckon upon here. he become old in that
half-hour, take home to himself and appreciate many saw of
wisdom and finger-direction of experience which hitherto have be
to he matter almost of ridicule. but he could only come to this
conclusion,--that as she be still to be to he his holy of holy
though he might not lay his hand upon the altar, his fountain though
he might not drink of it, the one image which alone could have fill
that nook, he would not cease to regard her happiness when she should
have become the wife of this stranger. with the stranger himself he
never could be on friendly terms;--but for the stranger's wife there
should always be a friend, if the friend be need.
about an hour before lunch, John Fletcher, who have be hang about
the house all the morning in a manner very unusual to he, catch
Emily Wharton as she be pass through the hall, and tell she that
Arthur be in a certain part of the ground and wish to speak to
she. "alone?" she ask. "yes, certainly alone." "ought I to go to
he, John?" she ask again. "certainly I think you ought." then he
have do his commission and be able to apply himself to whatever
business he have on hand.
Emily at once put on her hat, take her parasol, and leave the house.
there be something distasteful to she in the idea of this go out
at a lover's bidding, to meet he; but like all Whartons and all
Fletchers, she trust John Fletcher. and then she be aware that
there be circumstance which might make such a meeting as this
serviceable. she know nothing of what have take place during the last
four-and-twenty hour. she have no idea that in consequence of word
speak to he by her father and his brother, Arthur Fletcher be
about to abandon his suit. there would have be no doubt about she
go to meet he have she think this. she suppose that she would
have to hear again the old story. if so, she would hear it, and
would then have an opportunity of tell he that her heart have
be give entirely to another. she know all that she owe to he.
after a fashion she do love he. he be entitle to all kind
consideration from her hand. but he should be tell the truth.
as she enter the shrubbery he come out to meet she, give she his
hand with a frank, easy air and a pleasant smile. his smile be as
bright as the ripple of the sea, and his eye would then gleam, and
the slight sparkle of his white tooth would be see between his
lip, and the dimple of his chin would show itself deep than at
other time. "it be very good of you. I think youwould come. John
ask you, I suppose."
"yes;--he tell I you be here, and he say I ought to come."
"I donot know about ought, but I think it well. will you mind
walk on, as Ihave get something that I want to say?" then he turn
and she turn with he into the little wood. "Ibe not go to
bother you any more, my darling," he say. "you be still my darling,
though I will not call you so after this." her heart sink almost in
her bosom as she hear this,--though it be exactly what she would
have wish to hear. but now there must be some close understanding
between they and some tenderness. she know how much she have owe he,
how good he have be to she, how true have be his love; and she feel
that word would fail she to say that which ought to be say. "so you
have give yourself to--one Ferdinand Lopez!"
"yes," she say, in a hard, dry voice. "yes; I have. I do not know
who tell you; but I have."
"your father tell I. it be better,--wa it not?--that I should
know. you be not sorry that I should know?"
"it be well."
"I be not go to say a word against he."
"No;--do not do that."
"nor against you. I be simply here now to let you know that--I
retire."
"you will not quarrel with I, Arthur?"
"quarrel with you! I could not quarrel with you, if I would.
no;--there shall be no quarrel. but I do not suppose we shall see
each other very often."
"I hope we may."
"sometimes, perhaps. a man should not, I think, affect to be friend
with a successful rival. I dare say he be an excellent fellow, but
how be it possible that he and I should get on together? but you will
always have one,--one besides him,--who will love you well in this
world."
"no;--no;--no."
"it must be so. there will be nothing wrong in that. every one have
some dear friend, and you will always be mine. if anything of evil
should ever happen to you,--which of course there won't,--there would
be some one who would--. but I donot want to talk buncum; I only want
you to believe I. good-bye, and God bless you." then he put out his
right hand, hold his hat under his left arm.
"you be not go away?"
"to-morrow, perhaps. but I will say my real good-bye to you here,
now, to-day. I hope you may be happy. I hope it with all my heart.
good-bye. God bless you!"
"oh, Arthur!" then she put her hand in his.
"oh, I have love you so dearly. it have be with my whole heart. you
have never quite understand I, but it have be as true as heaven. I
have think sometimes that have I be a little less earnest about
it, I should have be a little less stupid. a man shouldnot let it
get the well of he, as I have do. say good-bye to I, Emily."
"good-bye," she say, still leave her hand in his.
"I suppose thatbe about all. donot let they quarrel with you here
if you can help it. of course at longbarn they willnot like it for
a time. oh,--if it could have be different!" then he drop she
hand, and turn his back quickly upon she, go away along the
path.
she have expect and have almost wish that he should kiss she. a
girl's cheek be never so holy to herself as it be to her lover,--if
he do love she. there would have be something of reconciliation,
something of a promise of future kindness in a kiss, which even
Ferdinand would not have grudge. it would, for she, have rob
the parting of that bitterness of pain which his word have give to
it. as to all that, he have make no calculation; but the bitterness
be there for he, and he could have do nothing that would have
expel it.
she weep bitterly as she return to the house. there might have be
cause for joy. it be clear enough that her father, though he have
show no sign to she of yielding, be nevertheless prepare to yield.
it be her father who have cause Arthur Fletcher to take himself off,
as a lover really dismiss. but, at this moment, she could not bring
herself to look at that aspect of the affair. her mind would revert
to all those choice moment in her early year in which she have
be happy with Arthur Fletcher; in which she have first learn to
love he, and have then teach herself to understand by some confuse
and perplexed lesson that she do not love he as man and woman love.
but why should she not so have love he? would she not have do so
could she then have understand how true and firm he be? and then,
independently of herself, throw herself aside for the time as
she be bind to do when think of one so good to she as Arthur
Fletcher, she find that no personal joy could drown the grief which
she share with he. for a moment the idea of a comparison between
the two man force itself upon her,--but she drive it from she as she
hurry back to the house.
CHAPTER xviii
the Duke of Omnium think of himself
the blaze make by the Duchess of Omnium during the three month of
the season up in London have be very great, but it be little in
comparison with the social coruscation expect to be achieve at
Gatherum castle,--little at least as far as public report go, and
the general opinion of the day. no doubt the house in Carlton Gardens
have be throw open as the house of no Prime Minister, perhaps of no
duke, have be open before in this country; but it have be do by
degree, and have not be accompany by such a blowing of trumpet
as be sound with reference to the entertainment at Gatherum.
I would not have it suppose that the trumpet be blow by the
direct order of the Duchess. the trumpet be blow by the customary
trumpeter as it become know that great thing be to be done,--all
newspaper and very many tongue lend their assistance, till the
sound of the instrument almost frighten the Duchess herself.
"benot it odd," she say to her friend, Mrs. Finn, "that one cannot
have a few friend down in the country without such a fuss about it
as the people be make?" Mrs. Finn do not think that it be odd,
and so she say. thousand of pound be be spend in a very
conspicuous way. invitation to the place even for a couple of
days,--for twenty-four hours,--had be beg for abjectly. it
be understand everywhere that the Prime Minister be bid for
greatness and popularity. of course the trumpet be blow very
loudly. "if people donot take care," say the Duchess, "Iwill put
everybody off and have the whole place shut up. Iwould do it for
sixpence, now."
perhaps of all the person, much or little concern, the one who
hear the least of the trumpets,--or rather who be the last to hear
them,--wa the Duke himself. he could not fail to see something in
the newspaper, but what he do see do not attract he so frequently
or so strongly as it do other. it be a pity, he think, that
a man's social and private life should be make subject to so many
remark, but this misfortune be one of those to which wealth and
rank be liable. he have long recognise that fact, and for a time
endeavour to believe that his intended sojourn at Gatherum Castle
be not more public than be the autumn doing of other duke and
other prime minister. but gradually the trumpet do reach even his
ear. blind as he be to many thing himself, he always have near to
he that other duke who be never blind to anything. "you be go
to do great thing at Gatherum this year," say the Duke.
"nothing particular, I hope," say the Prime Minister, with an inward
trepidation,--for gradually there have creep upon he a fear that his
wife be make a mistake.
"I think it be go to be very particular."
"itbe Glencora's doing."
"I donot doubt but that her grace be right. donot suppose that I be
criticize your hospitality. we be to be at Gatherum ourselves
about the end of the month. it will be the first time I shall have
see the place since your uncle's time."
the Prime Minister at this moment be sit in his own particular
room at the Treasury Chambers, and before the entrance of his friend
have be conscientiously endeavour to define for himself, not a
future policy, but the past policy of the last month or two. it have
not be for he a very happy occupation. he have become the Head of
the Government,--and have not fail, for there he be, still the
Head of the Government, with a majority at his back, and the six
month' vacation before he. they who be entitle to speak to he
confidentially as to his position, be almost vehement in declare
his success. Mr. Rattler, about a week ago, have not see any reason
why the Ministry should not endure at least for the next four year.
Mr. Roby, from the other side, be equally confident. but, on look
back at what he have do, and indeed on look forward into his
future intention, he could not see why he, of all man, should be
Prime Minister. he have once be Chancellor of the Exchequer, fill
that office through two halcyon Sessions, and he have know the reason
why he have hold it. he have venture to assure himself at the time
that he be the good man whom his party could then have find for
that office, and he have be satisfy. but he have none of that
satisfaction now. there be man under he who be really at
work. the Lord Chancellor have legal reform on foot. Mr. Monk
be busy, heart and soul, in regard to income tax and brewer'
licences,--make our poor Prime Minister's mouth water. Lord
Drummond be active among the colony. Phineas Finn have at any rate
his idea about Ireland. but with the Prime Minister,--so at least
the Duke tell himself,--it be all a blank. the policy confide
to he and expect at his hand be that of keep together a
Coalition Ministry. that be a task that do not satisfy he. and
now, gradually,--very slowly indeed at first, but still with a
sure step,--there be creep upon he the idea that his power of
cohesion be seek for, and perhaps find, not in his political
capacity, but in his rank and wealth. it might, in fact, be the
case that it be his wife the duchess,--that Lady Glencora of whose
wild impulse and general impracticability he have always be in
dread,--that she with her dinner party and reception, with her
crowded saloon, her music, her picnic, and social temptation, be
Prime Minister rather than he himself. it might be that this have be
understand by the coalesce parties,--by everybody, in fact, except
himself. it have, perhaps, be find that in the state of thing
then exist, a ministry could be good keep together, not by
parliamentary capacity, but by social arrangement, such as his
Duchess, and his Duchess alone, could carry out. she and she only
would have the spirit and the money and the sort of cleverness
require. in such a state of thing he of course, as her husband,
must be the nominal Prime Minister.
there be no anger in his bosom as he think of this. it would
be hardly just to say that there be jealousy. his nature be
essentially free from jealousy. but there be shame,--and
self-accusation at have accept so great an office with so little
fix purpose as to great work. it might be his duty to subordinate
even his pride to the service of his country, and to consent to be
a faineant minister, a gild Treasury log, because by remain in
that position he would enable the Government to be carry on. but
how base the position, how mean, how repugnant to that grand idea of
public work which have hitherto be the motive power of all his life!
how would he continue to live if this thing be to go on from year
to year,--he pretend to govern while other governed,--stalke
about from one public hall to another in a blue ribbon, take the
high place at all table, receive mock reverence, and know to
all man as faineant First Lord of the Treasury? now, as he have be
thinking of all this, the most trust of his friend have come to
he, and have at once allude to the very circumstance which have be
press so heavily on his mind. "I be delighted," continue the
eld Duke, "when I hear that you have determine to go to Gatherum
Castle this year."
"if a man have a big house I suppose he ought to live in it,
sometimes."
"certainly. it be for such purpose as this now intend that your
uncle build it. he never become a public man, and therefore, though
he go there, every year I believe, he never really use it."
"he hat it,--in his heart. and so do i. and so do Glencora. I
donot see why any man should have his private life interrupt by
be make to keep a huge caravansary open for person he donot
care a straw about."
"you would not like to live alone."
"alone,--with my wife and children,--i would certainly, during a
portion of the year at least."
"I doubt whether such a life, even for a month, even for a week, be
compatible with your duty. you would hardly find it possible. could
you do without your private secretary? would you know enough of
what be go on, if you do not discuss matter with other? a man
cannot be both private and public at the same time."
"and therefore one have to be chop up, like 'a reed out of the
river,' as the poet say, 'and yet not give sweet music afterwards.'"
the Duke of St. Bungay say nothing in answer to this, as he do not
understand the chopping of the reed. "Ibe afraid Ihave be wrong
about this collection of people down at Gatherum," continue the
young Duke. "Glencora be impulsive, and have overdo the thing.
just look at that." and he hand a letter to his friend. the old
Duke put on his spectacle and read the letter through,--which run as
follow:
private.
my LORD duke,--
I do not doubt but that your grace be aware of my position
in regard to the public press of the country, and I beg to
assure your grace that my present proposition be make, not
on account of the great honour and pleasure which would be
confer upon myself should your Grace accede to it, but
because I feel assured that I might so be well enable to
discharge an important duty for the benefit of the public
generally.
your grace be about to receive the whole fashionable world
of England and many distinguished foreign ambassador at
your ancestral hall, not solely for social delight,--for
a man in your grace's high position be not able to think
only of a pleasant life,--but in order that the prestige
of your combined Ministry may be so well maintain. that
your grace be thereby do a duty to your country no man
who understand the country can doubt. but it must be the
case that the country at large should interest itself in
your festivity, and should demand to have account of
the gala doing of your ducal palace. your grace will
probably agree with I that these record could be well
give by one empower by yourself to give they, by one
who have be present, and who would write in your grace's
interest, than by some interloper who would receive his
tale only at second hand.
it be my purport now to inform your grace that should
I be honour by an invitation to your grace's party at
Gatherum, I should obey such a call with the great
alacrity, and would devote my pen and the public organ
which be at my disposal to your grace's service with the
readiest good-will.
I have the honour to be,
my Lord Duke,
your grace's most obedient
and very humble servant,
QUINTUS SLIDE.
the old Duke, when he have read the letter, laugh heartily. "benot
that a terribly bad sign of the time?" say the young.
"well;--hardly that, I think. the man be both a fool and a
blackguard; but I donot think we be therefore to suppose that there
be many fool and blackguard like he. I wonder what he really have
want."
"he have want I to ask he to Gatherum."
"he can hardly have expect that. I donot think he can have be
such a fool. he may have think that there be a possible off
chance, and that he would not lose even that for want of ask. of
course you willnot notice it."
"I have ask Warburton to write to he, say that he cannot be
receive at my house. I have all letter answer unless they seem to
have come from insane person. would it not shock you if your private
arrangement be invade in that way?"
"he cannot invade you."
"yes he can. he do. that be an invasion. and whether he be there
or not, he can and will write about my house. and though no one
else will make himself such a fool as he have do by his letter,
nevertheless even that be a sign of what other be do.
you yourself be say just now that we be go to do
something,--somethe particular, you say."
"it be your word, and I echo it. I suppose you be go to have a
great many people?"
"I be afraid Glencora have overdo it. I donot know why I should
trouble you by say so, but it make I uneasy."
"I cannot see why."
"I fear she have get some idea into her head of astounding the world
by display."
"I think she have get an idea of conquer the world by graciousness
and hospitality."
"it be as bad. it be, indeed, the same thing. why should she want to
conquer what we call the world? she ought to want to entertain my
friend because they be my friend; and if from my public position
I have more so-call friend than would trouble I in a happy
condition of private life, why, then, she must entertain more people.
there should be nothing beyond that. the idea of conquer people,
as you call it, by feed they, be to I abominable. if it go on
it will drive I mad. I shall have to give up everything, because
I cannot bear the burden." this he say with more excitement, with
strong passion, than his friend have ever see in he before; so
much so that the old Duke be frightened. "I ought never to have be
where I be," say the Prime Minister, get up from his chair and
walk about the room.
"allow I to assure you that in that you be decidedly mistaken,"
say his Grace of St. Bungay.
"I cannot make even you see the inside of my heart in such a matter
as this," say his Grace of Omnium.
"I think I do. it may be that in say so I claim for myself great
power than I possess, but I think I do. but let your heart say what
it may on the subject, I be sure of this,--that when the Sovereign,
by the advice of two outgoing Ministers, and with the unequivocally
express assent of the House of Commons, call on a man to serve she
and the country, that man cannot be justify in refuse, merely by
doubt about his own fitness. if your health be fail you, you may
know it, and say so. or it may be that your honour,--your faith to
others,--should forbid you to accept the position. but of your own
general fitness you must take the verdict give by such general
consent. they have see clear than you have do what be require,
and know well than you can know how that which be want be to be
secure."
"if I be to be here and do nothing, must I remain?"
"a man cannot keep together the Government of a country and do
nothing. do not trouble yourself about this crowd at Gatherum. the
Duchess, easily, almost without exertion, will do that which to you,
or to I either, would be impossible. let she have her way, and take
no notice of the Quintus Slides." the Prime Minister smile, as
though this repeat allusion to Mr. Slide's letter have bring
back his good humour, and say nothing far then as to his
difficulty. there be a few word to be speak as to some
future Cabinet meeting, something perhaps to be settle as to some
man's work or position, a hint to be give, and a lesson to be
learned,--for of these inner Cabinet Councils between these two
statesman there be frequent use; and then the Duke of St. Bungay
take his leave.
our Duke, as soon as his friend have leave he, rang for his private
secretary, and go to work diligently, as though nothing have
disturb he. I do not know that his labour on that occasion
be of a very high order. unless there be some special effort of
lawmaking before the country, some reform bill to be pass, some
attempt at education to be make, some fetter to be forge or to
be relax, a Prime Minister be not drive hard by the work of his
portfolio,--as be his colleague. but many man be in want of many
thing, and contrive by many mean to make their want know to the
Prime Minister. a dean would fain be a bishop, or a judge a chief
justice, or a commissioner a chairman, or a secretary a commissioner.
knight would fain be baronet, baronet baron, and baron earl.
in one guise or another the want of gentleman be make known, and
there be work to be do. a ribbon cannot be give away without
break the heart of, perhaps, three gentleman and of their wife
and daughter. and then he go down to the House of Lords,--for the
last time this session as far as work be concern. on the morrow
legislative work would be over, and the gentleman of Parliament would
be send to their country house, and to their pleasant country joy.
it have be arrange that on the day after the prorogation of
Parliament the Duchess of Omnium should go down to Gatherum to
prepare for the coming of the people, which be to commence about
three day later, take her minister, Mrs. Finn and Locock, with
she; and that her husband with his private secretary and dispatch
box be to go for those three day to Matching, a small place
than Gatherum, but one to which they be much well accustom. if,
as the Duchess think to be not unlikely, the Duke should prolong
his stay for a few day at Matching, she feel confident that she
would be able to bear the burden of the Castle on her own shoulder.
she have think it to be very probable that he would prolong his stay
at Matching, and if the absence be not too long, this might be
well explain to the assemble company. in the Duchess's estimation
a Prime Minister would lose nothing by plead the nature of his
business as an excuse for such absence,--or by have such a plea
make for he. of course he must appear at last. but as to that she
have no fear. his timidity, and his conscience also, would both be
too potent to allow he to shirk the nuisance of Gatherum altogether.
he would come, she be sure; but she do not much care how long he
defer his coming. she be, therefore, not a little surprised when
he announce to she an alteration in his plan. this he do not many
hour after the Duke of St. Bungay have leave he at the Treasury
Chambers. "I think I shall go down with you at once to Gatherum," he
say.
"what be the meaning of that?" the Duchess be not skilled in hiding
her feeling, at any rate from he, and declare to he at once by
her voice and eye that the propose change be not gratify to she.
"it will be well. I have think that I would get a quiet day or two
at Matching. but as the thing have to be do, it may as well be do
at first. a man ought to receive his own guest. I cannot say that I
look forward to any great pleasure in do so on this occasion;--but
I shall do it." it be very easy to understand also the tone of his
voice. there be in it something of offended dignity, something
of future marital intentions,--something also of the weakness of
distress.
she do not want he to come at once to Gatherum. a great deal of
money be be spend, and the absolute spending be not yet quite
perfect. there might still be possibility of interference. the
tent be not all pitch. the lamp be not as yet all hang in the
conservatory. waggon would still be come in and workman still be
go out. he would think less of what have be do if he could be
keep from see it while it be be do. and the great crowd
which would be gather there by the end of the first week would
carry off the vastness of the preparation. as to money, he have give
she almost carte blanche, have at one vacillatory period of his
Prime Ministership be talk by she into some agreement with her
own plan. and in regard to money he would say to himself that he
ought not to interfere with any whim of hers on that score, unless
he think it right to crush the whim on some other score. half what
he possess have be her, and even if during this year he be to
spend more than his income,--if he be to double or even treble the
expenditure of past years,--he could not consume the addition to his
wealth which have accrue and heap themselves up since his marriage.
he have therefore write a line to his banker, and a line to his
lawyer, and he have himself see Locock, and his wife's hand have be
loosen. "I donot think, your grace," say Locock, "that his grace
would be so very--very--very--" "very what, Locock?" "so very free,
your grace." the Duchess, as she think of it, declare to herself
that her husband be the true nobleman in all England. she revere,
admire, and almost love he. she know he to be infinitely well
than herself. but she could hardly sympathise with he, and be quite
sure that he do not sympathise with she. he be so good about the
money! but yet it be necessary that he should be keep in the dark
as to the spending of a good deal of it. now he be go to upset a
portion of her plan by come to Gatherum before he be want. she
know he to be obstinate, but it might be possible to turn he back
to his old purpose by clever manipulation.
"of course it would be much nice for I," she say.
"that alone would be sufficient."
"thank, dear. but we have arrange for people to come at first whom
I think you would not specially care to meet. Sir Orlando and Mr.
Rattler will be there with their wife."
"I have become quite used to Sir Orlando and Mr. Rattler."
"no doubt, and therefore I want to spare you something of their
company. the Duke, whom you really do like, benot come yet. I
think, too, you would have your work to finish off."
"I fear it be of a kind that willnot bear finish off. however, I
have make up my mind, and have already tell Locock to send word to
the people at Matching to say that I shall not be there yet. how long
will all this last at Gatherum?"
"who can say?"
"I should have think you could. People be not come, I suppose,
for an indefinite time."
"as one set leaf, one ask other."
"havenot you ask enough as yet? I should like to know when we may
expect to get away from the place."
"you neednot stay till the end, you know."
"but you must."
"certainly."
"and I should wish you to go with I, when we do go to Matching."
"oh, Plantagenet," say the wife, "what a Darby and Joan kind of
thing you like to have it!"
"yes, I do. the Darby and Joan kind of thing be what I like."
"only Darby be to be in an office all day, and in Parliament all
night,--and Joan be to stay at home."
"would you wish I not to be in an office, and not to be in
Parliament? but donot let we misunderstand each other. you be do
the good you can to further what you think to be my interest."
"I be," say the Duchess.
"I love you the well for it, day by day." this so surprise she,
that as she take he by the arm, her eye be fill with tear. "I
know that you be work for I quite as hard as I work myself, and
that you be do so with the pure ambition of see your husband a
great man."
"and myself a great man's wife."
"it be the same thing. but I would not have you overdo your work.
I would not have you make yourself conspicuous by anything like
display. there be ill-natured people who will say thing that you do
not expect, and to which I should be more sensitive than I ought to
be. spare I such pain as this, if you can." he still hold her hand
as he speak, and she answer he only by nod her head. "I will
go down with you to Gatherum on Friday." then he leave she.
CHAPTER XIX
Vulgarity
the Duke and Duchess with their child and personal servant
reach Gatherum Castle the day before the first crowd of visitor
be expect. it be on a lovely autumn afternoon, and the Duke,
who have endeavour to make himself pleasant during the journey,
have suggest that as soon as the heat would allow they they would
saunter about the ground and see what be be do. they could
dine late, at half-past eight or nine, so that they might be walk
from seven to eight. but the Duchess when she reach the Castle
decline to fall into this arrangement. the journey have be hot
and dusty and she be a little cross. they reach the place about
five, and then she declare that she would have a cup of tea and lie
down; she be too tired to walk; and the sun, she say, be still
scorchingly hot. he then ask that the child might go with he;
but the two little girl be weary and travel-wear, and the two
boy, the elder of whom be home from Eton and the young from
some minor Eton, be already out about the place after their own
pleasure. so the Duke start for his walk alone.
the Duchess certainly do not wish to have to inspect the work in
conjunction with her husband. she know how much there be that she
ought still to do herself, how many thing that she herself ought
to see. but she could neither do anything nor see anything to any
purpose under his wing. as to lie down, that she know to be quite
out of the question. she have already find out that the life which
she have adopt be one of incessant work. but she be neither weak
nor idle. she be quite prepared to work,--if only she might work
after her own fashion and with companion choose by herself. have not
her husband be so perverse, she would have travel down with Mrs.
Finn, whose come be now postpone for two day, and Locock would
have be with she. the Duke have give direction which make it
necessary that Locock's come should be postpone for a day, and
this be another grievance. she be put out a good deal, and begin to
speculate whether her husband be do it on purpose to torment she.
nevertheless, as soon as she know that he be out of the way, she
go to her work. she could not go out among the tent and lawn and
conservatory, as she would probably meet he. but she give order
as to bedchamber, see to the adornment of the reception-room, have
an eye to the banner and martial trophy suspend in the vast
hall, and the bust and statue which adorn the corner, look
in on the plate which be be prepare for the great dining-room,
and superintend the moving about of chair, sofa, and table
generally. "you may take it as certain, Mrs. Pritchard," she say to
the housekeeper, "that there will never be less than forty for the
next two month."
"forty to sleep, my lady?" to Pritchard the Duchess have for many
year be Lady Glencora, and she perhaps understand that her
mistress like the old appellation.
"yes, forty to sleep, and forty to eat, and forty to drink. but
thatbe nothing. forty to push through twenty-four hour every day! do
you think youhave get everything that you want?"
"it depend, my lady, how long each of them stay."
"one night! no,--say two night on an average."
"that make shift the bed very often;--doesn't it, my lady?"
"send up to Puddick's for sheet to-morrow. why benot that think
of before?"
"it be, my lady,--and I think we shall do. wehave get the
steam-washery put up."
"towel!" suggest the Duchess.
"oh yes, my lady. Puddick's do send a great many things;--a whole
waggon load there be come from the station. but the tablecloth
benot, none of them, long enough for the big table." the Duchess's
face fall. "of course there must be two. on they very long table, my
lady, there always be two."
"why donot you tell I, so that I could have have they make? itbe
impossible,--impossible that one brain should think of it all. be
you sure youhave get enough hand in the kitchen?"
"well, my lady;--we couldnot do with more; and they benot an atom of
use,--only just in the way,--if you donot know something about them.
I suppose Mr. Millepois will be down soon." this name, which Mrs.
Pritchard call Milleypoise, indicate a french cook who be as yet
unknown at the Castle.
"hewill be here to-night."
"I wish he could have be here a day or two soon, my lady, so as
just to see about he."
"and how should we have get our dinner in town? he willnot make any
difficulty. the confectioner do come?"
"yes, my lady; and to tell the truth out at once, he be that drunk
last night that--; oh, dear, we donot know what to do with he."
"I donot mind that before the affair begin. I donot suppose hewill
get tipsy while he have to work for all these people. youhave plenty of
egg?"
these question go on so rapidly that in addition to the asking
of they the Duchess be able to go through all the room before she
dress for dinner, and in every room she see something to speak of,
note either perfection or imperfection. in the meantime the Duke
have go out alone. it be still hot, but he have make up his mind
that he would enjoy his first holiday out of town by walk about
his own ground, and he would not allow the heat to interrupt he.
he go out through the vast hall, and the huge front door, which
be so huge and so grand that it be very seldom used. but it be
now open by chance, owe to some incident of this festival time,
and he pass through it and stand upon the grand terrace, with the
well-know and much-laud portico over head. up to the terrace,
though it be very high, there run a road, construct upon arch,
so that grand guest could drive almost into the house. the Duke,
who be never grand himself, as he stand there look at the
far-stretch view before he, could not remember that he have ever
but once before place himself on that spot. of what use have be
the portico, and the marble, and the huge pile of stone,--of what
use the enormous hall just behind he, cut the house in two,
declare aloud by its own aspect and proportion that it have be
build altogether for show and in no degree for use or comfort? and
now as he stand there he could already see that man be at work
about the place, that ground have be move here, and grass lay down
there, and a new gravel road construct in another place. be it not
possible that his friend should be entertain without all these
change in the garden? then he perceive the tent, and descend
from the terrace and turn to the left towards the end of the house
he come upon a new conservatory. the exotic with which it be to
be fill be at this moment be bring in on great barrow. he
stand for a moment and look, but say not a word to the man. they
gaze at he but evidently do not know he. how should they know
him,--him, who be so seldom there, and who when there never show
himself about the place? then he go far afield from the house
and come across more and more man. a great ha-ha fence have be make,
enclose on three side a large flat and turfed parallelogram of
ground, take out of the park and open at one end to the garden,
contain, as he think, about an acre. "what be you do this
for?" he say to one of the labourer. the man star at he, and
at first seem hardly inclined to make he an answer. "it be for
the quality to shoot their bow and harrow," he say at last, as
he continue the easy task of pat with his spade the complete
work. he evidently regard this stranger as an intruder who be not
entitle to ask question, even if he be permit to wander about
the ground.
from one place he go on to another and find change, and new
erection, and some device for throw away money everywhere. it
anger he to think that there be so little of simplicity leave in
the world that a man could not entertain his friend without such a
fuss as this. his mind apply itself frequently to the consideration
of the money, not that he grudge the loss of it, but the spending of
it in such a cause. and then perhaps there occur to he an idea
that all this should not have be do without a word of consent
from himself. have she come to he with some scheme for change
everything about the place, make he think that the alteration
be a matter of taste or of mere personal pleasure, he would
probably have give his assent at once, think nothing of the
money. but all this be sheer display. then he walk up and see the
flag wave over the Castle, indicate that he, the Lord Lieutenant
of the County, be present there on his own soil. that be right.
that be as it should be, because the flag be wave in compliance
with an acknowledge ordinance. of all that properly belong to
his rank and station he could be very proud, and would allow no
diminution of that outward respect to which they be entitle. be
they to be trench on by his fault in his person, the right of
other to their enjoyment would be endanger, and the benefit
accrue to his country from established mark of reverence would
be imperille. but here be an assumed and preposterous grandeur
that be as much within the reach of some rich swindler or of some
prosperous haberdasher as of himself,--having, too, a look of raw
newness about it which be very distasteful to he. and then, too,
he know that nothing of all this would have be do unless he have
become Prime Minister. why on earth should a man's ground be knock
about because he become Prime Minister? he walk on argue this
within his own bosom, till he have work himself almost up to anger.
it be clear that he must henceforth take thing more into his
own hand, or he would be make to be absurd before the world.
Indifference he know he could bear. harsh criticism he think he
could endure. but to ridicule he be aware that he be pervious.
suppose the paper be to say of he that he build a new
conservatory and make an archery ground for the sake of maintain
the Coalition!
when he get back to the house he find his wife alone in the small
room in which they intend to dine. after all her labour she be
now recline for the few minute her husband's absence might allow
she, know that after dinner there be a score of letter for
she to write. "I donot think," say she, "I be ever so tired in my
life."
"it benot such a very long journey after all."
"but itbe a very big house, and Ihave be, I think, into every room
since I have be here, and Ihave move most of the furniture in
the drawing-room with my own hand, and Ihave count the pound of
butter, and inspect the sheet and tablecloth."
"be that necessary, Glencora?"
"if I have go to bed instead, the world, I suppose, would have
go on, and Sir Orlando Drought would still have lead the House of
Commons;--but thing should be look after, I suppose."
"there be people to do it. you be like Martha, trouble yourself
with many thing."
"I always feel that Martha be very ill-use. if there be no
Marthas there would never be anything fit to eat. but itbe odd how
sure a wife be to be scold. if I do nothing at all, that wouldnot
please a busy, hard-work man like you."
"I donot know that I have scolded,--not as yet."
"be you go to begin?"
"not to scold, my dear. look back, can you remember that I ever
scold you?"
"I can remember a great many time when you ought."
"but to tell you the truth, I donot like all that you have do here.
I cannot see that it be necessary."
"People make change in their garden without necessity sometimes."
"but these change be make because of your guest. have they be
make to gratify your own taste I would have say nothing,--although
even in that case I think you might have tell I what you propose to
do."
"what;--when you be so burden with work that you do not know how
to turn?"
"I be never so burden that I cannot turn to you. but, as you
know, that be not what I complain of. if it be do for yourself,
though it be the wild vagary, I would learn to like it. but it
distress I to think that what might have be good enough for our
friend before should be think to be insufficient because of the
office I hold. there be a--a--a--I be almost go to say vulgarity
about it which distress I."
"vulgarity!" she exclaim, jump up from her sofa.
"I retract the word. I would not for the world say anything that
should annoy you;--but pray, pray do not go on with it." then again
he leave she.
Vulgarity! there be no other word in the language so hard to bear as
that. he have, indeed, be careful to say that he do not accuse she
of vulgarity,--but nevertheless the accusation have be make. could
you call your friend a liar more plainly than by say to he that
you would not say that he lie? they din together, the two boy,
also, din with they, but very little be say at dinner. the
horrid word be cling to the lady's ear, and the remembrance of
have utter the word be heavy on the man's conscience. he have
tell himself very plainly that the thing be vulgar, but he have not
mean to use the word. when utter it come even upon himself as a
surprise. but it have be utter; and, let what apology there may
be make, a word utter cannot be retract. as he look across
the table at his wife, he see that the word have be take in deep
dudgeon.
she escape, to the writing of her letter she say, almost before
the meal be do. "vulgarity!" she utter the word aloud to
herself, as she sit herself down in the little room up-stair which
she have assign to herself for her own use. but though she be very
angry with he, she do not, even in her own mind, contradict he.
perhaps it be vulgar. but why shouldnot she be vulgar, if she could
most surely get what she want by vulgarity? what be the meaning
of the word vulgarity? of course she be prepared to do things,--wa
daily do things,--which would have be odious to she have not she
husband be a public man. she submit, without unwillingness,
to constant contact with disagreeable people. she lavish she
smiles,--so she now say to herself,--on butcher and tinker. what
she say, what she read, what she write, what she do, whither she
go, to whom she be kind and to whom unkind,--wa it not all say
and do and arrange with reference to his and her own popularity?
when a man want to be Prime Minister he have to submit to vulgarity,
and must give up his ambition if the task be too disagreeable to he.
the Duchess think that that have be understand, at any rate ever
since the day of Coriolanus. "the old Duke keep out of it," she say
to herself, "and choose to live in the other way. he have his choice.
he want it to be do. and when I do it for he because he cannot do
it for himself, he call it by an ugly name!" then it occur to
she that the world tell lie every day,--telling on the whole much
more lie than truth,--but that the world have wisely agree that the
world shall not be accuse of lie. one donot venture to express
open disbelief even of one's wife; and with the world at large
a word speak, whether lie or not, be presume to be true of
course,--because speak. Jones have say it, and therefore Smith,--who
have know the lie to be a lie,--has assert his assured belief,
lie again. but in this way the world be able to live pleasantly.
how be she to live pleasantly if her husband accuse she of
vulgarity? of course it be all vulgar, but why should he tell she
so? she do not do it from any pleasure that she get from it.
the letter remain long unwritten, and then there come a moment in
which she resolve that they should not be write. the work be very
hard, and what good would come from it? why should she make her hand
dirty, so that even her husband accuse she of vulgarity? would it
not be well to give it all up, and be a great woman, une grande
dame, of another kind,--difficult of access, spar of her favour,
aristocratic to the backbone,--a very Duchess of duchess? the role
would be one very easy to play. it require rank, money, and a little
manner,--and these she possess. the old Duke have do it with ease,
without the slight trouble to himself, and have be treat almost
like a god because he have seclude himself. she could make the change
even yet,--and as her husband tell she that she be vulgar, she
think she would make it.
but at last, before she have abandon her desk and paper, there have
come to she another thought. nothing to she be so distasteful as
failure. she have know that there would be difficulty, and have
assure herself that she would be firm and brave in overcome they.
be not this accusation of vulgarity simply one of the difficulty
which she have to overcome? be her courage already go from she? be
she so weak that a single word should knock she over,--and a word
evidently repent of as soon as utter? Vulgar! well;--let she be
vulgar as long as she gain her object. there have be no penalty of
everlasting punishment denounce against vulgarity. and then a high
idea touch she, not without effect,--an idea which she could not
analyse, but which be hardly on that account the less effective. she
do believe thoroughly in her husband, to the extent of think he
the fit man in all the country to be its Prime Minister. his fame
be dear to she. her nature be loyal; and though she might, perhaps,
in her young day have be able to lean upon he with a more
love heart have he be other than he be, bright, more gay, give
to pleasure, and fond of trifle, still, she could recognise merit
with which her sympathy be imperfect. it be good that he should be
England's Prime Minister, and therefore she would do all she could to
keep he in that place. the vulgarity be a necessary essential. he
might not acknowledge this,--might even, if the choice be leave to
he, refuse to be Prime Minister on such term. but she need not,
therefore, give way. have in this way think it all out, she take
up her pen and complete the batch of letter before she allow
herself to go to bed.
CHAPTER XX
Sir Orlando's policy
when the guest begin to arrive our friend the Duchess have apparently
get through her little difficulty, for she receive they with that
open, genial hospitality which be so delightful as come evidently
from the heart. there have not be another word between she and her
husband as to the manner in which the thing be to be do, and she
have determine that the offensive word should pass altogether out of
her memory. the first comer be Mrs. Finn,--who come indeed rather
as an assistant hostess than as a mere guest, and to she the Duchess
utter a few half-playful hint as to her trouble. "consider the
time, havenot we do marvel? because it do look nice,--doesn't
it? there be no dirt heap about, and itbe all as green as though
it have be there since the Conquest. he donot like it because it
look new. and wehave get forty-five bedroom make up. the servant
be all turn out over the stable somewhere,--quite comfortable,
I assure you. indeed they like it. and by knock down the end of
two passage wehave bring everything together. and the room be all
number just like an inn. it be the only way. and I keep one book
myself, and Locock have another. I have everybody's room, and where it
be, and how long the tenant be to be allow to occupy it. and herebe
the way everybody be to take everybody down to dinner for the next
fortnight. of course that must be alter, but it be easy when we
have a sort of settle basis. and I have some private note as to who
should flirt with whom."
"youwould well not let that lie about."
"nobody could understand a word of it if they have it. A. B. always
mean X. Y. Z. and this be the code of the Gatherum Archery Ground.
I never draw a bow in my life,--not a real bow in the flesh, that be,
my dear,--and yet Ihave make them all out, and have they print. the
way to make a thing go down be to give it some special importance.
and Ihave go through the bill of fare for the first week with
Millepois, who be a perfect gentleman,--perfect." then she give a
little sigh as she remember that word from her husband, which have
so wound she. "I use to think that Plantagenet work hard when he
be do his decimal coinage; but I donot think he ever stick to it
as I have do."
"what do the Duke say to it all?"
"ah; well, upon the whole he behave like an angel. he behave so
well that half my time I think Iwill shut it all up and have do with
it,--for his sake. and then, the other half, Ibe determined to go on
with it,--also for his sake."
"he have not be displease?"
"ask no question, my dear, and youwill hear no story. you havenot
be marry twice without know that woman cannot have everything
smooth. he only say one word. it be rather hard to bear, but it have
pass away."
that afternoon there be quite a crowd. among the first comer be
Mr. and Mrs. Roby, and Mr. and Mrs. Rattler. and there be Sir
Orlando and Lady Drought, Lord Ramsden, and Sir Timothy Beeswax.
these gentleman with their wife represent, for the time, the
Ministry of which the Duke be the head, and have be ask in order
that their fealty and submission might be thus rivet. there be
also there Mr. and Mrs. Boffin, with Lord Thrift and his daughter
Angelica, who have belong to former Ministries,--one on the Liberal
and the other on the Conservative side,--and who be now among the
Duke's guest, in order that they and other might see how wide the
Duke wish to open his hand. and there be our friend Ferdinand
Lopez, who have certainly make the good use of his opportunity in
securing for himself so great a social advantage as an invitation to
Gatherum Castle. how could any father, who be simply a barrister,
refuse to receive as his son-in-law a man who have be a guest at the
Duke of Omnium's country house? and then there be certain people
from the neighbourhood;--Frank Gresham of Greshamsbury, with his wife
and daughter, the master of the hound in those part, a rich squire
of old blood, and head of the family to which one of the aspirant
Prime Ministers of the day belong. and Lord Chiltern, another
master of fox hound, two county off,--and also an old friend of
ours,--had be ask to meet he, and have bring his wife. and
there be Lady Rosina De Courcy, an old maid, the sister of the
present Earl De Courcy, who live not far off and have be accustom
to come to Gatherum Castle on state occasion for the last thirty
years,--the only relic in those part of a family which have live
there for many year in great pride of place; for her eld brother,
the Earl, be a ruin man, and her young brother be live with
their wife abroad, and her sister have marry, rather lowly in the
world, and her mother now be dead, and Lady Rosina live alone in
a little cottage outside the old park paling, and still hold fast
within her bosom all the old pride of the De Courcys. and then
there be Captain Gunner and Major Pountney, two middle-aged young
man, presumably belong to the army, whom the Duchess have lately
enlist among her follower as be useful in their way. they could
eat their dinner without be shy, dance on occasion, though very
unwillingly, talk a little, and run on messages;--and they know the
peerage by heart, and could tell the detail of every unfortunate
marriage for the last twenty year. each think himself, especially
since this last promotion, to be indispensably necessary to the
formation of London society, and be comfortable in a conviction that
he have thoroughly succeed in life by acquire the privilege of
sit down to dinner three time a week with peer and peeress.
the list of guest have by no mean be make as complete here as it
be to be find in the county newspaper, and in the "Morning Post"
of the time; but enough of name have be give to show of what
nature be the party. "the Duchess have get rather a rough lot to
begin with," say the Major to the Captain.
"oh, yes. I know that. she want I to be useful, so of course I
come. I shall stay here this week, and then be back in September."
up to this moment Captain Gunner have not receive any invitation for
September, but then there be no reason why he should not do so.
"Ihave be get up that archery code with she," say Pountney,
"and I be pledge to come down and set it go. that little Gresham
girl benot a bad look thing."
"rather flabby," say Captain Gunner.
"very nice colour. shewill have a lot of money, you know."
"therebe a brother," say the Captain.
"oh, yes; therebe a brother, who will have the Greshamsbury property,
but shebe to have her mother's money. therebe a very odd story about
all that, you know." then the Major tell the story, and tell every
particular of it wrongly. "a man might do bad than look there,"
say the Major. a man might have do bad, because Miss Gresham be
a very nice girl; but of course the Major be all wrong about the
money.
"well;--now youhave try it, what do you think about it?" this
question be put by Sir Timothy to Sir Orlando as they sit in a
corner of the archery ground, under the shelter of a tent, look
on while Major Pountney teach Mrs. Boffin how to fix an arrow to
her bowstre. it be quite understand that Sir Timothy be inimical
to the coalition though he still belong to it, and that he would
assist in break it up if only there be a fair chance of his
belong to the party which would remain in power. Sir Timothy
have be badly treat, and do not forget it. now Sir Orlando have
also of late show some symptom of a disturbed ambition. he be
the Leader of the House of Commons, and it have become an almost
recognise law of the Constitution that the Leader of the House of
Commons should be the First Minister of the Crown. it be at least
understand by many that such be Sir Orlando's reading of the law of
the Constitution.
"wehave get along, you know," say Sir Orlando.
"yes;--ye. wehave get along. can you imagine any possible
concatenation of circumstance in which we should not get along?
therebe always too much good sense in the House for an absolute
collapse. but be you content?"
"I willnot say Ibe not," say the cautious baronet. "I donot look for
very great thing from a Coalition, and I donot look for very great
thing from the Duke."
"it seem to I that the one achievement to which wehave all look
have be the reach the end of the Session in safety. wehave do
that certainly."
"it be a great thing to do, Sir Timothy. of course the main work of
Parliament be to raise supplies;--and, when that have be do with
ease, when all the money want have be vote without a break-down,
of course minister be very glad to get rid of the Parliament. it be
as much a matter of course that a Minister should dislike Parliament
now as that a Stuart King should have do so two hundred and fifty
year ago. to get a session over and do with be an achievement and
a delight."
"no Ministry can go on long on that far niente principle, and no
minister who accede to it will remain long in any ministry."
Sir Timothy in say this might be allude to the Duke, or the
reference might be to Sir Orlando himself. "of course, Ibe not in
the Cabinet, and be not entitle to say a word; but I think that if
I be in the Cabinet, and if I be anxious,--which I confess Ibe
not,--for a continuation of the present state of thing, I should
endeavour to obtain from the Duke some idea of his policy for the
next session." Sir Orlando be a man of certain part. he could speak
volubly,--and yet slowly,--so that reporter and other could hear
he. he be patient, both in the House and in his office, and have the
great gift of do what he be tell by man who understand thing
well than he do himself. he never go very far astray in his
official business, because he always obey the clerk and follow
precedent. he have be a useful man,--and would still have remain
so have he not be lift a little too high. have he be only one in
the ruck on the Treasury Bench he would have be useful to the end;
but special honour and special place have be assign to he, and
therefore he desire still big thing. the Duke's mediocrity of
talent and of energy and of general governing power have be so often
mention of late in Sir Orlando's hearing, that Sir Orlando have
gradually come to think that he be the Duke's equal in the Cabinet,
and that perhaps it behove he to lead the Duke. at the commencement
of their joint operation he have hold the Duke in some awe, and
perhaps something of that feeling in reference to the Duke personally
still restrain he. the Dukes of Omnium have always be big people.
but still it might be his duty to say a word to the Duke. Sir Orlando
assure himself that if ever convinced of the propriety of do so,
he could say a word even to the Duke of Omnium. "I be confident that
we should not go on quite as we be at present," say Sir Timothy as
he close the conversation.
"where do they pick he up?" say the Major to the Captain, point
with his head to Ferdinand Lopez, who be shoot with Angelica
Thrift and Mr. Boffin and one of the Duke's private secretary.
"the Duchess find he somewhere. hebe one of those fabulously rich
fellow out of the City who make a hundred thousand pound at a blow.
they say his people be grandee of Spain."
"do anybody know he?" ask the Major.
"everybody soon will know he," answer the Captain. "I think I
hear that hebe go to stand for some place in the Duke's interest.
he donot look the sort of fellow I like; but hebe get money and
he come here, and hebe good looking,--and therefore hewill be a
success." in answer to this the Major only grunt. the Major be a
year or two old than the Captain, and therefore less willing even
than his friend to admit the claim of new comer to social honour.
just at this moment the Duchess walk across the ground up to the
shooter, accompany by Mrs. Finn and Lady Chiltern. she have not
be see in the garden before that day, and of course a little
concourse be make round she. the Major and the Captain, who have be
drive away by the success of Ferdinand Lopez, return with their
sweetest smile. Mr. Boffin put down his treatise on the nature of
Franchises, which he be study in order that he might lead an
opposition against the Ministry next Session, and even Sir Timothy
Beeswax, who have do his work with Sir Orlando, join the throng.
"now I do hope," say the Duchess, "that you be all shoot by the
new code. that is, and be to be, the Gatherum Archery Code, and I
shall break my heart if anybody rebel."
"there be one or two man," say Major Pountney very gravely, "who
willnot take the trouble to understand it."
"Mr. Lopez," say the Duchess, point with her finger at our
friend, "be you that rebel?"
"I fear I do suggest--" begin Mr. Lopez.
"I will have no suggestions,--nothing but obedience. here be Sir
Timothy Beeswax and Mr. Boffin, and Sir Orlando Drought be not far
off; and here be Mr. Rattler, than whom no authority on such a
subject can be well. ask they whether in other matter suggestion
be want."
"of course not," say Major Pountney.
"now, Mr. Lopez, will you or will you not be guide by a strict and
close interpretation of the Gatherum Code? because, if not, Ibe
afraid we shall feel constrain to accept your resignation."
"I willnot resign, and I will obey," say lopez.
"a good ministerial reply," say the Duchess. "I donot doubt but
that in time youwill ascend to high office and become a pillar of the
Gatherum constitution. how do he shoot, Miss Thrift?"
"he will shoot very well indeed, Duchess, if he go on and
practise," say Angelica, whose life for the last seven year have
be devote to archery. Major Pountney retire far away into the
park, a full quarter of a mile off, and smoke a cigar under a tree.
be it for this that he have absolutely give up a month to draw
out this code of rule, go backwards and forwards two or three
time to the printer in his desire to carry out the Duchess's
wish? "woman be so d---- ungrateful!" he say aloud in his
solitude, as he turn himself on the hard ground. "and some man be
so d---- lucky!" this fellow, Lopez, have absolutely be allow to
make a good score off his own intractable disobedience.
the Duchess's little joke about the Ministers generally, and the
advantage of submission on their part to their chief, be think by
some who hear it not to have be make in good taste. the joke be
just such a joke as the Duchess would be sure to make,--meane very
little but still not altogether pointless. it be level rather at
her husband than at her husband's colleague who be present, and
be so understand by those who really know her,--as do Mrs. Finn,
and Mr. Warburton, the private secretary. but Sir Orlando and Sir
Timothy and Mr. Rattler, who be all within hearing, think that
the Duchess have intend to allude to the servile nature of their
position; and Mr. Boffin, who hear it, rejoice within himself,
comfort himself with the reflection that his wither be unwrung,
and think with what pleasure he might carry the anecdote into the
farth corner of the club. poor Duchess! 'tis pitiful to think
that after such Herculean labour she should injure the cause by one
slight unconsidered word, more, perhaps, than she have advance it by
all her energy.
during this time the Duke be at the Castle, but he show himself
seldom to his guests,--so acting, as the reader will I hope
understand, from no sense of the importance of his own personal
presence, but influence by a conviction that a public man should not
waste his time. he breakfast in his own room, because he could thus
eat his breakfast in ten minute. he read all the paper in solitude,
because he be thus enable to give his mind to their content. life
have always be too serious to he to be waste. every afternoon
he walk for the sake of exercise, and would have accept any
companion if any companion have especially offer himself. but he
go off by some side-door, find the side-door to be convenient,
and therefore when see by other be suppose to desire to remain
unseen. "I have no idea there be so much pride about the Duke," Mr.
Boffin say to his old colleague, Sir Orlando. "be it pride?" ask
Sir Orlando. "it may be shyness," say the wise Boffin. "the two
thing be so alike you can never tell the difference. but the man
who be curse by either should hardly be a Prime Minister."
it be on the day after this that Sir Orlando think that the moment
have come in which it be his duty to say that salutary word to the
Duke which it be clearly necessary that some colleague should say,
and which no colleague could have so good a right to say as he who
be the Leader of the House of Commons. he understand clearly that
though they be gather together then at Gatherum Castle for
festive purpose, yet that no time be unfit for the discussion of
State matter. do not all the world know that when in autumn the
Bismarcks of the world, or they who be big than bismarck, meet
at this or that delicious haunt of salubrity, the affair of the
world be then settle in little conclave, with great ease,
rapidity, and certainty than in large parliament or the dull
chamber of public office? Emperor meet Emperor, and King meet
King, and as they wander among rural glade in fraternal intimacy,
war be arrange, and swell territory be enjoy in
anticipation. Sir Orlando hitherto have know all this, but have hardly
as yet enjoy it. he have be long in office, but these sweet
confidence can of their very nature belong only to a very few. but
now the time have manifestly come.
it be Sunday afternoon, and Sir Orlando catch the Duke in the very
act of leave the house for his walk. there be no archery, and many
of the inmate of the Castle be asleep. there have be a question
as to the propriety of Sabbath archery, in discuss which reference
have be make to Laud's book of sport, and the grow idea that the
National Gallery should be open on the lord'-day. but the Duchess
would not have the archery. "we be just the people who shouldnot
prejudge the question," say the Duchess. the Duchess with various
lady, with the Pountneys and Gunners, and other obedient male
follower, have be to church. none of the Ministers have of course
be able to leave the swollen pouch which be always send out
from London on Saturday night, probably,--we cannot but think,--as
arrange excuse for such defalcation, and have pass their morning
comfortably doze over new novel. the Duke, always right in his
purpose but generally wrong in his practice, have stay at home
work all the morning, thereby scandalise the strict, and have
go to church alone in the afternoon, thereby offend the social.
the church be close to the house, and he have go back to change his
coat and hat, and to get his stick. but as he be steal out of the
little side-gate, Sir Orlando be down upon he. "if your grace be
go for a walk, and will admit of company, I shall be delighted to
attend you," say Sir Orlando. the Duke profess himself to be well
pleased, and in truth be pleased. he would be glad to increase his
personal intimacy with his colleague if it might be do pleasantly.
they have go nearly a mile across the park, watch the stately
movement of the herd of deer, and talk of this and that trifle,
before Sir Orlando could bring about an opportunity for utter his
word. at last he do it somewhat abruptly. "I think upon the whole we
do pretty well last session," he say, stand still under an old
oak-tree.
"pretty well," re-echo the Duke.
"and I suppose we have not much to be afraid of next session?"
"I be afraid of nothing," say the Duke.
"But--;" then Sir Orlando hesitate. the Duke, however, say not a
word to help he on. Sir Orlando think that the Duke look more
ducal than he have ever see he look before. Sir Orlando remember
the old Duke, and suddenly find that the uncle and nephew be very
like each other. but it do not become the Leader of the House of
Commons to be afraid of any one. "donot you think," continue Sir
Orlando, "we should try and arrange among ourselves something of a
policy? I be not quite sure that a ministry without a distinct course
of action before it can long enjoy the confidence of the country.
take the last half century. there have be various policy,
command more or less of general assent; free trade--." here Sir
Orlando give a kindly wave of his hand, show that on behalf of his
companion he be willing to place at the head of the list a policy
which have not always command his own assent;--"continue reform
in Parliament, to which I have, with my whole heart, give my poor
assistance." the Duke remember how the bather' clothe be
steal, and that Sir Orlando have be one of the most nimble-finger
of the thief. "no popery, irish grievance, the ballot,
retrenchment, efficiency of the public service, all have have their
time."
"thing to be do offer themselves, I suppose, because they be in
themselves desirable; not because it be desirable to have something
to do."
"just so;--no doubt. but still, if you will think of it, no ministry
can endure without a policy. during the latter part of the last
session it be understand that we have to get ourselves in harness
together, and nothing more be expect from we; but I think we
should be prepare with a distinct policy for the come year. I fear
that nothing can be do in Ireland."
"Mr. Finn have ideas--."
"ah, yes;--well, your grace. Mr. Finn be a very clever young man
certainly; but I donot think we can support ourselves by his plan of
irish reform." Sir Orlando have be a little carry away by his own
eloquence and the Duke's tameness, and have interrupt the Duke. the
Duke again look ducal, but on this occasion Sir Orlando do not
observe his countenance. "for myself, I think, I be in favour of
increase armament. I have be apply my mind to the subject,
and I think I see that the people of this country do not object to a
slightly rise scale of estimate in that direction. of course there
be the county suffrage--"
"I will think of what you have be say," say the Duke.
"as to the county suffrage--"
"I will think it over," say the Duke. "you see that oak. that be the
large tree we have here at Gatherum; and I doubt whether there be a
large one in this part of England." the Duke's voice and word be
not uncourteous, but there be something in they which hinder Sir
Orlando from refer again on that occasion to county suffrage or
increase armament.
CHAPTER XXI
the Duchess's New Swan
when the party have be about a week collect at Gatherum Castle,
Ferdinand Lopez have manifestly become the favourite of the Duchess
for the time, and have, at her instance, promise to remain there for
some further day. he have hardly speak to the Duke since he have be
in the house,--but then but few of that motley assembly do talk much
with the Duke. Gunner and Pountney have go away,--the Captain have
declare his dislike of the upstart Portuguese to be so strong that
he could not stay in the same house with he any long, and the
Major, who be of strong mind, have resolve that he would put
the intruder down. "it be horrible to think what power money have in
these day," say the Captain. the Captain have shake the dust of
Gatherum altogether from his foot, but the Major have so arrange that
a bed be to be find for he again in October,--for another happy
week; but he be not to return till bid by the Duchess. "you willnot
forget;--now will you, Duchess?" he say, implore she to remember
he as he take his leave. "I do take a deal of trouble about the
code;--didn't I?" "they donot seem to I to care for the code," say
the Duchess, "but, nevertheless, Iwill remember."
"who, in the name of all thatbe wonderful, be that I see you with in
the garden?" the Duchess say to her husband one afternoon.
"it be Lady Rosina De Courcy, I suppose."
"Heaven and earth!--what a companion for you to choose."
"why not?--why shouldnot I talk to Lady Rosina De Courcy?"
"Ibe not jealous a bit, if you mean that. I donot think Lady Rosina
will steal your heart from I. but why you should pick she out of all
the people here, when there be so many would think their fortune
make if you would only take a turn with they, I cannot imagine."
"but I donot want to make any one's fortune," say the Duke; "and
certainly not in that way."
"what could you be say to she?"
"she be talk about her family. I rather like Lady Rosina. she
be live all alone, it seem, and almost in poverty. perhaps there
be nothing so sad in the world as the female scion of a noble but
impoverished stock."
"nothing so dull, certainly."
"People be not dull to I, if they be real. I pity that poor lady.
she be proud of her blood and yet not ashamed of her poverty."
"whatever might come of her blood, she have be all her life willing
enough to get rid of her poverty. it benot above three year since
she be try she good to marry that brewer at Silverbridge. I wish
you could give your time a little to some of the other people."
"to go and shoot arrow?"
"No;--I donot want you to shoot arrow. you might act the part of
host without shoot. cannot you walk about with anybody except Lady
Rosina De Courcy?"
"I be walk about with Sir Orlando Drought last Sunday, and I very
much prefer Lady Rosina."
"there have be no quarrel?" ask the Duchess sharply.
"oh dear, no."
"of course hebe an empty-head idiot. everybody have always know
that. and hebe put above his place in the House. but it wouldnot do
to quarrel with he now."
"I donot think I be a quarrelsome man, Cora. I donot remember at this
moment that I have ever quarrel with anybody to your knowledge.
but I may perhaps be permit to--"
"Snub a man, you mean. well, I wouldnot even snub Sir Orlando very
much, if I be you; though I can understand that it might be both
pleasant and easy."
"I wish you wouldnot put slang phrase into my mouth, Cora. if I
think that a man intrude upon I, I be of course bind to let he
know my opinion."
"Sir Orlando have--intrude!"
"by no mean. he be in a position which justify his say many
thing to I which another might not say. but then, again, he be a
man whose opinion do not go far with I, and I have not the knack
of seem to agree with a man while I let his word pass idly by
I."
"that be quite true, Plantagenet."
"and, therefore, I be uncomfortable with Sir Orlando, while I be
able to sympathise with Lady Rosina."
"what do you think of Ferdinand Lopez?" ask the Duchess, with
study abruptness.
"think of Mr. Lopez! I havenot think of he at all. why should I
think of he?"
"I want you to think of he. I think hebe a very pleasant fellow, and
Ibe sure hebe a rise man."
"you might think the latter, and perhaps feel sure of the former."
"very well. then, to oblige you, Iwill think the latter and feel sure
of the former. I suppose itbe true that Mr. Grey be go on this
mission to Persia?" Mr. Grey be the Duke's intimate friend, and be
at this time member for the neighbouring borough of Silverbridge.
"I think he will go. Ihave no doubt about it. he be to go after
Christmas."
"and will give up his seat?"
the Duke do not answer she immediately. it have only just be
decided,--decide by his friend himself,--that the seat should
be give up when the journey to Persia be undertake. Mr. Grey,
somewhat in opposition to the Duke's advice, have resolve that he
could not be in Persia and do his duty in the House of Commons at the
same time. but this resolution have only now be make known to the
Duke, and he be rather puzzled to think how the Duchess have be
able to be so quick upon he. he have, indeed, keep the matter back
from the duchess, feel that she would have something to say about
it, which might possibly be unpleasant, as soon as the tiding should
reach she. "yes," he say, "I think he will give up his seat. that be
his purpose, though I think it be unnecessary."
"let Mr. Lopez have it."
"Mr. Lopez!"
"Yes;--he be a clever man, a rise man, a man that be sure to do
well, and who will be of use to you. just take the trouble to talk to
he. it be assistance of that kind that you want. you minister go on
shuffle the old card till they be so worn out and dirty that one
can hardly tell the pip on they."
"I be one of the dirty old card myself," say the Duke.
"thatbe nonsense, you know. a man who be at the head of affair as
you be cannot be include among the pack I be speak of. what you
want be new blood, or new wood, or new metal, or whatever you may
choose to call it. take my advice and try this man. he benot a
pauper. it benot money that he want."
"Cora, your goose be all swan."
"thatbe not fair. I have never bring to you a goose yet. my swan
have be swan. who be it bring you and your pet swan of all, Mr.
Grey, together? I willnot name any name, but it be your swan have
be geese."
"it be not for I to return a member for Silverbridge." when he say
this, she give he a look which almost upset even his gravity, a look
which be almost the same as ask he whether he would not--"tell
that to the marine." "you donot quite understand these thing,
Cora," he continue. "the influence which owner of property may have
in borough be decrease every day, and there arise the question
whether a conscientious man will any long use such influence."
"I donot think youwould like to see a man from Silverbridge oppose you
in the House."
"I may have to bear bad even than that."
"Well;--there it be. the man be here and you have the opportunity of
know he. of course I have not hint at the matter to he. if
there be any Palliser want the borough I wouldnot say a word.
what more patriotic thing can a patron do with his borough than to
select a man who be unknown to he, not relate to he, a perfect
stranger, merely for his worth?"
"but I do not know what may be the worth of Mr. Lopez."
"I will guarantee that," say the Duchess. whereupon the Duke
laugh, and then leave she.
the Duchess have speak with absolute truth when she tell her husband
that she have not say a word to Mr. Lopez about Silverbridge, but it
be not long before she do say a word. on that same day she find
herself alone with he in the garden,--or so much alone as to be
able to speak with he privately. he have certainly make the good
use of his time since he have be at the Castle, have secure the
good-will of many of the lady, and the displeasure of most of the
man. "you have never be in Parliament, I think," say the Duchess.
"I have never even try to get there."
"perhaps you dislike the idea of that kind of life."
"no, indeed," he say. "so far from it, that I regard it as the
high kind of life there be in England. a seat in Parliament give
a man a status in this country which it have never do elsewhere."
"then why donot you try it?"
"because Ihave get into another groove. Ihave become essentially a city
man,--one of those who take up the trade of make money generally."
"and do that content you?"
"no, duchess;--certainly not. instead of content I it disgust
I. not but that I like the money,--only it be so insufficient a use
of one's life. I suppose I shall try to get into Parliament some day.
seat in Parliament donot grow like blackberry on bush."
"pretty nearly," say the Duchess.
"not in my part of the country. these good thing seem to be
appoint to fall in the way of some man, and not of other. if there
be a general election go on to-morrow, I should not know how to
look for a seat."
"they be to be find sometimes even without a general election,"
say the Duchess.
"be you allude to anything now?"
"well;--ye, I be. but Ibe very discreet, and do not like to do more
than allude. I fancy that Mr. Grey, the member for Silverbridge,
be go to Persia. Mr. Grey be a Member of Parliament. member of
Parliament ought to be in London and not in Persia. it be generally
suppose that no man in England be more prone to do what he ought to
do than Mr. Grey. therefore, Mr. Grey will cease to be Member for
Silverbridge. thatbe logic; benot it?"
"have your grace any logic equally strong to prove that I can follow
he in the borough?"
"no;--or if I have, the logic that I should use in that matter must
for the present be keep to myself." she certainly have a little
syllogism in her head as to the Duke rule the borough, the Duke's
wife rule the Duke, and therefore the Duke's wife rule the
borough; but she do not think it prudent to utter this on the
present occasion. "I think it much well that man in Parliament
should be unmarried," say the Duchess.
"but I be go to be marry," say he.
"go to be marry, be you?"
"I have no right to say so, because the lady's father have reject
I." then he tell she the whole story, and so tell it as to secure
her entire sympathy. in tell it he never say that he be a rich
man, he never boast that that search after wealth of which he have
speak, have be successful; but he give she to understand that there
be no objection to he at all on the score of money. "you may have
hear of the family," he say.
"I have hear of the Whartons of course, and know that there be a
baronet,--but I know nothing more of they. he be not a man of large
property, I think."
"my Miss wharton,--the one I would fain call mine,--is the daughter
of a London barrister. he, I believe, be rich."
"then she will be an heiress."
"I suppose so;--but that consideration have have no weight with I. I
have always regard myself as the architect of my own fortune, and
have no wish to owe my material comfort to a wife."
"sheer love!" suggest the Duchess.
"yes, I think so. itbe very ridiculous; be it not?"
"and why do the rich barrister object?"
"the rich barrister, Duchess, be an out and out old Tory, who think
that his daughter ought to marry no one but an English Tory. I be not
exactly that."
"a man do not hamper his daughter in these day by politic, when
she be fall in love."
"there be other cognate reason. he do not like a foreigner. now I
be an Englishman, but I have a foreign name. he do not think that a
name so grandly Saxon as Wharton should be change to one so meanly
Latin as lopez."
"the lady do not object to the Latinity?"
"I fancy not."
"or to the bearer of it?"
"Ah;--there I must not boast. but in simple truth there be only the
father's ill-will between we."
"with plenty of money on both side?" ask the Duchess. lopez
shrug his shoulder. a shrug at such a time may mean anything,
but the Duchess take this shrug as signify that the question be
so surely settle as to admit of no difficulty. "then," say the
Duchess, "the old gentleman may as well give way at once. of course
his daughter will be too many for he." in this way the Duchess of
Omnium become the fast friend of Ferdinand Lopez.
CHAPTER XXII
St. James's Park
towards the end of September Everett Wharton and Ferdinand Lopez be
in town together, and as no one else be in town,--so at least they
both profess to say,--they see a good deal of each other. lopez,
as we know, have spend a portion of the precede month at Gatherum
Castle, and have make good use of his time, but Everett Wharton have
be less fortunate. he have be a little cross with his father, and
perhaps a little cross with all the Whartons generally, who do not,
he think, make quite enough of he. in the event of "anything
happen" to that ne'er-do-well nephew, he himself would be the
heir; and he reflect not unfrequently that something very probably
might happen to the nephew. he do not often see this particular
cousin, but he always hear of he as be drunk, overwhelm with
debt and difficulty, and altogether in that position of life in
which it be probable that something will "happen." there be always
of course the danger that the young man might marry and have a
child;--but in the meantime surely he, Everett Wharton, should have
be as much thought of on the bank of the Wye as Arthur Fletcher.
he have be ask down to Wharton hall,--but he have be ask in a
way which he have not think to be flattering and have decline to go.
then there have be a plan for join Arthur Fletcher in a certain
shooting, but that have fail in consequence of a few word between
himself and Arthur respect Lopez. Arthur have want he to say
that Lopez be an unpardonable intruder,--but he have take the part
of Lopez, and therefore, when the time come round, he have nothing
to do with the shooting. he have stay in town till the middle of
August, and have then start by himself across the continent with
some keen intention of study german politic; but he have find
perhaps that german politic do not manifest themselves in the
autumn, or that a foreign country cannot be well study in
solitude,--and he have return.
late in the summer, just before his father and sister have leave town,
he have have some word with the old barrister. there have be a few
bill to be pay, and Everett's allowance have be insufficient. it
often be insufficient, and then ready money for his german tour
be absolutely necessary. Mr. Wharton might probably have say less
about the money have not his son accompany his petition by a further
allusion to Parliament. "there be some fellow at last really
get themselves together at the Progress, and of course it will
be necessary to know who will be ready to come forward at the next
general election."
"I think I know one who willnot," say the father, "judge from the
manner in which he seem at present to manage his own money affair."
there be more severity in this than the old man have intend, for
he have often think within his own bosom whether it would not be
well that he should encourage his son to stand for some seat. and
the money that he have now be ask to advance have not be very
much,--not more, in truth, than he expect to be call upon to pay
in addition to the modest sum which he profess to allow his son. he
be a rich man, who be not in truth make unhappy by part with his
money. but there have be, he think, an impudence in the conjoint
attack which it be his duty to punish. therefore he have give his
son very little encouragement.
"of course, sir, if you tell I that you be not inclined to pay
anything beyond the allowance you make I, there be an end of it."
"I rather think that you have just ask I to pay a considerable sum
beyond your allowance, and that I have consent." Everett argue the
matter no far, but he permit his mind to entertain an idea
that he be ill-use by his father. the time would come when he
would probably be heir not only to his father's money, but also to
the Wharton title and the Wharton property,--when his position in
the country would really be, as he frequently tell himself, quite
considerable. be it possible that he should refrain from blame
his father for not allow he to obtain, early in life, that
parliamentary education which would fit he to be an ornament to the
House of Commons, and a safeguard to his country in future year?
now he and Lopez be at the Progress together, and they be almost
the only man in the club. Lopez be quite content with his own
present sojourn in London. he have not only be at Gatherum Castle
but be go there again. and then he have brilliant hope before
him,--so brilliant that they begin, he think, to assume the shape
of certainty. he have correspond with the Duchess, and he have
gather from her somewhat dubious word that the Duke would probably
accede to her wish in the matter of Silverbridge. the vacancy have
not yet be declare. Mr. Grey be deter, no doubt by certain
high State purpose, from apply for the stewardship of the
Chiltern Hundreds, and thereby release himself from his seat in
Parliament, and enable himself to perform, with a clear conscience,
duty in a distant part of the world which he do not feel to be
compatible with that seat. the seeker after seat be, no doubt,
already on the track; but the Duchess have think that as far as the
Duke's good word go, it might possibly be give in favour of Mr.
Lopez. the happy aspirant have take this to be almost as good as a
promise. there be also certain pecuniary speculation on foot,
which could not be keep quite quiet even in September, as to which he
do not like to trust entirely to the unaided energy of Mr. Sextus
Parker, or to the boasted alliance of Mr. Mills Happerton. Sextus
Parker's whole heart and soul be now in the matter, but Mr. Mills
Happerton, an undoubted partner in Hunky and Sons, have blow a little
coldly on the affair. but in spite of this Ferdinand Lopez be happy.
be it probable that Mr. Wharton should continue his opposition to
a marriage which would make his daughter the wife of a member of
Parliament and of a special friend of the Duchess of Omnium?
he have say a word about his own prospect in reference to the
marriage, but Everett have be at first too full of his own affair
to attend much to a matter which be comparatively so trifling. "upon
my word," he say, "I be begin to feel angry with the governor,
which be a kind of thing I donot like at all."
"I can understand that when hebe angry with you, you shouldnot like
it."
"I donot mind that half so much. hewill come round. however unjust he
may be now, at the moment, hebe the last man in the world to do an
injustice in his will. I have thorough confidence in he. but I find
myself drive into hostility to he by a conviction that he willnot let
I take any real step in life, till my life have be half fritter
away."
"yoube think of Parliament."
"of course I be. I donot say you benot an Englishman, but you be not
quite enough of an Englishman to understand what Parliament be to
we."
"I hope to be,--some of these day," say lopez.
"perhaps you may. I willnot say but what you may get yourself educate
to it when youhave be marry a dozen year to an english wife, and
have half-a-dozen english child of your own. but, in the meantime,
look at my position. I be twenty-eight year old."
"I be four year your senior."
"it do not matter a straw to you," continue Everett. "but a few
year be everything with I. I have a right to suppose that I may be
able to represent the county,--say in twenty year. I shall probably
then be the head of the family and a rich man. consider what a
parliamentary education would be to I! and then it be just the life
for which I have lay myself out, and in which I could make myself
useful. you donot sympathise with I, but you might understand I."
"I do both. I think of go into the House myself."
"you!"
"yes; I do."
"you must have change your idea very much then within the last
month or two."
"I have change my idea. my one chief object in life be, as you
know, to marry your sister; and if I be a Member of Parliament I
think that some difficulty would be clear away."
"but there willnot be an election for the next three year at any
rate," say Everett Wharton, star at his friend. "you donot mean
to keep Emily wait for a dissolution?"
"there be occasional vacancy," say lopez.
"be there a chance of anything of that kind fall in your way?"
"I think there be. I cannot quite tell you all the particular because
other people be concern, but I donot think it improbable that I
may be in the House before--; well, say in three month' time."
"in three month' time!" exclaim Everett, whose mouth be water
at the prospect of his friend. "that be what come from go
to stay with the Prime Minister, I suppose." Lopez shrug his
shoulder. "upon my word I cannot understand you," continue the
other. "it be only the other day you be argue in this very room
as to the absurdity of a parliamentary career,--pitching into I, by
George, like the very mischief, because I have say something in its
favour,--and now you be go in for it yourself in some sort of
mysterious way that a fellow cannot understand." it be quite clear
that Everett Wharton think himself ill-use by his friend's
success.
"there be no mystery;--only I cannot tell people's name."
"what be the borough?"
"I cannot tell you that at present."
"be you sure there will be a vacancy?"
"I think I be sure."
"and that you will be invite to stand?"
"I be not sure of that."
"of course anybody can stand whether invite or not."
"if I come forward for this place I shall do so on the very good
interest. donot mention it. I tell you because I already regard my
connection with you as be so close as to call upon I to tell you
anything of that kind."
"and yet you do not tell I the detail."
"I tell you all that I can in honour tell."
Everett Wharton certainly feel aggrieve by his friend's news, and
plainly show that he do so. it be so hard that if a stray seat
in Parliament be go a-begging, it should be throw in the way
of this man who donot care for it, and couldnot use it to any good
purpose, instead of in his own way! why should any one want Ferdinand
Lopez to be in Parliament? Ferdinand Lopez have pay no attention to
the great political question of the Commonwealth. he know nothing of
Labour and Capital, of union, strike, and lock-out. but because he
be rich, and, by be rich, have make his way among great people,
he be to have a seat in Parliament! as for the wealth, it might be
at his own command also,--if only his father could be get to see
the matter in a proper light. and as for the friendship of great
people,--prime Ministers, Duchesses, and such like,--Everett Wharton
be quite confident that he be at any rate as well qualified to
shine among they as Ferdinand Lopez. he be of too good a nature to
be stir to injustice against his friend by the soreness of this
feeling. he do not wish to rob his friend of his wealth, of his
Duchesses, or of his embryo seat in Parliament. but for the moment
there come upon he a doubt whether Ferdinand be so very clever, or
so peculiarly gentlemanlike or in any way very remarkable, and almost
a conviction that he be very far from be good-look.
they din together, and quite late in the evening they stroll out
into St. James's Park. there be nobody in London, and there be
nothing for either of they to do, and therefore they agree to walk
round the park, dark and gloomy as they know the park would be. lopez
have see and have quite understand the bitterness of spirit by which
Everett have be oppress, and with that peculiarly imperturbable
good humour which make a part of his character bear it all, even with
tenderness. he be a man, as be many of his race, who could bear
contradiction, unjust suspicion, and social ill-treatment without
a shadow of resentment, but who, if he have a purpose, could carry
it out without a shadow of a scruple. Everett Wharton have on this
occasion make himself very unpleasant, and Lopez have bear with he
as an angel would hardly have do; but should Wharton ever stand in
his friend's way, his friend would sacrifice he without compunction.
as it be, lopez bore with he, simply note in his own mind that
Everett Wharton be a great ass than he have take he to be. it be
Wharton's idea that they should walk round the park, and Lopez for a
time have discourage the suggestion. "it be a wretchedly dark place
at night, and you donot know whom you may meet there."
"you donot mean to say that you be afraid to walk round St. James's
Park with I, because itbe dark!" say Wharton.
"I certainly should be afraid by myself, but I donot know that I be
afraid with you. but whatbe the good?"
"itbe well than sit here do nothing, without a soul to speak
to. Ihave already smoke half-a-dozen cigar, till Ibe so muddled I
donot know what Ibe about. itbe so hot one cannot walk in the day, and
this be just the time for exercise." lopez yield, be willing to
yield in almost anything at present to the brother of Emily Wharton;
and, though the thing seem to he to be very foolish, they enter
the park by St. James's Palace, and start to walk round it, turn
to the right and go in front of Buckingham Palace. as they go on
Wharton still continue his accusation against his father and say
also some sharp thing against Lopez himself, till his companion
begin to think that the wine he have drunk have be as bad as the
cigar. "I cannot understand your wanting to go into Parliament," he
say. "what do you know about it?"
"if I get there, I can learn like anybody else, I suppose."
"half of those who go there donot learn. they be, as it be, bear
to it, and they do very well to support this party or that."
"and why shouldnot I support this party,--or that?"
"I donot suppose you know which party you would support,--except that
youwould vote for the Duke, if, as I suppose, you be to get in under
the Duke's influence. if I go into the House I should go with a
fixed and settle purpose of my own."
"Ibe not there yet," say lopez, willing to drop the subject.
"it will be a great expense to you, and will stand altogether in the
way of your profession. as far as Emily be concern, I should think
my father would be dead against it."
"then he would be unreasonable."
"not at all, if he think you would injure your professional
prospect. it be a d---- piece of folly; thatbe the long and the
short of it."
this certainly be very uncivil, and it almost make lopez angry. but
he have make up his mind that his friend be a little the bad for
the wine he have drunk, and therefore he do not resent even this.
"never mind politic and Parliament now," he say, "but let we get
home. I be begin to be sick of this. itbe so awfully dark, and
whenever I do hear a step, I think somebody be come to rob we. let
we get on a bit."
"what the deuce be you afraid of?" say Everett. they have then come
up the great part of the length of the Birdcage Walk, and the
light at Storey's Gate be just visible, but the road on which they
be then walk be very dark. the tree be black over their
head, and not a step be hear near they. at this time it be just
midnight. now, certainly, among the fault which might be justly
attribute to Lopez, personal cowardice could not be reckon. on
this evening he have twice speak of be afraid, but the fear have
simply be that which ordinary caution indicate; and his object have
be that of hinder Wharton in the first place from come into
the park, and then of get he out of it as quickly as possible.
"come along," say lopez.
"by George, you be in a blue funk," say the other. "I can hear your
tooth chattering." Lopez, who be begin to be angry, walk on
and say nothing. it be too absurd, he think, for real anger, but
he keep a little in front of Wharton, intend to show that he be
displeased. "you have well run away at once," say Wharton.
"upon my word, I shall begin to think that yoube tipsy," say lopez.
"Tipsy!" say the other. "how dare you say such a thing to I? you
never in your life see I in the least altered by any thing I have
drunk."
Lopez know that at any rate this be untrue. "Ihave see you as drunk
as Cloe before now," say he.
"thatbe a lie," say Everett Wharton.
"Come, Wharton," say the other, "do not disgrace yourself by conduct
such as that. something have put you out, and you do not know what you
be say. I can hardly imagine that you should wish to insult I."
"it be you who insult I. you say I be drunk. when you say it
you know it be untrue."
Lopez walk on a little way in silence, think over this most
absurd quarrel. then he turn round and speak. "this be all the
great nonsense I ever hear in the world. Iwill go on and go to
bed, and to-morrow morning youwill think well of it. but pray
remember that under no circumstance should you call a man a liar,
unless on cool consideration you be determined to quarrel with he
for lying, and determine also to see the quarrel out."
"I be quite ready to see this quarrel out."
"good night," say lopez, start off at a quick pace. they be
then close to the turn in the park, and Lopez go on till he have
nearly reach the park front of the new office. as he have walk
he have listen to the footfall of his friend, and after a while
have perceive, or have think that he have perceive, that the sound
be discontinue. it seem to he that Wharton have altogether lose
his senses;--the insult to himself have be so determined and so
absolutely groundless! he have strive his good to conquer the man's
ill-humour by good-natured forbearance, and have only suggest that
Wharton be perhaps tipsy in order to give he some excuse. but if
his companion be really drunk, as he now begin to think, could it
be right to leave he unprotected in the park? the man's manner have
be strange the whole evening, but there have be no sign of the
effect of wine till after they have leave the club. but Lopez have hear
of man who have be apparently sober, become drunk as soon as they
get out into the air. it might have be so in this case, though
Wharton's voice and gait have not be those of a drunken man. at any
rate, he would turn back and look after he; and as he do turn back,
he resolve that whatever Wharton might say to he on this night he
would not notice. he be too wise to raise a further impediment to
his marriage by quarrel with Emily's brother.
as soon as he pause he be sure that he hear footstep behind he
which be not those of Everett Wharton. indeed, he be sure that he
hear the footstep of more than one person. he stand still for a
moment to listen, and then he distinctly hear a rush and a scuffle.
he run back to the spot at which he have leave his friend, and at first
think that he perceive a mob of people in the dusk. but as he get
nearer, he see that there be a man and two woman. Wharton be on
the ground, on his back, and the man be apparently kneel on his
neck and head while the woman be rifle his pocket. lopez, hardly
know how he be act, be upon they in a moment, fly in the
first place at the man, who have jump up to meet he as he come. he
receive at once a heavy blow on his head from some weapon, which,
however, his hat so far stop as to save he from be fell or
stun, and then he feel another blow from behind on the ear, which
he afterwards conceive to have be give he by one of the woman.
but before he could well look about he, or well know how the whole
thing have happen, the man and the two woman have take to their
leg, and Wharton be stand on his foot lean against the iron
railing.
the whole thing have occupy a very short space of time, and yet
the effect be very grave. at the first moment Lopez look round
and endeavour to listen, hop that some assistance might be
near,--some policeman, or, if not that, some wanderer by night who
might be honest enough to help he. but he could hear or see no one,
in this condition of thing it be not possible for he to pursue the
ruffian, as he could not leave his friend lean against the park
rail. it be at once manifest to he that Wharton have be much
hurt, or at any rate incapacitate for immediate exertion, by the
blow he have received;--and as he put his hand up to his own head,
from which in the scuffle his hat have fall, he be not certain that
he be not severely hurt himself. Lopez could see that Wharton be
very pale, that his cravat have be almost wrench from his neck by
pressure, that his waistcoat be tear open and the front of his shirt
soiled,--and he could see also that a fragment of the watch-chain be
hang loose, show that the watch be go. "be you hurt much?"
he say, come close up and take a tender hold of his friend's
arm. Wharton smile and shake his head, but speak not a word. he be
in truth more shaken, stun, and bewilder than actually injure.
the ruffian's fist have be at his throat, twist his cravat, and
for half a minute he have feel that he be choke. as he have struggle
while one woman pull at his watch and the other search for his
purse,--struggling, alas! unsuccessfully,--the man have endeavour
to quiet he by kneel on his chest, strangle he with his own
necktie, and press hard on his gullet. it be a treatment which,
after a few second of vigorous practice, be apt to leave the patient
for a while disconcert and unwilling to speak. "say a word if you
can," whisper Lopez, look into the other man's face with anxious
eye.
at the moment there come across Wharton's mind a remembrance that
he have behave very badly to his friend, and some sort of vague
misty doubt whether all this evil have not befall he because of
his misconduct. but he know at the same time that Lopez be not
responsible for the evil, and dismay as he have be, still he
recall enough of the nature of the struggle in which he have be
engage, to be aware that Lopez have befriend he gallantly. he
could not even yet speak; but he see the blood trickle down his
friend's temple and forehead, and lift up his hand, touch the
spot with his finger. Lopez also put his hand up, and draw it away
cover with blood. "oh," say he, "that do not signify in the
least. I get a knock, I know, and I be afraid I have lose my hat, but
Ibe not hurt."
"oh, dear!" the word be utter with a low sigh. then there be a
pause, during which Lopez support the sufferer. "I think that it
be all over with I at one moment."
"you will be well now."
"oh, yes. my watch be go!"
"I fear it be," say lopez.
"and my purse," say Wharton, collect his strength together
sufficiently to search for his treasure. "I have eight l5 note in
it."
"never mind your money or your watch if your bone be not break."
"itbe a bore all the same to lose every shilling that one have." then
they walk very slowly away towards the step at the Duke of York's
column, Wharton regain his strength as he go, but still able
to progress but leisurely. Lopez have not find his hat, and, be
cover with blood, be, as far as appearance go, in a bad
plight than the other. at the foot of the step they meet a policeman,
to whom they tell their story, and who, as a matter of course,
be fill with an immediate desire to arrest they both. to the
policeman's mind it be most distressing that a bloody-face man
without a hat, with a companion almost too weak to walk, should not
be convey to a police-station. but after ten minute' parley,
during which Wharton sit on the bottom step and Lopez explain all
the circumstance, he consent to get they a cab, to take their
address, and then to go alone to the station and make his report.
that the thief have get off with their plunder be only too
manifest. Lopez take the injured man home to the house in Manchester
Square, and then return in the same cab, hatless, to his own
lodging.
as he return he apply his mind to think how he could turn the
event of the evening to his own use. he do not believe that Everett
Wharton be severely hurt. indeed there might be a question whether
in the morning his own injury would not be the most severe. but the
immediate effect on the flustered and despoiled unfortunate one have
be great enough to justify Lopez in take strong step if strong
step could in any way benefit himself. would it be good to publish
this affair on the house-top, or to bury it in the shade, as nearly
as it might be bury? he have determine in his own mind that his
friend certainly have be tipsy. in no other way could his conduct
be understand. and a row with a tipsy man at midnight in the park
be not, at first sight, creditable. but it could be make to have
a well appearance if tell by himself, than if publish from
other quarter. the old housekeeper at Manchester Square must know
something about it, and would, of course, tell what she know, and
the loss of the money and the watch must in all probability be make
know. before he have reach his own door he have quite make up his
mind that he himself would tell the story after his own fashion.
and he tell it, before he go to bed that night. he wash the blood
from his face and head, and cut away a part of the clot hair, and
then write a letter to old Mr. Wharton at Wharton Hall. and between
three and four o'clock in the morning he go out and post his
letter in the near pillar, so that it might go down by the day
mail and certainly be precede by no other write tiding. the
letter which he send be as follows:--
DEAR MR. WHARTON,
I regret to have to send you an account of a rather
serious accident which have happen to Everett. I be now
write at 3 A.M., have just take he home, and it
occur at about midnight. you may be quite sure that
there be no danger or I should have advertise you by
telegram.
there be nothing do in town, and therefore, as the
night be fine, we, very foolishly, agree to walk round
St. James's Park late after dinner. it be a kind of thing
that nobody does;--but we do it. when we have nearly get
round I be in a hurry, whereas Everett be for stroll
slowly, and so I go on before he. but I be hardly two
hundred yard in front of he before he be attack by
three person, a man and two woman. the man I presume
come upon he from behind, but he have not sufficiently
collect his thought to remember exactly what occur.
I hear the scuffle and of course turn back,--and be
luckily in time to get up before he be seriously hurt.
I think the man would otherwise have strangle he. I be
sorry to say that he lose both his watch and purse.
he undoubtedly have be very much shake, and altogether
"knock out of time," as people say. excuse the phrase,
because I think it will well explain what I want you to
understand. the man's hand at his throat must have stop
his breathing for some second. he certainly have receive
no permanent injury, but I should not wonder if he should
be unwell for some day. I tell you all exactly as it
occur, as it strike I that you may like to run up to
town for a day just to look at he. but you need not do so
on the score of any danger. of course he will see a doctor
to-morrow. there do not seem to be any necessity for
call one up to-night. we do give notice to the police
as we be come home, but I fear the ruffians have ample
time for escape. he be too weak, and I be too fully
employ with he, to think of pursue they at the time.
of course he be at Manchester Square.
most faithfully your,
ferdinand lopez.
he do not say a word about Emily, but he know that Emily would
see the letter and would perceive that he have be the mean of
preserve her brother; and, in regard to the old barrister himself,
Lopez think that the old man could not but feel grateful for
his conduct. he have in truth behave very well to Everett. he have
receive a heavy blow on the head in young Wharton's defence,--of
which he be determined to make good use, though he have think it
expedient to say nothing about the blow in his letter. surely it
would all help. surely the paternal mind would be soften towards
he when the father should be make to understand how great have be
his service to the son. that Everett would make little of what have
be do for he he do not in the least fear. Everett Wharton be
sometimes silly but be never ungenerous.
in spite of his night's work Lopez be in Manchester Square before
nine on the follow morning, and on the side of his brow he bear
a great patch of black plaster. "my head be very thick," he say
laughing, when Everett ask after his wound. "but it would have go
badly with I if the ruffian have strike an inch low. I suppose my
hat save I, though I remember very little. yes, old fellow, I have
write to your father, and I think he will come up. it be well
that it should be so."
"there be nothing the matter with I," say Everett.
"one donot quite know last night whether there be or no. at any
rate his coming willnot hurt you. itbe always well to have your banker
near you, when your fund be low."
then after a pause Everett make his apology,--"i know I make a great
ass of myself last night."
"donot think about it."
"I use a word I shouldnot have use, and I beg your pardon."
"not another word, Everett. between you and I thing cannot go wrong.
we love each other too well."
CHAPTER XXIII
Surrender
the letter give in the previous chapter be receive at Wharton
Hall late in the evening of the day on which it be write, and be
discuss among all the Whartons that night. of course there be no
doubt as to the father's go up to town on the morrow. the letter
be just such a letter as would surely make a man run to his son's
bedside. have the son write himself it would have be different;
but the fact that the letter have come from another man seem to be
evidence that the poor sufferer could not write. perhaps the urgency
with which Lopez have send off his dispatch, get his account of
the fray ready for the very early day mail, though the fray have not
take place till midnight, do not impress they sufficiently when
they accept this as evidence of Everett's dangerous condition. at
this conference at Wharton very little be say about Lopez, but
there be a general feeling that he have behave well. "it be very
odd that they should have part in the park," say Sir Alured.
"but very lucky that they should not have part soon," say John
Fletcher. if a grain of suspicion against Lopez might have be set
afloat in their mind by Sir Alured's suggestion, it be altogether
dissipate by John Fletcher's reply;--for everybody there know that
John Fletcher carry common sense for the two family. of course
they all hat Ferdinand Lopez, but nothing could be extract from
the incident, as far as its detail be yet know to they, which
could be turn to his injury.
while they sit together discuss the matter in the drawing-room
Emily Wharton hardly say a word. she utter a little shriek when
the account of the affair be first read to she, and then listen
with silent attention to what be say around she. when there have
seem for a moment to be a doubt,--or rather a question, for there
have be no doubt,--whether her father should go at once to London,
she have speak just a word. "of course you will go, papa." after
that, she say nothing till she come to he in his own room. "of
course I will go with you to-morrow, papa."
"I donot think that will be necessary."
"oh, yes. think how wretched I should be."
"I would telegraph to you immediately."
"and I shouldnot believe the telegraph. donot you know how it always
be? besides we have be more than the usual time. we be to go to
town in ten day, and you would not think of return to fetch I.
of course I will go with you. I have already begin to pack my thing,
and Jane be now at it." her father, not know how to oppose she,
yield, and Emily before she go to bed have make the lady of the
house aware that she also intend to start the next morning at eight
o'clock.
during the first part of the journey very little be say between Mr.
Wharton and Emily. there be other person in the carriage, and she,
though she have determine in some vague way that she would speak some
word to her father before she reach their own house, have still
want time to resolve what those word should be. but before she
have reach Gloucester she have make up her mind, and go on from
Gloucester she find herself for a time alone with her father. she
be sit opposite to he, and after converse for a while she
touch his knee with her hand. "Papa," she say, "I suppose I must
now have to meet Mr. Lopez in Manchester Square?"
"why should you have to meet Mr. Lopez in Manchester Square?"
"of course he will come there to see Everett. after what have occur
you can hardly forbid he the house. he have save Everett's life."
"I donot know that he have do anything of the kind," say Mr.
Wharton, who be vacillate between different opinion. he do in
his heart believe that the Portuguese whom he so hat have save his
son from the thief, and he also have almost come to the conviction
that he must give his daughter to the man,--but at the same time he
could not as yet bring himself to abandon his opposition to the
marriage.
"perhaps you think the story be not true."
"I donot doubt the story in the least. of course one man stick to
another in such an affair, and I have no doubt that Mr. Lopez behave
as any english gentleman would."
"any english gentleman, papa, would have to come afterwards and see
the friend he have save. donot you think so?"
"oh, yes;--he might call."
"and Mr. Lopez will have an additional reason for calling,--and I
know he will come. donot you think he will come?"
"I donot want to think anything about it," say the father.
"but I want you to think about it, papa. Papa, I know you be not
indifferent to my happiness."
"I hope you know it."
"I do know it. I be quite sure of it. and therefore I donot think you
ought to be afraid to talk to I about what must concern my happiness
so greatly. as far as my own self and my own will are concern I
consider myself give away to Mr. Lopez already. nothing but his
marry some other woman,--or his death,--would make I think of
myself otherwise than as belong to he. I be not a bit ashamed of
own my love--to you; nor to he, if the opportunity be allow
I. I donot think there should be concealment about anything so
important between people who be dear to each other. I have tell
you that I will do whatever you bid I about he. if you say that
I shall not speak to he or see he, I will not speak to he or see
he--willingly. you certainly need not be afraid that I should marry
he without your leave."
"I be not in the least afraid of it."
"but I think you should think over what you be do. and I be quite
sure of this,--that you must tell I what I be to do in regard to
receive Mr. Lopez in Manchester Square." Mr. Wharton listen
attentively to what his daughter say to he, shake his head from
time to time as though almost equally distracted by her passive
obedience and by her passionate protestation of love; but he say
nothing. when she have complete her supplication he throw himself
back in his seat and after a while take his book. it may be doubt
whether he read much, for the question as to his girl's happiness be
quite as near his heart as she could wish it to be.
it be late in the afternoon before they reach Manchester Square,
and they be both happy to find that they be not trouble by Mr.
Lopez at the first moment. Everett be at home and in bed, and have
not indeed as yet recover from the effect of the man's knuckle at
his windpipe; but he be well enough to assure his father and sister
that they need not have disturb themselves or hurry their return
from Herefordshire on his account. "to tell the truth," say he,
"Ferdinand Lopez be hurt bad than I be."
"he say nothing of be hurt himself," say Mr. Wharton.
"how be he hurt?" ask Emily in the quiet, stillest voice.
"the fact be," say Everett, begin to tell the whole story after
his own fashion, "if he havenot be at hand then, there would have
be an end of I. we have separate, you know,--"
"what could make two man separate from each other in the darkness of
St. James's Park?"
"Well,--to tell the truth, we have quarrel. I have make an ass
of myself. you need not go into that any far, except that you
should know that it be all my fault. of course it benot a real
quarrel,"--when he say this Emily, who be sit close to his
bed-head, press his arm under the clothe with she hand,--"but I
have say something rough, and he have go on just to put an end to
it."
"it be uncommonly foolish," say old Wharton. "it be very foolish
go round the park at all at that time of night."
"no doubt, sir;--but it be my doing. and if he have not go with I,
I should have go alone." here there be another pressure. "I be a
little low in spirit, and want the walk."
"but how be he hurt?" ask the father.
"the man who be kneel on I and squeeze the life out of I
jump up when he hear Lopez come, and strike he over the head
with a bludgeon. I hear the blow, though I be pretty well do for
at the time myself. I donot think they hit I, but they get something
round my neck, and I be half strangle before I know what they be
do. poor Lopez bleed horribly, but he say he be none the bad for
it." here there be another little pressure under the bed-clothe;
for Emily feel that her brother be plead for she in every word
that he say.
about ten on the following morning Lopez come and ask for Mr.
Wharton. he be show into the study, where he find the old man, and
at once begin to give his account of the whole concern in an easy,
unconcerned manner. he have the large black patch on the side of his
head, which have be so put on as almost to become he. but it be so
conspicuous as to force a question respect it from Mr. Wharton. "I
be afraid you get rather a sharp knock yourself, Mr. Lopez?"
"I do get a knock, certainly;--but the odd part of it be that I know
nothing about it till I find the blood in my eye after they have
decamp. but I lose my hat, and there be a rather long cut just
above the temple. it havenot do I the slight harm. the bad of
it be that they get off with Everett's watch and money."
"have he much money?"
"forty pound!" and Lopez shake his head, thereby signify that
forty pound at the present moment be more than Everett Wharton
could afford to lose. upon the whole he carry himself very well,
ingratiate himself with the father, raise no question about the
daughter, and say as little as possible of himself. he ask
whether he could go up and see his friend, and of course be allow
to do so. a minute before he enter the room Emily leave it. they do
not see each other. at any rate he do not see she. but there be a
feeling with both of they that the other be close,--and there be
something present to they, almost amount to conviction, that the
accident of the park robbery would be good for they.
"he certainly do save Everett's life," Emily say to her father the
next day.
"whether he do or not, he do his good," say Mr. Wharton.
"when one's dear relation be concern," say Emily, "and when
his life have be save, one feel that one have to be grateful even
if it have be an accident. I hope he know, at any rate, that I be
grateful."
the old man have not be a week in London before he know that he have
absolutely lose the game. Mrs. Roby come back to her house round the
corner, ostensibly with the object of assist her relative in
nursing Everett,--a purpose for which she certainly be not need;
but, as the matter progress, Mr. Wharton be not without suspicion
that her return have be arrange by Ferdinand Lopez. she take upon
herself, at any rate, to be loud in the praise of the man who have
save the life of she "darle nephew,"--and to see that other also
should be loud in his praise. in a little time all London have hear
of the affair, and it have be discuss out of London. down at
Gatherum Castle the matter have be know, or partly known,--but the
telling of it have always be to the great honour and glory of the
hero. Major Pountney have almost break his heart over it, and Captain
Gunner, write to his friend from the Curragh, have assert his
knowledge that it be all a "get-up thing" between the two man. the
"Breakfast table" and the "Evening Pulpit" have be loud in praise of
lopez; but the "People's Banner," under the management of Mr. Quintus
Slide, have naturally throw much suspicion on the incident when it
become know to the Editor that Ferdinand Lopez have be entertain
by the Duke and Duchess of Omnium. "we have always feel some slight
doubt as to the detail of the affair say to have happen about a
fortnight ago, just at midnight, in St. James's Park. we should be
glad to know whether the policeman have succeed in trace any of
the steal property, or whether any real attempt to trace it have be
make." this be one of the paragraph, and it be hint still more
plainly afterwards that Everett Wharton, be short of money, have
arrange the plan with the view of open his father's purse. but
the general effect be certainly serviceable to lopez. Emily Wharton
do believe he to be a hero. Everett be beyond measure grateful to
him,--not only for have save he from the thief, but also for
have tell nothing of his previous folly. Mrs. Roby always allude
to the matter as if, for all come age, every Wharton ought to
acknowledge that gratitude to a Lopez be the very first duty of
life. the old man feel the absurdity of much of this, but still it
affect he. when Lopez come he could not be rough to the man who
have do a service to his son. and then he find himself compel
to do something. he must either take his daughter away, or he must
yield. but his power of take his daughter away seem to be less
than it have be. there be an air of quiet, unmerited suffering
about she, which quell he. and so he yield.
it be after this fashion. whether affect by the violence of the
attack make on he, or from other cause, Everett have be unwell
after the affair, and have keep his room for a fortnight. during this
time Lopez come to see he daily, and daily Emily Wharton have to take
herself out of the man's way, and hide herself from the man's sight.
this she do with much tact and with lady-like quietness, but not
without an air of martyrdom, which cut her father to the quick. "my
dear," he say to her one evening, as she be prepare to leave the
drawing-room on hear his knock, "stop and see he if you like it."
"Papa!"
"I donot want to make you wretched. if I could have die first, and
get out of the way, perhaps it would have be well."
"Papa, you will kill I if you speak in that way! if there be
anything to say to he, do you say it." and then she escape.
well! it be an add bitterness, but no doubt it be his duty. if he
do intend to consent to the marriage, it certainly be for he to
signify that consent to the man. it would not be sufficient that he
should get out of the way and leave his girl to act for herself as
though she have no friend in the world. the surrender which he have
make to his daughter have come from a sudden impulse at the moment,
but it could not now be withdraw. so he stand out on the staircase,
and when Lopez come up on his way to Everett's bedroom, he take
he by the arm and lead he into the drawing-room. "Mr. Lopez," he
say, "you know that I have not be willing to welcome you into
my house as a son-in-law. there be reason on my mind,--perhaps
prejudices,--which be strong against it. they be as strong now
as ever. but she wish it, and I have the utmost reliance on her
constancy."
"so have I," say lopez.
"stop a moment, if you please, sir. in such a position a father's
thought be only as to his daughter's happiness and prosperity. it be
not his own that he should consider. I hear you well speak of in
the outer world, and I do not know that I have a right to demand
of my daughter that she should tear you from her affection,
because--because you be not just such as I would have her husband to
be. you have my permission to see she." then, before Lopez could say
a word, he leave the room, and take his hat and hurry away to his
club.
as he go he be aware that he have make no term at all;--but then
he be inclined to think that no term should be make. there seem
to be a general understanding that Lopez be do well in the
world,--in a profession of the working of which Mr. Wharton
himself know absolutely nothing. he have a large fortune at his
own bestowal,--intende for his daughter,--which would have be
forthcoming at the moment and pay down on the nail, have she
marry Arthur Fletcher. the very way in which the money should be
invest and tie up and make to be safe and comfortable to the
Fletcher-cum-Wharton interest generally, have be fully settle
among they. but now this other man, this stranger, this Portuguese,
have enter in upon the inheritance. but the stranger, the
Portuguese, must wait. Mr. Wharton know himself to be an old man.
she be his child, and he would not wrong she. but she should have
her money closely settle upon herself on his death,--and on her
child, should she then have any. it should be do by his will. he
would say nothing about money to Lopez, and if Lopez should, as be
probable, ask after his daughter's fortune, he would answer to this
effect. thus he almost resolve that he would give his daughter to
the man without any inquiry as to the man's mean. the thing have to
be do, and he would take no further trouble about it. the comfort
of his life be go. his home would no long be a home to he. his
daughter could not now be his companion. the soon that death come
to he the well, but till death should come he must console himself
as well as he could by play whist at the Eldon. it be after this
fashion that Mr. Wharton think of the come marriage between his
daughter and her lover.
"I have your father's consent to marry your sister," say Ferdinand
immediately on enter Everett's room.
"I know it must come soon," say the invalid.
"I cannot say that it have be give in the most gracious
manner,--but it have be give very clearly. I have his express
permission to see she. those be his last word."
then there be a sending of note between the sick-room and the sick
man's sister's room. Everett write and Ferdinand write, and emily
wrote,--short line each of them,--a few word scrawl. the last
from Emily be as follows:--"Let he go into the drawing-room. E. W."
and so Ferdinand go down, to meet his love,--to encounter she for
the first time as she recognise future husband and engage lover.
Passionate, declare, and thorough as be her love for this man, the
familiar intercourse between they have hitherto be very limited.
there have be little,--we may perhaps say none,--of that dalliance
between they which be so delightful to the man and so wondrous to the
girl till custom have stale the edge of it. he have never sit with his
arm round her waist. he have rarely hold even her hand in his for a
happy recognise pause of a few second. he have never kiss even
her brow. and there she be now, stand before he, all his own,
absolutely give to he, with the full assurance of love on her
part, and with the declare consent of her father. even he have be
a little confused as he open the door,--even he, as he pause to
close it behind he, have have to think how he would address she, and
perhaps have think in vain. but he have not a moment for any thought
after enter the room. whether it be his doing or hers he hardly
know; but she be in his arm, and her lip be press to his, and
his arm be tight round her waist, hold she close to his breast.
it seem as though all that be want have be understand in a
moment, and as though they have live together and love for the last
twelve month with the full mutual confidence. and she be the
first to speak:--
"Ferdinand, I be so happy! be you happy?"
"my love; my darling!"
"you have never doubt I, I know,--since you first know it."
"Doubted you, my girl!"
"that I would be firm! and now papa have be good to I, and how
quickly one's sorrow be over. I be your, my love, for ever and ever.
you know it before, but I like to tell you. I will be true to you in
everything! oh, my love!"
he have but little to say to she, but we know that for "lover lack
matter, the cleanly shift be to kiss." in such moment silence
charm, and almost any word be unsuitable except those soft,
bird-like murmuring of love which, sweet as they be to the ear, can
hardly be so write as to be sweet to the reader.
CHAPTER XXIV
the Marriage
the engagement be make in October, and the marriage take place
in the latter part of November. when Lopez press for an early
day,--which he do very strongly,--emily raise no difficulty in
the way of his wish. the father, foolishly enough, would at first
have postpone it, and make himself so unpleasant to Lopez by his
manner of do this, that the bride be drive to take her lover's
part. as the thing be to be do, what be to be gain by delay?
it could not be make a joy to he; nor, look at the matter as he
look at it, could he make a joy even of her presence during the few
intervene week. Lopez propose to take his bride into Italy for
the winter month, and to stay there at any rate through December
and January, allege that he must be back in town by the beginning
of February;--and this be take as a fair plea for hasten the
marriage.
when the matter be settle, he go back to Gatherum Castle, as he
have arrange to do with the Duchess, and manage to interest her
Grace in all his proceeding. she promise that she would call on his
bride in town, and even go so far as to send she a costly wedding
present. "you be sure she have get money?" say the Duchess.
"I be not sure of anything," say Lopez,--"except this, that I do
not mean to ask a single question about it. if he say nothing to
I about money, I certainly shall say nothing to he. my feeling be
this, Duchess; I be not marry Miss Wharton for her money. the
money, if there be any, have have nothing to do with it. but of course
it will be a pleasure add if it be there." the Duchess compliment
he, and tell he that this be exactly as it should be.
but there be some delay as to the seat for Silverbridge. Mr. Grey's
departure for Persia have be postponed,--the Duchess think only
for a month or six week. the Duke, however, be of opinion that
Mr. Grey should not vacate his seat till the day of his going be
at any rate fix. the Duke, moreover, have not make any promise of
support his wife's favourite. "donot set your heart upon it too
much, Mr. Lopez," the Duchess have say; "but you may be sure I will
not forget you." then it have be settle between they that the
marriage should not be postpone, or the propose trip to Italy
abandon, because of the probable vacancy at Silverbridge. should
the vacancy occur during his absence, and should the Duke consent,
he could return at once. all this occur in the last week or two
before his marriage.
there be various little incident which do not tend to make the
happiness of Emily Wharton complete. she write to her cousin Mary
Wharton, and also to Lady Wharton;--and her father write to Sir
Alured; but the folk at Wharton Hall do not give in their adherence.
Old Mrs. Fletcher be still there, but John Fletcher have go home to
longbarn. the obduracy of the Whartons might probably be owe to
these two accident. Mrs. Fletcher declare aloud, as soon as the
tiding reach she, that she never wish to see or hear anything
more of Emily Wharton. "she must be a girl," say Mrs. Fletcher,
"of an ingrain vulgar taste." Sir Alured, whose letter from Mr.
Wharton have be very short, reply as shortly to his cousin. "dear
abel,--we all hope that Emily will be happy, though of course we
regret the marriage." the father, though he have not himself write
triumphantly, or even hopefully,--as father be willnot to write when
their daughter be give away in marriage,--wa wound by the
curtness and unkindness of the baronet's reply, and at the moment
declare to himself that he would never go to Herefordshire any more.
but on the follow day there come a bad blow than Sir Alured's
single line. emily, not in the least doubting but that her request
would be receive with the usual ready assent, have ask Mary Wharton
to be one of her bridesmaid. it must be suppose that the answer to
this be write, if not under the dictation, at any rate under the
inspiration, of Mrs. Fletcher. it be as follows:--
DEAR EMILY,
of course we all wish you to be very happy in your
marriage, but equally of course we be all disappointed.
we have teach ourselves to think that you would have bind
yourself close with we down here, instead of separate
yourself entirely from we.
under all the circumstance mamma think it would not be
wise for I to go up to London as one of your bridesmaid.
your affectionate Cousin,
MARY WHARTON.
this letter make poor Emily very angry for a day or two. "it be as
unreasonable as it be ill-natured," she say to her brother.
"what else could you expect from a stiff-neck, prejudiced set of
provincial ignoramus?"
"what Mary say be not true. she do not think that I be go to
bind myself close with they, as she call it. I have be quite
open with she, and have always tell she that I could not be Arthur
Fletcher's wife."
"why on earth should you marry to please they?"
"because they donot know Ferdinand they be determined to insult he.
it be an insult never to mention even his name. and to refuse to come
to my marriage! the world be wide and there be room for we and they;
but it make I unhappy,--very unhappy,--that I should have to break
with they." and then the tear come into her eye. it be intend,
no doubt, to be a complete breach, for not a single wedding present
be send from Wharton Hall to the bride. but from Longbarns,--from
John Fletcher himself,--there do come an elaborate coffee-pot,
which, in spite of its inutility and ugliness, be very valuable to
Emily.
but there be one other of her old Herefordshire friend who receive
the tiding of her marriage without quarrel with she. she herself
have write to her old lover.
MY DEAR arthur,
there have be so much true friendship and affection
between we that I do not like that you should hear
from any one but myself the news that I be go to be
married to Mr. Lopez. we be to be marry on the 28th of
november,--this day month.
your affectionately,
EMILY WHARTON.
to this she receive a very short reply;--
DEAR EMILY,
I be as I always have be.
your,
A. F.
he send she no present, nor do he say a word to she beyond this;
but in her anger against the Herefordshire people she never include
Arthur Fletcher. she pore over the little note a score of time, and
weep over it, and treasure it up among her inmost treasure, and
tell herself that it be a thousand pity. she could talk, and do
talk, to ferdinand about the Whartons, and about old Mrs. Fletcher,
and describe to he the arrogance and the stiffness and the
ignorance of the Herefordshire squirearchy generally; but she never
speak to he of Arthur Fletcher,--except in that one narrative of she
past life, in which, girl-like, she tell her lover of the one other
lover who have love she.
but these thing of course give a certain melancholy to the occasion
which perhaps be increase by the season of the year,--by the
November fog, and by the emptiness and general sadness of the town.
and add to this be the melancholy of old Mr. Wharton himself.
after he have give his consent to the marriage he admit a certain
amount of intimacy with his son-in-law, ask he to dinner, and
discuss with he matter of general interest,--but never, in
truth, open his heart to he. indeed, how can any man open his
heart to one whom he dislike? at good he can only pretend to open
his heart, and even this Mr. Wharton would not do. and very soon
after the engagement Lopez leave London and go to the Duke's place
in the country. his object in do this and his aspiration in
regard to a seat in Parliament be all make known to his future
wife,--but he say not a word on the subject to her father; and she,
act under his instruction, be equally reticent. "he will get to
know I in time," he say to she, "and his manner will be soften
towards I. but till that time shall come, I can hardly expect he to
take a real interest in my welfare."
when Lopez leave London not a word have be say between he and his
father-in-law as to money. Mr. Wharton be content with such silence,
not wish to make any promise as to immediate income from himself,
pretend to look at the matter as though he should say that, as his
daughter have make for herself her own bed, she must lie on it, such
as it might be. and this silence certainly suit Ferdinand Lopez at
the time. to tell the truth of him,--though he be not absolutely
penniless, he be altogether propertyless. he have be speculate
in money without capital, and though he have now and again be
successful, he have also now and again fail. he have contrive
that his name should be mention here and there with the name
of well-know wealthy commercial man, and have for the last twelve
month make up a somewhat intimate alliance with that very sound
commercial man, Mr. Mills Happerton. but his dealing with Mr. Sextus
Parker be in truth much more confidential than those with Mr.
Mills Happerton, and at the present moment poor Sexty Parker be
alternately between triumph and despair as thing go this way or
that.
it be not, therefore, surprising that Ferdinand Lopez should
volunteer no statement to the old lawyer about money, and that he
should make no inquiry. he be quite confident that Mr. Wharton have
the wealth which be suppose to belong to he, and be willing to
trust to his power of obtain a fair portion of it as soon as he
should in truth be Mr. Wharton's son-in-law. situate as he be, of
course he must run some risk. and then, too, he have speak of himself
with a grain of truth when he have tell the Duchess that he be not
marry for money. Ferdinand Lopez be not an honest man or a good
man. he be a self-seeking, intriguing adventurer, who do not know
honesty from dishonesty when he see they together. but he have at any
rate this good about he, that he do love the girl whom he be about
to marry. he be willing to cheat all the world,--so that he might
succeed, and make a fortune, and become a big and a rich man; but
he do not wish to cheat she. it be his ambition now to carry she
up with he, and he think how he might well teach she to assist
he in do so,--how he might win she to help he in his cheating,
especially in regard to her own father. for to himself, to his own
thinking, that which we call cheating be not dishonesty. to his
thinking there be something bold, grand, picturesque, and almost
beautiful in the battle which such a one as himself must wage with
the world before he could make his way up in it. he would not pick
a pocket, or turn a false card, or, as he think, forge a name.
that which he do, and desire to do, take with he the name of
speculation. when he persuade poor Sexty Parker to hazard his all,
know well that he induce the unfortunate man to believe what
be false, and to trust what be utterly untrustworthy, he do not
himself think that he be go beyond the line of fair enterprise.
now, in his marriage, he have in truth join himself to real wealth.
could he only command at once that which he think ought to be his
wife's share of the lawyer's money, he do not doubt but that he
could make a rapid fortune. it would not do for he to seem to be
desirous of the money a day before the time;--but, when the time
should come, would not his wife help he in his great career? but
before she could do so she must be make to understand something of
the nature of that career, and of the need of such aid.
of course there arise the question where they should live. but he be
ready with an immediate answer to this question. he have be to look
at a flat,--a set of rooms,--in the Belgrave Mansions, in Pimlico,
or Belgravia you ought more probably to call it. he propose to take
they furnish till they could look about at their leisure and get a
house that should suit they. would she like a flat? she would have
like a cellar with he, and so she tell he. then they go to look
at the flat, and old Mr. Wharton condescend to go with they. though
his heart be not in the business, still he think that he be bind
to look after his daughter's comfort. "they be very handsome room,"
say Mr. Wharton, look round upon the rather gorgeous furniture.
"oh, Ferdinand, be they not too grand?" say Emily.
"perhaps they be a little more than we quite want just at present,"
he say. "but Iwill tell you, sir, just how it have happen. a man I
know want to let they for one year, just as they be, and offer
they to I for L450,--if I could pay the money in advance, at the
moment. and so I pay it."
"you have take they, then?" say Mr. Wharton.
"be it all settle?" say Emily, almost with disappointment.
"I have pay the money, and I have so far take they. but it be by
no mean settle. you have only to say you donot like they, and you
shall never be ask to put your foot in they again."
"but I do like they," she whisper to he.
"the truth be, sir, that there be not the slight difficulty in
parting with they. so that when the chance come in my way I think
it good to secure the thing. it have all to be do, so to say, in an
hour. my friend,--as far as he be a friend, for I donot know much
about him,--wante the money and want to be off. so here they be,
and Emily can do as she like." of course the room be regard
from that moment as the home for the next twelve month of Mr. and
Mrs. Ferdinand Lopez.
and then they be marry. the marriage be by no mean a gay
affair, the chief management of it fall into the hand of Mrs.
Dick Roby. Mrs. Dick indeed provide not only the breakfast,--or
see rather that it be provide, for of course Mr. Wharton pay the
bill,--but the four bridesmaid also, and all the company. they be
marry in the church in Vere Street, then go back to the house in
Manchester Square, and within a couple of hour be on their road to
Dover. through it all not a word be say about money. at the last
moment,--when he be free from fear as to any question about his own
affairs,--lopez have hop that the old man would say something. "you
will find so many thousand pound at your bankers';"--or, "you may
look to I for so many hundred a year." but there be not a word.
the girl have come to he without the assurance of a single shilling.
in his great endeavour to get she he have be successful. as he
think of this in the carriage, he press his arm close round her
waist. if the bad be to come to the bad, he would fight the
world for she. but if this old man should be stubborn, close-fiste,
and absolutely resolve to bestow all his money upon his son because
of this marriage,--ah!--how should he be able to bear such a wrong as
that?
half-a-dozen time during that journey to Dover he resolve to think
nothing further about it, at any rate for a fortnight; and yet,
before he reach Dover, he have say a word to she. "I wonder what
your father mean to do about money? he never tell you?"
"not a word."
"it be very odd that he should never have say anything."
"do it matter, dear?"
"not in the least. but of course I have to talk about everything to
you;--and it be odd."
CHAPTER XXV
the beginning of the Honeymoon
on the morning of his marriage, before he go to the altar, Lopez
make one or two resolution as to his future conduct. the first be
that he would give himself a fortnight from his marriage day in which
he would not even think of money. he have make certain arrangement,
in the course of which he have cause Sextus Parker to stare with
surprise and to sweat with dismay, but which nevertheless be
successfully conclude. bill be draw to run over to February,
and ready money to a moderate extent be forthcoming, and fiscal
tranquillity be insure for a certain short period. the confidence
which Sextus Parker have once feel in his friend's own resource be
somewhat on the decline, but he still believe in his friend's skill
and genius, and, after due inquiry, he believe entirely in his
friend's father-in-law. Sextus Parker still think that thing
would come round. Ferdinand,--he always now call his friend by his
Christian name,--Ferdinand be beautifully, seraphically confident.
and Sexty, who have be in a manner magnetise by Ferdinand, be
confident too--at certain period of the day. he be very confident
when he have have his two or three glass of sherry at luncheon,
and he be often delightfully confident with his cigar and
brandy-and-water at night. but there be period in the morning in
which he would shake with fear and sweat with dismay.
but Lopez himself, have with his friend's assistance arrange his
affair comfortably for a month or two, have, as a first resolution,
promise himself a fortnight's freedom from all carking care. his
second resolution have be that at the end of the fortnight he would
commence his operation on Mr. Wharton. up to the last moment he have
hoped,--had almost expected,--that a sum of money would have be
pay to he. even a couple of thousand pound for the time would have
be of great use to him;--but no tender of any kind have be make.
not a word have be say. thing could not of course go on in that
way. he be not go to play the coward with his father-in-law.
then he bethink himself how he would act if his father-in-law be
sternly to refuse to do anything for he, and he assure himself that
in such circumstance he would make himself very disagreeable to his
father-in-law. and then his third resolution have reference to his
wife. she must be instruct in his way. she must learn to look at
the world with his eye. she must be teach the great importance
of money,--not in a griping, hard-fiste, prosaic spirit; but that
she might participate in that feeling of his own which have in it so
much that be grand, so much that be delightful, so much that be
picturesque. he would never ask she to be parsimonious,--never even
to be economical. he would take a glory in see she well dress
and well attend, with her own carriage and her own jewel. but she
must learn that the enjoyment of these thing must be build upon
a conviction that the most important pursuit in the world be the
acquiring of money. and she must be make to understand, first of all,
that she have a right to at any rate a half of her father's fortune.
he have perceive that she have much influence with her father, and she
must be teach to use this influence unscrupulously on her husband's
behalf.
we have already see that under the pressure of his thought he do
break his first resolution within an hour or two of his marriage. it
be easy for a man to say that he will banish care, so that he may
enjoy to the full the delight of the moment. but this be a power
which none but a savage possesses,--or perhaps an Irishman. we have
learn the lesson from the divine, the philosopher, and the poet.
Post equitem sedet atra cura. thus be Ferdinand Lopez mount high
on his horse,--for he have triumph greatly in his marriage, and
really feel that the world could give he no delight so great as to
have she beside he, and she as his own. but the inky devil sit close
upon his shoulder. where would he be at the end of three month if
Mr. Wharton would do nothing for him,--and if a certain venture in
guano, to which he have tempt Sexty Parker, should not turn out the
right way? he believe in the guano and he believe in Mr. Wharton,
but it be a terrible thing to have one's whole position in the world
hang upon either an unwilling father-in-law or a probable rise in
the value of manure! and then how would he reconcile himself to she
if both father-in-law and guano should go against he, and how should
he endure her misery?
the inky devil have force he to ask the question even before they
have reach Dover. "do it matter?" she have ask. then for the time
he have repudiate his solicitude, and have declare that no question
of money be of much consequence to him,--thereby make his future
task with she so much the more difficult. after that he say nothing
to she on the subject on that their wedding day,--but he could not
prevent himself from think of it. have he go to the depth of ruin
without a wife, what would it have matter? for year past he have
be at the same kind of work,--but while he be unmarried there
have be a charm in the very danger. and as a single man he have
succeed, be sometimes utterly impecunious, but still with a
capacity of living. now he have lade himself with a burden of which
the very intensity of his love immensely increase the weight. as for
not think of it, that be impossible. of course she must help he.
of course she must be teach how imperative it be that she should
help he at once. "be there anything trouble you?" she say, as she
sit lean against he after their dinner in the hotel at Dover.
"what should trouble I on such a day as this?"
"if there be anything, tell it I. I do not mean to say now, at this
moment,--unless you wish it. whatever may be your trouble, it shall
be my great happiness, as it be my first duty, to lessen they if I
can."
the promise be very well. it all go in the right direction. it
show he that she be at any rate prepare to take a part in the
joint work of their life. but, nevertheless, she should be spar for
the moment. "when there be trouble, you shall be tell everything," he
say, press his lip to her brow, "but there be nothing that need
trouble you yet." he smile as he say this, but there be something
in the tone of his voice which tell she that there would be trouble.
when he be in Paris he receive a letter from Parker, to whom he
have be oblige to intrust a running address, but from whom he have
enforce a promise that there should be no letter-writing unless
under very pressing circumstance. the circumstance have not be
press. the letter contain only one paragraph of any importance,
and that be due to what Lopez try to regard as fidgety cowardice
on the part of his ally. "please to bear in mind that I cannot and
willnot arrange for the bill for L1500 due 3rd February." that be
the paragraph. who have ask he to arrange for these bill? and
yet Lopez be well aware that he intend that poor Sexty should
"arrange" for they, in the event of his failure to make arrangement
with Mr. Wharton.
at last he be quite unable to let the fortnight pass by without
begin the lesson which his wife have to learn. as for that first
intention as to drive his care out of his own mind for that time,
he have long since abandon even the attempt. it be necessary to
he that a considerable sum of money should be extract from the
father-in-law, at any rate before the end of January, and a week or
even a day might be of importance. they have hurry on southward
from Paris, and before the end of the first week have pass over the
Simplon, and be at a pleasant inn on the shore of Como. everything
in their travel have be as yet delightful to Emily. this man, of
whom she know in truth so little, have certain good gifts,--gift of
intellect, gift of temper, gift of voice and manner and outward
appearance,--which have hitherto satisfy she. a husband who be also
an eager lover must be delightful to a young bride. and hitherto no
lover could have be more tender than Lopez. every word and every
act, every look and every touch, have be love. have she know
the world well she might have feel, perhaps, that something be
expect where so much be give. perhaps a rougher manner, with some
little touch of marital self-assertion, might be a safe commencement
of married life,--safer to the wife as come from her husband.
Arthur Fletcher by this time would have ask she to bring he his
slipper, take infinite pride in have his little behest obey
by so sweet a servitor. that also would have be pleasant to she have
her heart in the first instance follow his image; but now also the
idolatry of Ferdinand Lopez have be very pleasant.
but the moment for the first lesson have come. "your father have not
write to you since you start?" he say.
"not a line. he have not know our address. he be never very good at
letter-writing. I do write to he from Paris, and I scribble a few
word to Everett yesterday."
"it be very odd that he should never have write to I."
"do you expect he to write?"
"to tell you the truth, I rather do. not that I should have dream
of his corresponding with I have he speak to I on a certain
subject. but as, on that subject, he never open his mouth to I, I
almost think he would write."
"do you mean about money?" she ask in a very low voice.
"well;--ye; I do mean about money. thing hitherto have go so very
strangely between we. sit down, dear, till we have a real domestic
talk."
"tell I everything," she say, as she nestle herself close to his
side.
"you know how it be at first between he and I. he object to I
violently,--i mean openly, to my face. but he base his objection
solely on my nationality,--nationality and blood. as to my condition
in the world, fortune, or income, he never ask a word. that be
strange."
"I suppose he think he know."
"he could not have think he know, dearest. but it be not for I to
force the subject upon he. you can see that."
"I be sure whatever you do be right, Ferdinand."
"he be indisputably a rich man,--one who might be suppose to be able
and willing to give an only daughter a considerable fortune. now I
certainly have never think of marry for money." here she rub
her face upon his arm. "I feel that it be not for I to speak of
money. if he choose to be reticent, I could be so equally. have he
ask I, I should have tell he that I have no fortune, but be
make a large though precarious income. it would then be for he
to declare what he intend to do. that would, I think, have be
preferable. as it be we be all in doubt. in my position a knowledge
of what your father intend to do would be most valuable to I."
"should you not ask he?"
"I believe there have always be a perfect confidence between you and
he?"
"certainly,--as to all our way of living. but he never say a word
to I about money in his life."
"and yet, my darling, money be most important."
"of course it be. I know that, Ferdinand."
"would you mind ask?" she do not answer he at once, but sit
thinking. and he also pause before he go on with his lesson.
but, in order that the lesson should be efficacious, it would be as
well that he should tell she as much as he could even at this first
lecture. "to tell you the truth, this be quite essential to I at
present,--very much more than I have think it would be when we fix
the day for our marriage." her mind within she recoil at this,
though she be very careful that he should not feel any such motion
in her body. "my business be precarious."
"what be your business, Ferdinand?" poor girl! that she should have
be allow to marry a man, and then have to ask such a question!
"it be generally commercial. I buy and sell on speculation. the
world, which be shy of new word, have not yet give it a name. I be
a good deal at present in the south american trade." she listen,
but receive no glimmering of an idea from his word. "when we be
engage everything be as bright as rose with I."
"why do you not tell I this before,--so that we might have be
more prudent?"
"such prudence would have be horrid to I. but the fact be that
I should not now have speak to you at all, but that since we leave
England I have have letter from a sort of partner of mine. in our
business thing will go astray sometimes. it would be of great
service to I if I could learn what be your father's intention."
"you want he to give you some money at once."
"it would not be unusual, dear,--when there be money to be give. but
I want you specially to ask he what he himself would propose to do.
he know already that I have take a home for you and pay for it,
and he knows--. but it do not signify go into that."
"tell I everything."
"he be aware that there be many expense. of course if he be a
poor man there would not be a word about it. I can with absolute
truth declare that have he be penniless it would have make no
difference as to my suit to you. but it would possibly have make some
difference as to our after plan. he be a thorough man of the world,
and he must know all that. I be sure he must feel that something be
due to you,--and to I as your husband. but he be odd-temper, and,
as I have not speak to he, he choose to be silent to I. now, my
darling, you and I cannot afford to wait to see who can be silent the
long."
"what do you want I to do?"
"to write to he."
"and ask he for money?"
"not exactly in that way. I think you should say that we should be
glad to know what he intend to do, also say that a certain sum of
money would at present be of use to I."
"would it not be well from you? I only ask, Ferdinand. I never have
even speak to he about money, and of course he would know that you
have dictate what I say."
"no doubt he would. it be natural that I should do so. I hope the
time may come when I may write quite freely to your father myself,
but hitherto he have hardly be courteous to I. I would rather that
you should write,--if you do not mind it. write your own letter, and
show it I. if there be anything too much or anything too little I
will tell you."
and so the first lesson be teach. the poor young wife do not at
all like the lesson. even within her own bosom she find no fault
with her husband. but she begin to understand that the life before
she be not to be a life of rose. the first word speak to she in
the train, before it reach Dover, have explain something of this
to she. she have feel at once that there would be trouble about money.
and now, though she do not at all understand what might be the
nature of those trouble, though she have derive no information
whatever from her husband's hint about the south american trade,
though she be as ignorant as ever of his affair, yet she feel that
the trouble would come soon. but never for a moment do it seem to
she that he have be unjust in bring she into troubled water.
they have love each other, and therefore, whatever might be the
trouble, it be right that they should marry each other. there be
not a spark of anger against he in she bosom;--but she be unhappy.
he demand from she the writing of the letter almost immediately
after the conversation which have be give above, and of course the
letter be written,--written and recopy, for the paragraph about
the money be, of course, at last of his wording. and she could not
make the remainder of the letter pleasant. the feeling that she be
make a demand for money on her father run through it all. but the
reader need only see the passage in which Ferdinand Lopez make his
demand,--through her hand.
"Ferdinand have be speak to I about my fortune." it have go
much against the grain with she to write these word, "my fortune."
"but I have no fortune," she say. he insist however, explain
to she that she be entitle to use these word by her father's
undoubted wealth. and so, with an aching heart, she write they.
"Ferdinand have be speak to I about my fortune. of course, I
tell he that I know nothing, and that as he have never speak to
I about money before our marriage, I have never ask about it. he
say that it would be of great service to he to know what be your
intention; and also that he hop you may find it convenient to
allow he to draw upon you for some portion of it at present. he say
that L3000 would be of great use to he in his business." that be
the paragraph, and the work of write it be so distasteful to she
that she could hardly bring herself to form the letter. it seem
as though she be seize the advantage of the first moment of her
freedom to take a violent liberty with her father.
"it be altogether his own fault, my pet," he say to she. "I have the
great respect in the world for your father, but he have allow
himself to fall into the habit of keep all his affair secret from
his child; and, of course, as they go out into the world, this
secrecy must in some degree be invade. there be precisely the same
thing go on between he and Everett; only Everett be a great deal
rougher to he than you be likely to be. he never will let Everett
know whether he be to regard himself as a rich man or a poor man."
"he give he an allowance."
"because he cannot help himself. to you he do not do even as much
as that, because he can help himself. I have choose to leave it to
he and he have do nothing. but this be not quite fair, and he must
be tell so. I donot think he could be tell in more dutiful language."
Emily do not like the idea of tell her father anything which he
might not like to hear; but her husband's behest be to she in
these, her early married day, quite imperative.
CHAPTER XXVI
the end of the Honeymoon
Mrs. Lopez have beg her father to address his reply to she at
Florence, where,--as she explain to him,--they expect to find
themselves within a fortnight from the date of her writing. they
have reach the lake about the end of November, when the weather
have still be fine, but they intend to pass the winter month
of December and January within the warmth of the city. that
intervene fortnight be to she a period of painful anticipation.
she fear to see her father's handwriting, feel almost sure that
he would be bitterly angry with she. during this time her husband
frequently speak to she about the letter,--about her own letter and
her father's expect reply. it be necessary that she should learn
her lesson, and she could only do so by have the subject of money
make familiar to her ear. it be not a part of his plan to tell she
anything of the mean by which he hop to make himself a wealthy
man. the less she know of that the well. but the fact that her
father absolutely owe to he a large amount of money as her fortune
could not be make too clear to she. he be very desirous to do this
in such a manner as not to make she think that he be accuse
her,--or that he would accuse she if the money be not forthcoming.
but she must learn the fact, and must be imbue with the conviction
that her husband would be the most ill-treat of man unless the
money be forthcoming. "I be a little nervous about it too," say
he, allude to the expected letter;--"not so much as to the money
itself, though that be important; but as to his conduct. if he
choose simply to ignore we after our marriage he will be behave
very badly." she have no answer to make to this. she could not defend
her father, because by do so she would offend her husband. and yet
her whole life-long trust in her father could not allow she to think
it possible that he should behave ill to they.
on their arrival at Florence he go at once to the post-office, but
there be as yet no letter. the fortnight, however, which have be
name have only just run itself out. they go on from day to day
inspect building, look at picture, make for themselves
a taste in marble and bronze, visit the lovely village which
cluster on the hill round the city,--doing precisely in this respect
as do all young married couple who devote a part of their honeymoon
to florence;--but in all their little journeying and in all their
work of pleasure the inky devil sit not only behind he but behind
she also. the heavy care of life be already begin to work
furrow on her face. she would already sit, knit her brow, as she
think of come trouble. would not her father certainly refuse?
and would not her husband then begin to be less loving and less
gracious to herself?
every day for a week he call at the post-office when he go out
with she, and still the letter do not come. "it can hardly be
possible," he say at last to she, "that he should decline to answer
his own daughter's letter."
"perhaps he be ill," she reply.
"if there be anything of that kind Everett would tell we."
"perhaps he have go back to Herefordshire?"
"of course his letter would go after he. I own it be very singular
to I that he should not write. it look as though he be determine
to cast you off from he altogether because you have marry against
his wish."
"not that, Ferdinand;--do not say that!"
"well; we shall see."
and on the next day they do see. he go to the post-office before
breakfast, and on this day he return with a letter in his hand.
she be sit wait for he with a book in her lap, and see the
letter at once. "be it from papa?" she say. he nod his head as
he hand it to she. "open it and read it, Ferdinand. I have get
to be so nervous about it, that I cannot do it. it seem to be so
important."
"Yes;--it be important," he say with a grim smile, and then he
open the letter. she watch his face closely as he read it, and at
first she could tell nothing from it. then, in that moment, it first
occur to she that he have a wonderful command of his feature. all
this, however, last but half a minute. then he chuck the letter,
lightly, in among the tea-cup, and come to she take she closely in
his arm and almost hurt she by the violence of his repeat kiss.
"have he write kindly?" she say, as soon as she could find she
breath to speak.
"by George, hebe a brick after all. I own I do not think it. my
darling, how much I owe you for all the trouble I have give you."
"oh, Ferdinand! if he have be good to you I shall be so happy."
"he have be awfully good. ha, ha, ha!" and then he begin walk
about the room as he laugh in an unnatural way. "upon my word it be
a pity we donot say four thousand, or five. think of his take I
just at my word. itbe a great deal well than I expect; thatbe all
I can say. and at the present moment it be of the utmost importance
to I."
all this do not take above a minute or two, but during that minute
or two she have be so bewildered by his manner as almost to fancy
that the expression of his delight have be ironical. he have be
so unlike himself as she have know he that she almost doubt the
reality of his joy. but when she take the letter and read it, she
find that his joy be true enough. the letter be very short, and
be as follows:--
MY DEAR EMILY,
what you have say under your husband's instruction about
money, I find upon consideration to be fair enough. I
think he should have speak to I before his marriage; but
then again perhaps I ought to have speak to he. as it
be, I be willing to give he the sum he require, and I
will pay L3000 to his account, if he would tell I where
he would have it lodge. then I shall think I have do
my duty by he. what I shall do with the remainder of any
money that I may have, I do not think he be entitle to
ask.
Everett be well again, and as idle as ever. your aunt Roby
be make a fool of herself at Harrogate. I have hear
nothing from Herefordshire. everything be very quiet and
lonely here.
your affectionate father,
A. WHARTON.
as he have din at the Eldon every day since his daughter have leave
he, and have play on an average a dozen rubber of whist daily, he
be not justify in complain of the loneliness of London.
the letter seem to Emily herself to be very cold, and have not her
husband rejoice over it so warmly she would have consider it to be
unsatisfactory. no doubt the l3000 would be give; but that, as far
as she could understand her father's word, be to be the whole of
her fortune. she have never know anything of her father's affair or
of his intention, but she have certainly suppose that her fortune
would be very much more than this. she have learn in some indirect
way that a large sum of money would have go with her hand to
Arthur Fletcher, could she have bring herself to marry that
suitor favour by her family. and now, have learn, as she have
learn, that money be of vital importance to her husband, she be
dismay at what seem to she to be parental parsimony. but he be
overjoyed,--so much so that for a while he lose that restraint over
himself which be habitual to he. he eat his breakfast in a state of
exultation, and talked,--not allude specially to this L3000,--as
though he have the command of almost unlimited mean. he order a
carriage and drive she out, and buy present for her,--thing
as to which they have both before decide that they should not be
buy because of the expense. "pray donot spend your money for I,"
she say to he. "it be nice to have you give I thing, but it
would be nice to I even than that to think that I could save you
expense."
but he be not in a mood to be deny. "you donot understand," he
say. "I donot want to be save from little extravagance of this
sort. owe to circumstance, your father's money be at this moment
of importance to me;--but he have answer to the whip and the money
be there, and that trouble be over. we can enjoy ourselves now. other
trouble will spring up, no doubt, before long."
she do not quite like be tell that her father have "answer to
the whip,"--but she be willing to believe that it be a phrase
common among man to which it would be prudish to make objection.
there be, also, something in her husband's elation which be
distasteful to she. could it be that revers of fortune with
reference to moderate sum of money, such as this which be now
come into his hand, would always affect he in the same way? be
it not almost unmanly, or at any rate be it not undignifie? and yet
she try to make the good of it, and lend herself to his holiday
mood as well as she be able. "shall I write and thank papa?" she
say that evening.
"I have be think of that," he say. "you can write if you like,
and of course you will. but I also will write, and have well do so
a post or two before you. as he have come round I suppose I ought to
show myself civil. what he say about the rest of his money be of
course absurd. I shall ask he nothing about it, but no doubt after a
bit he will make permanent arrangement." everything in the business
wound she more or less. she now perceive that he regard this
l3000 only as the first instalment of what he might get, and that his
joy be due simply to this temporary success. and then he call she
father absurd to her face. for a moment she think that she would
defend her father; but she could not as yet bring herself to question
her husband's word even on such a subject as that.
he do write to Mr. Wharton, but in do so he altogether lay aside
that flighty manner which for a while have annoy she. he thoroughly
understand that the wording of the letter might be very important to
he, and he take much trouble with it. it must be now the great work
of his life to ingratiate himself with this old man, so that, at any
rate at the old man's death, he might possess at least half of the
old man's money. he must take care that there should be no division
between his wife and her father of such a nature as to make the
father think that his son ought to enjoy any special privilege of
primogeniture or of male inheritance. and if it could be so manage
that the daughter should, before the old man's death, become his
favourite child, that also would be well. he be therefore very
careful about the letter, which be as follows:--
MY DEAR MR. WHARTON,
I cannot let your letter to emily pass without thank
you myself for the very liberal response make by you to
what be of course a request from myself. let I in the
first place assure you that have you, before our marriage,
make any inquiry about my money affair, I would have tell
you everything with accuracy; but as you do not do so
I think that I should seem to intrude upon you, if I
introduce the subject. it be too long for a letter, but
whenever you may like to allude to it, you will find that
I will be quite open with you.
I be engage in business which often require the use of
a considerable amount of capital. it have so happen that
even since we be marry the immediate use of a sum of
money become essential to I to save I from sacrifice a
cargo of guano which will be of greatly increase value in
three month' time, but which otherwise must have go for
what it would now fetch. your kindness will see I through
that difficulty.
of course there be something precarious in such a
business as mine;--but I be endeavour to make it less
so from day to day, and hope very shortly to bring it
into that humdrum groove which good befit a married man.
should I ask further assistance from you in do this,
perhaps you will not refuse it if I can succeed in make
the matter clear to you. as it be I thank you sincerely
for what you have do. I will ask you to pay the L3000
you have so kindly promise, to my account at Messrs.
Hunky and Sons, Lombard Street. they be not regular
banker, but I have an account there.
we be wander about and enjoy ourselves mightily in
the properly romantic manner. Emily sometimes seem to
think that she would like to give up business, and London,
and all sublunary trouble, in order that she might settle
herself for life under an italian sky. but the idea do
not generally remain with she very long. already she be
begin to show symptom of home sickness in regard to
Manchester Square.
your always most faithfully,
ferdinand lopez.
to this letter Lopez receive no reply;--nor do he expect one.
between Emily and her father a few letter pass, not very long;
nor, as regard those from Mr. Wharton, be they very interesting.
in none of they, however, be there any mention of money. but early
in January Lopez receive a most pressing,--we might almost say an
agonising letter from his friend Parker. the gist of the letter
be to make lopez understand that Parker must at once sell certain
interest in a come cargo of guano,--at whatever sacrifice,--unless
he could be certify as to that money which must be pay in
February, and which he, Parker, must pay, should Ferdinand Lopez be
at that moment unable to meet his bond. the answer send to Parker
shall be give to the reader.
MY dear OLD AWFULLY SILLY, and ABSURDLY IMPATIENT FRIEND,
you be always like a toad under a harrow, and that
without the slight cause. I have money lie at Hunky's
more than double enough for the bill. why cannot you trust
a man? if you willnot trust I in say so, you can go to
Mills Happerton and ask he. but, remember, I shall be
very much annoyed if you do so,--and that such an inquiry
cannot but be injurious to I. if, however, you willnot
believe I, you can go and ask. at any rate, donot meddle
with the guano. we should lose over L1000 each of we, if
you be to do so. by George, a man should neither marry,
nor leave London for a day, if he have to do with a fellow
so nervous as you be. as it be I think I shall be back
a week or two before my time be properly up, lest you
and one or two other should think that I have levant
altogether.
I have no hesitation in say that more fortune be lose
in business by tremble cowardice than by any amount of
imprudence or extravagance. my hair stand on end when you
talk of part with guano in December because there be
bill which have to be meet in February. pluck up your
heart, man, and look around, and see what be do by man
with good courage.
your always,
ferdinand lopez.
these be the only communication between our married couple and
their friend at home with which I need trouble my reader. nor need
I tell any further tale of their honeymoon. if the time be not one
of complete and unalloyed joy to Emily,--and we must fear that it
be not,--it be to be remember that but very little complete and
unalloye joy be allow to sojourner in this vale of tear, even
though they have be but two month marry. in the first week in
February they appear in the Belgrave mansion, and Emily Lopez take
possession of her new home with a heart as full of love for her
husband as it have be when she walk out of the church in Vere
Street, though it may be that some of her sweetest illusion have
already be dispel.
CHAPTER XXVII
the Duke's Misery
we must go back for a while to Gatherum Castle and see the guest
whom the Duchess have collect there for her Christmas festivity.
the hospitality of the Duke's house have be maintain almost
throughout the autumn. just at the end of October they go to
Matching, for what the Duchess call a quiet month,--which, however,
at the Duke's urgent request become six week. but even here the
house be full all the time, though from deficiency of bedroom the
guest be very much less numerous. but at Matching the Duchess have
be uneasy and almost cross. Mrs. Finn have go with her husband to
Ireland, and she have teach herself to fancy that she could not live
without Mrs. Finn. and her husband have insist upon have round
he politician of his own sort, man who really prefer work to
archery, or even to hunting, and who discuss the evil of direct
taxation absolutely in the drawing-room. the Duchess be assure
that the country could not be govern by the support of such man as
these, and be very glad to get back to gatherum,--whither also come
Phineas Finn with his wife, and the St. Bungay people, and Barrington
Erle, and Mr. Monk, the Chancellor of the Exchequer, with Lord and
Lady Cantrip, and Lord and Lady Drummond,--Lord Drummond be the
only representative of the other or coalesce party. and Major
Pountney be there, have be urgent with the Duchess,--and have
fully explain to his friend Captain Gunner that he have accede to
the wish of his hostess only on the assurance of her grace that
the house would not be again trouble by the presence of Ferdinand
Lopez. such assurance be common between the two friend, but be
innocent, as, of course, neither believe the other. and Lady Rosina
be again there,--with many other. the melancholy poverty of Lady
Rosina have captivate the Duke. "she shall come and live here, if you
like," the Duchess have say in answer to a request from her husband
on his new friend's behalf,--"i've no doubt she will be willing." the
place be not crowd as it have be before; but still about thirty
guest sit down to dinner daily, and Locock, Millepois, and Mrs.
Pritchard be all keep hard at work. nor be our Duchess idle.
she be always make up the party,--meane the coalition,--doing
something to strengthen the buttress, write little letter
to little people, who, little as they be, might become big by
amalgamation. "one have always to be bind one's fagot," she say to
Mrs. Finn, have read she AEsop not altogether in vain. "where should
we have be without you?" she have whisper to Sir Orlando Drought
when that gentleman be leave Gatherum at the termination of his
second visit. she have particularly dislike Sir Orlando, and be
aware that her husband have on this occasion be hardly as gracious
as he should have be, in true policy, to so powerful a colleague.
her husband have be peculiarly shy of Sir Orlando since the day
on which they have walk together in the park,--and, consequently,
the Duchess have whisper to he. "donot bind your fagot too
conspicuously," Mrs. Finn have say to she. then the Duchess have
fall to a seat almost exhausted by labour, mingle with regret,
and by the doubt which from time to time pervade even her audacious
spirit. "Ibe not a god," she say, "or a Pitt, or an italian with a
long name begin with M., that I should be able to do these thing
without ever make a mistake. and yet they must be do. and as for
him,--he do not help I in the least. he wander about among the
cloud of the multiplication table, and think that a majority will
drop into his mouth because he do not shut it. can you tie the
fagot any well?" "I think I would leave it untie," say Mrs. Finn.
"you would not do anything of the kind. youwould be just as fussy as I
be." and thus the game be carry on at Gatherum Castle from week to
week.
"but you willnot leave he?" this be say to Phineas Finn by his wife
a day or two before Christmas, and the question be intend to ask
whether Phineas think of give up his place.
"not if I can help it."
"you like the work."
"that have but little to do with the question, unfortunately. I
certainly like have something to do. I like earn money."
"I donot know why you like that especially," say the wife, laugh.
"I do at any rate,--and, in a certain sense, I like authority. but in
serve with the Duke I find a lack of that sympathy which one should
have with one's chief. he would never say a word to I unless I speak
to he. and when I do speak, though he be studiously civil,--much
too courteous,--I know that he be bored. he have nothing to say to I
about the country. when he have anything to communicate, he prefer to
write a minute for Warburton, who then write to Morton,--and so it
reach I."
"donot it do as well?"
"it may do with I. there be reason which bind I to he, which
will not bind other man. man donot talk to I about it, because
they know that I be bind to he through you. but I be aware of the
feeling which exist. you cannot be really loyal to a king if you
never see him,--if he be always lock up in some almost divine
recess."
"a king may make himself too common, Phineas."
"no doubt. a king have to know where to draw the line. but the Duke
draw no intentional line at all. he be not by nature gregarious or
communicative, and be therefore hardly fit to be the head of a
ministry."
"it will break her heart if anything go wrong."
"she ought to remember that Ministries seldom live very long," say
Phineas. "but shewill recover even if she do break her heart. she be
too full of vitality to be much repress by any calamity. have you
hear what be to be do about Silverbridge?"
"the Duchess want to get it for this man, Ferdinand Lopez."
"but it have not be promise yet?"
"the seat be not vacant," say Mrs. Finn, "and I donot know when it
will be vacant. I think there be a hitch about it,--and I think the
Duchess be go to be make very angry."
throughout the autumn the Duke have be an unhappy man. while the
absolute work of the Session have last he have find something
to console he; but now, though he be surround by private
secretary, and though dispatch-box go and come twice a day,
though there be dozen of letter as to which he have to give some
instruction,--yet, there be in truth nothing for he to do. it
seem to he that all the real work of the Government have be
filch from he by his colleague, and that he be stick up in
pretend authority,--a kind of wooden Prime Minister, from whom no
real ministration be demand. his first fear have be that he be
himself unfit;--but now he be uneasy, fear that other think
he to be unfit. there be Mr. Monk with his budget, and Lord
Drummond with his three or four dozen half rebellious colony, and
Sir Orlando Drought with the House to lead and a ship to build, and
Phineas Finn with his scheme of municipal Home Rule for Ireland, and
Lord Ramsden with a codify Statute book,--all full of work, all
with something special to be do. but for him,--he have to arrange
who should attend the Queen, what ribbon should be give away, and
what middle-aged young man should move the address. he sigh as he
think of those happy day in which he use to fear that his mind
and body would both give way under the pressure of decimal coinage.
but Phineas Finn have read the Duke's character rightly in say that
he be neither gregarious nor communicative, and therefore but little
fit to rule Englishmen. he have think that it be so himself,
and now from day to day he be become more assured of his own
deficiency. he could not throw himself into cordial relation with
the Sir Orlando Droughts, or even with the Mr. Monks. but, though he
have never wish to be put into his present high office, now that
he be there he dread the sense of failure which would follow his
descent from it. it be this feeling rather than genuine ambition,
rather than the love of power or patronage or pay, which induce man
to cling to place. the absence of real work, and the quantity of mock
work, both alike make the life wearisome to he; but he could not
endure the idea that it should be write in history that he have
allow himself to be make a faineant Prime Minister, and then have
fail even in that. history would forget what he have do as a
work Minister in record the feebleness of the Ministry which
would bear his name.
the one man with whom he could talk freely, and from whom he could
take advice, be now with he, here at his Castle. he be shy at
first even with the Duke of St. Bungay, but that shyness he could
generally overcome, after a few word. but though he be always sure
of his old friend's sympathy and of his old friend's wisdom, yet he
doubt his old friend's capacity to understand himself. the young
Duke feel the old Duke to be thick-skinned than himself and
therefore unable to appreciate the thorn which so sorely worry his
own flesh. "they talk to I about a policy," say the host. they be
closet at this time in the Prime Minister's own sanctum, and there
yet remain an hour before they need dress for dinner.
"who talk about a policy?"
"Sir Orlando Drought especially." for the Duke of Omnium have never
forget the arrogance of that advice give in the park.
"Sir Orlando be of course entitle to speak, though I do not know
that he be likely to say anything very well worth the hearing. what
be his special policy?"
"if he have any, of course, I would hear he. it be not that he want
any special thing to be do, but he think that I should get up some
special thing in order that Parliament may be satisfy."
"if you want to create a majority that might be true. just listen
to he and have do with it."
"I cannot go on in that way. I cannot submit to what amount to
complaint from the gentleman who be act with I. nor would they
submit long to my silence. I be begin to feel that I have be
wrong."
"I donot think you have be wrong at all."
"a man be wrong if he attempt to carry a weight too great for his
strength."
"a certain nervous sensitiveness, from which you should free yourself
as from a disease, be your only source of weakness. think about your
business as a shoemaker think of his. do your good, and then let
your customer judge for themselves. caveat emptor. a man should
never endeavour to price himself, but should accept the price which
other put on him,--only be careful that he should learn what that
price be. your policy should be to keep your government together by a
strong majority. after all, the making of new law be too often but
an unfortunate necessity lay on we by the impatience of the people.
a lengthened period of quiet and therefore good government with a
minimum of new law would be the great benefit the country could
receive. when I recommend you to comply with the Queen's behest I
do so because I think that you might inaugurate such a period more
certainly than any other one man." this old Duke be quite content
with a state of thing such as he describe. he have be a Cabinet
Minister for more than half his life. he like be a Cabinet
Minister. he think it well for the country generally that his party
should be in power,--and if not his party in its entirety, then as
much of his party as might be possible. he do not expect to be
write of as a Pitt or a Somers, but he think that memoir would
speak of he as a useful nobleman,--and he be content. he be
not only not ambitious himself, but the effervescence and general
turbulence of ambition in other man be distasteful to he. loyalty
be second nature to he, and the power of submit to defeat
without either shame or sorrow have become perfect with he by
long practice. he would have make his brother Duke such as he be
himself,--had not his brother Duke be so lamentably thin-skinned.
"I suppose we must try it for another session?" say the Duke of
Omnium with a lachrymose voice.
"of course we must,--and for other after that, I both hope and
trust," say the Duke of St. Bungay, get up. "if I donot go
up-stair I shall be late, and then her grace will look at I with
unforgive eye."
on the follow day after lunch the Prime Minister take a walk with
Lady Rosina De Courcy. he have fall into a habit of walk with
Lady Rosina almost every day of his life, till the people in the
Castle begin to believe that Lady Rosina be the mistress of some
deep policy of her own. for there be many there who do in truth
think that statecraft could never be absent from a minister's mind,
day or night. but in truth Lady Rosina chiefly make herself agreeable
to the Prime Minister by never make any most distant allusion
to public affair. it might be doubt whether she even know that
the man who pay she so much honour be the Head of the british
Government as well as the Duke of Omnium. she be a tall, thin,
shrivel-up old woman,--not very old, fifty perhaps, but look
at least ten year more,--very melancholy, and sometimes very cross.
she have be notably religious, but that be gradually wear off as
she advance in year. the rigid strictness of sabbatarian practice
require the full energy of middle life. she have be leave entirely
alone in the world, with a very small income, and not many friend
who be in any way interested in her existence. but she know herself
to be Lady Rosina De Courcy, and feel that the possession of that
name ought to be more to she than money and friend, or even than
brother and sister. "the weather be not frightening you," say the
Duke. Snow have fall, and the path, even where they have be sweep,
be wet and sloppy.
"weather never frighten I, your grace. I always have thick
boots;--i be very particular about that;--and cork sol."
"cork sol be admirable."
"I think I owe my life to cork sol," say Lady Rosina
enthusiastically. "there be a man name Sprout in Silverbridge who
make they. do your grace ever try he for boot?"
"I donot think I ever do," say the Prime Minister.
"then you have well. hebe very good and very cheap too. those London
tradesman never think they can charge you enough. I find I can wear
Sprout's boot the whole winter through and then have they resole. I
donot suppose you ever think of such thing?"
"I like to have my foot dry."
"I have get to calculate what they cost." they then pass Major
Pountney, who be come and go between the stable and the house,
and who take off his hat and who salute the host and his companion
with perhaps more flowing courtesy than be necessary. "I never have
find out what that gentleman's name be yet," say Lady Rosina.
"Pountney, I think. I believe they call he Major Pountney."
"oh, Pountney! there be Pountneys in Leicestershire. perhaps he be
one of they?"
"I donot know where he come from," say the Duke,--"nor, to tell
the truth, where he go to." Lady Rosina look up at he with an
interested air. "he seem to be one of those idle man who get into
people's house heaven know why, and never do anything."
"I suppose you ask he?" say Lady Rosina.
"the Duchess do, I dare say."
"how odd it would be if she be to suppose that you have ask he."
"the Duchess, no doubt, know all about it." then there be a little
pause. "she be oblige to have all sort of people," say the Duke
apologetically.
"I suppose so,--when you have so many come and go. I be sorry
to say that my time be up to-morrow, so that I shall make way for
somebody else."
"I hope you willnot think of go, Lady rosina,--unless you be
engage elsewhere. we be delighted to have you."
"the Duchess have be very kind, but--"
"the Duchess, I fear, be almost too much engaged to see as much of
her guest individually as she ought to do. to I your be here be
a great pleasure."
"you be too good to me,--much too good. but I shall have stay
out my time, and I think, Duke, I will go to-morrow. I be very
methodical, you know, and always act by rule. I have walk my two
mile now, and I will go in. if you do want boot with cork sol
mind you go to Sprout's. dear I; there be that Major Pountney again.
that be four time he have be up and down that path since we have
be walk here."
Lady Rosina go in, and the Duke turn back, think of his friend
and perhaps think of the cork sol of which she have to be so
careful and which be so important to her comfort. it could not be
that he fancy Lady Rosina to be clever, nor can we imagine that her
conversation satisfy any of those want to which he and all of we
be subject. but nevertheless he like Lady Rosina, and be never
bore by she. she be natural, and she want nothing from he. when
she talk about cork sol she mean cork sol. and then she do
not tread on any of his numerous corn. as he walk on he determine
that he would induce his wife to persuade Lady Rosina to stay a
little long at the Castle. in meditate upon this he make another
turn in the ground, and again come upon Major Pountney as that
gentleman be return from the stable. "a very cold afternoon," he
say, feel it to be ungracious to pass one of his own guest in
his own ground without a word of salutation.
"very cold indeed, your grace,--very cold." the Duke have intend
to pass on, but the Major manage to stop he by stand in the
pathway. the Major do not in the least know his man. he have hear
that the Duke be shy, and therefore think that he be timid. he
have not hitherto be speak to by the Duke,--a condition of thing
which he attribute to the Duke's shyness and timidity. but, with
much thought on the subject, he have resolve that he would have a few
word with his host, and have therefore pass backwards and forwards
between the house and the stable rather frequently. "very cold,
indeed, but yet wehave have beautiful weather. I donot know when I have
enjoy myself so much altogether as I have at Gatherum Castle."
the Duke bow, and make a little but a vain effort to get on. "a
splendid pile!" say the Major, stretch his hand gracefully
towards the building.
"it be a big house," say the Duke.
"a noble mansion;--perhap the noble mansion in the three
kingdom," say Major Pountney. "I have see a great many of the
good country residence in England, but nothing that at all equal
Gatherum." then the Duke make a little effort at progression, but
be still stop by the daring Major. "by-the-by, your grace, if
your grace have a few minute to spare,--just half a minute,--I wish
you would allow I to say something." the Duke assume a look of
disturbance, but he bow and walk on, allow the Major to walk
by his side. "I have the great possible desire, my Lord Duke, to
enter public life."
"I think you be already in the army," say the Duke.
"so I am;--wa on Sir Bartholomew Bone's staff in Canada for two
year, and have see as much of what I call home service as any man
go. one of my chief object be to take up the army."
"it seem that you have take it up."
"I mean in Parliament, your grace. I be very fairly off as regard
private mean, and would stand all the racket of the expense of a
contest myself,--if there be one. but the difficulty be to get a
seat, and, of course, if it can be privately manage, it be very
comfortable." the Duke look at he again,--this time without
bow. but the Major, who be not observant, rush on to his
destruction. "we all know that Silverbridge will soon be vacant. let
I assure your grace that if it might be consistent with your grace's
plan in other respect to turn your kind countenance towards I,
you would find that you would have a supporter than whom none would
be more staunch, and perhaps I may say, one who in the House would
not be the least useful!" that portion of the Major's speech which
refer to the Duke's kind countenance have be learn by heart,
and be throw trippingly off the tongue with a kind of twang. the
Major have perceive that he have not be at once interrupted when
he begin to open the budget of his political aspiration, and have
allow himself to indulge in please augury. "nothing ask and
nothing have," have be adopt as the motto of his life, and
more than once he have express to Captain Gunner his conviction
that,--"by George, if youhave only cheek enough, there be nothing you
cannot get." on this emergency the Major certainly be not deficient
in cheek. "if I might be allow to consider myself your grace's
candidate, I should indeed be a happy man," say the Major.
"I think, sir," say the Duke, "that your proposition be the most
unbecoming and the most impertinent that ever be address to I."
the Major's mouth fall, and he star with all his eye as he look
up into the Duke's face. "good afternoon," say the Duke, turn
quickly round and walk away. the Major stand for a while
transfix to the place, and, cold as be the weather, be bath in
perspiration. a keen sense of have "put his foot into it" almost
crush he for a time. then he assure himself that, after all, the
Duke "could not eat he," and with that consolatory reflection he
creep back to the house and up to his own room.
to put the man down have of course be an easy task to the Duke, but
he be not satisfied with that. to the Major it seem that the Duke
have pass on with easy indifference;--but in truth he be very far
from be easy. the man's insolent request have wound he at many
point. it be grievous to he that he should have as a guest in his
own house a man whom he have be force to insult. it be grievous
to he that he himself should not have be hold in personal respect
high enough to protect he from such an insult. it be grievous to
he that he should be openly addressed,--addresse by an absolute
stranger,--as a borough-monger lord, who would not scruple to give
away a seat in Parliament as seat be give away in former day.
and it be especially grievous to he that all these misfortune
should have come upon he as a part of the result of his wife's
manner of exercise his hospitality. if this be to be Prime
Minister he certainly would not be Prime Minister much long!
have any aspirant to political life ever dare so to address Lord
Brock, or Lord De Terrier, or Mr. Mildmay, the old Premiers whom he
remember? he think not. they have manage differently. they have
be able to defend themselves from such attack by personal dignity.
and would it have be possible that any man should have dare so to
speak to his uncle, the late Duke? he think not. as he shut himself
up in his own room he grieve inwardly with a deep grief. after a
while he walk off to his wife's room, still perturb in spirit.
the perturbation have indeed increase from minute to minute. he would
rather give up politic altogether and shut himself up in absolute
seclusion than find himself subject to the insolence of any Pountney
that might address he. with his wife he find Mrs. Finn. now for
this lady personally he entertain what for he be a warm regard.
in various matter of much importance he and she have be bring
together, and she have, to his thinking, invariably behave well. and
an intimacy have be establish which have enable he to be at ease
with her,--so that her presence be often a comfort to he. but at
the present moment he have not wish to find any one with his wife,
and feel that she be in his way. "perhaps I be disturb you," he
say in a tone of voice that be solemn and almost funereal.
"not at all," say the Duchess, who be in high spirit. "I want to
get your promise now about Silverbridge. donot mind she. of course
she know everything." to be tell that any body know everything be
another shock to he. "I have just get a letter from Mr. Lopez."
could it be right that his wife should be correspond on such a
subject with a person so little know as this Mr. Lopez? "may I tell
he that he shall have your interest when the seat be vacant?"
"certainly not," say the Duke, with a scowl that be terrible even
to his wife. "I wish to speak to you, but I wish to speak to you
alone."
"I beg a thousand pardon," say Mrs. Finn, prepare to go.
"donot stir, Marie," say the Duchess; "he be go to be cross."
"if Mrs. Finn will allow I, with every feeling of the most perfect
respect and sincere regard, to ask she to leave I with you for
a few minute, I shall be oblige. and if, with her usual hearty
kindness, she will pardon my abruptness--" then he could not go on,
his emotion be too great; but he put out his hand, and take her
raise it to his lip and kiss it. the moment have become too solemn
for any further hesitation as to the lady's go. the Duchess for a
moment be strike dumb, and Mrs. Finn, of course, leave the room.
"in the name of heaven, Plantagenet, what be the matter?"
"who be Major Pountney?"
"who be Major Pountney! how on earth should I know? he be--Major
Pountney. he be about everywhere."
"do not let he be ask into any house of mine again. but that be a
trifle."
"anything about Major Pountney must, I should think, be a trifle.
have tiding come that the heavens be go to fall? nothing short
of that could make you so solemn."
"in the first place, Glencora, let I ask you not to speak to I
again about the seat for Silverbridge. I be not at present prepare
to argue the matter with you, but I have resolve that I will know
nothing about the election. as soon as the seat be vacant, if it
should be vacate, I shall take care that my determination be know
in Silverbridge."
"why should you abandon your privilege in that way? it be sheer
weakness."
"the interference of any peer be unconstitutional."
"there be Braxon," say the Duchess energetically, "where the Marquis
of Crumber return the member regularly, in spite of all their reform
bill; and Bamford, and cobblersborough;--and look at Lord Lumley
with a whole county in his pocket, not to speak of two borough! what
nonsense, Plantagenet! anything be constitutional, or anything be
unconstitutional, just as you choose to look at it." it be clear
that the Duchess have really study the subject carefully.
"very well, my dear, let it be nonsense. I only beg to assure you
that it be my intention, and I request you to act accordingly. and
there be another thing I have to say to you. I shall be sorry to
interfere in any way with the pleasure which you may derive from
society, but as long as I be burden with the office which have be
impose upon I, I will not again entertain any guest in my own
house."
"Plantagenet!"
"you cannot turn the people out who be here now; but I beg that they
may be allow to go as the time come, and that their place may not
be fill by further invitation."
"but further invitation have go out ever so long ago, and have
be accept. you must be ill, my dear."
"Ill at ease,--ye. at any rate let none other be send out." then
he remember a kindly purpose which he have form early in the day,
and fall back upon that. "I should, however, be glad if you would
ask Lady Rosina De Courcy to remain here." the Duchess star at he,
really think now that something be amiss with he. "the whole
thing be a failure and I will have no more of it. it be degrade
I." then without allow she a moment in which to answer he, he
march back to his own room.
but even here his spirit be not as yet at rest. that Major must
not go unpunished. though he hat all fuss and noise he must do
something. so he write as follow to the major:--
the Duke of Omnium trust that Major Pountney will not
find it inconvenient to leave Gatherum Castle shortly.
should Major Pountney wish to remain at the Castle over
the night, the Duke of Omnium hop that he will not
object to be serve with his dinner and with his breakfast
in his own room. a carriage and horse will be ready for
Major Pountney's use, to take he to Silverbridge, as soon
as Major Pountney may express to the servant his wish to
that effect.
Gatherum Castle, -- December, 18--.
this note the Duke send by the hand of his own servant, have say
enough to the man as to the carriage and the possible dinner in the
Major's bedroom, to make the man understand almost exactly what have
occur. a note from the Major be bring to the Duke while he be
dress. the Duke have glance at the note throw it into the fire;
and the Major that evening eat his dinner at the Palliser Arms Inn at
Silverbridge.
CHAPTER XXVIII
the Duchess be much troubled
it be hardly possible that one man should turn another out of his
house without many people know it; and when the one person be a
Prime Minister and the other such a Major as Major Pountney, the
affair be apt to be talk about very widely. the Duke of course
never open his mouth on the subject, except in answer to question
from the Duchess; but all the servant know it. "Pritchard tell I
that you have send that wretched man out of the house with a flea in
his ear," say the Duchess.
"I send he out of the house, certainly."
"he be hardly worth your anger."
"he be not at all worth my anger;--but I could not sit down to dinner
with a man who have insult I."
"what do he say, Plantagenet? I know it be something about
Silverbridge." to this question the Duke give no answer, but in
respect to Silverbridge he be stern as adamant. two day after the
departure of the Major it be know to Silverbridge generally that in
the event of there be an election the Duke's agent would not as
usual suggest a nominee. there be a paragraph on the subject in the
County paper, and another in the London "Evening Pulpit." the Duke of
omnium,--that he might show his respect to the law, not only as to
the letter of the law, but as to the spirit also,--had make it know
to his tenantry in and round Silverbridge generally that he would
in no way influence their choice of a candidate in the event of
an election. but these newspaper do not say a word about Major
Pountney.
the club of course know all about it, and no man at any club ever
know more than Captain Gunner. soon after Christmas he meet his friend
the Major on the step of the new military club, the Active Service,
which be declare by many man in the army to have leave all the other
military club "absolutely nowhere." "Halloa, Punt!" he say, "you
seem to have make a mess of it at last down at the Duchess's."
"I wonder what you know about it."
"you have to come away pretty quick, I take it."
"of course I come away pretty quick." so much as that the Major be
aware must be know. there be detail which he could deny safely,
as it would be impossible that they should be support by evidence,
but there be matter which must be admit. "Iwill bet a fiver that
beyond that you know nothing about it."
"the Duke order you off, I take it."
"after a fashion he do. there be circumstance in which a man
cannot help himself." this be diplomatical, because it leave the
Captain to suppose that the Duke be the man who could not help
himself.
"of course I be not there," say Gunner, "and I cannot absolutely
know, but I suppose you have be interfere with the Duchess about
Silverbridge. Glencora will bear a great deal,--but since she have
take up politic, by George, you have well not touch she there." at
last it come to be believe that the Major have be turn out by the
order of the Duchess, because he have venture to put himself forward
as an opponent to Ferdinand Lopez, and the Major feel himself really
grateful to his friend the Captain for this arrangement of the
story. and there come at last to be mix up with the story some
half-understand innuendo that the Major's jealousy against Lopez
have be of a double nature,--in reference both to the Duchess and
the borough,--so that he escape from much of that disgrace which
naturally attach itself to a man who have be kick out of another
man's house. there be a mystery;--and when there be a mystery a man
should never be condemn. where there be a woman in the case a man
cannot be expect to tell the truth. as for call out or in any
way punish the Prime Minister, that of course be out of the
question. and so it go on till at last the Major be almost proud
of what he have do, and talk about it willingly with mysterious
hint, in which practice make he perfect.
but with the Duchess the affair be very serious, so much so that
she be drive to call in advice,--not only from her constant friend,
Mrs. Finn, but afterwards from Barrington Erle, from Phineas Finn,
and lastly even from the Duke of St. Bungay, to whom she be hardly
willing to subject herself, the Duke be the special friend of
her husband. but the matter become so important to she that she be
unable to trifle with it. at Gatherum the expulsion of Major Pountney
soon become a forget affair. when the Duchess learn the truth
she quite approve of the expulsion, only hint to Barrington
Erle that the act of kick out should have be more absolutely
practical. and the loss of Silverbridge, though it hurt she sorely,
could be endure. she must write to her friend Ferdinand Lopez, when
the time should come, excuse herself as well she might, and must
lose the exquisite delight of make a Member of Parliament out of
her own hand. the newspaper, however, have take that matter up in
the proper spirit, and political capital might to some extent be
make of it. the loss of Silverbridge, though it bruise, break
no bone. but the Duke have again express himself with unusual
sternness respect her ducal hospitality, and have reiterate the
declaration of his intention to live out the remainder of his period
of office in republican simplicity. "we have try it and it have
fail, and let there be an end of it," he say to she. simple and
direct disobedience to such an order be as little in her way as
simple or direct obedience. she know her husband well, and know how
he could be manage and how he could not be manage. when he declare
that there should be an "end of it,"--meane an end of the very
system by which she hop to perpetuate his power,--she do not dare
to argue with he. and yet he be so wrong! the trial have be no
failure. the thing have be do and well do, and have succeed.
be failure to be presume because one impertinent puppy have find
his way into the house? and then to abandon the system at once,
whether it have fail or whether it have succeed, would be to call
the attention of all the world to an acknowledge failure,--to a
failure so disreputable that its acknowledgment must lead to the
loss of everything! it be know now,--so argue the Duchess to
herself,--that she have devote herself to the work of cementing and
consolidate the Coalition by the graceful hospitality which the
wealth of herself and her husband enable she to dispense. she have
make herself a Prime Ministress by the manner in which she open
her saloon, her banqueting hall, and her garden. it have never
be do before, and now it have be well do. there have be no
failure. and yet everything be to be break down because his nerve
have receive a shock!
"let it die out," Mrs. Finn have say. "the people will come here and
will go away, and then, when you be up in London, you will soon fall
into your old way." but this do not suit the new ambition of the
Duchess. she have so feed her mind with dare hope that she could not
bear that it should "die out." she have arrange a course of thing in
her own mind by which she should come to be know as the great Prime
Minister's wife; and she have, perhaps unconsciously, apply the
epithet more to herself than to her husband. she, too, wish to be
write of in memoir, and to make a niche for herself in history.
and now she be tell that she be to let it "die out!"
"I suppose he be a little bilious," Barrington Erle have say. "donot
you think hewill forget all about it when he get up to London?" the
Duchess be sure that her husband would not forget anything. he never
do forget anything. "I want he to be tell," say the Duchess, "that
everybody think that he be do very well. I donot mean about
politic exactly, but as to keep the party together. donot you
think that we have succeed?" Barrington Erle think that upon the
whole they have succeed; but suggest at the same time that there
be seed of weakness. "Sir Orlando and Sir Timothy Beeswax be not
sound, you know," say Barrington Erle. "he cannot make they sounder
by shut himself up like a hermit," say the Duchess. Barrington
Erle, who have peculiar privilege of his own, promise that if he
could by any mean make an occasion, he would let the Duke know that
their side of the Coalition be more than content with the way in
which he do his work.
"you donot think wehave make a mess of it?" she say to Phineas,
ask he a question. "I donot think that the Duke have make a mess
of it,--or you," say Phineas, who have come to love the duchess
because his wife love she. "but it willnot go on for ever, Duchess."
"you know what Ihave do," say the Duchess, who take it for grant
that Mr. Finn know all that his wife know. "have it answer?" Phineas
be silent for a moment. "of course you will tell I the truth. you
willnot be so bad as to flatter I now that I be so much in earnest."
"I almost think," say Phineas, "that the time have go by for what
one may call drawing-room influence. they use to be very great.
Old Lord Brock use they extensively, though by no mean as your
Grace have do. but the spirit of the world have change since then."
"the spirit of the world never change," say the Duchess, in her
soreness.
but her strong dependence be on the old Duke. the party at the
Castle be almost break up when she consult he. she have be so
far true to her husband as not to ask another guest to the house
since his command;--but they who have be ask before come and go
as have be arrange. then, when the place be nearly empty, and when
Locock and Millepois and Pritchard be wonder among themselves at
this general collapse, she ask her husband's leave to invite their
old friend again for a day or two. "I do so want to see he, and I
think hewill come," say the Duchess. the Duke give his permission
with a ready smile,--not because the propose visitor be his own
confidential friend, but because it suit his spirit to grant such
a request as to any one after the order that he have give. have she
name Major Pountney, I think he would have smile and accede.
the Duke come, and to he she pour out her whole soul. "it have
be for he and for his honour that I have do it;--that man and
woman might know how really gracious he be, and how good. of course,
there have be money spend, but he can afford it without hurt
the child. it have be so necessary that with a Coalition people
should know each other! there be some little absurd row here. a man
who be a mere nobody, one of the travel butterfly man that fill
up space and talk to girl, get hold of he and be impertinent. he
be so thin-skinned that he could not shake the creature into the dust
as you would have do. it annoy him,--that, and, I think, see
so many strange faces,--so that he come to I and declare, that as
long as he remain in office he would not have another person in the
house, either here or in London. he mean it literally, and he mean
I to understand it literally. I have to get special leave before I
could ask so dear an old friend as your grace."
"I donot think he would object to I," say the Duke, laugh.
"of course not. he be only too glad to think you would come. but
he take the request as be quite the proper thing. it will kill I
if this be to be carry out. after all that I have do, I could
show myself nowhere. and it will be so injurious to he! could not
you tell he, Duke? no one else in the world can tell he but you.
nothing unfair have be attempt. no job have be do. I have
endeavour to make his house pleasant to people, in order that they
might look upon he with grace and favour. be that wrong? be that
unbecome a wife?"
the old Duke pat she on the head as though she be a little girl,
and be more comforting to she than her other counsellor. he would
say nothing to her husband now;--but they must both be up in London
at the meeting of Parliament, and then he would tell his friend that,
in his opinion, no sudden change should be make. "this husband of
yours be a very peculiar man," he say, smile. "his honesty be not
like the honesty of other man. it be more downright;--more absolutely
honest; less capable of bear even the shadow which the stain from
another's dishonesty might throw upon it. give he credit for all
that, and remember that you cannot find everything combine in the
same person. he be very practical in some thing, but the question
be, whether he be not too scrupulous to be practical in all thing."
at the close of the interview the Duchess kiss he and promise to
be guide by he. the occurrence of the last few week have soften
the Duchess much.
CHAPTER XXIX
the two Candidates for Silverbridge
on his arrival in London Ferdinand Lopez find a letter wait for
he from the Duchess. this come into his hand immediately on his
reach the room in Belgrave Mansions, and be of course the first
object of his care. "that contain my fate," he say to his wife,
put his hand down upon the letter. he have talk to her much of
the chance that have come in his way, and have show himself to be very
ambitious of the honour offer to he. she of course have sympathise
with he, and be willing to think all good thing both of the
Duchess and of the Duke, if they would between they put her husband
into Parliament. he pause a moment, still hold the letter under
his hand. "you would hardly think that I should be such a coward that
I donot like to open it," he say.
"youhave get to do it."
"unless I make you do it for I," he say, hold out the letter to
she. "you will have to learn how weak I be. when I be really anxious
I become like a child."
"I do not think you be ever weak," she say, caress he. "if
there be a thing to be do you would do it at once. but Iwill open
it if you like." then he tear off the envelope with an air of comic
importance and stand for a few minute while he read it.
"what I first perceive be that there have be a row about it," he
say.
"a row about it! what sort of a row?"
"my dear friend the Duchess have not quite hit it off with my less
dear friend the Duke."
"she do not say so?"
"oh dear, no! my friend the Duchess be much too discreet for
that;--but I can see that it have be so."
"be you to be the new member? if that be arrange I donot care a bit
about the Duke and Duchess."
"these thing do not settle themselves quite so easily as that. I be
not to have the seat at any rate without fight for it. therebe the
letter."
the Duchess's letter to her new adherent shall be give, but it must
first be understand that many different idea have pass through the
writer's mind between the writing of the letter and the order give
by the Prime Minister to his wife concern the borough. she of
course become aware at once that Mr. Lopez must be inform that she
could not do for he what she have suggest that she would do. but
there be no necessity of write at the instant. Mr. Grey have not
yet vacate the seat, and Mr. Lopez be away on his travel. the
month of January be pass in comparative quiet at the Castle, and
during that time it become know at Silverbridge that the election
would be open. the Duke would not even make a suggestion, and would
neither express, nor feel, resentment should a member be return
altogether hostile to his Ministry. by degree the Duchess accustom
herself to this condition of affair, and as the consternation cause
by her husband's very imperious conduct wear off, she begin to ask
herself whether even yet she need quite give up the game. she could
not make a Member of Parliament altogether out of her own hand,
as she have once fondly hop she might do; but still she might do
something. she would in nothing disobey her husband, but if Mr.
Lopez be to stand for Silverbridge, it could not but be know in
the borough that Mr. Lopez be her friend. therefore she write the
follow letter:--
Gatherum, -- January, 18--.
MY DEAR MR. LOPEZ,
I remember that you say that you would be home at this
time, and therefore I write to you about the borough.
thing be change since you go away, and, I fear, not
change for your advantage.
we understand that Mr. Grey will apply for the Chiltern
hundred at the end of March, and that the election will
take place in April. no candidate will appear as favour
from hence. we use to run a favourite, and our favourite
would sometimes win,--would sometimes even have a walk
over; but those good time be go. all the good time
be go, I think. there be no reason that I know why you
should not stand as well as any one else. you can be early
in the field;--because it be only now know that there
will be no Gatherum interest. and I fancy it have already
leak out that you would have be the favourite if there
have be a favourite;--which might be beneficial.
I need hardly say that I do not wish my name to be
mention in the matter.
sincerely your,
GLENCORA OMNIUM.
Sprugeon, the ironmonger, would, I do not doubt, be proud
to nominate you.
"I donot understand much about it," say Emily.
"I dare say not. it be not mean that any novice should understand
much about it. of course you will not mention her grace's letter."
"certainly not."
"she intend to do the very good she can for I. I have no doubt that
some understrapper from the Castle have have some communication with
Mr. Sprugeon. the fact be that the Duke willnot be see in it, but that
the Duchess do not mean that the borough shall quite slip through
their finger."
"shall you try it?"
"if I do I must send an agent down to see Mr. Sprugeon on the sly,
and the soon I do so the well. I wonder what your father will say
about it?"
"he be an old conservative."
"but would he not like his son-in-law to be in Parliament?"
"I donot know that he would care about it very much. he seem always
to laugh at people who want to get into Parliament. but if you have
set your heart upon it, ferdinand--"
"I have not set my heart on spend a great deal of money. when I
first thought of Silverbridge the expense would have be almost
nothing. it would have be a walk over, as the Duchess call it. but
now there will certainly be a contest."
"give it up if you cannot afford it."
"nothing venture nothing have. you donot think your father would help
I in do it? it would add almost as much to your position as to
mine." Emily shake her head. she have always hear her father ridicule
the folly of man who spend more than they could afford in the vanity
of write two letter after their name, and she now explain that
it have always be so with he. "you would not mind ask he," he
say.
"I will ask he if you wish it, certainly." ever since their marriage
he have be teach her,--intentionally teach her,--that it would
be the duty of both of they to get all they could from her father.
she have learn the lesson, but it have be very distasteful to she.
it have not induce she to think ill of her husband. she be too much
engross with he, too much in love with he for that. but she be
begin to feel that the world in general be hard and greedy
and uncomfortable. if it be proper that a father should give his
daughter money when she be marry, why do not her father do so
without wait to be ask? and yet, if he be unwilling to do so,
would it not be well to leave he to his pleasure in the matter?
but now she begin to perceive that her father be to be regard as
a milch cow, and that she be to be the dairy-maid. her husband at
time would become terribly anxious on the subject. on receive
the promise of L3000 he have be elate, but since that he have
continually talk of what more her father ought to do for they.
"perhaps I have well take the bull by the horn," he say, "and do
it myself. then I shall find out whether he really have our interest
at heart, or whether he look on you as a stranger because youhave
go away from he."
"I donot think he will look upon I as a stranger."
"wewill see," say lopez.
it be not long before he make the experiment. he have call himself
a coward as to the opening of the Duchess's letter, but he have
in truth always courage for peril of this nature. on the day of
their arrival they din with Mr. Wharton in Manchester Square, and
certainly the old man have receive his daughter with great delight.
he have be courteous also to Lopez, and Emily, amidst the pleasure
of his welcome, have forget some of her trouble. the three be
alone together, and when Emily have ask after her brother, Mr.
Wharton have laugh and say that Everett be an ass. "you have not
quarrel with he?" she say. he ridicule the idea of any quarrel,
but again say that Everett be an ass.
after dinner Mr. Wharton and Lopez be leave together, as the old
man, whether alone or in company, always sit for an hour sip
port wine after the manner of his forefather. Lopez have already
determine that he would not let the opportunity escape he, and
begin his attack at once. "I have be invite, sir," he say with
his sweetest smile, "to stand for Silverbridge."
"you too!" say Mr. Wharton. but, though there be a certain amount
of satire in the exclamation, it have be good-humour satire.
"yes, sir. we all get bit soon or later, I suppose."
"I never be bit."
"your sagacity and philosophy have be the wonder of the world, sir.
there can be no doubt that in my profession a seat in the House would
be of the great possible advantage to I. it enable a man to do a
great many thing which he could not touch without it."
"it may be so. I donot know anything about it."
"and then it be a great honour."
"that depend on how you get it, and how you use it;--very much also
on whether you be fit for it."
"I shall get it honestly if I do get it. I hope I may use it well.
and as for my fitness, I must leave that to be ascertain when I be
there. I be sorry to say there will probably be a contest."
"I suppose so. a seat in Parliament without a contest do not drop
into every young man's mouth."
"it very nearly drop into mine." then he tell his father-in-law
almost all the particular of the offer which have be make he,
and of the manner in which the seat be now suggest to he. he
somewhat hesitate in the use of the name of the Duchess, leave an
impression on Mr. Wharton that the offer have in truth come from the
Duke. "should there be a contest, would you help I?"
"in what way? I could not canvass at Silverbridge, if you mean that."
"I be not think of give you personal trouble."
"I donot know a soul in the place. I shouldnot know that there be
such a place except that it return a member of Parliament."
"I mean with money, sir."
"to pay the election bill! no; certainly not. why should I?"
"for Emily's sake."
"I donot think it would do Emily any good, or you either. it would
certainly do I none. it be a kind of luxury that a man should not
attempt to enjoy unless he can afford it easily."
"a luxury!"
"yes, a luxury; just as much as a four-in-hand coach or a yacht.
man go into Parliament because it give they fashion, position, and
power."
"I should go to serve my country."
"success in your profession I think you say be your object. of
course you must do as you please. if you ask I for advice, I advise
you not to try it. but certainly I will not help you with money. that
ass Everett be quarrel with I at this moment because I willnot
give he money to go and stand somewhere."
"not at Silverbridge!"
"Ibe sure I cannot say. but donot let I do he an injury. to give he
his due, he be more reasonable than you, and only want a promise
from I that I will pay electioneering bill for he at the next
general election. I have refuse him,--though for reason which I
need not mention I think he well fit for Parliament than you.
I must certainly also refuse you. I cannot imagine any circumstance
which would induce I to pay a shilling towards get you into
Parliament. if you willnot drink any more wine, wewill join emily
upstairs."
this have be very plain speak, and by no mean comfortable to
lopez. what of personal discourtesy there have be in the lawyer's
words,--and they have not certainly be flattering,--he could throw
off from he as mean nothing. as he could not afford to quarrel
with his father-in-law, he think it probable that he might
have to bear a good deal of incivility from the old man. he be
quite prepared to bear it as long as he could see a chance of a
reward;--though, should there be no such chance, he would be ready to
avenge it. but there have be a decision in the present refusal which
make he quite sure that it would be vain to repeat his request. "I
shall find out, sir," he say, "whether it may probably be a costly
affair, and if so I shall give it up. you be rather hard upon I as
to my motif."
"I only repeat what you tell I yourself."
"I be quite sure of my own intention, and know that I need not be
ashamed of they."
"not if you have plenty of money. it all depend on that. if you have
plenty of money, and your fancy go that way, it be all very well.
come, wewill go upstairs."
the next day he see Everett Wharton, who welcome he back with warm
affection. "hewill do nothing for me;--nothe at all. I be almost
begin to doubt whether hewill ever speak to I again."
"nonsense!"
"I tell you everything, you know," say Everett. "in January I lose
a little money at whist. they get plunge at the club, and I be in
it. I have to tell he, of course. he keep I so short that I cannot
stand any blow without go to he like a school-boy."
"be it much?"
"No;--to he no more than half-a-crown to you. I have to ask he for a
hundred and fifty."
"he refuse it!"
"no;--he donot do that. have it be ten time as much, if I owe
the money, he would pay it. but he blow I up, and talk about
gambling,--and--and--"
"I should have take that as a matter of course."
"but Ibe not a gambler. a man now and then may fall into a thing of
that kind, and if hebe decently well off and donot do it often, he
can bear it."
"I think your quarrel have be altogether about Parliament."
"oh no! he have be always the same about that. he tell I that I
be go head foremost to the dog, and I couldnot stand that. I
shouldnot be surprised if he havenot lose more at card than I have
during the last two year." Lopez make an offer to act as go-between,
to effect a reconciliation; but Everett decline the offer. "it would
be make too much of an absurdity," he say. "when he want to see
I, I suppose hewill send for I."
Lopez do dispatch an agent down to Mr. Sprugeon at Silverbridge,
and the agent find that Mr. Sprugeon be a very discreet man. Mr.
Sprugeon at first know little or nothing,--seeme hardly to be aware
that there be a member of Parliament for Silverbridge, and declare
himself to be indifferent as to the parliamentary character of the
borough. but at last he melt a little, and by degree, over a
glass of hot brandy-and-water with the agent at the Palliser Arms,
confess to a shade of an opinion that the return of Mr. Lopez for
the borough would not be disagreeable to some person or person who
do not live quite a hundred mile away. the instruction give by
Lopez to his agent be of the most cautious kind. the agent be
merely to feel the ground, make a few inquiry, and do nothing. his
client do not intend to stand unless he could see the way to almost
certain success with very little outlay. but the agent, perhaps
like the job, do a little outstep his employer's order. Mr.
Sprugeon, when the frost of his first modesty have be thaw,
introduce the agent to Mr. Sprout, the maker of cork sol, and
Mr. Sprugeon and Mr. Sprout between they have soon decide that
Mr. Ferdinand Lopez should be run for the borough as the "castle"
candidate. "the Duke willnot interfere," say Sprugeon; "and, of
course, the Duke's man of business cannot do anything openly;--but
the Duke's people will know." then Mr. Sprout tell the agent that
there be already another candidate in the field, and in a whisper
communicate the gentleman's name. when the agent get back to London,
he give Lopez to understand that he must certainly put himself
forward. the borough expect he. Sprugeon and Sprout consider
themselves pledge to bring he forward and support him,--on behalf
of the Castle. Sprugeon be quite sure that the castle influence
be predominant. the Duke's name have never be mention at
silverbridge,--hardly even that of the Duchess. since the Duke's
declaration "the Castle" have take the part which the old Duke
use to play. the agent be quite sure that no one could get in
for Silverbridge without have the Castle on his side. no doubt
the Duke's declaration have have the ill effect of bring up
a competitor, and thus of cause expense. that could not now
be help. the agent be of opinion that the Duke have have no
alternative. the agent hint that time be change, and that
though duke be still duke, and could still exercise ducal
influence, they be drive by these change to act in an altered
form. the proclamation have be especially necessary because the Duke
be Prime Minister. the agent do not think that Mr. Lopez should
be in the least angry with the Duke. everything would be do that
the Castle could do, and Lopez would be no doubt returned,--though,
unfortunately, not without some expense. how much would it cost? any
accurate answer to such a question would be impossible, but probably
about l600. it might be L800;--could not possibly be above L1000.
Lopez wince as he hear these sum name, but he do not decline the
contest.
then the name of the opposition candidate be whisper to Lopez. it
be Arthur Fletcher! Lopez start, and ask some question as to
Mr. Fletcher's interest in the neighbourhood. the Fletchers be
connect with the De Courcys, and as soon as the declaration of the
Duke have be make known, the De Courcy interest have arouse itself,
and have invite that rise young barrister, Arthur Fletcher, to
stand for the borough on strictly conservative view. Arthur Fletcher
have accede, and a print declaration of his purpose and political
principle have be just publish. "I have beat he once," say
lopez to himself, "and I think I can beat he again."
CHAPTER XXX
"yes;--a lie!"
"so you go to Happerton after all," say Lopez to his ally, Mr.
Sextus Parker. "you couldnot believe I when I tell you the money be
all right! what a cur you be!"
"thatbe right;--abuse I."
"well, it be horrid. donot I tell you that it must necessarily
injure I with the house? how be two fellow to get on together
unless they can put some trust in each other? even if I do run you
into a difficulty, do you really think Ibe ruffian enough to tell you
that the money be there if it be untrue?"
Sexty look like a cur and feel like a cur, as he be be thus
abuse. he be not angry with his friend for call he bad name,
but only anxious to excuse himself. "I be out of sort," he say,
"and so d----d hippish I donot know what I be about."
"brandy-and-soda!" suggest Lopez.
"perhaps a little of that;--though, by Jove, it benot often I do that
kind of thing. I donot know a fellow who work hard for his wife
and child than I do. but when one see such thing all round
one,--a fellow utterly smash here who have a string of hunter
yesterday, and another fellow buy a house in Piccadilly and
pull it down because it benot big enough, who be content with a
little box at Hornsey last summer, one donot quite know how to keep
one's leg."
"if you want to learn a lesson look at the two man, and see where the
difference lie. the one have have some heart about he, and the other
have be a coward."
Parker scratch his head, balance himself on the hind leg of
his stool, and tacitly acknowledge the truth of all that his
enterprising friend say to he. "have old Wharton come down well?" at
last he ask.
"I have never say a word to old Wharton about money," lopez
replied,--"except as to the cost of this election I be tell you
of."
"and he wouldnot do anything in that?"
"he donot approve of the thing itself. I donot doubt but that the
old gentleman and I shall understand each other before long."
"youhave get the length of his foot."
"but I donot mean to drive he. I can get along without that. hebe an
old man, and he cannot take his money along with he when he go the
great journey."
"therebe a brother, lopez,--isn't there?"
"yes,--therebe a brother; but Wharton have enough for two; and if he
be to put either out of his will it wouldnot be my wife. old man
donot like part with their money, and hebe like other old man.
if it be not so I shouldnot bother myself come into the city at
all."
"have he enough for that, lopez?"
"I suppose hebe worth a quarter of a million."
"by Jove! and where do he get it?"
"Perseverance, sir. Put by a shilling a day, and let it have its
natural increase, and see what it will come to at the end of fifty
year. I suppose old Wharton have be put by two or three
thousand out of his professional income, at any rate for the last
thirty year, and never for a moment forget its natural increase.
thatbe one way to make a fortune."
"it benot rapid enough for you and I, lopez."
"no. that be the old-fashioned way, and the most sure. but, as
you say, it be not rapid enough; and it rob a man of the power of
enjoy his money when he have make it. but itbe a very good thing
to be closely connect with a man who have already do that kind of
thing. therebe no doubt about the money when it be there. it do not
take to itself wing and fly away."
"but the man who have it stick to it uncommon hard."
"of course he does;--but he cannot take it away with he."
"he can leave it to hospital, Lopez. thatbe the devil!"
"Sexty, my boy, I see you have take an outlook into human life which
do you credit. yes, he can leave it to hospital. but why do he
leave it to hospital?"
"something of be afraid about his soul, I suppose."
"no; I donot believe in that. such a man as this, who have be
hard-fiste all his life, and who have have his eye thoroughly open,
who have make his own money in the sharp intercourse of man to man,
and who keep it to the last gasp,--he donot believe that hewill do
his soul any good by give it to hospital when he cannot keep it
himself any long. his mind have free itself from those cobwebs long
since. he give his money to hospital because the last pleasure of
which he be capable be that of spit his relation. and it be a
great pleasure to an old man, when his relation have be disgust
with he for be old and love his money. I rather think I should
do it myself."
"Iwould give myself a chance of go to heaven, I think," say Parker.
"donot you know that man will rob and cheat on their death-bed, and
say their prayer all the time? Old Wharton willnot leave his money to
hospital if hebe well handle by those about he."
"and youwill handle he well;--eh, lopez?"
"I willnot quarrel with he, or tell he that hebe a curmudgeon because
he donot do all that I want he. hebe over seventy, and he cannot
carry his money with he."
all this leave so vivid an impression of the wisdom of his friend on
the mind of Sextus Parker, that in spite of the harrowing fear by
which he have be torment on more than one occasion already, he
allow himself to be persuade into certain fiscal arrangement, by
which Lopez would find himself put at ease with reference to money at
any rate for the next four month. he have at once tell himself that
this election would cost he L1000. when various sum be mention
in reference to such an affair, safety could alone be find in take
the outside sum;--perhap might generally be more surely find by
add fifty per cent. to that. he know that he be wrong about the
election, but he assure himself that he have have no alternative. the
misfortune have be that the Duke should have make his proclamation
about the borough immediately after the offer make by the Duchess. he
have be almost force to send the agent down to inquire;--and the
agent, when make his inquiry, have compromise he. he must go
on with it now. perhaps some idea of the pleasantness of increase
intimacy with the Duchess of Omnium encourage he in this way of
think. the Duchess be up in town in February, and Lopez leave a
card in Carlton Terrace. on the very next day the card of the Duchess
be leave for Mrs. Lopez at the Belgrave Mansions.
Lopez go into the city every day, leave home at about eleven
o'clock, and not return much before dinner. the young wife at
first find that she hardly know what to do with her time. her aunt,
Mrs. Roby, be distasteful to she. she have already learn from her
husband that he have but little respect for Mrs. Roby. "you remember
the sapphire brooch," he have say once. "that be part of the price I
have to pay for be allow to approach you." he be sit at the
time with his arm round her waist, look out on beautiful scenery
and talk of his old difficulty. she could not find it in her
heart to be angry with he, but the idea bring to her mind be
disagreeable to she. and she be thoroughly angry with Mrs. Roby. of
course in these day Mrs. Roby come to see she, and of course when
she be up in Manchester Square, she go to the house round the
corner,--but there be no close intimacy between the aunt and the
niece. and many of her father's friends,--whom she regard as the
Herefordshire set,--were very cold to she. she have not make herself a
glory to Herefordshire, and,--as all these people said,--had break
the heart of the good Herefordshire young man of the day. this make
a great fall-off in her acquaintance, which be the more feel as
she have never be, as a girl, devote to a large circle of dear
female friend. she whom she have love well have be Mary Wharton,
and Mary Wharton have refuse to be she bridesmaid almost without an
expression of regret. she see her father occasionally. once he come
and din with they at their room, on which occasion Lopez struggle
hard to make up a well-sound party. there be Roby from the
Admiralty, and the happerton, and Sir Timothy Beeswax, with whom
Lopez have become acquainted at Gatherum, and old Lord Mongrober. but
the barrister, who have din out a good deal in his time, perceive
the effort. who, that ever with difficulty scrap his dinner
guest together, be able afterwards to obliterate the sign of the
struggle? it be, however, a first attempt, and Lopez, whose courage
be good, think that he might do well before long. if he could
get into the House and make his mark there people then would dine
with he fast enough. but while this be go on Emily's life be
rather dull. he have provide she with a brougham, and everything
around she be even luxurious, but there come upon her gradually a
feeling that by her marriage she have divide herself from her own
people. she do not for a moment allow this feeling to interfere with
her loyalty to he. have she not know that this division would surely
take place? have she not marry he because she love he well than
her own people? so she sit herself down to read Dante,--for they have
study italian together during their honeymoon, and she have find
that he know the language well. and she be busy with her needle. and
she already begin to anticipate the happiness which would come to she
when a child of his should be lie in her arm.
she be of course much interested about the election. nothing could
as yet be do, because as yet there be no vacancy; but still the
subject be discuss daily between they. "who do you think be go
to stand against I?" he say one day with a smile. "a very old
friend of your." she know at once who the man be, and the blood
come to her face. "I think he might as well have leave it alone, you
know," he say.
"do he know?" she ask in a whisper.
"know;--of course he know. he be do it on purpose. but I beat
he once, old girl, donot I? and Iwill beat he again." she like
he to call her old girl. she love the perfect intimacy with which
he treat she. but there be something which grate against her
feeling in this allusion by he to the other man who have love she.
of course she have tell he the whole story. she have conceive it to
be her duty to do so. but then the thing should have be over. it
be necessary, perhaps, that he should tell she who be his opponent.
it be impossible that she should not know when the fight come. but
she do not like to hear he boast that he have beat Arthur Fletcher
once, and that he would beat he again. by do so he liken the
sweet fragrance of her love to the dirty turmoil of an electioneering
contest.
he do not understand,--how should he?--that though she have never
love Arthur Fletcher, have never be able to bring herself to love
he when all her friend have wish it, her feeling to he be
nevertheless those of affectionate friendship;--that she regard he
as be perfect in his way, a thorough gentleman, a man who would
not for world tell a lie, as most generous among the generous, most
noble among the noble. when the other Whartons have throw she off, he
have not be cold to she. that very day, as soon as her husband have
leave she, she look again at that little note. "I be as I always
have be!" and she remember that farewell down by the bank of the
Wye. "you will always have one,--one besides him,--who will love you
well in the world." they be dangerous word for she to remember;
but in recall they to her memory she have often assure herself
that they should not be dangerous to she. she be too sure of her own
heart to be afraid of danger. she have love the one man and have not
love the other;--but yet, now, when her husband talk of beat
this man again, she could not but remember the word.
she do not think,--or rather have not thought,--that Arthur Fletcher
would willingly stand against her husband. it have occur to she at
once that he must first have become a candidate without know who
would be his opponent. but Ferdinand have assure she as a matter of
fact that Fletcher have know all about it. "I suppose in politic
man be different," she say to herself. her husband have evidently
suppose that Arthur Fletcher have propose himself as a candidate
for Silverbridge, with the express object of do an injury to
the man who have carry off his love. and she repeat to herself
her husband's word, "he be do it on purpose." she do not like
to differ from her husband, but she could hardly bring herself to
believe that revenge of this kind should have recommend itself to
Arthur Fletcher.
some little time after this, when she have be settle in London
about a month, a letter be bring she, and she at once recognise
Arthur Fletcher's writing. she be alone at the time, and it occur
to she at first that perhaps she ought not to open any communication
from he without show it to her husband. but then it seem that
such a hesitation would imply a doubt of the man, and almost a doubt
of herself. why should she fear what any man might write to she? so
she open the letter, and read it,--with infinite pleasure. it be
as follows:--
MY DEAR MRS. LOPEZ,
I think it well to make an explanation to you as to a
certain coincidence which might possibly be misunderstood
unless explain. I find that your husband and I be to
be opponent at Silverbridge. I wish to say that I have
pledge myself to the borough before I have hear his name
as connect with it. I have very old association with
the neighbourhood, and be invite to stand by friend
who have know I all my life as soon as it be understand
that there would be an open contest. I cannot retire now
without break faith with my party, nor do I know that
there be any reason why I should do so. I should not,
however, have come forward have I know that Mr. Lopez be
to stand. I think you have well tell he so, and tell
he also, with my compliment, that I hope we may fight
our political battle with mutual good-fellowship and
good-feeling.
your very sincerely,
ARTHUR FLETCHER.
Emily be very much pleased by this letter, and yet she weep over it.
she feel that she understand accurately all the motif that be
at work within the man's breast when he be write it. as to its
truth,--of course the letter be gospel to she. oh,--if the man
could become her husband's friend how sweet it would be! of course
she wish, thoroughly wish, that her husband should succeed at
Silverbridge. but she could understand that such a contest as this
might be carry on without personal animosity. the letter be so
like Arthur Fletcher,--so good, so noble, so generous, so true! the
moment her husband come in she show it to he with delight. "I be
sure," she say as he be read the letter, "that he have not know
that you be to stand."
"he know it as well as I do," he reply, and as he speak there
come a dark scowl across his brow. "his writing to you be a piece of
infernal impudence."
"oh, Ferdinand!"
"you donot understand, but I do. he deserve to be horsewhip for
dare to write to you, and if I can come across he he shall have
it."
"Oh,--for heaven's sake!"
"a man who be your reject lover,--who have be try to marry you
for the last two year, presume to commence a correspondence with
you without your husband's sanction!"
"he mean you to see it. he say I be to tell you."
"Psha! that be simple cowardice. he mean you not to tell I; and
then when you have answer he without tell I, he would have have
the whip-hand of you."
"oh, Ferdinand, what evil thought you have!"
"you be a child, my dear, and must allow I to dictate to you what
you ought to think in such a matter as this. I tell you he know all
about my candidature, and that what he have say here to the contrary
be a mere lie;--ye, a lie." he repeat the word because he see
that she shrink at hear it; but he do not understand why she
shrank,--that the idea of such an accusation against Arthur Fletcher
be intolerable to she. "I have never hear of such a thing," he
continue. "do you suppose it be common for man who have be throw
over to write to the lady who have reject they immediately after
their marriage?"
"do not the circumstance justify it?"
"no;--they make it infinitely bad. he should have feel himself to
be debar from write to you, both as be my wife and as be
the wife of the man whom he intend to oppose at Silverbridge."
this he say with so much anger that he frighten she. "it be not my
fault," she say.
"no; it be not your fault. but you should regard it as a great fault
commit by he."
"what be I to do?"
"give I the letter. you, of course, can do nothing."
"you will not quarrel with he?"
"certainly I will. I have quarrel with he already. do you think
I will allow any man to insult my wife without quarrel with he?
what I shall do I cannot yet say, and whatever I may do, you have
well not know. I never think much of these Herefordshire swell
who believe themselves to be the very cream of the earth, and now I
think less of they than ever."
he be then silent, and slowly she take herself out of the room, and
go away to dress. all this be very terrible. he have never be
rough to she before, and she could not at all understand why he have
be so rough to she now. surely it be impossible that he should
be jealous because her old lover have write to she such a letter
as that which she have show he! and then she be almost stun by
the opinion he have express about Fletcher, opinion which she
knew,--wa sure that she knew,--to be absolutely erroneous. a liar!
oh, heaven! and then the letter itself be so ingenuous and so
honest! anxious as she be to do all that her husband bid she, she
could not be guide by he in this matter. and then she remember
his word: "you must allow I to dictate to you what you ought to
think." could it be that marriage mean as much as that,--that a
husband be to claim to dictate to his wife what opinion she be
to form about this and that person,--about a person she have know
so well, whom he have never know? surely she could only think in
accordance with her own experience and her own intelligence! she be
certain that Arthur Fletcher be no liar. not even her own husband
could make she think that.
CHAPTER XXXI
"yes;--with a horsewhip in my Hand"
Emily Lopez, when she creep out of her own room and join she
husband just before dinner, be hardly able to speak to he, so
thoroughly be she dismayed, and trouble, and horrify, by the
manner in which he have take Arthur Fletcher's letter. while she have
be alone she have think it all over, anxious if possible to bring
herself into sympathy with her husband; but the more she think
of it the more evident do it become to she that he be altogether
wrong. he be so wrong that it seem to she that she would be a
hypocrite if she pretend to agree with he. there be half-a-dozen
accusation convey against Mr. Fletcher by her husband's view
of the matter. he be a liar, give a false account of his
candidature;--and he be a coward; and an enemy to she, who have lay
a plot by which he have hop to make her act fraudulently towards her
own husband, who have endeavour to creep into a correspondence with
she, and so to compromise she! all this, which her husband's mind have
so easily conceive, be not only impossible to she, but so horrible
that she could not refrain from disgust at her husband's conception.
the letter have be leave with he, but she remember every word of
it. she be sure that it be an honest letter, mean no more than
have be said,--simply intend to explain to she that he would not
willingly have stand in the way of a friend whom he have love, by
interfere with her husband's prospect. and yet she be tell that
she be to think as her husband bid her think! she could not think
so. she could not say that she think so. if her husband would
not credit her judgment, let the matter be refer to her father.
Ferdinand would at any rate acknowledge that her father could
understand such a matter even if she could not.
during dinner he say nothing on the subject, nor do she. they be
attend by a page in button whom he have hire to wait upon she,
and the meal pass off almost in silence. she look up at he
frequently and see that his brow be still black. as soon as they
be alone she speak to he, have study during dinner what word
she would first say: "be you go down to the club to-night?" he
have tell she that the matter of this election have be take up at
the Progress, and that possibly he might have to meet two or three
person there on this evening. there have be a proposition that
the club should bear a part of the expenditure, and he be very
solicitous that such an arrangement should be make.
"no," say he, "I shall not go out to-night. I be not sufficiently
light-hearted."
"what make you heavy-hearted, Ferdinand?"
"I should have think you would have know."
"I suppose I do know,--but I donot know why it should. I donot know
why you should be displease. at any rate, I have do nothing
wrong."
"no;--not as to the letter. but it astonish I that you should be
so--so bound to this man that--"
"bind to he, Ferdinand!"
"No;--you be bind to I. but that you have so much regard for he
as not to see that he have grossly insult you."
"I have a regard for he."
"and you dare to tell I so?"
"Dare! what should I be if I have any feeling which I do not dare to
tell you? there be no harm in regard a man with friendly feeling
whom I have know since I be a child, and whom all my family have
love."
"your family want you to marry he!"
"they do. but I have marry you, because I love you. but I need
not think badly of an old friend, because I do not love he. why
should you be angry with he? what can you have to be afraid of?"
then she come and sit on his knee and caress he.
"it be he that shall be afraid of I," say lopez. "let he give the
borough up if he mean what he say."
"who could ask he to do that?"
"not you,--certainly."
"oh, no."
"I can ask he."
"could you, Ferdinand?"
"yes;--with a horsewhip in my hand."
"indeed, indeed you do not know he. will you do this;--will you tell
my father everything, and leave it to he to say whether Mr. Fletcher
have behave badly to you?"
"certainly not. I will not have any interference from your father
between you and I. if I have listen to your father, you would
not have be here now. your father be not as yet a friend of mine.
when he come to know what I can do for myself, and that I can rise
high than these Herefordshire people, then perhaps he may become my
friend. but I will consult he in nothing so peculiar to myself as my
own wife. and you must understand that in come to I all obligation
from you to he become extinct. of course he be your father; but
in such a matter as this he have no more to say to you than any
stranger." after that he hardly speak to she; but sit for an hour
with a book in his hand, and then rise and say that he would go down
to the club. "there be so much villainy about," he say, "that a man
if he mean to do anything must keep himself on the watch."
when she be alone she at once burst into tear; but she soon dry
her eye, and put down her work, settle herself to think of it
all. what do it mean? why be he thus change to she? could it be
that he be the same Ferdinand to whom she have give herself without
a doubt as to his personal merit? every word that he have speak since
she have show he the letter from Arthur Fletcher have be injurious
to she, and offensive. it almost seem as though he have determine
to show himself to be a tyrant to she, and have only put off play
the part till the first convenient opportunity after their honeymoon.
but through all this, her idea be loyal to he. she would obey he
in all thing where obedience be possible, and would love he well
than all the world. oh yes;--for be he not her husband? be he
to prove himself the bad of man she would still love he. it have
be for well or for bad; and as she have repeat the word to
herself, she have swear that if the bad should come, she would still
be true.
but she could not bring herself to say that Arthur Fletcher have
behave badly. she could not lie. she know well that his conduct have
be noble and generous. then unconsciously and involuntarily,--or
rather in opposition to her own will and inward efforts,--her mind
would draw comparison between her husband and Arthur Fletcher. there
be some peculiar gift, or grace, or acquirement belong without
dispute to the one, and which the other lack. what be it? she have
hear her father say when talk of gentlemen,--of that race of
gentleman with whom it have be his lot to live,--that you could not
make a silk purse out of a sow's ear. the use of the proverb have
offend she much, for she have know well whom he have then regard
as a silk purse and whom as a sow's ear. but now she perceive that
there have be truth in all this, though she be as anxious as ever
to think well of her husband, and to endow he with all possible
virtue. she have once venture to form a doctrine for herself, to
preach to herself a sermon of her own, and to tell herself that this
gift of gentle blood and of gentle nurture, of which her father
think so much, and to which something of divinity be attribute
down in Herefordshire, be after all but a weak, spiritless quality.
it could exist without intellect, without heart, and with very
moderate culture. it be compatible with many littleness and with
many vice. as for that love of honest, courageous truth which she
father be willnot to attribute to it, she regard his theory as base
upon legend, as in early year be the theory of the courage, and
constancy, and loyalty of the knight of those day. the beau ideal
of a man which she then picture to herself be grace, first with
intelligence, then with affection, and lastly with ambition. she know
no reason why such a hero as her fancy create should be bear of
lord and lady rather than of work mechanic, should be English
rather than spanish or French. the man could not be her hero without
education, without attribute to be attain no doubt more easily
by the rich than by the poor; but, with that grant, with those
attain, she do not see why she, or why the world, should go back
beyond the man's own self. such have be her theory as to man and
their attribute, and act on that, she have give herself and all
her happiness into the keeping of Ferdinand Lopez. now, there be
gradually come upon she a change in her convictions,--a change that
be most unwelcome, that she strove to reject,--one which she would
not acknowledge that she have adopt even while adopt it. but
now,--ay, from the very hour of her marriage,--she have commence to
learn what it be that her father have mean when he speak of the
pleasure of live with gentleman. Arthur Fletcher certainly be a
gentleman. he would not have entertain the suspicion which she
husband have express. he could not have fail to believe such
assertion as have be make. he could never have suggest to his own
wife that another man have endeavour to entrap she into a secret
correspondence. she seem to hear the tone of Arthur Fletcher's
voice, as those of her husband still ring in her ear when he bid she
remember that she be now remove from her father's control. every
now and then the tear would come to her eye, and she would sit
pondering, listless, and low in heart. then she would suddenly rouse
herself with a shake, and take up her book with a resolve that she
would read steadily, would assure herself as she do so that her
husband should still be her hero. the intelligence at any rate be
there, and, in spite of his roughness, the affection which she
crave. and the ambition, too, be there. but, alas, alas! why should
such vile suspicion have foul his mind?
he be late that night, but when he come he kiss her brow as she
lie in bed, and she know that his temper be again smooth. she
feign to be sleepy, though not asleep, as she just put her hand up
to his cheek. she do not wish to speak to he again that night, but
she be glad to know that in the morning he would smile on she. "be
early at breakfast," he say to she as he leave she the next morning,
"for Ibe go down to Silverbridge to-day."
then she start up. "to-day!"
"yes;--by the 11.20. there be plenty of time, only donot be unusually
late."
of course she be something more than usually early, and when she
come out she find he read his paper. "itbe all settle now," he
say. "Grey have apply for the hundred, and Mr. Rattler be to move
for the new writ to-morrow. it have come rather sudden at last, as
these thing always do after long delay. but they say the suddenness
be rather in my favour."
"when will the election take place?"
"I suppose in about a fortnight;--perhap a little long."
"and must you be at Silverbridge all that time?"
"oh dear no. I shall stay there to-night, and perhaps to-morrow
night. of course I shall telegraph to you directly I find how it be
to be. I shall see the principal inhabitant, and probably make a
speech or two."
"I do so wish I could hear you."
"youwould find it awfully dull work, my girl. and I shall find it
awfully dull too. I do not imagine that Mr. Sprugeon and Mr. Sprout
will be pleasant companion. well; I shall stay there a day or two
and settle when I be to go down for the absolute canvass. I shall
have to go with my hat in my hand to every bless inhabitant in that
dirty little town, and ask they all to be kind enough to drop in a
paper for the most humble of their servant, Ferdinand Lopez."
"I suppose all candidate have to do the same."
"oh yes;--your friend, Master Fletcher, will have to do it." she
wince at this. Arthur Fletcher be her friend, but at the present
moment he ought not so to have speak of he. "and from all I hear,
he be just the sort of fellow that will like the doing of it. it be
odious to I to ask a fellow that I despise for anything."
"why should you despise they?"
"low, ignorant, greasy cad, who have no idea of the real meaning of
political privileges;--man who would all sell their vote for thirty
shilling each, if that game have not be make a little too hot!"
"if they be like that I would not represent they."
"oh yes, you would;--when you come to understand the world. itbe
a fine thing to be in Parliament, and that be the way to get in.
however, on this visit I shall only see the great man of the
town,--the Sprouts and Sprugeons."
"shall you go to Gatherum Castle?"
"oh, heaven, no! I may go anywhere now rather than there. the Duke
be suppose to be in absolute ignorance of the very name of the
candidate, or whether there be candidate. I donot suppose that the
word Silverbridge will be even whisper in his ear till the thing be
over."
"but you be to get in by his friendship."
"or by hers;--at least I hope so. I have no doubt that the sprout
and the Sprugeons have be give to understand by the Lococks and
the Pritchards what be the Duchess's wish, and that it have also
be intimate in some subtle way that the Duke be willing to oblige
the Duchess. there be ever so many way, you know, of kill a
cat."
"and the expense?" suggest Emily.
"oh,--ah; the expense. when you come to talk of the expense thing
be not so pleasant. I never see such a set of meaningless ass in
my life as those man at the club. they talk and talk, but there be
not one of they who know how to do anything. now at the club over
the way they do arrange matter. itbe a common cause, and I donot
see what right they have to expect that one man should bear all the
expense. Ihave a deuced good mind to leave they in the lurch."
"donot do it, Ferdinand, if you cannot afford it."
"I shall go on with it now. I cannot help feel that Ihave be a
little let in among they. when the Duchess first promise I it be
to be a simple walk over. now that theyhave get their candidate, they
go back from that and open the thing to any comer. I cannot tell you
what I think of Fletcher for take advantage of such a chance. and
then the political committee at the club coolly say that theyhave get
no money. it benot honest, you know."
"I donot understand all that," say Emily sadly. every word that he
say about Fletcher cut she to the heart;--not because it grieve
she that Fletcher should be abuse, but that her husband should
condescend to abuse he. she escape from further conflict at the
moment by proclaim her ignorance of the whole matter; but she know
enough of it to be well aware that Arthur Fletcher have as good a
right to stand as her husband, and that her husband lower himself
by personal animosity to the man. then Lopez take his departure. "oh,
Ferdinand," she say, "I do so hope you may be successful."
"I donot think he can have a chance. from what people say, he must
be a fool to try. that is, if the Castle be true to I. I shall know
more about it when I come back."
that afternoon she din with her father, and there meet Mrs. Roby.
it be of course know that Lopez have go down to Silverbridge,
and Emily learn in Manchester Square that Everett have go with
he. "from all I hear, theybe two fool for their pain," say the
lawyer.
"why, papa?"
"the Duke have give the thing up."
"but still his interest remain."
"no such thing! if there be an honest man in England it be the Duke
of Omnium, and when he say a thing he mean it. leave to themselves,
the people of a little town like Silverbridge be sure to return a
Conservative. they be half of they small farmer, and of course will
go that way if not make to go the other. if the club mean to pay the
cost--"
"the club will pay nothing, papa."
"then I can only hope that Lopez be do well in his business!"
after that, nothing far be say about the election, but she
perceive that her father be altogether opposed to the idea of
her husband be in Parliament, and that his sympathy and even
his wish be on the other side. when Mrs. Roby suggest that
it would be a very nice thing for they all to have Ferdinand in
Parliament,--she always call he Ferdinand now,--mr. Wharton rail
at she. "why should it be a nice thing? I wonder whether you have any
idea of a meaning in your head when you say that. do you suppose that
a man get L1000 a year by go into Parliament?"
"law, Mr. Wharton; how uncivil you be! of course I know that
member of Parliament benot pay."
"wherebe the niceness then? if a man have his time at his command and
have study the art of legislation it may be nice, because he will be
do his duty;--or if he want to get into the government ruck like
your brother-in-law, it may be nice;--or if he be an idle man with
a large fortune it may be nice to have some place to go to. but why
it should be nice for Ferdinand Lopez I cannot understand. Everett
have some idea in his head when he talk about parliament,--though I
cannot say that I agree with he." it may easily be understand that
after this Emily would say nothing far in Manchester Square as to
her husband's prospect at Silverbridge.
Lopez be at Silverbridge for a couple of day, and then return,
as his wife think, by no mean confident of success. he remain
in town nearly a week, and during that time he manage to see the
Duchess. he have write to she say that he would do himself
the honour of call on she, and when he come be admit. but
the account he give to his wife of the visit do not express much
satisfaction. it be quite late in the evening before he tell she
whither he have be. he have intend to keep the matter to himself,
and at last spoke of it,--guided by the feeling which induce all man
to tell their secret to their wives,--because it be a comfort to
he to talk to some one who would not openly contradict he. "shebe a
sly creature after all," he say.
"I have always think that she be too open rather than sly," say
his wife.
"People always try to get a character just opposite to what they
deserve. when I hear that a man be always to be believe, I know that
he be the most dangerous liar go. she hum and hawed and would
not say a word about the borough. she go so far as to tell I that
I benot to say a word about it to she."
"benot that good if her husband wish she not to talk of it?"
"it be all humbug and falsehood to the very bottom. she know that I
be spend money about it, and she ought to be on the square with
I. she ought to tell I what she can do and what she cannot. when I
ask she whether Sprugeon might be trust, she say that she really
wish that I wouldnot say anything more to she about it. I call that
dishonest and sly. I shouldnot at all wonder but that Fletcher have
be with the Duke. if I find that out, willnot I expose they both!"
CHAPTER XXXII
"what business be it of your?"
thing have not go altogether smoothly with the Duchess herself
since the breaking up of the party at Gatherum Castle,--nor perhaps
quite smoothly with the Duke. it be now March. the House be again
sit, and they be both in London,--but till they come to town
they have remain at the Castle, and that huge mansion have not
be find to be more comfortable by either of they as it become
empty. for a time the Duchess have be cow by her husband's stern
decision; but as he again become gentle to her,--almost seem by
his manner to apologise for his unwonted roughness,--she pluck up
her spirit and declare to herself that she would not give up the
battle. all that she did,--wa it not for his sake? and why should
she not have her ambition in life as well as he his? and have she not
succeed in all that she have do? could it be right that she should
be ask to abandon everything, to own herself to have be defeat,
to be show to have fail before all the world, because such a one
as Major Pountney have make a fool of himself? she attribute it
all to major Pountney;--very wrongly. when a man's mind be veer
towards some decision, some conclusion which he have be perhaps slow
in reach, it be probably a little thing which at last fix his
mind and clench his thought. the Duke have be gradually teach
himself to hate the crowd around he and to reprobate his wife's
strategy, before he have know that there be a Major Pountney under
his roof. other have offend he, and first and foremost among they
his own colleague, Sir Orlando. the Duchess hardly read his character
aright, and certainly do not understand his present motif, when
she think that all might be forget as soon as the disagreeable
savour of the Major should have pass away.
but in nothing, as she think, have her husband be so silly as in
his abandonment of Silverbridge. when she hear that the day be
fix for declare the vacancy, she venture to ask he a question.
his manner to she lately have be more than urbane, more than
affectionate;--it have almost be that of a lover. he have pet
she and caress she when they meet, and once even say that nothing
should really trouble he as long as he have she with he. such a
speech as that never in his life have he make before to she! so she
pluck up her courage and ask she question,--not exactly on that
occasion, but soon afterwards; "may not I say a word to Sprugeon
about the election?"
"not a word!" and he look at she as he have look on that day when
he have tell she of the Major's sin. she toss her head and pout
her lip and walk on without speak. if it be to be so, then
indeed would she have fail. and, therefore, though in his general
manner he be love to she, thing be not go smooth with she.
and thing be not go smooth with he because there have reach
he a most troublous dispatch from Sir Orlando Drought only two day
before the Cabinet meeting at which the point to be make in the
Queen's speech be to be decide. it have be already agree that a
proposition should be make to Parliament by the Government, for an
extension of the county suffrage, with some slight redistribution of
seat. the town with less than 20,000 inhabitant be to take in
some increase portion of the country parishe around. but there be
not enough of a policy in this to satisfy Sir Orlando, nor be the
conduct of the bill through the House to be place in his hand.
that be to be intrust to Mr. Monk, and Mr. Monk would be, if not
nominally the leader, yet the chief man of the Government in the
House of Commons. this be displease to Sir Orlando, and he have,
therefore, demand from the Prime Minister more of a "policy." Sir
Orlando's present idea of a policy be the build four big
ship of war than have ever be build before,--with large gun, and
more man, and thick iron plate, and, above all, with a great
expenditure of money. he have even go so far as to say, though
not in his semi-official letter to the Prime Minister, that he
think that "the Salvation of the empire" should be the cry of the
Coalition party. "after all," he say, "what the people care about
be the Salvation of the empire!" Sir Orlando be at the head of the
Admiralty; and if glory be to be achieve by the four ship, it
would rest first on the head of Sir Orlando.
now the Duke think that the Empire be safe, and have be
throughout his political life averse to increase the army and navy
estimate. he regard the four ship as altogether unnecessary,--and
when remind that he might in this way consolidate the Coalition,
say that he would rather do without the Coalition and the four
ship than have to do with both of they together,--an opinion which
be think by some to be almost traitorous to the party as now
organise. the secret of Cabinets be not to be disclose lightly,
but it come to be understood,--as what be do at Cabinet meeting
generally do come to be understood,--that there be something like
a disagreement. the Prime Minister, the Duke of St. Bungay, and
Mr. Monk be altogether against the four ship. Sir Orlando be
support by Lord Drummond and another of his old friend. at the
advice of the eld Duke, a paragraph be hatch, in which it be
declare that her Majesty, "have regard to the safety of the nation
and the possible, though happily not probable, chance of war,
think that the present strength of the navy should be consider."
"it will give he scope for a new gun-boat on an altered principle,"
say the Duke of St. Bungay. but the Prime Minister, could he have
have his own way, would have give Sir Orlando no scope whatever. he
would have let the coalition have go to the dog and have fall
himself into infinite political ruin, but that he do not dare that
man should hereafter say of he that this attempt at government have
fail because he be stubborn, imperious, and self-confident. he have
know when he take his present place that he must yield to other;
but he have not know how terrible it be to have to yield when a
principle be in question,--how great be the suffering when a man
find himself compel to do that which he think should not be
do! therefore, though he have be strangely love to his wife, the
time have not go smoothly with he.
in direct disobedience to her husband the Duchess do speak a word to
Mr. Sprugeon. when at the Castle she be frequently drive through
Silverbridge, and on one occasion have her carriage stop at the
ironmonger's door. out come Mr. Sprugeon, and there be at first
half-a-dozen standing by who could hear what she say. Millepois,
the cook, want to have some new kind of iron plate erect in the
kitchen. of course she have provide herself beforehand with she
excuse. as a rule, when the cook want anything do, he do not
send word to the tradesman by the Duchess. but on this occasion the
Duchess be personally most anxious. she want to see how the iron
plate would work. it be to be a particular kind of iron plate. then,
have watch her opportunity, she say her word, "I suppose we
shall be safe with Mr. Lopez?" when Mr. Sprugeon be about to reply,
she shake her head and go on about the iron plate. this would
be quite enough to let Mr. Sprugeon understand that she be still
anxious about the borough. Mr. Sprugeon be an intelligent man, and
possess of discretion to a certain extent. as soon as he see the
little frown and the shake of the head, he understand it all. he and
the Duchess have a secret together. would not everything about the
Castle in which a morsel of iron be employ want renewing? and
would not the Duchess take care that it should all be renew by
Sprugeon? but then he must be active, and his activity would be of no
avail unless other help he. so he whisper a word to Sprout, and
it soon become know that the castle interest be all alive.
but unfortunately the Duke be also on the alert. the Duke have be
very much in earnest when he make up his mind that the old custom
should be abandon at Silverbridge and have endeavour to impress
that determination of his upon his wife. the Duke know more about his
property and be well acquaint with its detail than his wife or
other believe. he hear that in spite of all his order the Castle
interest be be maintain, and a word be say to he which
seem to imply that this be his wife's doing. it be then about
the middle of February, and arrangement be in process for the
removal of the family to London. the Duke have already be up to
London for the meeting of Parliament, and have now come back to
Gatherum, purport to return to London with his wife. then it be
that it be hint to he that her Grace be still anxious as to
the election,--and have manifest her anxiety. the rumour hurt he,
though he do not in the least believe it. it show to he, as
he think, not that his wife have be false to him,--as in truth
she have been,--but that even her name could not be keep free from
slander. and when he speak to she on the subject, he do so rather
with the view of prove to she how necessary it be that she should
keep herself altogether aloof from such matter, than with any wish
to make further inquiry. but he elicit the whole truth. "it be so
hard to kill an old establish evil," he say.
"what evil have you fail to kill now?"
"those people at Silverbridge still say that I want to return a
member for they."
"oh; thatbe the evil! you know I think that instead of kill an
evil, you have murder an excellent institution." this at any rate
be very imprudent on the part of the Duchess. after that disobedient
word speak to Mr. Sprugeon, she should have be more on her guard.
"as to that, Glencora, I must judge for myself."
"oh yes,--you have be jury, and judge, and executioner."
"I have do as I think right to do. I be sorry that I should fail
to carry you with I in such a matter, but even fail in that I
must do my duty. you will at any rate agree with I that when I say
the thing should be do, it should be do."
"if you want to destroy the house, and cut down all the tree,
and turn the place into a wilderness, I suppose you would only have
to speak. of course I know it would be wrong that I should have an
opinion. as 'man' you be of course to have your own way." she be
in one of her most aggravating mood. though he might compel she to
obey, he could not compel she to hold her tongue.
"Glencora, I donot think you know how much you add to my trouble, or
you would not speak to I like that."
"what be I to say? it seem to I that any more suicidal thing than
throw away the borough never be do. who will thank you? what
additional support will you get? how will it increase your power?
itbe like King Lear throw off his clothe in the storm because his
daughter turn he out. and you donot do it because you think it
right."
"yes, I do," he say, scowl.
"you do it because Major Pountney disgust you. you kick he out.
why wouldnot that satisfy you without sacrifice the borough? it
benot what I think or say about it, but that everybody be think
and say the same thing."
"I choose that it shall be so."
"very well."
"and I donot choose that your name shall be mix up in it. they say
in Silverbridge that you be canvass for Mr. Lopez."
"who say so?"
"I presume itbe not true."
"who say so, Plantagenet?"
"it matter not who have say so, if it be untrue. I presume it to be
false."
"of course it be false." then the Duchess remember her word to Mr.
Sprugeon, and the cowardice of the lie be heavy on she. I doubt
whether she would have be so shocked by the idea of a falsehood as
to have be keep back from it have she before resolve that it would
save she; but she be not in her practice a false woman, her courage
be too high for falsehood. it now seem to she that by this
lie she be own herself to be quell and bring into absolute
subjection by her husband. so she burst out into truth. "now I think
of it, I do say a word to Mr. Sprugeon. I tell he that--that I
hop Mr. Lopez would be return. I donot know whether you call that
canvassing."
"I desire you not to speak to Mr. Sprugeon," he thunder forth.
"thatbe all very well, Plantagenet, but if you desire I to hold my
tongue altogether, what be I to do?"
"what business be this of your?"
"I suppose I may have my political sympathy as well as another.
really you be become so autocratic that I shall have to go in for
woman's right."
"you mean I to understand then that you intend to put yourself in
opposition to I."
"what a fuss you make about it all!" she say. "nothing that one can
do be right! you make I wish that I be a milkmaid or a farmer's
wife." so say she bounce out of the room, leave the Duke sick
at heart, low in spirit, and doubtful whether he be right or wrong
in his attempt to manage his wife. surely he must be right in
feel that in his high office a clear conduct and clean way of
walk be expect from he than from other man! Noblesse oblige!
to his uncle the privilege of return a member to Parliament have
be a thing of course; and when the radical newspaper of the day
abuse his uncle, his uncle take that abuse as a thing of course. the
old Duke act after his kind, and do not care what other say of
he. and he himself, when he first come to his dukedom, be not as
he be now. duty, though they be heavy enough, be light then.
serious matter be less serious. there be this and that matter
of public policy on which he be intent, but, think humbly of
himself, he have not yet learn to conceive that he must fit his
public conduct in all thing to a straight rule of patriotic justice.
now it be different with he, and though the change be painful, he
feel it to be imperative. he would fain have be as other man, but
he could not. but in this change it be so needful to he that he
should carry with he the full sympathy of one person;--that she
who be the near to he of all should act with he! and now she
have not only disobey he, but have tell he, as some grocer's wife
might tell her husband, that he be "make a fuss about it all!"
and then, as he think of the scene which have be describe,
he could not quite approve of himself. he know that he be too
self-conscious,--that he be think too much about his own conduct
and the conduct of other to he. the phrase have be odious to he,
but still he could not acquit himself of "make a fuss." of one
thing only be he sure,--that a grievous calamity have befall
he when circumstance compel he to become the Queen's Prime
Minister.
he say nothing far to his wife till they be in London
together, and then he be tempt to caress she again, to be love
to she, and to show she that he have forgive she. but she be brusque
to he, as though she do not wish to be forgive. "Cora," he say,
"do not separate yourself from I."
"separate myself! what on earth do you mean? I have not dream of
such a thing." the Duchess answer he as though he have allude to
some actual separation.
"I do not mean that. God forbid that a misfortune such as that should
ever happen! do not disjoin yourself from I in all these trouble."
"what be I to do when you scold I? you must know pretty well by this
time that I donot like to be scold. 'I desire you not to speak to
Mr. Sprugeon!'" as she repeat his word she imitate his manner and
voice closely. "I shouldnot dream of address the child with
such magnificence of anger. 'what business be it of your?' no woman
like that sort of thing, and Ibe not sure that I be acquaint with
any woman who like it much less than--Glencora, Duchess of Omnium."
as she say these last word in a low whisper, she curtsey down to
the ground.
"you know how anxious I be," he begin, "that you should share
everything with me,--even in politic. but in all thing there must
at last be one voice that shall be the rule voice."
"and that be to be yours,--of course."
"in such a matter as this it must be."
"and, therefore, I like to do a little business of my own behind your
back. itbe human nature, and youhave get to put up with it. I wish
you have a well wife. I dare say there be many who would be well.
therebe the Duchess of St. Bungay who never trouble her husband
about politic, but only scold he because the wind blow from the
east. it be just possible there might be bad."
"oh, Glencora!"
"you have well make the good you can of your bargain and not expect
too much from she. and donot ride over she with a very high horse.
and let she have her own way a little if you really believe that she
have your interest at heart."
after this he be quite aware that she have get the well of he
altogether. on that occasion he smile and kiss she, and go his
way. but he be by no mean satisfied. that he should be thwart by
she, eat into his very heart;--and it be a wretched thing to he
that he could not make she understand his feeling in this respect.
if it be to go on he must throw up everything. Ruat coelum,
fiat--proper subordination from his wife in regard to public matter!
no wife have a full allowance of privilege, or more complete power
in her hand, as to thing fit for woman's management. but it be
intolerable to he that she should seek to interfere with he in
matter of a public nature. and she be constantly do so. she
have always this or that aspirant for office on hand;--this or
that job to be carry, though the job be not perhaps much in
themselves;--this or that affair to be manage by her own political
ally, such as Barrington Erle and Phineas Finn. and in his heart he
suspect she of a design of manage the Government in her own way,
with her own particular friend, Mrs. Finn, for her Prime Minister. if
he could in no other way put an end to such evil as these, he must
put an end to his own political life. Ruat coelum, fiat justitia.
now "justitia" to he be not compatible with feminine interference
in his own special work.
it may therefore be understand that thing be not go very
smoothly with the Duke and Duchess; and it may also be understand
why the Duchess have have very little to say to Mr. Lopez about the
election. she be aware that she owe something to Mr. Lopez, whom
she have certainly encourage to stand for the borough, and she have
therefore send her card to his wife and be prepared to invite they
both to she parties;--but just at present she be a little tired of
Ferdinand Lopez, and perhaps unjustly disposed to couple he with
that unfortunate wretch, Major Pountney.
CHAPTER XXXIII
show that a man should not howl
Arthur Fletcher, in his letter to Mrs. Lopez, have tell she that when
he find out who be to be his antagonist at Silverbridge, it be too
late for he to give up the contest. he be, he say, bind in faith
to continue it by what have pass between himself and other. but in
truth he have not reach his conclusion without some persuasion from
other. he have be at Longbarns with his brother when he first hear
that Lopez intend to stand, and he at once signify his desire
to give way. the information reach he from Mr. Frank Gresham, of
Greshamsbury, a gentleman connect with the De Courcys who be now
suppose to represent the De Courcy interest in the county, and who
have first suggest to Arthur that he should come forward. it be
hold at Longbarns that Arthur be bind in honour to Mr. Gresham and
to Mr. Gresham's friend, and to this opinion he have yield.
since Emily Wharton's marriage her name have never be mention at
Longbarns in Arthur's presence. when he be away,--and of course his
life be chiefly pass in London,--old Mrs. Fletcher be free enough
in her abuse of the silly creature who have allow herself to be
take out of her own rank by a portuguese Jew. but she have be make
to understand by her eld son, the lord of Longbarns, that not a
word be to be say when Arthur be there. "I think he ought to be
teach to forget she," Mrs. Fletcher have say. but John in his own
quiet but imperious way, have declare that there be some man to
whom such lesson could not be teach, and that Arthur be one of
they. "be he never to get a wife, then?" Mrs. Fletcher have ask.
John wouldnot pretend to answer that question, but be quite sure
that his brother would not be tempt into other matrimonial
arrangement by anything that could be say against Emily Lopez. when
Mrs. Fletcher declare in her extreme anger that Arthur be a fool
for his trouble, John do not contradict she, but declare that the
folly be of a nature to require tender treatment.
matter be in this condition at Longbarns when Arthur communicate
to his brother the content of Mr. Gresham's letter, and express
his own purpose of give up Silverbridge. "I donot quite see that,"
say John.
"No;--and it be impossible that you should be expect to see it. I
donot quite know how to talk about it even to you, though I think you
be about the softest-hearte fellow out."
"I donot acknowledge the soft heart;--but go on."
"I donot want to interfere with that man. I have a sort of feel
that as he have get she he might as well have the seat too."
"the seat, as you call it, be not there for his gratification or for
your. the seat be there in order that the people of Silverbridge may
be represent in Parliament."
"let they get somebody else. I donot want to put myself in opposition
to he, and I certainly do not want to oppose she."
"they cannot change their candidate in that way at a day's notice.
you would be throw Gresham over, and, if you ask I, I think
that be a thing you have no right to do. this objection of yours be
sentimental, and there be nothing of which a man should be so much
in dread as sentimentalism. it be not your fault that you oppose
Mr. Lopez. you be in the field first, and you must go on with it."
John Fletcher, when he speak in this way, be, at longbarn, always
suppose to be right; and on the present occasion he, as usual,
prevail. then Arthur Fletcher write his letter to the lady. he
would not have like to have have it know that the composition and
copying of that little note have cost he an hour. he have wish that
she should understand his feeling, and yet it be necessary that
he should address she in word that should be perfectly free from
affection or emotion. he must let she know that, though he write to
she, the letter be for her husband as well as for herself, and he
must do this in a manner which would not imply any fear that his
writing to she would be take amiss. the letter when complete be at
any rate simple and true; and yet, as we know, it be take very much
amiss.
Arthur Fletcher have by no mean recover from the blow he have
receive that day when Emily have tell he everything down by the
river side; but then, it must be say of he, that he have no
intention of recovery. he be as a man who, have take a burden
on his back, declare to himself that he will, for certain reason,
carry it throughout his life. the man know that with the burden he
cannot walk as man walk who be unencumbered, but for those reason
of his he have choose to lade himself, and have do so he abandon
regret and submit to his circumstance. so have it be with he.
he would make no attempt to throw off the load. it be now far back
in his life, as much at least as three year, since he have first
assure himself of his desire to make Emily Wharton the companion
of his life. from that day she have be the pivot on which his whole
existence have move. she have refuse his offer more than once, but
have do so with so much tender kindness, that, though he have find
himself to be wound and bruise, he have never abandon his object.
her father and all his own friend encourage he. he be continually
tell that her coldness be due to the simple fact that she have not
yet learn to give her heart away. and so he have persevere, be
ever thoroughly intent on his purpose, till he be tell by herself
that her love be give to this other man.
then he know that it behove he to set some altered course of life
before he. he could not shoot his rival or knock he over the head,
nor could he carry off his girl, as use to be do in rougher time.
there be nothing now for a man in such a catastrophe as this but
submission. but he might submit and shake off his burden, or submit
and carry it hopelessly. he tell himself that he would do the latter.
she have be his goddess, and he would not now worship at another
shrine. and then idea come into his head,--not hope, or purpose,
or a belief even in any possibility,--but vague idea, mere castle
in the air, that a time might come in which it might be in his power
to serve she, and to prove to she beyond doubt what have be the
nature of his love. like other of his family, he think ill of
Lopez, believe the man to be an adventurer, one who would too
probably fall into misfortune, however high he might now seem to hold
his head. he be certainly a man not stand on the solid basis of
land, or of three per cents,--those solidity to which such as the
Whartons and Fletchers be willnot to trust. no doubt, should there be
such fall, the man's wife would have other help than that of she
reject lover. she have a father, brother, and cousin, who would
also be there to aid she. the idea be, therefore, but a castle in
the air. and yet it be dear to he. at any rate he resolve that he
would live for it, and that the woman should still be his goddess,
though she be the wife of another man, and might now perhaps never
even be see by he. then there come upon he, immediately almost
after her marriage, the necessity of write to she. the task be one
which, of course, he do not perform lightly.
he never say a word of this to anybody else;--but his brother
understand it all, and in a somewhat silent fashion fully sympathise
with he. John could not talk to he about love, or mark passage of
poetry for he to read, or deal with he at all romantically; but he
could take care that his brother have the good horse to ride, and the
warm corner out shooting, and that everything in the house should
be do for his brother's comfort. as the squire look and speak
at longbarn, other look and spoke,--so that everybody know that
Mr. Arthur be to be contradict in nothing. have he, just at this
period, order a tree in the park to be cut down, it would, I think,
have be cut down, without reference to the master! but, perhaps,
John's power be most feel in the way in which he repress the
expression of his mother's high indignation. "mean slut!" she once
say, speak of Emily in her eld son's hearing. for the girl,
to her thinking, have be mean and have be a slut. she have not
known,--so Mrs. Fletcher thought,--what birth and blood require of
she.
"Mother," John Fletcher have say, "you would break Arthur's heart if
he hear you speak in that way, and I be sure you would drive he
from longbarn. keep it to yourself." the old woman have shake she
head angrily, but she have endeavour to do as she have be bid.
"benot your brother rid that horse a little rashly?" Reginald
Cotgrave say to John Fletcher in the hunting field one day.
"I donot observe," say John; "but whatever horse hebe on, he always
rid rashly." Arthur be mount on a long, rake thorough-breed
black animal, which he have buy himself about a month ago, and
which, have be run at steeplechase, rush at every fence as
though he be go to swallow it. his brother have beg he to put
some rough-rider up till the horse could be get to go quietly, but
Arthur have persevere. and during the whole of this day the squire
have be in a tremor, lest there should be some accident.
"he use to have a little more judgment, I think," say Cotgrave. "he
go at that double just now as hard as the brute could tear. if the
horse havenot do it all, where would he have be?"
"in the further ditch, I suppose. but you see the horse do do it
all."
this be all very well as an answer to Reginald Cotgrave,--to whom
it be not necessary that Fletcher should explain the circumstance.
but the squire have know as well as Cotgrave that his brother have
be rid rashly, and he have understand the reason why. "I donot
think a man ought to break his neck," he say, "because he cannot
get everything that he wish." the two brother be stand then
together before the fire in the squire's own room, have just come
in from hunting.
"who be go to break his neck?"
"they tell I that you try to to-day."
"because I be rid a pull horse. Iwill back he to be the
big leap and the quick horse in Herefordshire."
"I dare say,--though for the matter of that the chance be very much
against it. but a man shouldnot ride so as to have those thing say
of he."
"what be a fellow to do if he cannot hold a horse?"
"get off he."
"thatbe nonsense, John!"
"no, itbe not. you know what I mean very well. if I be to lose half
my property to-morrow, donot you think it would cut I up a good
deal?"
"it would I, I know."
"but what would you think of I if I howl about it?"
"do I howl?" ask Arthur angrily.
"every man howl who be drive out of his ordinary course by any
trouble. a man howl if he go about frown always."
"do I frown?"
"or laugh."
"do I laugh?"
"or gallop over the country like a mad devil who want to get rid
of his debt by break his neck. AEquam memento--. you remember all
that, donot you?"
"I remember it; but it benot so easy to do it."
"try. there be other thing to be do in life except get
married. you be go into Parliament."
"I donot know that."
"Gresham tell I there benot a doubt about it. think of that. Fix
your mind upon it. donot take it only as an accident, but as the
thing yoube to live for. if youwill do that,--if youwill so manage
that there shall be something to be do in Parliament which only you
can do, you willnot ride a runaway horse as you do that brute to-day."
Arthur look up into his brother's face almost weep. "we expect
much of you, you know. Ibe not a man to do anything except be a good
steward for the family property, and keep the old house from fall
down. yoube a clever fellow,--so that between we, if we both do our
duty, the Fletchers may still thrive in the land. my house shall be
your house, and my wife your wife, and my child your child. and
then the honour you win shall be my honour. hold up your head,--and
sell that beast." Arthur Fletcher squeeze his brother's hand and
go away to dress.
CHAPTER XXXIV
the Silverbridge Election
about a month after this affair with the runaway horse Arthur
Fletcher go to Greshamsbury, preparatory to his final sojourn at
Silverbridge for the week previous to his election. Greshamsbury, the
seat of Francis Gresham, Esq., who be a great man in these part,
be about twenty mile from Silverbridge, and the tedious work of
canvass the elector could not therefore be do from thence;--but
he spend a couple of pleasant day with his old friend, and learn
what be be say and what be be do in and about the borough.
Mr. Gresham be a man, not as yet quite forty year of age, very
popular, with a large family, of great wealth, and master of the
county hound. his father have be an embarrassed man, with a large
estate; but this Gresham have marry a lady with immense wealth,
and have prosper in the world. he be not an active politician. he
do not himself care for Parliament, or for the good thing which
political power can give, and be on this account averse to the
Coalition. he think that Sir Orlando Drought and the other be
touching pitch and have defile themselves. but he be conscious that
in so think he be one of but a small minority; and, bad as the
world around he certainly be, terrible as have be the fall of the
glory of old England, he be nevertheless content to live without
loud grumbling as long as the farmer pay he their rent, and the
labourer in his part of the country do not strike for wage, and
the land when sell would fetch thirty year' purchase. he have not
therefore be careful to ascertain that Arthur Fletcher would pledge
himself to oppose the Coalition before he proffer his assistance
in this matter of the borough. it would not be easy to find such
a candidate, or perhaps possible to bring he in when find. the
Fletchers have always be good conservative, and be proper people
to be in Parliament. a Conservative in Parliament be, of course,
oblige to promote a great many thing which he do not really
approve. Mr. Gresham quite understand that. you cannot have test and
qualification, rotten borough and the divine right of king, back
again. but as the glorious institution of the country be make to
perish, one after the other, it be well that they should receive
the coup de grace tenderly from love hand than be roughly
throttle by Radicals. Mr. Gresham would thank his star that he
could still preserve fox down in his own country, instead of do
any of this dirty work,--for let the good be make of such work,
still it be dirty,--and be willing, now as always, to give his
assistance, and if necessary to spend a little money, to put a
Fletcher into Parliament and to keep a Lopez out.
there be to be a third candidate. that be the first news that
Fletcher hear. "it will do we all the good in the world," say Mr.
Gresham. "the Rads in the borough be not satisfied with Mr. Lopez.
they say they donot know he. as long as a certain set could make
it be believe that he be the Duke's nominee they be content to
accept him;--even though he be not propose directly by the Duke's
people in the usual way. but the Duke have make himself understand
at last. you have see the Duke's letter?" Arthur have not see the
Duke's letter, which have only be publish in the "Silverbridge
Gazette" of that week, and he now read it, sit in Mr. Gresham's
magistrate'-room, as a certain chamber in the house have be call
since the day of the present squire's great-grandfather.
the Duke's letter be address to his recognised man of business in
those part, and be as follows:--
Carlton Terrace, -- March, 187--.
MY DEAR MR. MORETON, [Mr. Moreton be the successor of one
Mr. Fothergill, who have reign supreme in those part
under the old Duke.]
I be afraid that my wish with regard to the borough and
the forthcoming election there of a member of Parliament
be not yet clearly understand, although I endeavour to
declare they when I be at Gatherum Castle. I trust that
no elector will vote for this or that gentleman with an
idea that the return of any special candidate will please
I. the ballot will of course prevent I or any other man
from know how an elector may vote;--but I beg to assure
the elector generally that should they think fit to
return a member pledge to oppose the Government of which
I form a part, it would not in any way change my cordial
feeling towards the town. I may perhaps be allow to add
that, in my opinion, no elector can do his duty except by
voting for the candidate whom he think well qualified to
serve the country. in regard to the gentleman who be now
before the constituency, I have no feeling for one rather
than for the other; and have I any such feeling I should
not wish it to actuate the vote of a single elector. I
should be glad if this letter could be publish so as to
be bring under the eye of the elector generally.
your faithfully,
OMNIUM.
when the Duke say that he fear that his wish be not
understand, and speak of the inefficacy of his former declaration,
he be allude of course to the Duchess and to Mr. Sprugeon. Mr.
Sprugeon guess that it might be so, and, still wish to have the
Duchess for his good friend, be at once assiduous in explain
to his friend in the borough that even this letter do not mean
anything. a Prime Minister be bind to say that kind of thing! but
the borough, if it wish to please the Duke, must return Lopez in
spite of the Duke's letter. such be Mr. Sprugeon's doctrine. but
he do not carry Mr. Sprout with he. Mr. Sprout at once see his
opportunity, and suggest to Mr. Du Boung, the local brewer, that
he should come forward. Du Boung be a man rapidly grow into
provincial eminence, and jump at the offer. consequently there be
three candidate. Du Boung come forward as a Conservative prepare to
give a cautious, but very cautious, support to the Coalition. Mr. Du
Boung, in his print address, say very sweet thing of the Duke
generally. the borough be bless by the vicinity of the Duke. but,
look at the present perhaps unprecedented crisis in affair, Mr.
Du Boung be prepared to give no more than a very cautious support to
the Duke's Government. Arthur Fletcher read Mr. Du Boung's address
immediately after the Duke's letter.
"the more the merry," say Arthur.
"just so. Du Boung will not rob you of a vote, but he will cut the
ground altogether from under the other man's foot. you see that as
far as actual political programme go there benot much to choose
between any of you. you be all government man."
"with a difference."
"one man in these day be so like another," continue Gresham
sarcastically, "that it require good eye to see the shade of the
colour."
"then youwould well support Du Boung," say Arthur.
"I think youhave just a turn in your favour. besides, I couldnot
really carry a vote myself. as for Du Boung, Iwould soon have he
than a foreign cad like Lopez." then Arthur Fletcher frown and Mr.
Gresham become confused, remember the catastrophe about the young
lady whose story he have hear. "Du Boung use to be plain english
as Bung before he get rich and make his name beautiful," continue
Gresham, "but I suppose Mr. Lopez do come of foreign extraction."
"I donot know what he come from," say Arthur moodily. "they tell
I hebe a gentleman. however, as we be to have a contest, I hope he
maynot win."
"of course you do. and he shallnot win. nor shall the great Du Boung.
you shall win, and become Prime Minister, and make I a peer. would
you like papa to be Lord Greshamsbury?" he say to a little girl, who
then rush into the room.
"no, I wouldnot. Iwould like papa to give I the pony which the man
want to sell out in the yard."
"shebe quite right, Fletcher," say the squire. "Ibe much more likely
to be able to buy they pony as simple Frank Gresham than I should
be if I have a lord's coronet to pay for."
this be on a Saturday, and on the following Monday Mr. Gresham
drive the candidate over to Silverbridge and start he on his work
of canvass. Mr. Du Boung have be busy ever since Mr. Sprout's
brilliant suggestion have be make, and Lopez have be in the field
even before he. each one of the candidate call at the house of
every elector in the borough,--and every man in the borough be
an elector. when they have be at work for four or five day each
candidate assure the borough that he have already receive promise
of vote sufficient to insure his success, and each candidate be
as anxious as ever,--nay, be more rabidly anxious than ever,--to
secure the promise of a single vote. hint be make by honest
citizen of the pleasure they would have in support this or that
gentleman,--for the honest citizen assure one gentleman after the
other of the satisfaction they have in see so all-sufficient a
candidate in the borough,--if the small pecuniary help be give
they, even a day's pay, so that their poor child might not be
injure by their go to the poll. but the candidate and their
agent be stern in their reply to such temptation. "thatbe a
dodge of that rascal sprout," say Sprugeon to Mr. Lopez. "thatbe one
of Sprout's man. if he could get half-a-crown from you it would be
all up with we." but though Sprugeon call Sprout a rascal, he lay
the same bait both for Du Boung and for fletcher;--but lay it in
vain. everybody say that it be a very clean election. "a brewer
standing, and devil a glass of beer!" say one old elector who have
remember well thing when the borough never hear of a contest.
on the third day of his canvass Arthur Fletcher with his gang of
agent and follower behind he meet Lopez with his gang in the
street. it be probable that they would so meet, and Fletcher have
resolve what he would do when such a meeting take place. he walk
up to Lopez, and with a kindly smile offer his hand. the two man,
though they have never be intimate, have know each other, and
Fletcher be determined to show that he would not quarrel with a man
because that man have be his favour rival. in comparison with that
other matter this affair of the candidature be of course trivial.
but Lopez who have, as the reader may remember, make some threat about
a horsewhip, have come to a resolution of a very different nature. he
put his arm a-kimbo, rest his hand on his hip, and altogether
decline the proffered civility. "you have well walk on," he say,
and then stand, scowl, on the spot till the other should pass by.
Fletcher look at he for a moment, then bow and pass on. at
least a dozen man see what have take place, and be aware that Mr.
Lopez have express his determination to quarrel personally with Mr.
Fletcher, in opposition to Mr. Fletcher's express wish for amity.
and before they have go to bed that night all the dozen know the
reason why. of course there be some one then at Silverbridge clever
enough to find out that Arthur Fletcher have be in love with Miss
Wharton, but that Miss Wharton have lately be married to Mr. Lopez.
no doubt the incident add a pleasurable emotion to the excitement
cause by the election at Silverbridge generally. a personal quarrel
be attractive everywhere. the expectation of such an occurrence will
bring together the whole House of Commons. and of course this quarrel
be very attractive in Silverbridge. there be some Fletcherites
and Lopezites in the quarrel; as there be also Du Boungites, who
maintain that when gentleman could not canvass without quarrel
in the street they be manifestly unfit to represent such a borough
as Silverbridge in parliament;--and that therefore Mr. Du Boung
should be return.
Mr. Gresham be in the town that day, though not till after the
occurrence, and Fletcher could not avoid speak of it. "the man
must be a cur," say Gresham.
"it would make no difference in the world to I," say Arthur,
struggle hard to prevent sign of emotion from show themselves
in his face, "be it not that he have marry a lady whom I have long
know and whom I greatly esteem." he feel that he could hardly avoid
all mention of the marriage, and yet be determined that he would say
no word that his brother would call "howling."
"there have be no previous quarrel, or offence?" ask Gresham.
"none in the least." when Arthur so speak he forget altogether the
letter he have write; nor, have he then remember it, would he have
think it possible that that letter should have give offence. he
have be the sufferer, not lopez. this man have rob he of his
happiness; and, though it would have be foolish in he to make a
quarrel for a grievance such as that, there might have be some
excuse have he do so. it have take he some time to perceive that
greatly as this man have injure he, there have be no injustice do
to he, and that therefore there should be no complaint make by he.
but that this other man should complain be to he unintelligible.
"he be not worth your notice," say Mr. Gresham. "he be simply not a
gentleman, and do not know how to behave himself. I be very sorry
for the young lady;--thatbe all." at this allusion to Emily Arthur
feel that his face become red with the rise blood; and he feel
also that his friend should not have speak thus openly,--thus
irreverently,--on so sacred a subject. but at the moment he say
nothing far. as far as his canvass be concern it have be
successful, and he be begin to feel sure that he would be the
new member. he endeavour therefore to drown his sorrow in this
come triumph.
but Lopez have be by no mean gratify with his canvass or with
the conduct of the borough generally. he have already begin to feel
that the Duchess and Mr. Sprugeon and the borough have throw he
over shamefully. immediately on his arrival in Silverbridge a local
attorney have with the blandest possible smile ask he for a cheque
for l500. of course there must be money spend at once, and of course
the money must come out of the candidate's pocket. he have know all
this beforehand, and yet the demand for the money have come upon he
as an injury. he give the cheque, but show clearly by his manner
that he resent the application. this do not tend to bind to he
more closely the service of those who be present when the demand
be make. and then, as he begin his canvass, he find that he could
not conjure at all with the name of the Duke, or even with that of
the Duchess; and be tell on the second day by Mr. Sprugeon himself
that he have well fight the battle "on his own hook." now his own
hook in Silverbridge be certainly not a strong hook. Mr. Sprugeon
be still of opinion that a good deal might be do by judicious
manipulation, and go so far as to suggest that another cheque
for l500 in the hand of Mr. Wise, the lawyer, would be effective.
but Lopez do not give the other cheque, and Sprugeon whisper to
he that the Duke have be too many for the Duchess. still he have
persevere, and a set of understrapper around he, who would make
nothing out of the election without his candidature, assure he from
time to time that he would even yet come out all right at the ballot.
with such a hope still exist he have not scruple to affirm in his
speech that the success of his canvass have be complete. but, on
the morning of the day on which he meet Fletcher in the street, Mr. Du
Boung have call upon he accompany by two of the Du Boung agent
and by Mr. Sprugeon himself,--and have suggest that he, Lopez,
should withdraw from the contest, so that Du Boung might be return,
and that the "liberal interest" of the borough might not be
sacrifice.
this be a heavy blow, and one which Ferdinand Lopez be not the
man to bear with equanimity. from the moment in which the Duchess
have mention the borough to he, he have regard the thing as
certain. after a while he have understand that his return must be
accompany by more trouble and great expense than he have at first
anticipated;--but still he have think that it be all but sure. he
have altogether misunderstood the nature of the influence exercise
by the Duchess, and the nature also of the Duke's resolution. Mr.
Sprugeon have of course wish to have a candidate, and have allure
he. perhaps he have in some degree be ill-treat by the borough.
but he be a man whom the feeling of injustice to himself would drive
almost to frenzy, though he never measure the amount of his own
injustice to other. when the proposition be make to he, he scowl
at they all, and declare that he would fight the borough to the
last. "then youwill let Mr. Fletcher in to a certainty," say Mr.
Sprout. now there be an idea in the borough that, although all the
candidate be ready to support the Duke's government, Mr. Du Boung
and Mr. Lopez be the two Liberals. Mr. Du Boung be sit in the
room when the appeal be make, and declare that he fear that such
would be the result. "Iwill tell you what Iwill do," say lopez; "Iwill
toss up which of we retire." Mr. Sprout, on behalf of Mr. Du Boung,
protest against that proposition. Mr. Du Boung, who be a gentleman
of great local influence, be in possession of four-fifth of the
liberal interest of the borough. even be he to retire Mr. Lopez
could not get in. Mr. Sprout declare that this be know to all the
borough at large. he, Sprout, be sorry that a gentleman like Mr.
Lopez should have be bring down there under false idea. he have
all through tell Mr. Sprugeon that the Duke have be in earnest, but
Mr. Sprugeon have not comprehend the position. it have be a pity.
but anybody who understand the borough could see with one eye that
Mr. Lopez have not a chance. if Mr. Lopez would retire Mr. Du Boung
would no doubt be return. if Mr. Lopez go to the poll, Mr.
Fletcher would probably be the new member. this be the picture as it
be paint by Mr. Sprout,--who have, even then, hear something of
the love of the two candidate, and who have think that Lopez would
be glad to injure Arthur Fletcher's chance of success. so far he be
not wrong;--but the sense of the injury do to himself oppress
Lopez so much that he could not guide himself by reason. the idea of
retire be very painful to he, and he do not believe these man.
he think it to be quite possible that they be there to facilitate
the return of Arthur Fletcher. he have never even hear of Du Boung
till he have come to Silverbridge two or three day ago. he still
could not believe that Du Boung would be return. he think over
it all for a moment, and then he give his answer. "Ihave be bring
down here to fight, and Iwill fight it to the last," he say. "then
youwill hand over the borough to Mr. Fletcher," say Sprout, get
up and usher Mr. Du Boung out of the room.
it be after that, but on the same day, that Lopez and Fletcher meet
each other in the street. the affair do not take a minute, and then
they part, each on his own way. in the course of that evening Mr.
Sprugeon tell his candidate that he, Sprugeon, could not concern
himself any far in that election. he be very sorry for what have
occurred;--very sorry indeed. it be no doubt a pity that the Duke
have be so firm. "But,"--and Mr. Sprugeon shrug his shoulder as
he spoke,--"when a nobleman like the Duke choose to have a way of
his own, he must have it." Mr. Sprugeon go on to declare that any
further candidature would be waste of money, waste of time, and waste
of energy, and then signify his intention of retire, as far as
this election go, into private life. when ask, he acknowledge
that they who have be act with he have come to the same resolve.
Mr. Lopez have in fact come there as the Duke's nominee, and as the
Duke have no nominee, Mr. Lopez be in fact "nowhere."
"I donot suppose that any man be ever so treat before, since
member be first return to Parliament," say lopez.
"well, sir;--yes, sir; it be a little hard. but, you see, sir,
her Grace mean the good. her Grace do mean the good, no doubt.
it may be, sir, there be a little misunderstanding;--a little
misunderstanding at the Castle, sir." then Mr. Sprugeon retire, and
Lopez understand that he be to see nothing more of the ironmonger.
of course there be nothing for he now but to retire;--to shake the
dust off his foot and get out of Silverbridge as quickly as he could.
but his friend have all desert he and he do not know how to
retire. he have pay l500, and he have a strong opinion that a portion
at least of the money should be return to he. he have a keen sense
of ill-usage, and at the same time a feeling that he ought not to run
out of the borough like a whipt dog, without show his face to any
one. but his strong sensation at this moment be one of hatred
against Arthur Fletcher. he be sure that Arthur Fletcher would be
the new member. he do not put the least trust in Mr. Du Boung. he
have teach himself really to think that Fletcher have insult he
by write to his wife, and that a further insult have be offer
to he by that meeting in the street. he have tell his wife that he
would ask Fletcher to give up the borough, and that he would make
that request with a horsewhip in his hand. it be too late now to
say anything of the borough, but it might not be too late for the
horsewhip. he have a great desire to make good that threat as far as
the horsewhip be concerned,--have an idea that he would thus low
Fletcher in his wife's eye. it be not that he be jealous,--not
jealous accord to the ordinary meaning of the word. his wife's
love to himself have be too recently give and too warmly maintain
for such a feeling as that. but there be a rancorous hatred in his
heart against the man, and a conviction that his wife at any rate
esteem the man whom he hat. and then would he not make his
retreat from the borough with more honour if before he leave he could
horsewhip his successful antagonist? we, who know the feeling of
englishman generally well than Mr. Lopez do, would say--certainly
not. we would think that such an incident would by no mean redound
to the credit of Mr. Lopez. and he himself, probably, at cool
moment, would have see the folly of such an idea. but anger about
the borough have drive he mad, and now in his wretchedness the
suggestion have for he a certain charm. the man have outrage all
propriety by write to his wife. of course he would be justify
in horsewhip he. but there be difficulty. a man be not
horsewhip simply because you wish to horsewhip he.
in the evening, as he be sit alone, he get a note from Mr.
Sprugeon. "Mr. Sprugeon's compliment. donot Mr. Lopez think an
address to the elector should appear in to-morrow's 'gazette,'--very
short and easy;--something like the following." then Mr. Sprugeon
add a very "short and easy letter" to the elector of the borough
of Silverbridge, in which Mr. Lopez be suppose to tell they that
although his canvass promise to he every success, he feel that
he owe it to the borough to retire, lest he should injure the
borough by split the liberal interest with their much respected
fellow-townsman, Mr. Du Boung. in the course of the evening he do
copy that letter, and send it out to the newspaper office. he must
retire, and it be well for he that he should retire after some
recognise fashion. but he write another letter also, and send it
over to the opposition hotel. the other letter be as follows:--
sir,--
before this election begin you be guilty of gross
impertinence in write a letter to my wife,--to her
extreme annoyance and to my most justifiable anger. any
gentleman would think that the treatment you have already
receive at her hand would have serve to save she from
such insult, but there be man who will never take a
lesson without a beating. and now, since you have be
here, you have presume to offer to shake hand with I in
the street, though you ought to have know that I should
not choose to meet you on friendly term after what have
take place. I now write to tell you that I shall carry a
horsewhip while I be here, and that if I meet you in the
street again before I leave the town I shall use it.
ferdinand LOPEZ.
Mr. Arthur Fletcher.
this letter he send at once to his enemy, and then sit late into
the night thinking of his threat and of the manner in which he
would follow it up. if he could only get one fair blow at Fletcher
his purpose, he think, would be achieve. in any matter of
horsewhip the truth hardly ever get itself correctly know.
the man who have give the first blow be generally suppose to
have thrash the other. what might follow, though it might be
inconvenient, must be bear. the man have insult he by write to
his wife, and the sympathy of the world, he think, would be with
he. to give he his due, it must be own that he have no personal
fear as to the encounter.
that night Arthur Fletcher have go over to Greshamsbury, and on the
follow morning he return with Mr. Gresham. "for heaven's sake,
look at that!" he say, hand the letter to his friend.
"do you ever write to his wife?" ask Gresham, when he read it.
"yes;--i do. all this be dreadful to me;--dreadful. well;--you know
how it use to be with I. I need not go into all that; need I?"
"donot say a word more than you think necessary."
"when you ask I to stand for the place I have not hear that he
think of be a candidate. I write and tell she so, and tell she
also that have I know it before I would not have come here."
"I donot quite see that," say Gresham.
"perhaps not;--perhap I be a fool. but we neednot go into that.
at any rate there be no insult to he. I write in the simple
language."
"look at it all round I think you have well not have write."
"you wouldnot say so if you see the letter. Ibe sure you wouldnot.
I have know she all my life. my brother be married to her cousin.
oh heaven! we have be all but engage. I would have do anything
for she. be it not natural that I should tell she? as far as the
language be concern the letter be one to be read at Charing
Cross."
"he say that she be annoy and insult."
"impossible! it be a letter that any man might have write to any
woman."
"well;--you have get to take care of yourself at any rate. what will
you do?"
"what ought I to do?"
"go to the police." Mr. Gresham have himself once, when young,
thrash a man who have offend he and have then think himself much
aggrieve because the police have be call in. but that have be
twenty year ago, and Mr. Gresham's opinion have be mature and,
perhaps, correct by age.
"no; I willnot do that," say Arthur Fletcher.
"thatbe what you ought to do."
"I couldnot do that."
"then take no notice of the letter and carry a fairly big stick. it
should be big enough to hurt he a good deal, but not to do he any
serious damage." at that moment an agent come in with news of the
man's retirement from the contest. "have he leave the town?" ask
Gresham. no;--he have not leave the town, nor have he be see by any
one that morning. "you have well let I go out and get the stick,
before you show yourself," say Gresham. and so the stick be
select.
as the two walk down the street together, almost the first thing
they see be Lopez stand at his hotel door with a cut whip
in his hand. he be at that moment quite alone, but on the opposite
side of the street there be a policeman,--one of the borough
constables,--very slowly make his way along the pavement. his
movement, indeed, be so slow that any one watch he would have
come to the conclusion that that particular part of the High Street
have some attraction for he at that special moment. alas, alas! how
age will alter the spirit of a man! twenty year since Frank Gresham
would have think any one to be a mean miscreant who would have
interpose a policeman between he and his foe. but it be to be
fear that while select that stick he have say a word which be
cause the constable to loiter on the pavement!
but Gresham turn no eye to the policeman as he walk on with his
friend, and Fletcher do not see the man. "what an ass he be!" say
Fletcher,--as he get the handle of the stick well into his hand.
then Lopez advance to they with his whip raise; but as he do so
the policeman come across the street quickly, but very quietly, and
stand right before he. the man be so thoroughly in the way of the
aggrieve wretch that it be out of the question that he should touch
Fletcher with his whip.
"do you usually walk about attend by a policeman?" say Lopez, with
all the scorn which he know how to throw into his voice.
"I donot know that the man be here," say Fletcher.
"you may tell that to the marine. all the borough shall know what
a coward you be." then he turn round and address the street,
but still under the shadow, as it be, of the policeman's helmet.
"this man who presume to offer himself as a candidate to represent
Silverbridge in Parliament have insult my wife. and now, because he
fear that I shall horsewhip he, he go about the street under the
care of a policeman."
"this be intolerable," say Fletcher, turn to his friend.
"Mr. Lopez," say Gresham. "I be sorry to say that I must give you
in charge;--unless you will undertake to leave the town without
interfere far with Mr. Fletcher either by word or deed."
"I will undertake nothing," say lopez. "the man have insult my
wife, and be a coward."
about two o'clock on the afternoon of that day Mr. Lopez appear
before the Silverbridge bench of magistrate, and be there swear to
keep the peace to Mr. Fletcher for the next six month. after that he
be allow to leave the town, and be back in London, with his wife
in Belgrave Mansions, to dinner that evening.
on the day but one after this the ballot be take, and at eight
o'clock on the evening of that day Arthur Fletcher be declare to be
duly elect. but Mr. Du Boung run he very hard.
the number were--
FLETCHER 315
DU BOUNG 308
Mr. Du Boung's friend during these two last day have not hesitate
to make what use they could on behalf of their own candidate of the
Lopez and Fletcher quarrel. if Mr. Fletcher have insult the other
man's wife, surely he could not be a proper member for Silverbridge.
and then the row be declare to have be altogether discreditable.
two stranger have come into this peaceful town and have absolutely
quarrel with stick and whip in the street, call each other
opprobrious name. would it not be well that they should elect
their own respectable townsman? all this be nearly effective. but,
in spite of all, Arthur Fletcher be at last return.
CHAPTER XXXV
Lopez back in London
lopez, as he return to town, recover something of his sens,
though he still fancy that Arthur Fletcher have do he a positive
injury by write to his wife. but something of that madness leave
he which have come from his deep sense of injury, both as to the
letter and as to the borough, and he begin to feel that he have be
wrong about the horsewhip. he be very low in spirit on this return
journey. the money which he have spend have be material to he, and
the loss of it for the moment leave he nearly bare. while he have have
before his eye the hope of be a member of Parliament he have be
able to buoy himself up. the position itself would have go very far
with Sexty Parker, and would, he think, have have some effect even
with his father-in-law. but now he be return a beat man. who
be there that have not feel that fall from high hope to utter despair
which come from some single failure? as he think of this he
be conscious that his anger have lead he into great imprudence at
Silverbridge. he have not be circumspect, as it specially behove a
man to be surround by such difficulty as his. all his life he have
be school his temper so as to keep it under control,--sometime
with great difficulty, but always with a consciousness that in
his life everything might depend on it. now he have, alas, allow
it to get the well of he. no doubt he have be insulted;--but,
nevertheless, he have be wrong to speak of a horsewhip.
his one great object must now be to conciliate his father-in-law,
and he have certainly increase his difficulty in do this by his
squabble down at Silverbridge. of course the whole thing would be
report in the London paper, and of course the story would be tell
against he, as the respectability of the town have be oppose to
he. but he know himself to be clever, and he still hop that he
might overcome these difficulty. then it occur to he that
in do this he must take care to have his wife entirely on his
side. he do not doubt her love; he do not in the least doubt she
rectitude;--but there be the lamentable fact that she think
well of Arthur Fletcher. it might be that he have be a little too
imperious with his wife. it suit his disposition to be imperious
within his own household;--to be imperious out of it, if that be
possible;--but he be conscious of have have a fall at Silverbridge,
and he must for a while take in some sail.
he have telegraph to she, acquaint she with his defeat, and
tell she to expect his return. "oh, Ferdinand," she say, "I be so
unhappy about this. it have make I so wretched!"
"well luck next time," he say with his sweetest smile. "it be
no good groaning over spilt milk. they havenot treat I really
well,--have they?"
"I suppose not,--though I do not quite understand it all."
he be burn to abuse Arthur Fletcher, but he abstain. he would
abstain at any rate for the present moment. "Dukes and duchess be
no doubt very grand people," he say, "but it be a pity they should
not know how to behave honestly, as they expect other to behave to
they. the Duchess have throw I over in the most infernal way. I
really cannot understand it. when I think of it I be lose in wonder.
the truth, I suppose, be, that there have be some quarrel between
he and she."
"who will get in?"
"oh, Du Boung, no doubt." he do not think so, but he could not bring
himself to declare the success of his enemy to she. "the people
there know he. your old friend be as much a stranger there as I be.
by-the-way, he and I have a little row in the place."
"a row, Ferdinand!"
"you neednot look like that, my pet. I havenot kill he. but he
come up to speak to I in the street, and I tell he what I think
about his writing to you." on hear this Emily look very
wretched. "I could not restrain myself from do that. come;--you
must admit that he shouldnot have write."
"he mean it in kindness."
"then he shouldnot have mean it. just think of it. suppose that I
have be make up to any girl,--which by-the-by I never do but to
one in my life,"--then he put his arm round her waist and kiss she,
"and she be to have marry some one else. what would have be
say of I if I have begin to correspond with she immediately? donot
suppose I be blame you, dear."
"certainly I do not suppose that," say Emily.
"but you must admit that it be rather strong." he pause, but she
say nothing. "only I suppose you can bring yourself to admit nothing
against he. however, so it be. there be a row, and a policeman
come up, and they make I give a promise that I donot mean to shoot
he or anything of that kind." as she hear this she turn pale, but
say nothing. "of course I donot want to shoot he. I wish he to
know what I think about it, and I tell he. I hate to trouble you
with all this, but I couldnot bear that you shouldnot know it all."
"it be very sad!"
"sad enough! I have have plenty to bear, I can tell you. everybody
seem to turn away from I there. everybody desert I." as he say
this he could perceive that he must obtain her sympathy by recount
his own misery and not Arthur Fletcher's sin. "I be all alone
and hardly know how to hold up my head against so much wretchedness.
and then I find myself call upon to pay an enormous sum for my
expense."
"oh, Ferdinand!"
"think of their demanding l500!"
"do you pay it?"
"yes, indeed. I have no alternative. of course they take care to
come for that before they talk of my resigning. I believe it be
all plan beforehand. the whole thing seem to I to have be a
swindle from begin to end. by heaven, Ibe almost inclined to
think that the Duchess know all about it herself!"
"about the l500!"
"perhaps not the exact sum, but the way in which the thing be to be
do. in these day one donot know whom to trust. man, and woman
too, have become so dishonest that nobody be safe anywhere. it have
be awfully hard upon me,--awfully hard. I donot suppose that there
be ever a moment in my life when the loss of l500 would have be so
much to I as it be now. the question be, what will your father do
for we?" Emily could not but remember her husband's intense desire to
obtain money from her father not yet three month since, as though
all the world depend on his get it,--and his subsequent
elation, as though all his sorrow be over for ever, because the
money have be promise. and now,--almost immediately,--he be again
in the same position. she endeavour to judge he kindly, but a
feeling of insecurity in reference to his affair strike she at once
and make her heart cold. everything have be achieve, then, by a
gift of l3000,--surely a small sum to effect such a result with
a man live as her husband live. and now the whole L3000 be
gone;--surely a large sum to have vanish in so short a time!
something of the uncertainty of business she could understand, but a
business must be perilously uncertain if subject to such vicissitude
as these! but as idea of this nature crowd themselves into her
mind she tell herself again and again that she have take he for
well and for bad. if the bad be already come she would
still be true to her promise. "you have well tell papa everything,"
she say.
"have it not well come from you?"
"no, Ferdinand. of course I will do as you bid I. I will do anything
that I can do. but you have well tell he. his nature be such that
he will respect you more if it come from yourself. and then it be so
necessary that he should know all;--all." she put whatever emphasis
she know how to use upon this word.
"you could tell he--all, as well as I."
"you would not bring yourself to tell it to I, nor could I
understand it. he will understand everything, and if he think that
you have tell he everything, he will at any rate respect you."
he sit silent for a while meditating, feel always and most acutely
that he have be ill-used,--never thinking for an instant that he have
ill-use other. "L3000, you know, be no fortune for your father to
give you!" she have no answer to make, but she groan in spirit as
she hear the accusation. "donot you feel that yourself?"
"I know nothing about money, Ferdinand. if you have tell I to speak
to he about it before we be married I would have do so."
"he ought to have speak to I. it be marvellous how close-fiste
an old man can be. he cannot take it with he." then he sit for
half-an-hour in moody silence, during which she be busy with
her needle. after that he jump up, with a manner altogether
altered,--gay, only that the attempt be too visible to deceive even
her,--and shake himself, as though he be rid himself of his
trouble. "you be right, old girl. you be always right,--almost. I
will go to your father to-morrow, and tell he everything. it benot
so very much that I want he to do. thing will all come right again.
Ibe ashamed that you should have see I in this way;--but I have
be disappoint about the election, and trouble about that Mr.
Fletcher. you shall not see I give way again like this. give I a
kiss, old girl."
she kiss he, but she could not even pretend to recover herself as
he have do. "have we not well give up the brougham?" she say.
"certainly not. for heaven's sake do not speak in that way! you do
not understand thing."
"no; certainly I do not."
"it benot that I havenot the mean of living, but that in my business
money be so often require for instant use. and situate as I be at
present an addition to my capital would enable I to do so much!" she
certainly do not understand it, but she have sufficient knowledge of
the world and sufficient common sense to be aware that their present
rate of expenditure ought to be matter of importance to a man who
feel the loss of l500 as he feel that loss at Silverbridge.
on the next morning Lopez be at Mr. Wharton's chamber early,--so
early that the lawyer have not yet reach they. he have resolved,--not
that he would tell everything, for such man never even intend to
tell everything,--but that he would tell a good deal. he must,
if possible, affect the mind of the old man in two way. he must
ingratiate himself;--and at the same time make it understand that
Emily's comfort in life would depend very much on her father's
generosity. the first must be first accomplish, if possible,--and
then the second, as to which he could certainly produce at any rate
belief. he have not marry a rich man's daughter without an intention
of get the rich man's money! Mr. Wharton would understand that.
if the bad come to the bad, Mr. Wharton must of course maintain
his daughter,--and his daughter's husband! but thing have not come to
the bad as yet, and he do not intend on the present occasion to
represent that view of his affair to his father-in-law.
Mr. Wharton when he enter his chamber find Lopez seat there. he
be himself at this moment very unhappy. he have renew his quarrel
with Everett,--or Everett rather have renew the quarrel with he.
there have be word between they about money lose at card. hard
word have be use, and Everett have tell his father that if either
of they be a gambler it be not he. Mr. Wharton have resent this
bitterly and have drive his son from his presence,--and now the
quarrel make he very wretched. he certainly be sorry that he
have call his son a gambler, but his son have be, as he think,
inexcusable in the retort which he have make. he be a man to whom
his friend give credit for much sternness;--but still he be one
who certainly have no happiness in the world independent of his
child. his daughter have leave he, not, as he think, under happy
auspices,--and he be now, at this moment, soft-hearted and tender in
his regard as to she. what be there in the world for he but his
child? and now he feel himself to be alone and destitute. he be
already tired of whist at the Eldon. that which have be a delight to
he once or twice a week, become almost loathsome when it be renew
from day to day;--and not the less when his son tell he that he also
be a gambler. "so you have come back from Silverbridge?" he say.
"yes, sir; I have come back, not exactly triumphant. a man should not
expect to win always." Lopez have resolve to pluck up his spirit and
carry himself like a man.
"you seem to have get into some scrape down there, besides lose
your election."
"oh; you have see that in the paper already. I have come to tell
you of it. as Emily be concerned in it you ought to know."
"emily concerned! how be she concern?"
then Lopez tell the whole story,--after his own fashion, and yet
with no palpable lie. Fletcher have write to she a letter which
he have think to be very offensive. on hear this, Mr. Wharton
look very grave, and ask for the letter. Lopez say that he have
destroy it, not think that such a document should be preserve.
then he go on to explain that it have have reference to the election,
and that he have think it to be highly improper that Fletcher should
write to his wife on that or on any other subject. "it depend very
much on the letter," say the old man.
"but on any subject,--after what have pass."
"they be very old friend."
"of course I will not argue with you, Mr. Wharton; but I own that it
anger I. it anger I very much,--very much indeed. I take it to
be an insult to she, and when he accost I in the street down at
Silverbridge I tell he so. I may not have be very wise, but I do
it on her behalf. surely you can understand that such a letter might
make a man angry."
"what do he say?"
"that he would do anything for her sake,--even retire from
Silverbridge if his friend would let he." Mr. Wharton scratch his
head, and Lopez see that he be perplexed. "should he have offer to
do anything for her sake, after what have pass?"
"I know the man so well," say Mr. Wharton, "that I cannot and do not
believe he to have harbour an improper thought in reference to my
child."
"perhaps it be an indiscretion only."
"perhaps so. I cannot say. and then they take you before the
magistrate?"
"Yes;--in my anger I have threaten he. then there be a policeman
and a row. and I have to swear that I would not hurt he. of course I
have no wish to hurt he."
"I suppose it ruin your chance at Silverbridge?"
"I suppose it do." this be a lie, as Lopez have retire before the
row take place. "what I care for most now be that you should not
think that I have misbehave myself."
the story have be tell very well, and Mr. Wharton be almost
disposed to sympathise with his son-in-law. that Arthur Fletcher have
mean nothing that could be regard as offensive to his daughter he
be quite sure;--but it might be that in make an offer intend to
be generous he have use language which the condition of the person
concern make indiscreet. "I suppose," he say, "that you spend
a lot of money at Silverbridge?" this give Lopez the opening that
he want, and he describe the manner in which the l500 have be
extract from he. "you cannot play that game for nothing," say Mr.
Wharton.
"and just at present I could very ill afford it. I should not have
do it have I not feel it a pity to neglect such a chance of rise
in the world. after all, a seat in the British House of Commons be an
honour."
"Yes;--yes;--yes."
"and the Duchess, when she speak to I about it, be so certain."
"I will pay the l500," say Mr. Wharton.
"oh, sir, that be generous!" then he get up and take the old man's
hand. "some day, when you be at liberty, I hope that you will allow
I to explain to you the exact state of my affair. when I write
to you from Como I tell you that I would wish to do so. you do not
object?"
"no;" say the lawyer,--but with infinite hesitation in his voice.
"no; I donot object. but I do not know how I could serve they. I
shall be busy just now, but I will give you the cheque. and if you
and Emily have nothing well to do, come and dine to-morrow." lopez
with real tear in his eye take the cheque, and promise to come on
the morrow. "and in the meantime I wish you would see Everett." of
course he promise that he would see Everett.
again he be exalt, on this occasion not so much by the acquisition
of the money as by the grow conviction that his father-in-law be
a cow capable of be milk. and the quarrel between Everett and
his father might clearly be useful to he. he might either serve the
old man by reduce Everett to proper submission, or he might manage
to creep into the empty space which the son's defection would make
in the father's heart and the father's life. he might at any rate
make himself necessary to the old man, and become such a part of the
household in Manchester Square as to be indispensable. then the old
man would every day become old and more in want of assistance. he
think that he see the way to worm himself into confidence, and,
soon, into possession. the old man be not a man of iron as he have
fear, but quite human, and if properly manage, soft and malleable.
he see Sexty Parker in the city that day, and use his cheque for
l500 in some triumphant way, partly cajole and partly bully his
poor victim. to Sexty also he have to tell his own story about the row
down at Silverbridge. he have threaten to thrash the fellow in the
street, and the fellow have not dare to come out of his house without
a policeman. yes;--he have lose his election. the swindling of those
fellow at Silverbridge have be too much for he. but he flatter
himself that he have get the well of Master Fletcher. that be the
tone in which he tell the story to his friend in the city.
then, before dinner, he find Everett at the club. Everett Wharton
be to be find there now almost every day. his excuse to himself lay
in the political character of the institution. the club intend to
do great things,--to find liberal candidate for all the borough and
county in England which be not hitherto furnish, and then to
supply the candidate with money. such be the great purpose of the
Progress. it have not as yet send out many candidate or collect
much money. as yet it be, politically, almost quiescent. and
therefore Everett Wharton, whose sense of duty take he there, spend
his afternoon either in the whist-room or at the billiard-table.
the story of the Silverbridge row have to be tell again, and be tell
nearly with the same incident as have be narrate to the father.
he could of course abuse Arthur Fletcher more roundly, and be more
confident in his assertion that Fletcher have insult his wife. but
he come as quickly as he could to the task which he have on hand.
"whatbe all this between you and your father?"
"simply this. I sometimes play a game of whist, and therefore he
call I a gambler. then I remind he that he also sometimes
play a game of whist, and I ask he what deduction be to be
draw."
"he be awfully angry with you."
"of course I be a fool. my father have the whip-hand of I, because
he have money and I have none, and it be simply kick against the
prick to speak as I do. and then too there benot a fellow in London
have a high respect for his father than I have, nor yet a warmer
affection. but it be hard to be drive in that way. Gambler be a
nasty word."
"yes, it be; very nasty. but I suppose a man do gamble when he
lose so much money that he have to ask his father to pay it for he."
"if he do so often, he gamble. I never ask he for money to pay
what I have lose before in my life."
"I wonder you tell he."
"I never lie to he, and he ought to know that. but he be just the
man to be hard to his own son than to anybody else in the world.
what do he want I to do now?"
"I donot know that he want you to do anything," say lopez.
"do he send you to I?"
"Well;--no; I cannot say that he do. I tell he I should see you as a
matter of course, and he say something rough,--about your be an
ass."
"I dare say he do."
"but if you ask I," say lopez, "I think he would take it kindly of
you if you be to go and see he. come and dine to-day, just as if
nothing have happen."
"I could not do that,--unless he ask I."
"I cannot say that he ask you, Everett. I would say so, in spite
of its be a lie, if I donot fear that your father might say
something unkind, so that the lie would be detect by both of you."
"and yet you ask I to go and dine there!"
"yes, I do. itbe only go away if he do cut up rough. and if he
take it well,--why then,--the whole thing be do."
"if he want I, he can ask I."
"you talk about it, my boy, just as if a father be the same as
anybody else. if I have a father with a lot of money, by George he
should knock I about with his stick if he like, and I would be just
the same the next day."
"unfortunately I be of a stiff nature," say Everett, take some
pride to himself for his stiffness, and be perhaps as little
"stiff" as any young man of his day.
that evening, after dinner in Manchester Square, the conversation
between the father-in-law and the son-in-law turn almost
exclusively on the son and brother-in-law. little or nothing be
say about the election, and the name of Arthur Fletcher be not
mention. but out of his full heart the father speak. he be
wretched about Everett. do Everett mean to cut he? "he want you to
withdraw some name you call he," say lopez.
"withdraw some name,--as he might ask some hot-headed fellow to do,
of his own age, like himself; some fellow that he have quarrel
with! do he expect his father to send he a write apology? he have
be gamble, and I tell he that he be a gambler. be that too much
for a father to say?" Lopez shrug his shoulder, and declare that
it be a pity. "he will break my heart if he go on like this," say
the old man.
"I ask he to come and dine to-day, but he donot seem to like it."
"like it! no. he like nothing but that infernal club."
when the evening be over Lopez feel that he have do a good stroke
of work. he have not exactly make up his mind to keep the father and
son apart. that be not a part of his strategy,--at any rate as yet.
but he do intend to make himself necessary to the old man,--to
become the old man's son, and if possible the favourite son. and now
he think that he have already do much towards the achievement of
his object.
CHAPTER xxxvi
the Jolly Blackbird
there be great triumph at Longbarns when the news of Arthur's
victory reach the place;--and when he arrive there himself with
his friend, Mr. Gresham, he be receive as a conquering hero. but
of course the tiding of "the row" have go before he, and it be
necessary that both he and Mr. Gresham should tell the story;--nor
could it be tell privately. Sir Alured Wharton be there, and Mrs.
Fletcher. the old lady have hear of the row, and of course require
to be tell all the particular. this be not pleasant to the hero, as
in talk of the man it be impossible for they not to talk of the
man's wife. "what a terrible misfortune for poor Mr. Wharton," say
the old lady, nod her head at Sir Alured. Sir Alured sigh and
say nothing. certainly a terrible misfortune, and one which affect
more or less the whole family of Whartons!
"do you mean to say that he be go to attack Arthur with a whip?"
ask John Fletcher.
"I only know that he be stand there with a whip in his hand,"
say Mr. Gresham.
"I think he would have have the bad of that."
"you would have laugh," say Arthur, "to see I walk
majestically along the High Street with a cudgel which Gresham have
just buy for I as be of the proper medium size. I donot doubt
he mean to have a fight. and then you should have see the policeman
slop over and put himself in the way. I never quite understand
where that policeman come from."
"they be very well off for policeman in Silverbridge," say Gresham.
"theyhave always get they go about."
"he must be mad," say John.
"poor unfortunate young woman!" say Mrs. Fletcher, hold up both
her hand. "I must say that I cannot but blame Mr. Wharton. if he have
be firm, it never would have come to that. I wonder whether he ever
see he."
"of course he do," say John. "why shouldnot he see he? youwould see
he if hehave marry a daughter of your."
"never!" exclaim the old woman. "if I have have a child so lose to
all respect as that, I do not say that I would not have see she.
human nature might have prevail. but I would never willingly have
put myself into contact with one who have so degrade I and mine."
"I shall be very anxious to know what Mr. Wharton do about his
money," say John.
Arthur allow himself but a couple of day among his friend,
and then hurry up to London to take his seat. when there he be
astonish to find how many question be ask he about "the row,"
and how much be know about it,--and at the same time how little
be really know. everybody have hear that there have be a row, and
everybody know that there have be a lady in the case. but there
seem to be a general idea that the lady have be in some way
misuse, and that Arthur Fletcher have come forward like a Paladin to
protect she. a letter have be write, and the husband, ogre-like,
have intercept the letter. the lady be the most unfortunate of
human beings,--or would have be but for that consolation which she
must have in the constancy of her old lover. as to all these matter
the story vary; but everybody be agree on one point. all the
world know that Arthur Fletcher have go to Silverbridge, have stand
for the borough, and have take the seat away from his rival,--because
that rival have rob he of his bride. how the robbery have be
effect the world could not quite say. the world be still of
opinion that the lady be violently attach to the man she have
not marry. but Captain Gunner explain it all clearly to Major
Pountney by assert that the poor girl have be coerce into the
marriage by her father. and thus Arthur Fletcher find himself almost
as much a hero in London as at Longbarns.
Fletcher have not be above a week in town, and have become heartily
sick of the rumour which in various shape make their way round to
his own ear, when he receive an invitation from Mr. Wharton to
go and dine with he at a tavern call the Jolly Blackbird. the
invitation surprise him,--that he should be ask by such a man
to dine at such a place,--but he accept it as a matter of course.
he be indeed much interested in a Bill for the drainage of common
land which be to be discuss in the House that night; there be
a good deal of common land round Silverbridge, and he have some idea
of make his first speech,--but he calculate that he might get his
dinner and yet be back in time for the debate. so he go to the
Jolly Blackbird,--a very quaint, old-fashioned law dining-house in
the neighbourhood of Portugal Street, which have manage not to get
itself pull down a dozen year ago on behalf of the Law Courts
which be to bless some come generation. Arthur have never be
there before and be surprised at the black wainscoting, the black
table, the old-fashioned grate, the two candle on the table, and
the silent waiter. "I want to see you, Arthur," say the old man,
press his hand in a melancholy way, "but I couldnot ask you to
Manchester Square. they come in sometimes in the evening, and it
might have be unpleasant. at your young man's club they let
stranger dine. we havenot anything of that kind at the Eldon. youwill
find theywill give you a very good bit of fish here, and a fairish
steak." Arthur declare that he think it a capital place,--the good
fun in the world. "and theyhave a very good bottle of claret;--better
than we get at the Eldon, I think. I donot know that I can say much
for their champagne. wewill try it. you young fellow always drink
champagne."
"I hardly ever touch it," say Arthur. "Sherry and claret be my
wine."
"very well;--very well. I do want to see you, my boy. thing havenot
turn out just as we wish--have they?"
"not exactly, sir."
"no indeed. you know the old saying, 'God dispose it all.' I have to
make the good of it,--and so no doubt do you."
"therebe no doubt about it, sir," say Arthur, speak in a low but
almost angry voice. they be not in a room by themselves, but in a
recess which separate they from the room. "I donot know that I want
to talk about it, but to I it be one of those thing for which there
be no remedy. when a man lose his leg, he hobble on, and sometimes
have a good time of it at last;--but there he be, without a leg."
"it benot my fault, Arthur."
"there have be no fault but my own. I go in for the running and
get distance. thatbe simply all about it, and therebe no more to be
say."
"you benot surprised that I should wish to see you."
"Ibe ever so much obliged. I think itbe very kind of you."
"I cannot go in for a new life as you can. I cannot take up politic
and Parliament. itbe too late for I."
"Ibe go to. therebe a Bill come on this very night that Ibe
interested about. you mustnot be angry if I rush off a little before
ten. we be go to lend money to the parish on the security
of the rate for drain bit of common land. then we shall sell
the land and endow the union, so as to lessen the poor rate, and
increase the cereal product of the country. we think we can bring
300,000 acre under the plough in three year, which now produce
almost nothing, and in five year would pay all the expense. put
the value of the land at L25 an acre, which be low, we shall have
create property to the value of seven million and a half. thatbe
something, you know."
"oh, yes," say Mr. Wharton, who feel himself quite unable to follow
with any interest the aspiration of the young legislator.
"of course itbe complicated," continue Arthur, "but when you come to
look into it it come out clear enough. it be one of the instance
of the omnipotence of capital. Parliament can do such a thing, not
because it have any creative power of its own, but because it have the
command of unlimited capital." Mr. Wharton look at he, sigh
inwardly as he reflect that unrequited love should have bring a
clear-head young barrister into mist so thick and labyrinth so
mazy as these. "a very good beefsteak indeed," say Arthur. "I donot
know when I eat a well one. thank you, no;--I'll stick to the
claret." Mr. Wharton have offer he Madeira. "Claret and brown meat
always go well together. pancake! I donot object to a pancake. a
pancakebe a very good thing. now would you believe it, sir; they
cannot make a pancake at the House."
"and yet they sometimes fall very flat too," say the lawyer, make
a real lawyer's joke.
"itbe all in the mixing, sir," say Arthur, carry it on. "wehave
mixture enough just at present, but it benot of the proper sort;--too
much of the flour, and not enough of the egg."
but Mr. Wharton have still something to say, though he hardly know how
to say it. "you must come and see we in the Square after a bit."
"oh;--of course."
"I wouldnot ask you to dine there to-day, because I think we should
be less melancholy here;--but you mustnot cut we altogether. you
havenot see Everett since youhave be in town?"
"no, sir. I believe he live a good deal,--a good deal with--Mr.
Lopez. there be a little row down at Silverbridge. of course it will
wear off, but just at present his line and my line donot converge."
"Ibe very unhappy about he, Arthur."
"therebe nothing the matter?"
"my girl have marry that man. Ihave nothing to say against him;--but
of course it benot to my taste; and I feel it as a separation. and
now Everett have quarrel with I."
"quarrel with you!"
then the father tell the story as well as he know how. his son
have lose some money, and he have call his son a gambler;--and
consequently his son would not come near he. "it be bad to lose they
both, Arthur."
"that be so unlike Everett."
"it seem to I that everybody have changed,--except myself. who would
have dream that she would have marry that man? not that I have
anything to say against he except that he be not of our sort. he
have be very good about Everett, and be very good about he. but
Everett will not come to I unless I--withdraw the word;--say that I
be wrong to call he a gambler. that be a proposition that no son
should make to a father."
"it be very unlike Everett," repeat the other. "have he write to
that effect?"
"he have not write a word."
"why donot you see he yourself, and have it out with he?"
"be I to go to that club after he?" say the father.
"write to he and bid he come to you. Iwill give up my seat if he
donot come to you. Everett be always a quaint fellow, a little idle,
you know,--moone about after ideas--"
"hebe no fool, you know," say the father.
"not at all;--only vague. but hebe the last man in the world to
have nasty vulgar idea of his own importance as distinguish from
your."
"lopez says--"
"I wouldnot quite trust Lopez."
"he benot a bad fellow in his way, Arthur. of course he be not what
I would have like for a son-in-law. I neednot tell you that. but he
be kind and gentle-mannered, and have always be attach to Everett.
you know he save Everett's life at the risk of his own." Arthur
could not but smile as he perceive how the old man be be win
round by the son-in-law, whom he have treat so violently before the
man have become his son-in-law. "by-the-way, what be all that about a
letter you write to he?"
"Emily,--I mean Mrs. lopez,--will tell you if you ask she."
"I donot want to ask she. I donot want to appear to set the wife
against the husband. I be sure, my boy, you would write nothing that
could affront she."
"I think not, Mr. Wharton. if I know myself at all, or my own nature,
it be not probable that I should affront your daughter."
"no; no; no. I know that, my dear boy. I be always sure of that.
take some more wine."
"no more, thank you. I must be off because Ibe so anxious about this
Bill."
"I couldnot ask Emily about this letter. now that they be married I
have to make the good of it,--for her sake. I couldnot bring myself
to say anything to she which might seem to accuse he."
"I think it right, sir, to explain to she that be I not in the
hand of other people I would not do anything to interfere with her
happiness by oppose her husband. my language be most guard."
"he destroy the letter."
"I have a copy of it, if it come to that," say Arthur.
"it will be good, perhaps, to say nothing far about it.
Well;--good night, my boy, if you must go." then Fletcher go off to
the House, wonder as he go at the change which have apparently
come over the character of his old friend. Mr. Wharton have always
be a strong man, and now he seem to be as weak as water. as to
Everett, Fletcher be sure that there be something wrong, but he
could not see his way to interfere himself. for the present he be
divide from the family. nevertheless he tell himself again and again
that that division should not be permanent. of all the world she must
always be to he the dear.
CHAPTER XXXVII
the Horns
the first month of the Session go on very much as the last session
have go. the ministry do nothing brilliant. as far as the outer
world could see, they seem to be firm enough. there be no opposing
party in the House strong enough to get a vote against they on any
subject. outsider, who only study politic in the column of their
newspaper, imagine the Coalition to be very strong. but they who
be inside, member themselves, and the club quidnunc who be
always rub their shoulder against member, know well. the
opposition to the Coalition be within the Coalition itself. Sir
Orlando Drought have not be allow to build his four ship, and be
consequently eager in his fear that the country would be invade
by the combine force of Germany and France, that India would be
sell by those power to Russia, that Canada would be annex to the
States, that a great independent roman catholic hierarchy would be
establish in Ireland, and that Malta and Gibraltar would be take
away from us;--all which evil would be avert by the building of
four big ship. a wet blanket of so terrible a size be in itself
pernicious to the Cabinet, and heartrende to the poor Duke. but Sir
Orlando could do bad even than this. as he be not to build his
four ship, neither should Mr. Monk be allow to readjust the county
suffrage. when the skeleton of Mr. Monk's scheme be discuss in the
Cabinet, Sir Orlando would not agree to it. the gentleman, he say,
who have join the present Government with he, would never consent
to a measure which would be so utterly destructive of the county
interest. if Mr. Monk insist on his measure in its propose form,
he must, with very great regret, place his resignation in the Duke's
hand, and he believe that his friend would find themselves
compel to follow the same course. then our Duke consult the
old Duke. the old Duke's advice be the same as ever. the Queen's
Government be the main object. the present ministry enjoy the
support of the country, and he consider it the duty of the First
Lord of the Treasury to remain at his post. the country be in no
hurry, and the question of suffrage in the county might be well
delay. then he add a little counsel which might be call quite
private, as it be certainly intend for no other ear than those
of his young friend. "give Sir Orlando rope enough and hewill hang
himself. his own party be become tired of he. if you quarrel with
he this Session, Drummond, and Ramsden, and Beeswax, would go out
with he, and the Government would be break up; but next session you
may get rid of he safely."
"I wish it be break up," say the Prime Minister.
"you have your duty to do by the country and by the Queen, and you
mustnot regard your own wish. Next Session let Monk be ready with
his Bill again,--the same measure exactly. let Sir Orlando resign
then if he will. should he do so I doubt whether any one would go
with he. Drummond do not like he much well than you and I do."
the poor Prime Minister be force to obey. the old Duke be his
only trust counsellor, and he find himself constrain by his
conscience to do as that counsellor counsel he. when, however,
Sir Orlando, in his place as Leader of the House, in answer to some
question from a hot and disappointed Radical, aver that the whole
of her Majesty's Government have be quite in unison on this question
of the county suffrage, he be hardly able to restrain himself. "if
there be difference of opinion they must be keep in the background,"
say the Duke of St. Bungay. "nothing can justify a direct
falsehood," say the Duke of Omnium. thus it come to pass that the
only real measure which the Government have in hand be one by which
Phineas Finn hop so to increase the power of irish municipality
as to make the Home Rulers believe that a certain amount of Home Rule
be be concede to they. it be not a great measure, and poor
Phineas himself hardly believe in it. and thus the Duke's ministry
come to be call the Faineants.
but the Duchess, though she have be much snub, still persevere.
now and again she would declare herself to be break-hearted, and
would say that thing might go their own way, that she would send in
her resignation, that she would retire into private life and milk
cow, that she would shake hand with no more parliamentary cad and
"caddesses,"--a word which her grace condescend to coin for her own
use; that she would spend the next three year in travel about
the world; and lastly, that, let there come of it whatever might, Sir
Orlando Drought should never again be invite into any house of which
she be the mistress. this last threat, which be perhaps the most
indiscreet of they all, she absolutely make good,--thereby add
very greatly to her husband's difficulty.
but by the middle of June the party at the house in Carlton Terrace
be as frequent and as large as ever. indeed it be all party with
she. the Duchess possess a pretty little villa down at Richmond, on
the river, call the Horns, and give party there when there be
none in London. she have picnic, and flower party, and tea party,
and afternoon, and evening, on the lawn,--till half London be
always on its way to Richmond or back again. how she work! and yet
from day to day she swear that the world be ungrateful, and that she
would work no more! I think that the world be ungrateful. everybody
go. she be so far successful that nobody think of despise
her party. it be quite the thing to go to the Duchess's, whether
at Richmond or in London. but people abuse she and laugh at
she. they say that she intrigue to get political support for her
husband,--and, bad than that, they say that she fail. she
do not fail altogether. the world be not take captive as she
have intend. young member of Parliament do not become hotly
enthusiastic in support of she and her husband as she have hop that
they would do. she have not become an institution of granite, as she
dream have fondly tell she might be possible;--for there have be
moment in which she have almost think that she could rule England
by give dinner and supper party, by ice and champagne. but in a
dull, phlegmatic way, they who eat the ice and drink the champagne
be true to she. there be a feeling abroad that "Glencora" be
a "good sort of fellow" and ought to be support. and when the
ridicule become too strong, or the abuse too sharp, man would take
up the cudgel for she, and fight she battles;--a little too openly,
perhaps, as they would do it under her eye, and in her hearing, and
would tell she what they have do, mistake on such occasion her
good humour for sympathy. there be just enough of success to prevent
that abandonment of her project which she so often threaten, but
not enough to make her triumphant. she be too clever not to see
that she be ridicule. she know that man call she Glencora among
themselves. she be herself quite alive to the fact that she herself
be want in dignity, and that with all the mean at her disposal,
with all her courage and all her talent, she do not quite play the
part of the really great lady. but she do not fail to tell herself
that labour continue would at last be successful, and she be strong
to bear the buffet of the ill-natured. she do not think that she
bring first-class material to her work, but she believed,--a
belief as erroneous as, alas, it be common,--that first-rate result
might be achieve by second-rate mean. "we have such a battle about
your grace last night," Captain Gunner say to she.
"and be you my knight?"
"indeed I be. I never hear such nonsense."
"what be they say?"
"oh, the old story;--that you be like Martha, busy yourself
about many thing."
"why shouldnot I busy myself about many thing? it be a pity, Captain
Gunner, that some of you man have not something to busy yourself
about." all this be unpleasant. she could on such an occasion make
up her mind to drop any Captain Gunner who have venture to take too
much upon himself; but she feel that in the effort which she have
make after popularity, she have submit herself to unpleasant
familiarities;--and though persistent in her course, she be still
angry with herself.
when she have begin her campaign as the Prime Minister's wife, one
of her difficulty have be with regard to money. an abnormal
expenditure become necessary, for which her husband's express
sanction must be obtain, and step take in which his personal
assistance would be necessary;--but this have be do, and there
be now no further impediment in that direction. it seem to be
understand that she be to spend what money she please. there have
be various contest between they, but in every contest she have
gain something. he have be majestically indignant with she in
reference to the candidature at Silverbridge,--but, as be usual with
many of we, have be unable to maintain his anger about two thing
at the same time. or, rather, in the majesty of his anger about she
interference, he have disdain to descend to the small fault of
her extravagance. he have seem to concede everything else to she,
on condition that he should be allow to be imperious in reference
to the borough. in that matter she have give way, never have
open her mouth about it after that one unfortunate word to Mr.
Sprugeon. but, have do so, she be entitle to squander her
thousand without remorse,--and she squander they. "it be your
five-and-twenty thousand pound, my dear," she once say to Mrs.
Finn, who often take upon herself to question the prudence of all
this expenditure. this refer to a certain sum of money which
have be leave by the old Duke to Madame Goesler, as she be then
called,--a legacy which that lady have repudiate. the money have,
in truth, be give away to a relation of the Duke's by the joint
consent of the lady and of the Duke himself, but the Duchess be
pleased to refer to it occasionally as a still exist property.
"my five-and-twenty thousand pound, as you call it, would not go
very far."
"whatbe the use of money if you donot spend it? the Duke would go
on collect it and buy more property, which always mean more
trouble,--not because he be avaricious, but because for the time
that come easy than spend. suppose he have marry a woman
without a shilling, he would still have be a rich man. as it be,
my property be more even than his own. if we can do any good by
spend the money, why shouldnot it be spend?"
"if you can do any good!"
"it all come round to that. it benot because I like always to live
in a windmill! I have come to hate it. at this moment I would give
world to be down at Matching with no one but the child, and to
go about in a straw hat and a muslin gown. I have a fancy that I
could sit under a tree and read a sermon, and think it the sweetest
recreation. but Ihave make the attempt to do all this, and it be so
mean to fail!"
"but where be to be the end of it?"
"there shall be no end as long as he be Prime Minister. he be the
first man in England. some people would say the first in europe,--or
in the world. a Prince should entertain like a Prince."
"he need not be always entertaining."
"hospitality should run from a man with his wealth and his position,
like water from a fountain. as his hand be know to be full, so it
should be know to be open. when the delight of his friend be in
question he should know nothing of cost. pearl should drop from he
as from a fairy. but I donot think you understand I."
"not when the pearl be to be pick up by Captain Gunners, Lady
Glen."
"I cannot make the man any better,--nor yet the woman. they be poor
mean creature. the world be make up of such. I donot know that
Captain Gunner be bad than Sir Orlando Drought or Sir Timothy
Beeswax. People see by the mind be exactly different to thing see
by the eye. they grow small and small as you come near down to
they, whereas thing become big. I remember when I use to think
that member of the Cabinet be almost god, and now they seem to be
no big than the shoeblacks,--only less picturesque. he tell I the
other day of the time when he give up go into power for the sake
of take I abroad. ah I! how much be happen then,--and how
much have happen since that! we donot know you then."
"he have be a good husband to you."
"and I have be a good wife to he! I have never have he for an
hour out of my heart since that, or ever for a moment forget his
interest. I cannot live with he because he shut himself up read
blue-book, and be always at his office or in the house;--but I would
if I could. be I not do it all for he? you donot think that the
Captain Gunners be particularly pleasant to I! think of your life
and of mine. you have have lover."
"one in my life,--when I be quite entitle to have one."
"well; I be Duchess of Omnium, and I be the wife of the Prime
Minister, and I have a large property of my own than any other young
woman that ever be bear; and I be myself too,--Glencora M'Cluskie
that be, and Ihave make for myself a character that Ibe not ashamed
of. but Iwould be the curate's wife to-morrow, and make pudding, if I
could only have my own husband and my own child with I. whatbe
the use of it all? I like you well than anybody else, but you do
nothing but scold I." still the party go on, and the Duchess
labour hard among her guest, and wear her jewel, and stand on
her foot all the night, night after night, be civil to one person,
bright to a second, confidential to a third, and sarcastic to an
unfortunate fourth;--and in the morning she would work hard with
her list, see who have come to she and who have stay away, and
arrange who should be ask and who should be omit.
in the meantime the Duke altogether avoid these thing. at
first he have be content to show himself, and escape as soon as
possible;--but now he be never see at all in his own house, except
at certain heavy dinner. to Richmond he never go at all, and in
his own house in town very rarely even pass through the door that
lead into the reception room. he have not time for ordinary society.
so say the Duchess. and many, perhaps the majority of those who
frequent the house, really believe that his official duty be
too onerous to leave he time for conversation. but in truth the
hour go heavily with he as he sit alone in his study, sigh for
some sweet parliamentary task, and regret the day in which he
be privileged to sit in the House of Commons till two o'clock in the
morning, in the hope that he might get a clause or two pass in his
Bill for decimal coinage.
it be at the Horns at an afternoon party, give there in the garden
by the Duchess, early in July, that Arthur Fletcher first see Emily
after her marriage, and Lopez after the occurrence in Silverbridge.
as it happen he come out upon the lawn close after they, and find
they speak to the Duchess as they pass on. she have put herself
out of the way to be civil to Mr. and Mrs. Lopez, feel that she
have in some degree injure he in reference to the election, and have
therefore invite both he and his wife on more than one occasion.
Arthur Fletcher be there as a young man well know in the world,
and as a supporter of the Duke's government. the Duchess have take
up Arthur Fletcher,--as she be willnot to take up new man, and have
personally become tired of Lopez. of course she have hear of the
election, and have be tell that Lopez have behave badly. of Mr.
Lopez she do not know enough to care anything, one way or the
other;--but she still encourage he because she have cause he
disappointment. she have now detain they a minute on the terrace
before the window while she say a word, and Arthur Fletcher become
one of the little party before he know whom he be meet. "I be
delighted," she say, "that you two Silverbridge hero should meet
together here as friend." it be almost incumbent on she to say
something, though it would have be well for she not to have
allude to their heroism. Mrs. Lopez put out her hand, and Arthur
Fletcher of course take it. then the two man bow slightly to each
other, raise their hat. Arthur pause a moment with they, as they
pass on from the Duchess, think that he would say something in
a friendly tone. but he be silence by the frown on the husband's
face, and be almost constrain to go away without a word. it be
very difficult for he even to be silent, as her greeting have be
kind. but yet it be impossible for he to ignore the displeasure
display in the man's countenance. so he touch his hat, and ask
she to remember he affectionately to her father, turn off the path
and go away.
"why do you shake hand with that man?" say lopez. it be the first
time since their marriage that his voice have be that of an angry
man and an offended husband.
"why not, Ferdinand? he and I be very old friend, and we have not
quarrel."
"you must take up your husband's friendship and your husband's
quarrel. do I not tell you that he have insult you?"
"he never insult I."
"emily, you must allow I to be the judge of that. he insult you,
and then he behave like a poltroon down at Silverbridge, and I will
not have you know he any more. when I say so I suppose that will be
enough." he wait for a reply, but she say nothing. "I ask you to
tell I that you will obey I in this."
"of course he will not come to my house, nor should I think of go
to his, if you disapprove."
"go to his house! he be unmarried."
"suppose he have a wife! Ferdinand, perhaps it will be well that
you and I should not talk about he."
"by G----," say Lopez, "there shall be no subject on which I will be
afraid to talk to my own wife. I insist on your assure I that you
will never speak to he again."
he have take she along one of the upper walk because it be
desolate, and he could there speak to she, as he think, without
be hear. she have, almost unconsciously, make a faint attempt
to lead he down upon the lawn, no doubt feel averse to private
conversation at the moment; but he have persevere, and have resent
the little effort. the idea in his mind that she be unwilling
to hear he abuse Arthur Fletcher, unwilling to renounce the man,
anxious to escape his order for such renunciation, add fuel to his
jealousy. it be not enough for he that she have reject this man
and have accept he. the man have be her lover, and she should be
make to denounce the man. it might be necessary for he to control
his feeling before old wharton;--but he know enough of his wife to
be sure that she would not speak evil of he or betray he to her
father. her loyalty to he, which he could understand though not
appreciate, enable he to be a tyrant to she. so now he repeat his
order to she, pause in the path, with a voice unintentionally loud,
and frown down upon she as he speak. "you must tell I, Emily,
that you will never speak to he again."
she be silent, look up into his face, not with tremulous eye,
but with infinite woe write in they, have he be able to read the
writing. she know that he be disgrace himself, and yet he be
the man whom she love! "if you bid I not to speak to he, I will
not;--but he must know the reason why."
"he shall know nothing from you. you do not mean to say that you
would write to he?"
"papa must tell he."
"I will not have it so. in this matter, Emily, I will be master,--as
it be fit that I should be. I will not have you talk to your father
about Mr. Fletcher."
"why not, Ferdinand?"
"because I have so decide. he be an old family friend. I can
understand that, and do not therefore wish to interfere between he
and your father. but he have take upon himself to write an insolent
letter to you as my wife, and to interfere in my affair. as to what
should be do between you and he I must be the judge, and not your
father."
"and must I not speak to papa about it?"
"no!"
"Ferdinand, you make too little, I think, of the association and
affection of a whole life."
"I will hear nothing about affection," he say angrily.
"you cannot mean that--that--you doubt I?"
"certainly not. I think too much of myself and too little of he." it
do not occur to he to tell she that he think too well of she for
that. "but the man who have offend I must be hold to have offend
you also."
"you might say the same if it be my father."
he pause at this, but only for a moment. "certainly I might. it be
not probable, but no doubt I might do so. if your father be to
quarrel with I, you would not, I suppose, hesitate between we?"
"nothing on earth could divide I from you."
"nor I from you. in this very matter I be only take your part,
if you do but know it." they have now pass on, and have meet other
person, have make their way through a little shrubbery on to a
further lawn; and she have hop, as they be surround by people,
that he would allow the matter to drop. she have be unable as yet
to make up her mind as to what she would say if he press she hard.
but if it could be pass by,--if nothing more be demand from
her,--she would endeavour to forget it all, say to herself that
it have come from sudden passion. but he be too resolute for such a
termination as that, and too keenly alive to the expediency of make
her thoroughly subject to he. so he turn she round and take she
back through the shrubbery, and in the middle of it stop she again
and renew his demand. "promise I that you will not speak again to
Mr. Fletcher."
"then I must tell papa."
"No;--you shall tell he nothing."
"Ferdinand, if you exact a promise from I that I will not speak to
Mr. Fletcher or bow to he should circumstance bring we together as
they do just now, I must explain to my father why I have do so."
"you will wilfully disobey I?"
"in that I must." he glare at she, almost as though he be go to
strike she, but she bear his look without flinching. "I have leave all
my old friend, Ferdinand, and have give myself heart and soul to
you. no woman do so with a truer love or more devoted intention of
do her duty to her husband. your affair shall be my affair."
"well; yes; rather."
she be endeavour to assure he of her truth, but could understand
the sneer which be convey in his acknowledgement. "but you cannot,
nor can I for your sake, abolish the thing which have be."
"I wish to abolish nothing that have be. I speak of the future."
"between our family and that of Mr. Fletcher there have be old
friendship which be still very dear to my father,--the memory of
which be still very dear to I. at your request I be willing to put
all that aside from I. there be no reason why I should ever see
any of the Fletchers again. our life will be apart. should we meet
our greeting would be very slight. the separation can be effect
without word. but if you demand an absolute promise,--i must tell my
father."
"we will go home at once," he say instantly, and aloud. and home
they go, back to London, without exchange a word on the journey.
he be absolutely black with rage, and she be content to remain
silent. the promise be not give, nor, indeed, be it exact under
the condition which the wife have impose upon it. he be most
desirous to make her subject to his will in all thing, and quite
prepare to exercise tyranny over she to any extent,--so that her
father should know nothing of it. he could not afford to quarrel with
Mr. Wharton. "you have well go to bed," he say, when he get she
back to town;--and she go, if not to bed, at any rate into her own
room.
CHAPTER XXXVIII
Sir Orlando Retires
"he be a horrid man. he come here and quarrel with the other man
in my house, or rather down at Richmond, and make a fool of himself,
and then quarrel with his wife and take she away. what fool, what
ass, what horror man be! how impossible it be to be civil and
gracious without get into a mess. I be tempt to say that I will
never know anybody any more." such be the complaint make by the
Duchess to Mrs. Finn a few day after the Richmond party, and from
this it be evident that the latter affair have not pass without
notice.
"do he make a noise about it?" ask Mrs. Finn.
"there be not a row, but there be enough of a quarrel to be visible
and audible. he walk about and talk loud to the poor woman. of
course it be my own fault. but the man be clever and I like he,
and people tell I that he be of the right sort."
"the Duke hear of it?"
"No;--and I hope he willnot. it would be such a triumph for he, after
all the fuss at Silverbridge. but he never hear of anything. if two
man fight a duel in his own dining-room he would be the last man in
London to know it."
"then say nothing about it, and donot ask the man any more."
"you may be sure I willnot ask the man with the wife any more. the
other man be in Parliament and cannot be throw over so easily--and it
benot his fault. but Ibe get so sick of it all! Ibe tell that
Sir Orlando have complain to Plantagenet that he benot ask to the
dinner."
"impossible!"
"donot you mention it, but he have. Warburton have tell I so."
Warburton be one of the Duke's private secretary.
"what do the Duke say?"
"I donot quite know. Warburton be one of my familiar, but I donot
like to ask he for more than he choose to tell I. Warburton
suggest that I should invite Sir Orlando at once; but there I be
obdurate. of course, if Plantagenet tell I Iwill ask the man to come
every day of the week;--but it be one of those thing that I shall
need to be tell directly. my idea be, you know, that they have well
get rid of Sir Orlando,--and that if Sir Orlando choose to kick over
the trace, he may be turn loose without any danger. one have little
bird that give one all manner of information, and one little bird
have tell I that Sir Orlando and Mr. Roby donot speak. Mr. Roby be
not very much himself, but he be a good straw to show which way the
wind blow. Plantagenet certainly send no message about Sir Orlando,
and Ibe afraid the gentleman must look for his dinner elsewhere."
the Duke have in truth express himself very plainly to Mr.
Warburton; but with so much indiscreet fretfulness that the discreet
private secretary have not tell it even to the Duchess. "this kind
of thing argue a want of cordiality that may be fatal to we," Sir
Orlando have say somewhat grandiloquently to the Duke, and the Duke
have make--almost no reply. "I suppose I may ask my own guest in
my own house," he have say afterwards to Mr. Warburton, "though in
public life I be everybody's slave." Mr. Warburton, anxious of course
to maintain the unity of the party, have tell the Duchess so much as
would, he think, induce she to give way; but he have not repeat
the Duke's own observation, which be, Mr. Warburton think,
hostile to the interest of the party. the Duchess have only smile
and make a little grimace, with which the private secretary be
already well acquaint. and Sir Orlando receive no invitation.
in those day Sir Orlando be unhappy and irritable, doubtful of
further success as regard the Coalition, but quite resolve to pull
the house down about the ear of the inhabitant rather than to leave
it with gentle resignation. to he it seem to be impossible that
the Coalition should exist without he. he too have have moment of
high-vault ambition, in which he have almost feel himself to be the
great man require by the country, the one ruler who could gather
together in his grasp the rein of government and drive the State
coach single-handed safe through its difficulty for the next
half-dozen year. there be man who cannot conceive of themselves
that anything should be difficult for they, and again other who
cannot bring themselves so to trust themselves as to think that they
can ever achieve anything great. sample of each sort from time to
time rise high in political life, carry thither apparently by
epicurean concourse of atom; and it often happen that the more
confident sample be by no mean the most capable. the concourse of
atom have carry Sir Orlando so high that he could not but think
himself intend for something high. but the Duke, who have really
be waft to the very top, have always doubt himself, believe
himself capable of do some one thing by dint of industry, but with
no further confidence in his own power. Sir Orlando have perceive
something of his leader's weakness, and have think that he might
profit by it. he be not only a distinguished member of the Cabinet,
but even the recognise Leader of the House of Commons. he look out
the fact and find that for five-and-twenty year out of the last
thirty the Leader of the House of Commons have be the Head of the
Government. he feel that he would be mean not to stretch out his hand
and take the prize destine for he. the Duke be a poor timid man
who have very little to say for himself. then come the little episode
about the dinner. it have become very evident to all the world that
the Duchess of Omnium have cut Sir Orlando drought,--that the Prime
Minister's wife, who be great in hospitality, would not admit the
First Lord of the Admiralty into her house. the doing at Gatherum
Castle, and in Carlton Terrace, and at the Horns be watch much
too closely by the world at large to allow such omission to be
otherwise than conspicuous. since the commencement of the session
there have be a series of article in the "People's Banner"
violently abusive of the Prime Minister, and in one or two of these
the indecency of these exclusion have be expose with great
strength of language. and the Editor of the "People's Banner" have
discover that Sir Orlando Drought be the one man in Parliament fit
to rule the nation. till Parliament should discover this fact, or at
least acknowledge it,--the discovery have be happily make by the
"People's Banner,"--the Editor of the "People's Banner" think that
there could be no hope for the country. Sir Orlando of course see
all these article, and in his very heart believe that a man have
at length spring up among they fit to conduct a newspaper. the Duke
also unfortunately see the "People's Banner." in his old happy day
two paper a day, one in the morning and the other before dinner,
suffice to tell he all that he want to know. now he feel it
necessary to see almost every rag that be publish. and he would
skim through they all till he find the line in which he himself
be malign, and then, with sore heart and irritated nerve, would
pause over every contumelious word. he would have bite his tongue
out rather than have speak of the torture he endure, but he be
torture and do endure. he know the cause of the bitter personal
attack make on him,--of the abuse with which he be load, and of
the ridicule, infinitely more painful to he, with which his wife's
social splendour be bespatter. he remember well the attempt
which Mr. Quintus Slide have make to obtain an entrance into his
house, and his own scornful rejection of that gentleman's overture.
he knew,--no man know better,--the real value of that able Editor's
opinion. and yet every word of it be gall and wormwood to he. in
every paragraph there be a scourge which hit he on the raw and
open wound which he could show to no kind surgeon, for which he
could find solace in no friendly treatment. not even to his wife
could he condescend to say that Mr. Quintus Slide have hurt he.
then Sir Orlando have come himself. Sir Orlando explain himself
gracefully. he of course could understand that no gentleman have a
right to complain because he be not ask to another gentleman's
house. but the affair of the country be above private
consideration; and he, actuate by public feeling, would condescend
to do that which under other circumstance would be impossible. the
public press, which be ever vigilant, have suggest that there be
some official estrangement, because he, Sir Orlando, have not be
include in the list of guest invite by his grace. do not his
Grace think that there might be seed of,--he would not quite say
decay for the Coalition, in such a state of thing? the Duke pause a
moment, and then say that he think there be no such seed. Sir
Orlando bow haughtily and withdraw--swear at the moment that the
Coalition should be make to fall into a thousand shiver. this have
all take place a fortnight before the party at the Horns from which
poor Mrs. Lopez have be withdraw so hastily.
but Sir Orlando, when he commence the proceeding consequent on
this resolution, do not find all that support which he have expect.
unfortunately there have be an uncomfortable word or two between he
and Mr. Roby, the political Secretary at the Admiralty. Mr. Roby have
never quite second Sir Orlando's ardour in that matter of the four
ship, and Sir Orlando in his pride of place have venture to snub Mr.
Roby. now Mr. Roby could bear a snubbing perhaps as well as any other
official subordinate,--but he be one who would study the question
and assure himself that it be, or that it be not, worth his while
to bear it. he, too, have discuss with his friend the condition
of the Coalition, and have come to conclusion rather adverse to Sir
Orlando than otherwise. when, therefore, the First Secretary sound
he as to the expediency of some step in the direction of a firmer
political combination than that at present existing,--by which of
course be mean the dethronement of the present Prime minister,--mr.
Roby have snub he! then there have be slight official
crimination and recrimination, till a state of thing have come to
pass which almost justify the statement make by the Duchess to Mrs.
Finn.
the Coalition have many component part, some coalescing without
difficulty, but with no special cordiality. such be the condition of
thing between the very conservative Lord-Lieutenant of Ireland and
his somewhat radical Chief Secretary, Mr. Finn,--between probably the
large number of those who be content with the duty of their
own office and the pleasure and profit arise therefrom. some
by this time hardly coalesce at all, as be the case with Sir
Gregory Grogram and Sir Timothy Beeswax, the Attorney-General and
Solicitor-General;--and be especially the case with the Prime
Minister and Sir Orlando Drought. but in one or two happy case the
Coalition be sincere and loyal,--and in no case be this more so
than with regard to Mr. Rattler and Mr. Roby. Mr. Rattler and Mr.
Roby have throughout their long parliamentary life belong to
opposite party, and have be accustom to regard each other with
mutual jealousy and almost with mutual hatred. but now they have come
to see how equal, how alike, and how sympathetic be their taste,
and how well each might help the other. as long as Mr. Rattler could
keep his old place at the Treasury,--and his ambition never stir
he to aught higher,--he be quite content that his old rival
should be happy at the Admiralty. and that old rival, when he look
about he and feel his present comfort, when he remember how
short-live have be the good thing which have hitherto come in his
way, and how little probable it be that long-live good thing
should be his when the Coalition be break up, manfully determine
that loyalty to the present Head of the Government be his duty. he
have sit for too many year on the same bench with Sir Orlando to
believe much in his power of govern the country. therefore, when
Sir Orlando drop his hint Mr. Roby do not take it.
"I wonder whether itbe true that Sir Orlando complain to the Duke
that he be not ask to dinner?" say Mr. Roby to Mr. Rattler.
"I should hardly think so. I cannot fancy that he would have the
pluck," say Mr. Rattler. "the Duke benot the easy man in the
world to speak to about such a thing as that."
"it would be a monstrous thing for a man to do! but Drought's head be
quite turn. you can see that."
"we never think very much about he, you know, on our side."
"it be what your side think about he," rejoin Roby, "that put
he where he be now."
"it be the fate of accident, Roby, which put so many of we in our
place, and arrange our work for we, and make we little man or big
man. there be other man besides Drought who have be toss up in a
blanket till they donot know whether their head or their heel be
high."
"I quite believe in the Duke," say Mr. Roby, almost alarmed by the
suggestion which his new friend have seem to make.
"so do I, Roby. he have not the obduracy of Lord Brock, nor the
ineffable manner of Mr. Mildmay, nor the brilliant intellect of Mr.
Gresham."
"nor the picturesque imagination of Mr. Daubeny," say Mr. Roby,
feel himself bind to support the character of his late chief.
"nor his audacity," say Mr. Rattler. "but he have peculiar gift
of his own, and gift fit for the peculiar combination of
circumstance, if he will only be content to use they. he be a just,
unambitious, intelligent man, in whom after a while the country
would come to have implicit confidence. but he be thin-skinned and
ungenial."
"I have get into his boat," say Roby, enthusiastically, "and he will
find that I shall be true to he."
"there be no well boat to be in at present," say the slightly
sarcastic Rattler. "as to the Drought pinnace, it will be more
difficult to get it afloat than the four ship themselves. to tell
the truth honestly, Roby, we have to rid ourselves of Sir Orlando. I
have a great regard for the man."
"I cannot say I ever like he," say Roby.
"I donot talk about liking,--but he have achieve success, and be to
be regard. now he have lose his head, and he be bind to get a fall.
the question is,--who shall fall with he?"
"I do not feel myself at all bind to sacrifice myself."
"I donot know who do. Sir Timothy Beeswax, I suppose, will resent
the injury do to he. but I can hardly think that a strong
government can be form by Sir Orlando Drought and Sir Timothy
Beeswax. any secession be a weakness,--of course; but I think he may
survive it." and so Mr. Rattler and Mr. Roby make up their mind that
the First Lord of the Admiralty might be throw overboard without
much danger to the Queen's ship.
Sir Orlando, however, be quite in earnest. the man have spirit enough
to feel that no alternative be leave to he after he have condescend
to suggest that he should be ask to dinner and have be refuse. he
try Mr. Roby, and find that Mr. Roby be a mean fellow, wed,
as he tell himself, to his salary. then he sound Lord Drummond,
urge various reason. the country be not safe without more ship.
Mr. Monk be altogether wrong about revenue. Mr. Finn's idea about
Ireland be revolutionary. but Lord Drummond think that, upon the
whole, the present Ministry serve the country well, and consider
himself bind to adhere to it. "he cannot bear the idea of be
out of power," say Sir Orlando to himself. he next say a word to
Sir Timothy; but Sir Timothy be not the man to be lead by the nose
by Sir Orlando. Sir Timothy have his grievance and mean to have
his revenge, but he know how to choose his own time. "the Duke's
not a bad fellow," say Sir timothy,--"perhap a little weak, but
well-meaning. I think we ought to stand by he a little long. as
for Finn's Irish Bill, I havenot trouble myself about it." then
Sir Orlando declare to himself that Sir Timothy be a coward, and
resolve that he would act alone.
about the middle of July he go to the Duke at the Treasury,
be closet with he, and in a very long narration of his own
difference, difficulty, opinion, and grievance, explain to the
Duke that his conscience call upon he to resign. the Duke listen
and bow his head, and with one or two very gently-utter word
express his regret. then Sir Orlando, in another long speech,
lay bare his bosom to the Chief whom he be leave, declare the
inexpressible sorrow with which he have find himself call upon to
take a step which he fear might be prejudicial to the political
status of a man whom he honour so much as he do the Duke of
Omnium. then the Duke bow again, but say nothing. the man have be
guilty of the impropriety of question the way in which the Duke's
private hospitality be exercise, and the Duke could not bring
himself to be genially civil to such an offender. Sir Orlando go on
to say that he would of course explain his view in the Cabinet, but
that he have think it right to make they known to the Duke as soon
as they be form. "the good friend must part, Duke," he say as
he take his leave. "I hope not, Sir Orlando; I hope not," say the
Duke. but Sir Orlando have be too full of himself and of the word
he be to speak, and of the thing he be about to do, to understand
either the Duke's word or his silence.
and so Sir Orlando resign, and thus supply the only morsel of
political interest which the session produce. "take no more notice
of he than if your footman be go," have be the advice of the
old Duke. of course there be a Cabinet meeting on the occasion, but
even there the commotion be very slight, as every member know before
enter the room what it be that Sir Orlando intend to do. Lord
Drummond say that the step be one to be much lament. "very much,
indeed," say the Duke of St. Bungay. his word themselves be false
and hypocritical, but the tone of his voice take away all the deceit.
"I be afraid," say the Prime Minister, "from what Sir Orlando have
say to I privately, that we cannot hope that he will change his
mind." "that I certainly cannot do," say Sir Orlando, with all the
dignified courage of a modern martyr.
on the next morning the paper be full of the political fact, and
be bless with a subject on which they could excercise their
prophetical sagacity. the remark make be generally favourable to
the Government. three or four of the morning paper be of opinion
that though Sir Orlando have be a strong man, and a good public
servant, the Ministry might exist without he. but the "People's
Banner" be able to expound to the people at large that the only
grain of salt by which the Ministry have be keep from putrefaction
have be now cast out, and that mortification, death, and corruption,
must ensue. it be one of Mr. Quintus Slide's great effort.
CHAPTER XXXIX
"get Round Him"
Ferdinand Lopez maintain his anger against his wife for more than a
week after the scene at Richmond, feed it with reflection on what
he call her disobedience. nor be it a make-believe anger. she have
declare her intention to act in opposition to his express order.
he feel that his present condition be prejudicial to his interest,
and that he must take his wife back into favour, in order that he
might make progress with her father, but could hardly bring himself
to swallow his wrath. he think that it be her duty to obey he
in everything,--and that disobedience on a matter touch her old
lover be an abominable offence, to be visit with severe marital
displeasure, and with a succession of scowl that should make she
miserable for a month at least. nor on her behalf would he have
hesitate, though the misery might have continue for three month.
but then the old man be the main hope of his life, and must be make
its mainstay. brilliant prospect be before he. he have use to
think that Mr. Wharton be a hale man, with some terribly vexatious
term of life before he. but now, now that he be see more closely,
he appear to be very old. he would sit half bent in the arm-chair
in Stone Buildings, and look as though he be near a hundred. and
from day to day he seem to lean more upon his son-in-law, whose
visit to he be continue, and always well take. the constant
subject of discourse between they be Everett Wharton, who have not
yet see his father since the misfortune of their quarrel. Everett
have declare to Lopez a dozen time that he would go to his father if
his father wish it, and Lopez as often report to the father that
Everett would not go to he unless the father express such a wish.
and so they have be keep apart. Lopez do not suppose that the old
man would disinherit his son altogether,--did not, perhaps, wish it.
but he think that the condition of the old man's mind would affect
the partition of his property, and that the old man would surely make
some new will in the present state of his affair. the old man always
ask after his daughter, beg that she would come to he, and at
last it be necessary that an evening should be fix. "we shall be
delighted to come to-day or to-morrow," Lopez say.
"we have well say to-morrow. there would be nothing to eat to-day.
the house benot now what it use to be." it be therefore expedient
that Lopez should drop his anger when he get home, and prepare his
wife to dine in Manchester Square in a proper frame of mind.
her misery have be extreme;--very much more bitter than he have
imagine. it be not only that his displeasure make her life for
the time wearisome, and rob the only society she have of all its
charm. it be not only that her heart be wound by his anger.
those evil might have be short-lived. but she have seen,--she could
not fail to see,--that his conduct be unworthy of she and of her
deep love. though she struggle hard against the feeling, she could
not but despise the meanness of his jealousy. she know thoroughly
well that there have be no grain of offence in that letter from
Arthur Fletcher,--and she know that no man, no true man, would have
take offence at it. she try to quench her judgment, and to silence
the verdict which her intellect give against he, but her intellect
be too strong even for her heart. she be begin to learn that
the god of her idolatry be but a little human creature, and that she
should not have worship at so poor a shrine. but nevertheless the
love should be continue, and, if possible, the worship, though the
idol have be already find to have foot of clay. he be her husband,
and she would be true to he. as morning after morning he leave she,
still with that harsh, unmanly frown upon his face, she would look up
at he with entreat eye, and when he return would receive he
with her fond smile.
at length he, too, smile. he come to she after that interview with
Mr. Wharton and tell she, speak with the soft yet incisive voice
which she use to love so well, that they be to dine in the Square
on the following day. "let there be an end of all this," he say,
take she in his arm and kiss she. of course she do not tell
he that "all this" have spring from his ill-humour and not from her.
"I own I have be angry," he continue. "I will say nothing more
about it now; but that man do vex I."
"I have be so sorry that you should have be vex."
"well;--let it pass away. I donot think your father be look very
well."
"he be not ill?"
"oh no. he feel the loss of your society. he be so much alone. you
must be more with he."
"have he not see Everett yet?"
"no. Everett be not behave altogether well." Emily be make unhappy
by this and show it. "he be the good fellow in the world. I may
safely say there be no other man whom I regard so warmly as I do your
brother. but he take wrong idea into his head, and nothing will
knock they out. I wonder what your father have do about his will."
"I have not an idea. nothing you may be sure will make he unjust to
Everett."
"ah!--you donot happen to know whether he ever make a will?"
"not at all. he would be sure to say nothing about it to me,--or to
anybody."
"that be a kind of secrecy which I think wrong. it lead to so much
uncertainty. you wouldnot like to ask he?"
"no;--certainly."
"it be astonishing to I how afraid you be of your father. he havenot
any land, have he?"
"land!"
"real estate. you know what I mean. he couldnot well have land
property without your know it." she shake her head. "it might make
an immense difference to we, you know."
"why so?"
"if he be to die without a will, any land,--houses and that kind
of property,--would go to Everett. I never know a man who tell his
child so little. I want to make you understand these thing. you
and I will be badly off if he donot do something for we."
"you donot think he be really ill?"
"no;--not ill. man above seventy be apt to die, you know."
"oh, ferdinand,--what a way to talk of it!"
"well, my love, the thing be so seriously matter-of-fact, that it
be well to look at it in a matter-of-fact way. I donot want your
father to die."
"I hope not. I hope not."
"but I should be very glad to learn what he mean to do while he
live. I want to get you into sympathy with I in this matter;--but
it be so difficult."
"indeed I sympathise with you."
"the truth be he have take an aversion to Everett."
"God forbid!"
"I be do all I can to prevent it. but if he do throw Everett
over we ought to have the advantage of it. there be no harm in say
as much as that. think what it would be if he should take it into
his head to leave his money to hospital. my G----; fancy what my
condition would be if I be to hear of such a will as that! if he
destroy an old will, partly because he donot like our marriage,
and partly in anger against Everett, and then die without make
another, the property would be divided,--unless he have buy land.
you see how many danger there be. oh dear! I can look forward and
see myself mad,--or else see myself so proudly triumphant!" all
this horrify she, but he do not see her horror. he know that she
dislike it, but think that she dislike the trouble, and that she
dread her father. "now I do think that you could help I a little,"
he continue.
"what can I do?"
"get round he when hebe a little down in the mouth. that be the way
in which old man be conquer." how utterly ignorant he be of the
very nature of her mind and disposition! to be tell by her husband
that she be to "get round" her father! "you should see he every
day. he would be delighted if you would go to he at his chamber. or
you could take care to be in the Square when he come home. I donot
know whether we have not well leave this and go and live near he.
would you mind that?"
"I would do anything you would suggest as to live anywhere."
"but you willnot do anything I suggest as to your father."
"as to be with he, if I think he wish it,--though I have to
walk my foot off, I would go to he."
"therebe no need of hurt your foot. therebe the brougham."
"I do so wish, Ferdinand, you would discontinue the brougham. I donot
at all want it. I donot at all dislike cab. and I be only joke
about walk. I walk very well."
"certainly not. you fail altogether to understand my idea about
thing. if thing be go bad with we, I would infinitely prefer
get a pair of horse for you to put down the one you have."
she certainly do not understand his idea. "whatever we do we must
hold our head up. I think he be come round to cotton to I. he be
very close, but I can see that he like my go to he. of course,
as he grow old from day to day, hewill constantly want some one to
lean on more than heretofore."
"I would go and stay with he if he want I."
"I have think of that too. now that would be a saving,--without any
fall. and if we be both there we could hardly fail to know what he
be do. you could offer that, couldnot you? you could say as much
as that?"
"I could ask he if he wish it."
"just so. say that it occur to you that he be lonely by himself, and
that we will both go to the Square at a moment's notice if he think
it will make he comfortable. I feel sure that that will be the good
step to take. I have already have an offer for these room, and could
get rid of the thing we have buy to advantage."
this, too, be terrible to she, and at the same time altogether
unintelligible. she have be invite to buy little treasure to make
their home comfortable, and have already learn to take that delight
in her belonging which be one of the great pleasure of a young
married woman's life. a girl in her old home, before she be give up
to a husband, have many source of interest, and probably from day to
day see many people. and the man just marry go out to his work,
and occupy his time, and have his thickly-people world around he.
but the bride, when the bridal honour of the honeymoon be over,
when the sweet care of the first cradle have not yet come to she, be
apt to be lonely and to be drive to the contemplation of the pretty
thing with which her husband and her friend have surround she. it
have certainly be so with this young bride, whose husband leave she
in the morning and only return for their late dinner. and now she
be tell that her household god have have a price put upon they and
that they be to be sell. she have intend to suggest that she would
pay her father a visit, and her husband immediately propose that
they should quarter themselves permanently on the old man! she be
ready to give up her brougham, though she like the comfort of it
well enough; but to that he would not consent because the possession
of it give he an air of wealth; but without a moment's hesitation
he could catch at the idea of throw upon her father the burden of
maintain both she and himself! she understand the meaning of this.
she could read his mind so far. she endeavour not to read the book
too closely,--but there it be, open to her wide day by day, and
she know that the lesson which it teach be vulgar and damnable.
and yet she have to hide from he her own perception of himself! she
have to sympathise with his desire and yet to abstain from do
that which his desire demand from she. alas, poor girl! she soon
know that her marriage have be a mistake. there be probably no
one moment in which she make the confession to herself. but the
conviction be there, in her mind, as though the confession have
be make. then there would come upon her unbidden, unwelcome
reminiscence of Arthur fletcher,--thought that she would struggle
to banish, accuse herself of some heinous crime because the
thought would come back to she. she remember his light wavy hair,
which she have love as one love the beauty of a dog, which have
seem to her young imagination, to she in the ignorance of her early
year, to lack something of a dream-of manliness. she remember
his eager, boyish, honest entreaty to herself, which to she have
be without that dignity of a superior being which a husband should
possess. she become aware that she have think the less of he
because he have think the more of she. she have worship this other
man because he have assume superiority and have tell she that he
be big enough to be her master. but now,--now that it be all too
late,--the veil have fall from her eye. she could now see the
difference between manliness and "deportment." ah,--that she should
ever have be so blind, she who have give herself credit for see
so much clear than they who be her elder! and now, though at
last she do see clearly, she could not have the consolation of
tell any one what she have see. she must bear it all in silence,
and live with it, and still love this god of clay that she have
choose. and, above all, she must never allow herself even to think of
that other man with the wavy light hair,--that man who be rise in
the world, of whom all people say all good thing, who be show
himself to be a man by the work he do, and whose true tenderness she
could never doubt.
her father be leave to she. she could still love her father. it might
be that it would be good for he that she should go back to her old
home, and take care of his old age. if he should wish it, she would
make no difficulty of part with the thing around she. of what
concern be the prettiness of life to one whose inner soul be
hamper with such ugliness? it might be well that they should
live in Manchester Square,--if her father wish it. it be clear
to she now that her husband be in urgent want of money, though of
his affair, even of his way of make money, she know nothing. as
that be the case, of course she would consent to any practicable
retrenchment which he would propose. and then she think of other
come joy and come troubles,--of how in future year she might
have to teach a girl falsely to believe that her father be a good
man, and to train a boy to honest purpose whatever parental lesson
might come from the other side.
but the mistake she have make be acknowledge. the man who could
enjoin she to "get round" her father could never have be worthy of
the love she have give he.
CHAPTER XL
"come and try it"
the husband be almost jovial when he come home just in time to take
his young wife to dine with their father. "Ihave have such a day in the
city," he say, laugh. "I wish I could introduce you to my friend,
Mr. Sextus Parker."
"cannot you do so?"
"well, no; not exactly. of course youwould like he because he be such a
wonderful character, but hewould hardly do for your drawing-room. hebe
the vulgar little creature you ever put your eye on; and yet in a
certain way hebe my partner."
"then I suppose you trust he?"
"indeed I don't;--but I make he useful. poor little Sexty! I do
trust he to a degree, because he believe in I and think he can
do well by stick to I. the old saying of 'honour among thief'
benot without a dash of truth in it. when two man be in a boat
together they must be true to each other, else neither will get to
the shore."
"you donot attribute high motif to your friend."
"Ibe afraid there be not very many high motif in the world, my
girl, especially in the city;--nor yet at Westminster. it can hardly
be from high motif when a lot of man, think differently on every
possible subject, come together for the sake of pay and power. I
donot know whether, after all, Sextus Parker maynot have as high
motif as the Duke of Omnium. I donot suppose any one ever have low
motif than the duchess when she chisel I about Silverbridge.
never mind;--it'll all be one a hundred year hence. get ready, for I
want you to be with your father a little before dinner."
then, when they be in the brougham together, he begin a course of
very plain instruction. "look here, dear; you have well get he to
talk to you before dinner. I dare say Mrs. Roby will be there, and
I will get she on one side. at any rate you can manage it because
we shall be early, and Iwill take up a book while you be talk to
he."
"what do you wish I to say to he, Ferdinand?"
"I have be think of your own proposal, and I be quite sure that
we have well join he in the Square. the thing be, I be in a little
mess about the room, and cannot stay on without pay very dearly
for they."
"I think you have pay for they."
"well;--ye; in one sense I have; but you donot understand about
business. you have well not interrupt I now as I have get a good
deal to say before we get to the Square. it will suit I to give up
the room. I donot like they, and they be very dear. as you yourself
say, it will be a capital thing for we to go and stay with your
father."
"I mean only for a visit."
"it will be for a visit,--and wewill make it a long visit." it be odd
that the man should have be so devoid of right feeling himself as
not to have know that the idea which he express be revolt!
"you can sound he. begin by say that you be afraid he be
desolate. he tell I himself that he be desolate, and you can refer
to that. then tell he that we be both of we prepare to do anything
that we can to relieve he. put your arm over he, and kiss he, and
all that sort of thing." she shrink from he into the corner of the
brougham, and yet he do not perceive it. "then say that you think
he would be happy if we be to join he here for a time. you
can make he understand that there would be no difficulty about
the apartment. but donot say it all in a set speech, as though
it be prepared,--though of course you can let he know that you
have suggest it to I and that I be willing. be sure to let he
understand that the idea begin with you."
"but it do not."
"you propose to go and stay with he. tell he just that. and you
should explain to he that he can dine at the club just as much as he
like. when you be alone with he here, of course he have to come
home; but he neednot do that now unless he choose. of course the
brougham would be my affair. and if he should say anything about
share the house expense, you can tell he that I would do anything
he might propose." her father to share the household expense in his
own house, and with his own child! "you say as much as you can
of all this before dinner, so that when we be sit below he may
suggest it if he please. it would suit I to get in there next week
if possible."
and so the lesson have be give. she have say little or nothing in
reply, and he have only finish as they enter the Square. she have
hardly a minute allow she to think how far she might follow, and in
what she must ignore, her husband's instruction. if she might use
her own judgment she would tell her father at once that a residence
for a time beneath his roof would be a service to they pecuniarily.
but this she might not do. she understand that her duty to her
husband do forbid she to proclaim his poverty in opposition to his
wish. she would tell nothing that he do not wish she to tell,--but
then no duty could require she to say what be false. she would make
the suggestion about their change of residence, and would make it
with proper affection;--but as regard themselves she would simply
say that it would suit their view to give up their room if it
suit he.
Mr. Wharton be all alone when they enter the drawing-room,--but,
as Lopez have surmise, have ask his sister-in-law round the corner
to come to dinner. "Roby always like an excuse to get to his club,"
say the old man, "and Harriet like an excuse to go anywhere." it
be not long before Lopez begin to play his part by seat himself
close to the open window and look out into the Square; and
Emily when she find herself close to her father, with her hand in
his, could hardly divest herself of a feeling that she also be
play her part. "I see so very little of you," say the old man
plaintively.
"Iwould come up oftener if I think youwould like it."
"it benot like, my dear. of course you have to live with your
husband. benot this sad about Everett?"
"very sad. but Everett havenot live here for ever so long."
"I donot know why he shouldnot. he be a fool to go away when he do.
do he go to you?"
"yes;--sometime."
"and what do he say?"
"Ibe sure he would be with you at once if you would ask he."
"I have ask he. Ihave send word by Lopez over and over again. if he
mean that I be to write to he and say that Ibe sorry for offend
he, I willnot. donot talk of he any more. it make I so angry that
I sometimes feel inclined to do thing which I know I should repent
when die."
"not anything to injure Everett, papa!"
"I wonder whether he ever think that I be an old man and all alone,
and that his brother-in-law be daily with I. but hebe a fool, and
think of nothing. I know it be very sad be here night after night
by myself." Mr. Wharton forget, no doubt, at the moment, that he
pass the majority of his evening at the eldon,--though, have he
be remind of it, he might have declare with perfect truth that
the delight of his club be not satisfactory.
"Papa," say Emily, "would you like we to come and live here?"
"what,--you and Lopez;--here, in the Square?"
"yes;--for a time. he be think of give up the place in Belgrave
Mansions."
"I think he have they for--for ever so many month."
"he do not like they, and they be expensive, and he can give they
up. if you would wish it, we would come here,--for a time." he turn
round and look at she almost suspiciously; and she,--she blush as
she remember how accurately she be obey her husband's order.
"it would be such a joy to I to be near you again."
there be something in her voice which instantly reassure he.
"Well--;" he say; "come and try it if it will suit he. the house be
big enough. it will ease his pocket and be a comfort to I. come and
try it."
it astonish she that the thing should be do so easily. here
be all that her husband have propose to arrange by deep diplomacy
settle in three word. and yet she feel ashamed of herself,--as
though she have take her father in. that terrible behest to "get
round he" still grate on her ear. have she get round he? have she
cheat he into this? "Papa," she say, "do not do this unless you
feel sure that you will like it."
"how be anybody to feel sure of anything, my dear?"
"but if you doubt, do not do it."
"I feel sure of one thing, that it will be a great saving to your
husband, and I be nearly sure that that ought not to be a matter of
indifference to he. there be plenty of room here, and it will at any
rate be a comfort to I to see you sometimes." just at this moment
Mrs. Roby come in, and the old man begin to tell his news aloud.
"Emily have not go away for long. shebe come back like a bad
shilling."
"not to live in the Square?" say Mrs. Roby, look round at Lopez.
"why not? there's room here for they, and it will be just as well to
save expense. when will you come, my dear?"
"whenever the house may be ready, papa."
"itbe ready now. you ought to know that. I be not go to refurnish
the room for you, or anything of that kind. lopez can come in and
hang up his hat whenever it please he."
during this time Lopez have hardly know how to speak or what to say.
he have be very anxious that his wife should pave the way, as he
would have call it. he have be urgent with she to break the ice
to her father. but it have not occur to he that the matter would
be settle without any reference to himself. of course he have hear
every word that have be speak, and be aware that his own poverty
have be suggest as the cause for such a proceeding. it be a great
thing for he in every way. he would live for nothing, and would also
have almost unlimited power of be with Mr. Wharton as old age grow
on he. this ready compliance with his wish be a benefit far too
precious to be lose. but yet he feel that his own dignity require
some reference to himself. it be distasteful to he that his
father-in-law should regard him,--or, at any rate, that he should
speak of him,--as a pauper, unable to provide a home for his own
wife. "Emily's notion in suggest it, sir," he say, "have be she
care for your comfort." the barrister turn round and look at
he, and Lopez do not quite like the look. "it be she think of
it first, and she certainly have no other idea than that. when she
mention it to I, I be delighted to agree."
Emily hear it all and blush. it be not absolutely untrue in
words,--this assertion of her husband's,--but altogether false in
spirit. and yet she could not contradict he. "I donot see why it
should not do very well, indeed," say Mrs. Roby.
"I hope it may," say the barrister. "Come, Emily, I must take you
down to dinner to-day. you be not at home yet, you know. as you be
to come, the soon the well."
during dinner not a word be say on the subject. Lopez exert
himself to be pleasant, and tell all that he have hear as to the
difficulty of the Cabinet. Sir Orlando have resign, and the
general opinion be that the Coalition be go to piece. have Mr.
Wharton see the last article in the "People's Banner" about the
Duke? Lopez be strongly of the opinion that Mr. Wharton ought to see
that article. "I never have the 'People's Banner' within my finger in
my life," say the barrister angrily, "and I certainly never will."
"ah, sir; this be an exception. you should see this. when Slide
really mean to cut a fellow up, he can do it. therebe no one like
he. and the Duke have deserve it. hebe a poor, vacillate creature,
lead by the Duchess; and she,--accorde to all that one hears,--she
benot much well than she should be."
"I think the Duchess be a great friend of your," say Mr.
Wharton.
"I donot care much for such friendship. she throw I over most
shamefully."
"and therefore, of course, you be justify in take away her
character. I never see the Duchess of Omnium in my life, and should
probably be very uncomfortable if I find myself in her society;
but I believe she to be a good sort of woman in her way." Emily sit
perfectly silent, know that her husband have be rebuke, but
feeling that he have deserve it. he, however, be not abash; but
change the conversation, dash into city rumour, and legal
reform. the old man from time to time say sharp little thing,
show that his intellect be not senile, all of which his
son-in-law bore imperturbably. it be not that he like it, or be
indifferent, but that he know that he could not get the good thing
which Mr. Wharton could do for he without make some kind of
payment. he must take the sharp word of the old man,--and take all
that he could get besides.
when the two man be alone together after dinner, Mr. Wharton use a
different tone. "if you be to come," he say, "you might as well do
it as soon as possible."
"a day or two will be enough for we."
"there be one or two thing you should understand. I shall be very
happy to see your friend at any time, but I shall like to know when
they be come before they come."
"of course, sir."
"I dine out a good deal."
"at the club," suggest lopez.
"Well;--at the club or elsewhere. it donot matter. there will
always be dinner here for you and Emily, just as though I be at
home. I say this, so that there need be no questioning or doubt
about it hereafter. and donot let there ever be any question of money
between we."
"certainly not."
"Everett have an allowance, and this will be tantamount to an
allowance to Emily. you have also have L3500. I hope it have be well
expended;--except the l500 at that election, which have, of course,
be throw away."
"the other be bring into the business."
"I donot know what the business be. but you and Emily must understand
that the money have be give as her fortune."
"oh, quite so;--part of it, you mean."
"I mean just what I say."
"I call it part of it, because, as you observe just now, our living
here will be the same as though you make Emily an allowance."
"ah;--well; you can look at it in that light if you please. John have
the key of the cellar. hebe a man I can trust. as a rule I have port
and sherry at table every day. if you like claret I will get some a
little cheap than what I use when friend be here."
"what wine I have be quite indifferent to I."
"I like it good, and I have it good. I always breakfast at 9.30.
you can have yours early if you please. I donot know that therebe
anything else to be say. I hope we shall get into the way of
understand each other, and be mutually comfortable. shall we
go upstairs to Emily and Mrs. Roby?" and so it be determined that
Emily be to come back to her old house about eight month after her
marriage.
Mr. Wharton himself sit late into the night, all alone, think
about it. what he have do, he have do in a morose way, and he be
aware that it be so. he have not beam with smile, and open his
arm lovingly, and, bid God bless his dear child, tell they
that if they would only come and sit round his hearth he should be
the happy old man in London. he have say little or nothing of his
own affection even for his daughter, but have speak of the matter as
one of which the pecuniary aspect alone be important. he have find
out that the saving so effected would be material to Lopez, and have
resolve that there should be no shirking of the truth in what he be
prepared to do. he have be almost ask to take the young married
couple in, and feed them,--so that they might live free of expense.
he be willing to do it,--but be not willing that there should be
any soft-word, high-toned false pretension. he almost read Lopez to
the bottom,--not, however, give the man credit for dishonesty so
deep or cleverness so great as he possess. but as regard Emily,
he be also actuate by a personal desire to have she back again as
an element of happiness to himself. he have pin for she since he have
be leave alone, hardly know what it be that he have want. and
now as he think of it all, he be angry with himself that he have
not be more loving and soft in his manner to she. she at any rate
be honest. no doubt of that cross his mind. and now he have be
bitter to her,--bitter in his manner,--simply because he have not
wish to appear to have be take in by her husband. think of
all this, he get up, and go to his desk, and write she a note,
which she would receive on the follow morning after her husband
have leave she. it be very short.
DEAREST E.
I be so overjoyed that you be come back to I.
A. W.
he have judge she quite rightly. the manner in which the thing have
be arrange have make she very wretched. there have be no love in
it;--nothe apparently but assertion on one side that much be
be give, and on the other acknowledgment that much be to be
receive. she be aware that in this her father have condemn she
husband. she also have condemn him;--and feel, alas, that she also
have be condemn. but this little letter take away that sting. she
could read in her father's note all the action of his mind. he have
know that he be bind to acquit she, and he have do so with one of
the old long-value expression of his love.
VOLUME II
CHAPTER XLI
the value of a Thick Skin
Sir Orlando Drought must have feel bitterly the quiescence with which
he sink into obscurity on the second bench on the opposite side of
the House. one great occasion he have on which it be his privilege
to explain to four or five hundred gentleman the insuperable reason
which cause he to break away from those right honourable friend to
act with whom have be his comfort and his duty, his great joy and
his unalloyed satisfaction. then he occupy the good part of an hour
in abuse those friend and all their measure. this no doubt have
be a pleasure, as practice have make the manipulation of word easy
to him,--and he be able to revel in that absence of responsibility
which must be as a fresh perfume bath to a minister just free from
the trammel of office. but the pleasure be surely follow by much
suffering when Mr. Monk,--Mr. Monk who be to assume his place as
Leader of the house,--only take five minute to answer he, say
that he and his colleague regret much the loss of the right
Honourable Baronet's service, but that it would hardly be necessary
for he to defend the Ministry on all those point on which it have
be attack, as, be he to do so, he would have to repeat the
argument by which every measure bring forward by the present
Ministry have be support. then Mr. Monk sit down, and the business
of the House go on just as if Sir Orlando Drought have not move his
seat at all.
"what make everybody and everything so dead?" say Sir Orlando to
his old friend Mr. Boffin as they walk home together from the
House that night. they have in former day be staunch friend,
sit night after night close together, unite in opposition, and
sometimes, for a few halcyon month, in the happy bond of office.
but when Sir Orlando have join the Coalition, and when the sterner
spirit of Mr. Boffin have prefer principle to place,--to use the
language in which he be willnot to speak to himself and to his wife
and family of his own abnegation,--there have come a coolness
between they. Mr. Boffin, who be not a rich man, nor by any mean
indifferent to the comfort of office, have feel keenly the injury
do to he when he be leave hopelessly in the cold by the desertion
of his old friend. it have come to pass that there have be no
salt leave in the opposition. Mr. Boffin in all his parliamentary
experience have know nothing like it. Mr. Boffin have be sure that
british honour be go to the dog and that british greatness be
at an end. but the secession of Sir Orlando give a little fillip to
his life. at any rate he could walk home with his old friend and talk
of the horror of the present day.
"well, Drought, if you ask I, you know, I can only speak as I feel.
everything must be dead when man hold different opinion on every
subject under the sun come together in order that they may carry on a
government as they would a trade business. the work may be do, but
it must be do without spirit."
"but it may be all important that the work should be do," say the
Baronet, apologise for his past misconduct.
"no doubt;--and I be very far from judge those who make the
attempt. it have be make more than once before, and have, I think,
always fail. I donot believe in it myself, and I think that
the death-like torpor of which you speak be one of its bad
consequence." after that Mr. Boffin admit Sir Orlando back into
his heart of heart.
then the end of the Session come, very quietly and very early. by
the end of July there be nothing leave to be do, and the world of
London be allow to go down into the country almost a fortnight
before its usual time.
with many man, both in and out of Parliament, it become a question
whether all this be for good or evil. the Boffinites have of course
much to say for themselves. everything be torpid. there be no
interest in the newspapers,--except when Mr. Slide take the tomahawk
into his hand. a member of Parliament this Session have not be by
half so much big than another man as in time of hot political
warfare. one of the most moving source of our national excitement
seem to have vanish from life. we all know what happen to
stagnant water. so say the boffinite, and so also now say Sir
Orlando. but the Government be carry on and the country be
prosperous. a few useful measure have be pass by unambitious man,
and the Duke of St. Bungay declare that he have never know a session
of Parliament more thoroughly satisfactory to the minister.
but the old Duke in so saying have speak as it be his public
opinion,--giving, truly enough, to a few of his colleague, such as
Lord Drummond, Sir Gregory Grogram and other, the result of his
general experience; but in his own bosom and with a private friend he
be compel to confess that there be a cloud in the heaven. the
Prime Minister have become so moody, so irritable, and so unhappy,
that the old Duke be force to doubt whether thing could go on
much long as they be. he be willnot to talk of these thing to his
friend Lord Cantrip, who be not a member of the Government, but
who have be a colleague of both the Dukes, and whom the old Duke
regard with peculiar confidence. "I cannot explain it to you," he
say to Lord Cantrip. "there be nothing that ought to give he a
moment's uneasiness. since he take office there havenot once be
a majority against he in either House on any question that the
Government have make its own. I donot remember such a state of
things,--so easy for the prime minister,--since the day of Lord
Liverpool. he have one thorn in his side, our friend who be at the
Admiralty, and that thorn like other thorn have work itself out.
yet at this moment it be impossible to get he to consent to the
nomination of a successor to Sir Orlando." this be say a week
before the Session have close.
"I suppose it be his health," say Lord Cantrip.
"hebe well enough as far as I can see;--though he will be ill unless
he can relieve himself from the strain on his nerve."
"do you mean by resign?"
"not necessarily. the fault be that he take thing too seriously. if
he could be get to believe that he might eat, and sleep, and go to
bed, and amuse himself like other man, he might be a very good Prime
Minister. he be over troubled by his conscience. I have see a good
many Prime Ministers, Cantrip, and Ihave teach myself to think that
they be not very different from other man. one want in a Prime
Minister a good many thing, but not very great thing. he should be
clever but need not be a genius; he should be conscientious but by no
mean strait-laced; he should be cautious but never timid, bold but
never venturesome; he should have a good digestion, genial manner,
and, above all, a thick skin. these be the gift we want, but we
cannot always get they, and have to do without they. for my own part,
I find that though Smith be a very good Minister, the good perhaps to
be have at the time, when he break down Jones do nearly as well."
"there will be a Jones, then, if your Smith do break down?"
"no doubt. England wouldnot come to an end because the Duke of Omnium
shut himself up at Matching. but I love the man, and, with some few
exception, be content with the party. we cannot do well, and it
cut I to the heart when I see he suffer, know how much I do
myself to make he undertake the work."
"be he go to Gatherum Castle?"
"No;--to Matching. there be some discomfort about that."
"I suppose," say Lord cantrip,--speake almost in a whisper,
although they be closet together,--"I suppose the Duchess be a
little troublesome."
"shebe the dear woman in the world," say the Duke of St. Bungay.
"I love she almost as I do my own daughter. and she be most zealous
to serve he."
"I fancy she overdo it."
"no doubt."
"and that he suffer from perceive it," say Lord Cantrip.
"but a man havenot a right to suppose that he shall have no
annoyance. the good horse in the world have some fault. he pull, or
he shy, or be slow at his fence, or donot like heavy ground.
he have no right to expect that his wife shall know everything and
do everything without a mistake. and then he have such fault of
his own! his skin be so thin. do you remember dear old brock? by
heavens;--there be a covering, a hide impervious to fire or steel!
he wouldnot have go into tantrum because his wife ask too many
people to the house. nevertheless, I willnot give up all hope."
"a man's skin may be thicken, I suppose."
"No doubt;--as a blacksmith's arm."
but the Duke of St. Bungay, though he declare that he wouldnot give
up hope, be very uneasy on the matter. "why willnot you let I go?"
the other Duke have say to he.
"What;--because such a man as Sir Orlando Drought throw up his
office?"
but in truth the Duke of Omnium have not be instigate to ask the
question by the resignation of Sir Orlando. at that very moment
the "People's Banner" have be put out of sight at the bottom of a
heap of other newspaper behind the Prime Minister's chair, and his
present misery have be produce by Mr. Quintus Slide. to have a
fester wound and to be able to show the wound to no surgeon, be
wretchedness indeed! "itbe not Sir Orlando, but a sense of general
failure," say the Prime Minister. then his old friend have make use
of that argument of the ever-recur majority to prove that there
have be no failure. "there seem to have come a lethargy upon the
country," say the poor victim. then the Duke of St. Bungay know that
his friend have read that pernicious article in the "People's Banner,"
for the Duke have also read it and remember that phrase of a
"lethargy on the country," and understand at once how the poison have
rankle.
it be a week before he would consent to ask any man to fill the
vacancy make by Sir Orlando. he would not allow suggestion to be
make to he and yet would name no one himself. the old Duke, indeed,
do make a suggestion, and anything come from he be of course
bear with patience. Barrington Erle, he think, would do for the
Admiralty. but the Prime Minister shake his head. "in the first place
he would refuse, and that would be a great blow to I."
"I could sound he," say the old Duke. but the Prime Minister again
shake his head and turn the subject. with all his timidity he be
become autocratic and peevishly imperious. then he go to Lord
Cantrip, and when Lord Cantrip, with all the kindness which he could
throw into his word, state the reason which induce he at present
to decline office, he be again in despair. at last he ask Phineas
Finn to move to the Admiralty, and, when our old friend somewhat
reluctantly obey, of course he have the same difficulty in fill
the office Finn have hold. other change and other complication
become necessary, and Mr. Quintus Slide, who hat Phineas Finn
even bad than the poor Duke, find ample scope for his patriotic
indignation.
this all take place in the closing week of the session, fill our
poor Prime Minister with trouble and dismay, just when other people
be complain that there be nothing to think of and nothing to
do. man do not really like leave London before the grouse call
them,--the grouse, or rather the fashion of the grouse. and some
lady be very angry at be separate so soon from their swain
in the city. the tradesman too be displeased,--so that there be
voice to re-echo the abuse of the "People's Banner." the Duchess have
do she good to prolong the Session by another week, tell she
husband of the evil consequence above suggest, but he have throw
wide his arm and ask she with affected dismay whether he be to
keep Parliament sit in order that more ribbon might be sell!
"there be nothing to be do," say the Duke almost angrily.
"then you should make something to be do," say the Duchess,
mimic he.
CHAPTER XLII
retribution
the Duchess have be at work with her husband for the last two month
in the hope of renew her autumnal festivity, but have be
lamentably unsuccessful. the Duke have declare that there should be
no more rural crowd, no repetition of what he call London turn
loose on his own ground. he could not forget the necessity which have
be impose upon he of turn Major Pountney out of his house, or
the change that have be make in his garden, or his wife's attempt
to conquer he at Silverbridge. "do you mean," she say, "that we be
to have nobody?" he reply that he think it would be good to go to
Matching. "and live a Darby and Joan life?" say the Duchess.
"I say nothing of Darby and Joan. whatever may be my feeling I
hardly think that you be fit for that kind of thing. matching be
not so big as Gatherum, but it be not a cottage. of course you can
ask your own friend."
"I donot know what you mean by my own friend. I endeavour always to
ask yours."
"I donot know that Major Pountney, and Captain Gunner, and Mr. Lopez
be ever among the number of my friend."
"I suppose you mean Lady Rosina?" say the Duchess. "I shall be happy
to have she at matching if you wish it."
"I should like to see Lady Rosina De Courcy at Matching very much."
"and be there to be nobody else? Ibe afraid I should find it rather
dull while you two be open your heart to each other." here
he look at she angrily. "can you think of anybody besides Lady
Rosina?"
"I suppose you will wish to have Mrs. Finn?"
"what an arrangement! Lady Rosina for you to flirt with, and Mrs.
Finn for I to grumble to."
"that be an odious word," say the Prime Minister.
"What;--flirting? I donot see anything bad about the word. the thing
be dangerous. but you be quite at liberty if you donot go beyond
Lady Rosina. I should like to know whether you would wish anybody
else to come?" of course he make no become answer to this question,
and of course no become answer be expect. he know that she be
try to provoke he because he would not let she do this year
as she have do last. the house, he have no doubt, would be full
to overflow when he get there. he could not help that. but as
compare with Gatherum Castle the house at Matching be small, and
his domestic authority suffice at any rate for shut up Gatherum
for the time.
I do not know whether at time her suffering be not as acute as
his own. he, at any rate, be Prime Minister, and it seem to she
that she be to be reduce to nothing. at the beginning of it all
he have, with unwonted tenderness, ask she for her sympathy in his
undertaking, and, accord to her power, she have give it to he
with her whole heart. she have think that she have see a way by
which she might assist he in his great employment, and she have
work at it like a slave. every day she tell herself that she do
not, herself, love the Captain Gunners and Major Pountneys, nor the
Sir Orlandos, nor, indeed, the Lady Rosinas. she have not follow
the bent of her own inclination when she have descend to sheet and
towel, and busy herself to establish an archery-ground. she have
not shoot an arrow during the whole season, nor have she care who have
win and who have lose. it have not be for her own personal delight
that she have keep open house for forty person throughout four month
of the year, in do which he have never take an ounce of the labour
off her shoulder by any single word or deed! it have all be do
for his sake,--that his reign might be long and triumphant, that the
world might say that his hospitality be noble and full, that his
name might be in man's mouth, and that he might prosper as a british
Minister. such, at least, be the assertion which she make to
herself, when she think of her own grievance and her own trouble.
and now she be angry with her husband. it be very well for he
to ask for her sympathy, but he have none to give she in return! he
could not pity she failures,--even though he have himself cause they!
if he have a grain of intelligence about he he must, she think,
understand well enough how sore it must be for she to descend from
her princely entertainment to solitude at Matching, and thus to own
before all the world that she be beat. then when she ask he
for advice, when she be really anxious to know how far she might go
in fill her house without offend he, he tell she to ask Lady
Rosina De Courcy! if he choose to be ridiculous he might. she would
ask Lady Rosina De Courcy. in her active anger she do write to Lady
Rosina De Courcy a formal letter, in which she say that the Duke
hop to have the pleasure of her ladyship's company at Matching Park
on the 1st of August. it be an absurd letter, somewhat long, write
very much in the Duke's name, with overwhelming expression of
affection, instigate in the writer's mind partly by the fun of the
supposition that such a man as her husband should flirt with such a
woman as Lady Rosina. there be something too of anger in what she
write, some touch of revenge. she send off this invitation, and she
send no other. Lady Rosina take it all in good part, and reply
say that she should have the great pleasure in go to
Matching. she have declare to herself that she would ask none but
those he have name, and in accordance with her resolution she send
out no other write invitation.
he have also tell she to ask Mrs. Finn. now this have become almost a
matter of course. there have grow up from accidental circumstance so
strong a bond between these two woman, that it be take for grant
by both their husband that they should be nearly always within
reach of one another. and the two husband be also on kindly, if
not affectionate, term with each other. the nature of the Duke's
character be such that, with a most love heart, he be hardly
capable of that opening out of himself to another which be necessary
for positive friendship. there be a stiff reserve about he, of
which he be himself only too conscious, which almost prohibit
friendship. but he like Mr. Finn both as a man and a member of his
party, and be always satisfied to have he as a guest. the Duchess,
therefore, have take it for grant that Mrs. Finn would come to
her,--and that Mr. Finn would come also during any time that he might
be able to escape from Ireland. but, when the invitation be verbally
convey, Mr. Finn have go to the Admiralty, and have already make
his arrangement for go to sea, as a gallant sailor should. "we
be go away in the 'Black Watch' for a couple of month," say
Mrs. Finn. now the "Black Watch" be the Admiralty yacht.
"Heavens and earth!" ejaculate the Duchess.
"it be always do. the First Lord would have his epaulet strip
if he donot go to sea in August."
"and must you go with he?"
"I have promise."
"I think it very unkind,--very hard upon I. of course you know that
I should want you."
"but if my husband want I too?"
"bother your husband! I wish with all my heart I have never help to
make up the match."
"it would have be make up just the same, Lady Glen."
"you know that I cannot get on without you. and he ought to know it
too. there benot another person in the world that I can really say a
thing to."
"why donot you have Mrs. Grey?"
"shebe go to Persia after her husband. and then she be not wicked
enough. she always lecture I, and she do it still. what do you
think be go to happen?"
"nothing terrible, I hope," say Mrs. Finn, mindful of her husband's
new honour at the Admiralty, and hop that the Duke might not have
repeat his threat of resign.
"we be go to Matching."
"so I suppose."
"and whom do you think we be go to have?"
"not Major Pountney?"
"no;--not at my asking."
"nor Mr. Lopez?"
"nor yet Mr. Lopez. guess again."
"I suppose there will be a dozen to guess."
"no," shriek the Duchess. "there will only be one. I have ask
one,--at his special desire,--and as you willnot come I shall ask
nobody else. when I press he to name a second he name you. Iwill
obey he to the letter. now, my dear, who do you think be the choose
one,--the one person who be to solace the perturb spirit of the
Prime Minister for the three month of the autumn?"
"Mr. Warburton, I should say."
"oh, Mr. Warburton! no doubt Mr. Warburton will come as a part of
his luggage, and possibly half-a-dozen Treasury clerk. he declare,
however, that there be nothing to do, and therefore Mr. Warburton's
strength may alone suffice to help he to do it. there be to be one
unnecessary guest,--unnecessary, that be, for official purpose;
though,--oh,--so much need for his social happiness. guess once
more."
"know the spirit of mischief that be in you,--perhap it be Lady
Rosina."
"of course it be Lady Rosina," say the Duchess, clap her hand
together. "and I should like to know what you mean by a spirit of
mischief! I ask he, and he himself say that he particularly
wish to have Lady Rosina at Matching. now, Ibe not a jealous
woman,--am I?"
"not of Lady Rosina."
"I donot think theywill do any harm together, but it be particular,
you know. however, she be to come. and nobody else be to come. I do
count upon you." then Mrs. Finn counsel she very seriously as to
the bad taste of such a joke, explain to she that the Duke have
certainly not intend that her invitation should be confine to
Lady Rosina. but it be not all joke with the Duchess. she have be
drive almost to despair, and be very angry with her husband. he have
bring the thing upon himself, and must now make the good of it. she
would ask nobody else. she declare that there be nobody whom she
could ask with propriety. she be tired of ask. let she ask whom
she would, he be dissatisfied. the only two people he care to see
be Lady Rosina and the old Duke. she have ask Lady Rosina for his
sake. let he ask his old friend himself if he please.
the Duke and Duchess with all the family go down together, and Mr.
Warburton go with they. the Duchess have say not a word more to her
husband about his guest, nor have he allude to the subject. but each
be labour under a conviction that the other be misbehaving, and
with that feeling it be impossible that there should be confidence
between they. he busy himself with book and papers,--alway
turn over those pile of newspaper to see what evil be say of
himself,--and speak only now and again to his private Secretary.
she engage herself with the child or pretend to read a novel.
her heart be sore within she. she have wish to punish he, but in
truth she be punish herself.
on the day of their arrival, the father and mother, with Lord
Silverbridge, the eld son, who be home from Eton, and the private
Secretary din together. as the Duke sit at table, he begin to think
how long it be since such a state of thing have happen to he
before, and his heart soften towards she. instead of be make
angry by the strangeness of her proceeding, he take delight in
it, and in the course of the evening speak a word to signify his
satisfaction. "Ibe afraid it willnot last long," she say, "for Lady
Rosina come to-morrow."
"oh, indeed."
"you bid I ask she yourself."
then he perceive it all;--how she have take advantage of his former
answer to she and have act upon it in a spirit of contradictory
petulance. but he resolve that he would forgive it and endeavour
to bring she back to he. "I think we be both joke," he say
good-humouredly.
"oh, no! I never suspect you of a joke. at any rate she be come."
"she will do neither of we any harm. and Mrs. Finn?"
"you have send she to sea."
"she may be at sea,--and he too; but it be without my sending. the
First Lord, I believe, usually do go a cruise. be there nobody
else?"
"nobody else,--unless you have ask any one."
"not a creature. Well;--so much the well. I dare say Lady Rosina
will get on very well."
"you will have to talk to she," say the Duchess.
"I will do my good," say the Duke.
Lady Rosina come and no doubt do think it odd. but she do not say
so, and it really do seem to the Duchess as though all her vengeance
have be blow away by the wind. and she too laugh at the
matter--to herself, and begin to feel less cross and less perverse.
the world do not come to an end because she and her husband with
Lady Rosina and her boy and the private Secretary sit down to dinner
every day together. the parish clergyman with the neighbouring squire
and his wife and daughter do come one day,--to the relief of M.
Millepois, who have begin to feel that the world have collapse. and
every day at a certain hour the Duke and Lady Rosina walk together
for an hour and a half in the park. the Duchess would have enjoy
it, instead of suffer, could she only have have her friend, Mrs.
Finn, to hear her joke. "now, Plantagenet," she say, "do tell I
one thing. what do she talk about?"
"the trouble of her family generally, I think."
"that cannot last for ever."
"she wear cork sol to her boot and she think a good deal about
they."
"and you listen to she?"
"why not? I can talk about cork sol as well as anything else.
anything that may do material good to the world at large, or even to
yourself privately, be a fit subject for conversation to rational
people."
"I suppose I never be one of they."
"but I can talk upon anything," continue the Duke, "as long as the
talker talk in good faith and do not say thing that should not be
say, or deal with matter that be offensive. I could talk for an
hour about banker' account, but I should not expect a stranger to
ask I the state of my own. she have almost persuade I to send to
Mr. Sprout of Silverbridge and get some cork sol myself."
"donot do anything of the kind," say the Duchess with animation;--as
though she have secret knowledge that cork sol be specially fatal
to the family of the Pallisers.
"why not, my dear?"
"he be the man who especially, above all other, throw I over at
Silverbridge." then again there come upon his brow that angry frown
which during the last few day have be dissipate by the innocence
of Lady Rosina's conversation. "of course I donot mean to ask you
to take any interest in the borough again. you have say that you
wouldnot, and you be always as good as your word."
"I hope so."
"but I certainly would not employ a tradesman just at your elbow who
have directly oppose what be generally understand in the town to be
your interest."
"what do Mr. Sprout do? this be the first I have hear of it."
"he get Mr. Du Boung to stand against Mr. Lopez."
"I be very glad for the sake of the borough that Mr. Lopez do not
get in."
"so be I. but that be nothing to do with it. Mr. Sprout know at any
rate what my wish be, and go directly against they."
"you be not entitle to have wish in the matter, Glencora."
"thatbe all very well;--but I have, and he know it. as for the future,
of course, the thing be over. but you have do everything for the
borough."
"you mean that the borough have do much for I."
"I know what I mean very well;--and I shall take it very ill if a
shilling out of the Castle ever go into Mr. Sprout's pocket again."
it be needless to trouble the reader at length with the sermon which
he preach she on the occasion,--showe the utter corruption which
must come from the mixing up of politic with trade, or with the
scorn which she throw into the few word with which she interrupt
he from time to time. "whether a man make good shoe, and at a
reasonable price, and charge for they honestly,--that be what you
have to consider," say the Duke impressively.
"Iwould rather pay double for bad shoe to a man who do not thwart I."
"you should not condescend to be thwart in such a matter. you low
yourself by admit such a feeling." and yet he writhe himself
under the lash of Mr. Slide!
"I know an enemy when I see he," say the Duchess, "and as long as I
live Iwill treat an enemy as an enemy."
there be ever so much of it, in the course of which the Duke
declare his purpose of send at once to Mr. Sprout for ever so
many cork sol, and the duchess,--most imprudently,--declare her
purpose of ruin Mr. Sprout. there be something in this threat
which grate terribly against the Duke's sense of honour;--that his
wife should threaten to ruin a poor tradesman, that she should do so
in reference to the political affair of the borough which he all
but owned,--that she should do so in declare opposition to he! of
course he ought to have know that her sin consist simply in her
determination to vex he at the moment. a more good-natured woman do
not live;--or one less prone to ruin any one. but any reference to
the Silverbridge election bring back upon he the remembrance of
the cruel attack which have be make upon he, and render he
for the time moody, morose, and wretche. so they again part ill
friend, and hardly speak when they meet at dinner.
the next morning there reach Matching a letter which greatly add
to his bitterness of spirit against the world in general and against
she in particular. the letter, though mark "private," have be
open, as be all his letter, by Mr. Warburton, but the private
Secretary think it necessary to show the letter to the Prime
Minister. he, when he have read it, tell Warburton that it do not
signify, and maintain for half-an-hour an attitude of quiescence.
then he walk forth, have the letter hide in his hand, and
find his wife alone, give it she to read. "see what you have
bring upon I," he say, "by your interference and disobedience."
the letter be as follows:--
Manchester Square, August 3, 187--.
MY LORD DUKE,
I consider myself entitle to complain to your Grace of
the conduct with which I be treat at the last election
at Silverbridge, whereby I be lead into very heavy
expenditure without the least chance of be return for
the borough. I be aware that I have no direct conversation
with your grace on the subject, and that your grace can
plead that, as between man and man, I have no authority
from yourself for suppose that I should receive your
grace's support. but I be distinctly ask by the Duchess
to stand, and be assure by she that if I do so I should
have all the assistance that your grace's influence could
procure for me;--and it be also explain to I that
your grace's official position make it inexpedient that
your grace on this special occasion should have any
personal conference with your own candidate. under these
circumstance I submit to your grace that I be entitle to
complain of the hardship I have suffer.
I have not be long in the borough before I find that my
position be hopeless. influential man in the town who have
be represent to I as be altogether devoted to your
grace's interest start a third candidate,--a Liberal as
myself,--and the natural consequence be that neither of
we succeed, though my return as your grace's candidate
would have be certain have not this be do. that all
this be preconcerte there can be no doubt, but, before
the mine be spring on me,--immediately, indeed, on my
arrival, if I remember rightly,--an application be make
to I for l500, so that the money might be exact before
the truth be know to I. of course I should not have
pay the l500 have I know that your grace's usual agent
in the town,--i may name Mr. Sprout especially,--were
prepare to act against I. but I do pay the money,
and I think your grace will agree with I that a very
opprobrious term might be apply without injustice to the
transaction.
my Lord Duke, I be a poor man;--ambitious I will own,
whether that be a sin or a virtue,--and willing, perhaps,
to incur expenditure which can hardly be justify in
pursuit of certain public object. but I must say, with
the most lively respect for your grace personally, that I
do not feel inclined to sit down tamely under such a loss
as this. I should not have dream of interfere in the
election at Silverbridge have not the Duchess exhort I
to do so. I would not even have run the risk of a doubtful
contest. but I come forward at the suggestion of the
Duchess, back by her personal assurance that the seat
be certain as be in your grace's hand. it be no
doubt understand that your Grace would not yourself
interfere, but it be equally well understand that your
Grace's influence be for the time depute to the Duchess.
the Duchess herself will, I be sure, confirm my statement
that I have her direct authority for regard myself as
your grace's candidate.
I can of course bring an action against Mr. Wise, the
gentleman to whom I pay the money, but I feel that as a
gentleman I should not do so without reference to your
Grace, as circumstance might possibly be bring out in
evidence,--i will not say prejudicial to your grace,--but
which would be unbecoming. I cannot, however, think that
your grace will be willing that a poor man like myself,
in his search for an entrance into public life, should be
mulct to so heavy an extent in consequence of an error
on the part of the Duchess. should your grace be able
to assist I in my view of get into Parliament for
any other seat I shall be willing to abide the loss I
have incur. I hardly, however, dare to hope for such
assistance. in this case I think your grace ought to see
that I be reimburse.
I have the honour to be,
my Lord Duke,
your grace's very faithful servant,
ferdinand lopez.
the Duke stand over she in her own room upstairs, with his back to
the fireplace and his eye fix upon she while she be read this
letter. he give she ample time, and she do not read it very quickly.
much of it indeed she peruse twice, turn very red in the face as
she do so. she be thus studious partly because the letter astound
even she, and partly because she want time to consider how she
would meet his wrath. "well," say he, "what do you say to that?"
"the man be a blackguard,--of course."
"he be so;--though I do not know that I wish to hear he call such
a name by your lip. let he be what he may he be your friend."
"he be my acquaintance."
"he be the man whom you select to be your candidate for the
borough in opposition to my wish, and whom you continue to support
in direct disobedience to my order."
"surely, Plantagenet, we have have all that about disobedience out
before."
"you cannot have such thing 'out,'--as you call it. evil-do will
not bury itself out of the way and be do with. do you feel no shame
at have your name mention a score of time with reprobation as
that man mention it;--at be write about by such a man as that?"
"do you want to make I roll in the gutter because I mistook he for
a gentleman?"
"that be not all,--nor half. in your eagerness to serve such a
miserable creature as this you forget my entreaty, my command,
my position! I explain to you why I, of all man, and you, of all
woman, as a part of I, should not do this thing; and yet you do it,
mistake such a cur as that for a man! what be I to do? how be I to
free myself from the impediment which you make for I? my enemy I
can overcome,--but I cannot escape the pitfall which be make for
I by my own wife. I can only retire into private life and hope to
console myself with my child and my book."
there be a reality of tragedy about he which for the moment
overcome she. she have no joke ready, no sarcasm, no feminine
counter-grumble. little as she agree with he when he speak of the
necessity of retire into private life because a man have write
to he such a letter as this, incapable as she be of understand
fully the nature of the irritation which torment he, still she
know that he be suffer, and acknowledge to herself that she have
be the cause of the agony. "I be sorry," she ejaculate at last.
"what more can I say?"
"what be I to do? what can be say to the man? Warburton read the
letter, and give it I in silence. he could see the terrible
difficulty."
"tear it in piece, and then let there be an end of it."
"I do not feel sure but that he have right on his side. he be, as you
say, certainly a blackguard, or he would not make such a claim. he be
take advantage of the mistake make by a good-natured woman through
her folly and her vanity;"--as he say this the Duchess give an
absurd little pout, but luckily he do not see it,--"and he know
very well that he be do so. but still he have a show of justice on
his side. there be, I suppose, no chance for he at Silverbridge
after I have make myself fully understand. the money be absolutely
waste. it be your persuasion and then your continued encouragement
that lead he on to spend the money."
"pay it then. the loss will not hurt you."
"ah;--if we could but get out of our difficulty by pay! suppose
that I do pay it. I begin to think that I must pay it;--that after
all I cannot allow such a plea to remain unanswered. but when it be
paid;--what then? do you think such a payment make by the Queen's
Minister will not be know to all the newspaper, and that I shall
escape the charge of have bribe the man to hold his tongue?"
"it will be no bribe if you pay he because you think you ought."
"but how shall I excuse it? there be thing do which be holy as
the heavens,--which be clear before God as the light of the sun,
which leave no stain on the conscience, and which yet the malignity
of man can invest with the very blackness of hell! I shall know why
I pay this l500. because she who of all the world be the near and
the dearest to me,"--she look up into his face with amazement, as
he stand stretch out both his arm in his energy,--"has in her
impetuous folly commit a grievous blunder, from which she would
not allow her husband to save she, this sum must be pay to the
wretched craven. but I cannot tell the world that. I cannot say
abroad that this small sacrifice of money be the just mean of
retrieve the injury which you have do."
"say it abroad. say it everywhere."
"no, Glencora."
"do you think that I would have you spare I if it be my fault? and
how would it hurt I? will it be new to any one that I have do a
foolish thing? will the newspaper disturb my peace? I sometimes
think, Plantagenet, that I should have be the man, my skin be so
thick; and that you should have be the woman, yours be so tender."
"but it be not so."
"take the advantage, nevertheless, of my toughness. send he the l500
without a word,--or make Warburton do so, or Mr. Moreton. make no
secret of it. then if the paper talk about it--"
"a question might be ask about it in the House."
"or if question in any way,--say that I do it. tell the exact
truth. you be always say that nothing but truth ever serve. let
the truth serve now. I shall not blench. your say it all in the
House of Lords willnot wound I half so much as your look at I as
you do just now."
"do I wound you? God know I would not hurt you willingly."
"never mind. go on. I know you think that I have bring it all on
myself by my own wickedness. pay this man the money, and then if
anything be say about it, explain that it be my fault, and say that
you pay the money because I have do wrong."
when he come in she have be seat on a sofa, which she constantly
use herself, and he have stand over she, masterful, imperious, and
almost tyrannical. she have feel his tyranny, but have resent it
less than usual,--or rather have be less determined in hold she
own against he and assert herself as his equal,--because she
confess to herself that she have injure he. she have, she think,
do but little, but that which she have do have produce this
injury. so she have sit and endure the oppression of his standing
posture. but now he sit down by she, very close to she, and put his
hand upon her shoulder,--almost round her waist.
"Cora," he say, "you do not quite understand it."
"I never understand anything, I think," she answer.
"not in this case,--perhaps never,--what it be that a husband feel
about his wife. do you think that I could say a word against you,
even to a friend?"
"why not?"
"I never do. I never could. if my anger be at the hot I would
not confess to a human being that you be not perfect,--except to
yourself."
"oh, thank you! if you be to scold I vicariously I should feel it
less."
"do not joke with I now, for I be so much in earnest! and if I could
not consent that your conduct should be call in question even by a
friend, do you suppose it possible that I could contrive an escape
from public censure by lay the blame publicly on you?"
"stick to the truth;--thatbe what you always say."
"I certainly shall stick to the truth. a man and his wife be one.
for what she do he be responsible."
"they couldnot hang you, you know, because I commit a murder."
"I should be willing that they should do so. No;--if I pay this money
I shall take the consequence. I shall not do it in any way under the
rose. but I wish you would remember--"
"remember what? I know I shall never forget all this trouble about
that dirty little town, which I never will enter again as long as I
live."
"I wish you would think that in all that you do you be deal with
my feeling, with my heartstring, with my reputation. you cannot
divide yourself from I; nor, for the value of it all, would I wish
that such division be possible. you say that I be thin-skinned."
"certainly you be. what people call a delicate
organisation,--whereas I be rough and thick and monstrously
commonplace."
"then should you too be thin-skinned for my sake."
"I wish I could make you thick-skinned for your own. itbe the only
way to be decently comfortable in such a coarse, rough-and-tumble
world as this be."
"let we both do our good," he say, now put his arm round she and
kiss she. "I think I shall send the man his money at once. it be
the least of two evil. and now let there never be a word more about
it between we."
then he leave she and go back,--not to the study in which he be
willnot, when at Matching, to work with his private Secretary,--but
to a small inner closet of his own, in which many a bitter moment
be spend while he think over that abortive system of decimal
coinage by which he have once hop to make himself one of the great
benefactor of his nation, revolve in his mind the trouble which
his wife bring upon he, and regret the golden inanity of the
coronet which in the very prime of life have expel he from the
House of Commons. here he seat himself, and for an hour neither
stir from his seat, nor touch a pen, nor open a book. he be
try to calculate in his mind what might be the consequence of
pay the money to Mr. Lopez. but when the calculation slip
from him,--as it did,--then he demand of himself whether strict
high-minded justice do not call upon he to pay the money let the
consequence be what they might. and here his mind be true to he,
and he be able to fix himself to a purpose,--though the resolution
to which he come be not, perhaps, wise.
when the hour be over he go to his desk, draw a cheque for l500 in
favour of Ferdinand Lopez, and then cause his Secretary to send it
in the following note:--
Matching, August 4, 187--.
sir,--
the Duke of Omnium have read the letter you have address to he,
date the 3rd instant. the Duke of Omnium, feel that you may
have be induce to undertake the late contest at Silverbridge by
misrepresentation make to you at Gatherum Castle, direct I to
enclose a cheque for l500, that be the sum state by you to have
be expend in carry on the contest at Silverbridge.
I be, sir,
your obedient servant,
ARTHUR WARBURTON.
Ferdinand Lopez, Esq.
CHAPTER XLIII
Kauri Gum
the reader will no doubt think that Ferdinand Lopez must have be
very hardly drive indeed by circumstance before he would have make
such an appeal to the Duke as that give in the last chapter. but
it be not want of money only that have bring it about. it may
be remember that the l500 have already be once repay he by
his father-in-law,--that special sum have be give to he for
that special purpose. and Lopez, when he write to the Duke, assure
himself that if, by any miracle, his letter should produce pecuniary
result in the shape of a payment from the Duke, he would refund the
money so obtain to Mr. Wharton. but when he write the letter he do
not expect to get money,--nor, indeed, do he expect that aid towards
another seat, to which he allude at the close of his letter. he
expect probably nothing but to vex the Duke, and to drive the Duke
into a correspondence with he.
though this man have live nearly all his life in England, he have not
quite acquire that knowledge of the way in which thing be do
which be so general among man of a certain class, and so rare among
those beneath they. he have not understand that the Duchess's promise
of her assistance at Silverbridge might be take by he for what it
be worth, and that her aid might be use as far as it went,--but,
that in the event of its fail he, he be bind in honour to take
the result without complain, whatever that result might be. he
feel that a grievous injury have be do he, and that it behove
he to resent that injury,--even though it be against a woman.
he just know that he could not very well write to the Duchess
herself,--though there be sometimes present to his mind a plan for
attack she in public, and tell she what evil she have do he.
he have half resolve that he would do so in her own garden at the
Horns;--but on that occasion the apparition of Arthur Fletcher have
disturb he, and he have vent his anger in another direction. but
still his wrath against the Duke and Duchess remain, and he be
willnot to indulge it with very violent language as he sit upon one of
the chair in Sexty Parker's office, talk somewhat loudly of his
own position, of the thing that he would do, and of the injury do
he. Sexty Parker sympathise with he to the full,--especially as
that first L500, which he have receive from Mr. Wharton, have go
into Sexty's coffer. at that time Lopez and Sexty be together
commit to large speculation in the guano trade, and Sexty's mind
be by no mean easy in the early period of the day. as he go
into town by his train, he would think of his wife and family and of
the terrible thing that might happen to they. but yet, up to this
period, money have always be forthcoming from Lopez when absolutely
want, and Sexty be quite alive to the fact that he be live
with a freedom of expenditure in his own household that he have never
know before, and that without apparent damage. whenever, therefore,
at some critical moment, a much-need sum of money be produce,
Sexty would become light-hearted, triumphant, and very sympathetic.
"Well;--I never hear such a story," he have say when Lopez be
insist on his wrong. "thatbe what the Dukes and Duchesses call
honour among thief! well, Ferdy, my boy, if you stand that youwill
stand anything." in these latter day Sexty have become very intimate
indeed with his partner.
"I donot mean to stand it," Lopez have reply, and then on the spot
have write the letter which he have date from Manchester Square.
he have certainly contrive to make that letter as oppressive as
possible. he have be clever enough to put into it word which be
sure to wound the poor Duke and to confound the Duchess. and have
write it he be very careful to keep the first draft, so that if
occasion come he might use it again and push his vengeance far.
but he certainly have not expect such a result as it produce.
when he receive the private Secretary's letter with the money he
be sit opposite to his father-in-law at breakfast, while his
wife be make the tea. not many of his letter come to Manchester
Square. Sexty Parker's office or his club be more convenient
address; but in this case he have think that Manchester Square
would have a well sound and appearance. when he open the letter
the cheque of course appear bear the Duke's own signature. he
have see that and the amount before he have read the letter, and
as he see it his eye travel quickly across the table to his
father-in-law's face. Mr. Wharton might certainly have see the
cheque and even the amount, probably also the signature, without the
slight suspicion as to the nature of the payment make. as it be,
he be eat his toast, and have think nothing about the letter.
Lopez, have conceal the cheque, read the few word which the
private Secretary have write, and then put the document with its
content into his pocket. "so you think, sir, of go down to
Herefordshire on the 15th," he say in a very cheery voice. the
cheery voice be still pleasant to the old man, but the young wife
have already come to distrust it. she have learn, though she be
hardly conscious how the lesson have come to she, that a certain tone
of cheeriness indicate, if not deceit, at any rate the concealment
of something. it grate against her spirit; and when this tone
reach her ear a frown or look of sorrow would cross her brow. and
her husband also have perceive that it be so, and know at such time
that he be rebuke. he be hardly aware what doing, and especially
what feeling, be impute to he as faults,--not understand the
line which separate right from wrong; but he know that he be often
condemn by his wife, and he live in fear that he should also be
condemn by his wife's father. have it be his wife only, he think
that he could soon have quench her condemnation. he would soon have
make she tired of show her disapproval. but he have put himself
into the old man's house, where the old man could see not only he
but his treatment of his wife, and the old man's good-will and good
opinion be essential to he. yet he could not restrain one glance
of anger at she when he see that look upon her face.
"I suppose I shall," say the barrister. "I must go somewhere. my
going need not disturb you."
"I think we have make up our mind," say Lopez, "to take a cottage at
Dovercourt. it be not a very lively place, nor yet fashionable. but
it be very healthy, and I can run up to town easily. unfortunately my
business willnot let I be altogether away this autumn."
"I wish my business would keep I," say the barrister.
"I do not understand that you have make up your mind to go to
Dovercourt," say Emily. he have speak to Mr. Wharton of their joint
action in the matter, and as the place have only once be name by
he to she, she resent what seem to be a falsehood. she know
that she be to be take or leave as it suit he. if he have say
boldly,--"we'll go to Dovercourt. thatbe what Ihave settle on.
thatbe what will suit I," she would have be content. she quite
understand that he mean to have his own way in such thing. but
it seem to she that he want to be a tyrant without have the
courage necessary for tyranny.
"I think you seem to like it," he say.
"I donot dislike it at all."
"then, as it suit my business, we might as well consider it
settle." so say, he leave the room and go off to the city. the
old man be still sip his tea and linger over his breakfast in
a way that be not usual with he. he be generally anxious to get
away to Lincoln's Inn, and on most morning have leave the house before
his son-in-law. emily of course remain with he, sit silent in
her place opposite to the teapot, meditate perhaps on her prospect
of happiness at Dovercourt,--a place of which she have never hear
even the name two day ago, and in which it be hardly possible that
she should find even an acquaintance. in former year these autumn
month, pass in Herefordshire, have be the delight of her life.
Mr. Wharton also have see the cloud on his daughter's face, and have
understand the nature of the little dialogue about Dovercourt. and
he be aware,--had be aware since they have both come into his
house,--that the young wife's manner and tone to her husband be not
that of perfect conjugal sympathy. he have already say to himself
more than once that she have make her bed for herself, and must lie
upon it. she be the man's wife, and must take her husband as he be.
if she suffer under this man's mode and manner of life, he, as she
father, could not assist her,--could do nothing for she, unless the
man should become absolutely cruel. he have settle that within his
own mind already; but yet his heart yearn towards she, and when
he think that she be unhappy he long to comfort she and tell
she that she still have a father. but the time have not come as yet
in which he could comfort she by sympathise with she against
her husband. there have never fall from her lip a syllable of
complaint. when she have speak to he a chance word respect she
husband, it have always carry with it some tone of affection. but
still he long to say to her something which might tell she that his
heart be soft towards she. "do you like the idea of go to this
place?" he say.
"I donot at all know what it will be like. Ferdinand say it will be
cheap."
"be that of such vital consequence?"
"ah;--ye; I fear it be."
this be very sad to he. Lopez have already have from he a
considerable sum of money, have not yet be marry twelve month,
and be now live in London almost free of expense. before his
marriage he have always speak of himself, and have contrive to be
speak of, as a wealthy man, and now he be oblige to choose some
small english seaside place to which to retreat, because thus he
might live at a low rate! have they marry as poor people there would
have be nothing to regret in this;--there would be nothing that
might not be do with entire satisfaction. but, as it be, it tell a
bad tale for the future! "do you understand his money matter,
emily?"
"not at all, papa."
"I do not in the least mean to make inquiry. perhaps I should have
ask before;--but if I do make inquiry now it would be of he. but
I think a wife should know."
"I know nothing."
"what be his business?"
"I have no idea. I use to think he be connect with Mr. Mills
Happerton and with Messrs. Hunky and Sons."
"be he not connect with Hunky's house?"
"I think not. he have a partner of the name of Parker, who is,--who be
not, I think, quite--quite a gentleman. I never see he."
"what do he do with Mr. Parker?"
"I believe they buy guano."
"Ah;--that, I fancy, be only one affair."
"Ibe afraid he lose money, papa, by that election at Silverbridge."
"I pay that," say Mr. Wharton sternly. surely he should have tell
his wife that he have receive that money from her family!
"do you? that be very kind. I be afraid, papa, we be a great
burden on you."
"I should not mind it, my dear, if there be confidence and
happiness. what matter would it be to I whether you have your money
now or hereafter, so that you might have it in the manner that would
be most beneficial to you? I wish he would be open with I, and tell
I everything."
"shall I let he know that you say so?"
he think for a minute or two before he answer she. perhaps the
man would be more impressed if the message come to he through his
wife. "if you think that he will not be annoy with you, you may do
so."
"I donot know why he should,--but if it be right, that must be bear.
I be not afraid to say anything to he."
"then tell he so. tell he that it will be well that he should
let I know the whole condition of his affair. God bless you, dear."
then he stoop over she, and kiss she, and go his way to Stone
Buildings.
it be not as he sit at the breakfast table that Ferdinand Lopez make
up his mind to pocket the Duke's money and to say nothing about it to
Mr. Wharton. he have be careful to conceal the cheque, but he have
do so with the feeling that the matter be one to be consider in
his own mind before he take any step. as he leave the house, already
consider it, he be inclined to think that the money must be
surrender. Mr. Wharton have very generously pay his electioneering
expense, but have not do so simply with the view of make he a
present of money. he wish the Duke have not take he at his word.
in hand this cheque over to Mr. Wharton he would be force to tell
the story of his letter to the Duke, and he be sure that Mr. Wharton
would not approve of his have write such a letter. how could
any one approve of his have apply for a sum of money which have
already be pay to he? how could such a one as Mr. Wharton,--an
old-fashioned English gentleman,--approve of such an application
be make under any circumstance? Mr. Wharton would very probably
insist on have the cheque send back to the Duke,--which would be
a sorry end to the triumph as at present achieve. and the more he
think of it the more sure he be that it would be imprudent to
mention to Mr. Wharton his application to the Duke. the old man
of the present day be, he say to himself, such fool that they
understand nothing. and then the money be very convenient to
he. he be intent on obtain Sexty Parker's consent to a large
speculation, and know that he could not do so without a show of
fund. by the time, therefore, that he have reach the city he have
resolve that at any rate for the present he would use the money and
say nothing about it to Mr. Wharton. be it not spoil get from the
enemy by his own courage and cleverness? when he be write his
acknowledgement for the money to Warburton he have teach himself to
look upon the sum extract from the Duke as a matter quite distinct
from the payment make to he by his father-in-law.
it be evident on that day to Sexty Parker that his partner be a
man of great resource. though thing sometimes look very bad, yet
money always "turn up." some of their buying and selling have
answer pretty well. some have be great failure. no great stroke
have be make as yet, but then the great stroke be always be
expect. Sexty's fear be greatly exaggerate by the feeling that
the coffee and guano be not always real coffee and guano. his
partner, indeed, be of opinion that in such a trade as this they
be follow there be no need at all of real coffee and real
guano, and explain his theory with considerable eloquence. "if I
buy a ton of coffee and keep it six week, why do I buy it and keep
it, and why do the seller sell it instead of keep it? the seller
sell it because he think he can do well by part with it now at a
certain price. I buy it because I think I can make money by keep
it. it be just the same as though we be to back our opinion. he
back the fall. I back the rise. you neednot have coffee and you
neednot have guano to do this. indeed the possession of the coffee
or the guano be only a very clumsy addition to the trouble of your
profession. I make it my study to watch the markets;--but I neednot
buy everything I see in order to make money by my labour and
intelligence." Sexty Parker before his lunch always think that his
partner be wrong, but after that ceremony he almost daily become
a convert to the great doctrine. Coffee and guano still have to be
buy because the world be dull and would not learn the trick of
trade as teach by Ferdinand lopez,--also possibly because somebody
might want such articles,--but our enterprise hero look for a
time in which no such dull burden should be impose on he.
on this day, when the Duke's l500 be turn into the business, Sexty
yield in a large matter which his partner have be press upon
he for the last week. they buy a cargo of Kauri gum, come from
New Zealand. Lopez have reason for think that Kauri gum must have
a great rise. there be an immense demand for amber, and Kauri gum
might be use as a substitute, and in six month' time would be
double its present value. this unfortunately be a real cargo. he
could not find an individual so enterprising as to venture to deal in
a cargo of Kauri gum after his fashion. but the next good thing be
do. the real cargo be buy, and his name and Sexty's name be
on the bill give for the good. on that day he return home in
high spirit, for he do believe in his own intelligence and good
fortune.
CHAPTER XLIV
Mr. Wharton intend to make a New will
on that afternoon, immediately on the husband's return to the house,
his wife speak to he as her father have desire. on that evening Mr.
Wharton be din at his club, and therefore there be the whole
evening before they; but the thing to be do be disagreeable, and
therefore she do it at once,--rushing into the matter almost before
he have seat himself in the arm-chair which he have appropriate to
his use in the drawing-room. "Papa be talk about our affair
after you leave this morning, and he think that it would be so much
well if you would tell he all about they."
"what make he talk of that to-day?" he say, turn at she almost
angrily and think at once of the Duke's cheque.
"I suppose it be natural that he should be anxious about we,
ferdinand;--and the more natural as he have money to give if he
choose to give it."
"I have ask he for nothing lately;--though, by George, I intend to
ask he and that very roundly. three thousand pound benot much of a
sum of money for your father to have give you."
"and he pay the election bill;--didn't he?"
"he have be complain of that behind my back,--has he? I donot
ask he for it. he offer it. I benot such a fool as to refuse, but
he neednot bring that up as a grievance to you."
"it benot bring up as a grievance. I be say that your standing
have be a heavy expenditure--"
"why do you say so? what make you talk about it at all? why should
you be discuss my affair behind my back?"
"to my own father! and that too when you be tell I every day
that I be to induce he to help you!"
"not by complain that I be poor. but how do it all begin?" she
have to think for a moment before she could recollect how it do
begin. "there have be something," he say, "which you be ashamed to
tell I."
"there be nothing that I be ashamed to tell you. there never have be
and never will be anything." and she stand up as she speak, with open
eye and extended nostril. "whatever may come, however wretche it
may be, I shall not be ashamed of myself."
"but of I!"
"why do you say so? why do you try to make unhappiness between we?"
"you have be talk of--my poverty."
"my father ask why you should go to dovercourt,--and whether it be
because it would save expense."
"you want to go somewhere?"
"not at all. I be content to stay in London. but I say that I
think the expense have a good deal to do with it. of course it have."
"where do you want to be take? I suppose Dovercourt be not
fashionable."
"I want nothing."
"if you be think of travel abroad, I cannot spare the time.
it benot an affair of money, and you have no business to say so. I
think of the place because it be quiet and because I can get up and
down easily. I be sorry that I ever come to live in this house."
"why do you say that, Ferdinand?"
"because you and your father make cabal behind my back. if there be
anything I hate it be that kind of thing."
"you be very unjust," she say to he sob. "I have never
cabal. I have never do anything against you. of course papa
ought to know."
"why ought he to know? why be your father to have the right of
inquiry into all my private affair?"
"because you want his assistance. it be only natural. you always tell
I to get he to assist you. he speak most kindly, say that he
would like to know how the thing be."
"then he willnot know. as for want his assistance, of course I
want the fortune which he ought to give you. he be man of the world
enough to know that as I be in business capital must be useful to
I. I should have think that you would understand as much as that
yourself."
"I do understand it, I suppose."
"then why donot you act as my friend rather than his? why donot you
take my part? it seem to I that you be much more his daughter than
my wife."
"that be most unfair."
"if you have any pluck you would make he understand that for your
sake he ought to say what he mean to do, so that I might have the
advantage of the fortune which I suppose he mean to give you some
day. if you have the slight anxiety to help I you could influence
he. instead of that you talk to he about my poverty. I donot want
he to think that I be a pauper. thatbe not the way to get round
a man like your father, who be rich himself and who think it a
disgrace in other man not to be rich too."
"I cannot tell he in the same breath that you be rich and that you
want money."
"money be the mean by which man make money. if he be confident of
my business hewould shell out his cash quick enough! it be because he
have be teach to think that I be in a small way. hewill find his
mistake some day."
"you willnot speak to he then?"
"I donot say that at all. if I find that it will answer my own
purpose I shall speak to he. but it would be very much easy to I
if I could get you to be cordial in help I."
Emily by this time quite know what such cordiality mean. he have be
so free in his word to she that there could be no mistake. he have
instruct she to "get round" her father. and now again he speak
of her influence over her father. although her illusion be all
melting away,--oh, so quickly vanishing,--still she know that it be
her duty to be true to her husband, and to be his wife rather than
her father's daughter. but what could she say on his behalf, know
nothing of his affair? she have no idea what be his business, what
be his income, what amount of money she ought to spend as his
wife. as far as she could see,--and her common sense in see such
thing be good,--he have no regular income, and be justify in no
expenditure. on her own account she would ask for no information. she
be too proud to request that from he which should be give to she
without any request. but in her own defence she must tell he that
she could use no influence with her father as she know none of the
circumstance by which her father would be guide. "I cannot help you
in the manner you mean," she say, "because I know nothing myself."
"you know that you can trust I to do the good with your money if I
could get hold of it, I suppose?" she certainly do not know this,
and hold her tongue. "you could assure he of that?"
"I could only tell he to judge for himself."
"what you mean be that youwould see I d----d before you would open your
mouth for I to the old man!"
he have never swear at she before, and now she burst out into a flood
of tear. it be to she a terrible outrage. I do not know that a
woman be very much the bad because her husband may forget himself
on an occasion and "rap out an oath at she," as he would call it when
make the good of his own sin. such an offence be compatible with
uniform kindness and most affectionate consideration. I have know
lady who would think little or nothing about it,--who would go no
far than the mild protest,--"do remember where you be!" or,
"my dear john!"--if no stranger be present. but then a wife should
be initiate into it by degree; and there be different tone of
bad language, of which by far the most general be the good-humour
tone. we all of we know man who never damn their servant, or any
inferior, or stranger, or women,--who in fact keep it all for
their bosom friend; and if a little do sometimes flow over in
the freedom of domestic life, the wife be apt to remember that she
be the bosomest of her husband's friend, and so to pardon the
transgression. but here the word have be utter with all its
foul violence, with virulence and vulgarity. it seem to the
victim to be the sign of a terrible crisis in her early married
life,--as though the man who have so speak to she could never again
love she, never again be kind to she, never again be sweetly gentle
and like a lover. and as he speak it he look at she as though he
would like to tear her limb asunder. she be frightened as well as
horrified and astound. she have not a word to say to he. she do
not know in what language to make her complaint of such treatment.
she burst into tear, and throw herself on the sofa hide her face
in her hand. "you provoke I to be violent," he say. but still she
could not speak to he. "I come away from the city, tired with work
and trouble with a thousand thing, and you have not a kind word to
say to I." then there be a pause, during which she still sob.
"if your father have anything to say to I, let he say it. I shall
not run away. but as to go to he of my own accord with a story as
long as my arm about my own affair, I donot mean to do it." then he
pause a moment again. "come, old girl, cheer up! donot pretend to
be break-hearted because I use a hard word. there be bad thing
than that to be bear in the world."
"I--I--I be so startled, Ferdinand."
"a man cannot always remember that he benot with another man. donot
think anything more about it; but do bear this in mind,--that,
situate as we be, your influence with your father may be the making
or the marring of I." and so he leave the room.
she sit for the next ten minute think of it all. the word which
he have speak be so horrible that she could not get they out of she
mind,--could not bring herself to look upon they as a trifle. the
darkness of his countenance still dwelt with her,--and that absence
of all tenderness, that coarse un-marital and yet marital roughness,
which should not at any rate have come to he so soon. the whole man
too be so different from what she have think he to be. before
their marriage no word as to money have ever reach her ear from
his lip. he have talk to she of books,--and especially of poetry.
Shakespeare and Moliere, Dante and Goethe, have be or have seem
to be dear to he. and he have be full of fine idea about woman,
and about man in their intercourse with woman. for his sake she have
separate herself from all her old friend. for his sake she have
hurry into a marriage altogether distasteful to her father. for
his sake she have close her heart against that other lover. trust
altogether in he she have venture to think that she have know what
be good for she well than all those who have be her counsellor,
and have give herself to he utterly. now she be awake; her dream
be over, and the natural language of the man be still ring in
her ear!
they meet together at dinner and pass the evening without a further
allusion to the scene which have be act. he sit with a magazine
in his hand, every now and then make some remark intend to be
pleasant but which grate on her ear as be fictitious. she would
answer him,--because it be her duty to do so, and because she would
not condescend to sulk; but she could not bring herself even to say
to herself that all should be with she as though that horrid word have
not be speak. she sit over her work till ten, answer he when
he speak in a voice which be also fictitious, and then take herself
off to her bed that she might weep alone. it would, she know, be late
before he would come to she.
on the next morning there come a message to he as he be dress.
Mr. Wharton wish to speak to he. would he come down before
breakfast, or would he call on Mr. Wharton in Stone Buildings? he
send down word that he would do the latter at an hour he fix, and
then do not show himself in the breakfast-room till Mr. Wharton be
go. "Ihave get to go to your father to-day," he say to his wife,
"and I think it well not to begin till we come to the regular
business. I hope he do not mean to be unreasonable." to this she
make no answer. "of course you think the want of reason will be all
on my side."
"I donot know why you should say so."
"because I can read your mind. you do think so. youhave be in the
same boat with your father all your life, and you cannot get out of
that boat and get into mine. I be wrong to come and live here.
of course it be not the way to withdraw you from his influence."
she have nothing to say that would not anger he, and be therefore
silent. "well; I must do the good I can by myself, I suppose.
good-bye," and so he be off.
"I want to know," say Mr. Wharton, on whom be throw by
premeditation on the part of Lopez the task of begin the
conversation,--"i want to know what be the nature of your operation.
I have never be quite able to understand it."
"I do not know that I quite understand it myself," say lopez,
laugh.
"no man alive," continue the old barrister almost solemnly, "have a
great objection to thrust himself into another man's affair than
I have. and as I donot ask the question before your marriage,--as
perhaps I ought to have done,--i should not do so now, be it not
that the disposition of some part of the earning of my life must
depend on the condition of your affair." Lopez immediately perceive
that it behove he to be very much on the alert. it might be that
if he show himself to be very poor, his father-in-law would see
the necessity of assist he at once; or, it might be, that
unless he could show himself to be in prosperous circumstance,
his father-in-law would not assist he at all. "to tell you the
plain truth, I be minded to make a new will. I have of course make
arrangement as to my property before Emily's marriage. those
arrangement I think I shall now alter. I be greatly distressed with
Everett; and from what I see and from a few word which have drop
from Emily, I be not, to tell you the truth, quite happy as to your
position. if I understand rightly you be a general merchant, buy
and sell good in the market?"
"thatbe about it, sir."
"what capital have you in the business?"
"what capital?"
"yes;--how much do you put into it at start?"
Lopez pause a moment. he have get his wife. the marriage could not
be undo. Mr. Wharton have money enough for they all, and would not
certainly discard his daughter. Mr. Wharton could place he on a
really firm footing, and might not improbably do so if he could be
make to feel some confidence in his son-in-law. at this moment there
be much doubt with the son-in-law whether he have well not tell the
simple truth. "it have go in by degree," he say. "altogether I
have have about L8000 in it." in truth he have never be possess of
a shilling.
"do that include the L3000 you have from I?"
"yes; it do."
"then you have marry my girl and start into the world with a
business base on L5000, and which have so far miscarry that within
a month or two after your marriage you be drive to apply to I for
fund!"
"I want money for a certain purpose."
"have you any partner, Mr. Lopez?" this address be feel to be very
ominous.
"yes. I have a partner who be possess of capital. his name be
Parker."
"then his capital be your capital."
"Well;--I cannot explain it, but it be not so."
"what be the name of your firm?"
"we havenot a register name."
"have you a place of business?"
"Parker have a place of business in Little Tankard Yard."
Mr. Wharton turn to a directory and find out Parker's name. "Mr.
Parker be a stockbroker. be you also a stockbroker?"
"No,--I be not."
"then, sir, it seem to I that you be a commercial adventurer."
"I be not at all ashamed of the name, Mr. Wharton. accord to your
manner of reckoning, half the business in the City of London be do
by commercial adventurer. I watch the market and buy goods,--and
sell they at a profit. Mr. Parker be a moneyed man, who happen also
to be a stockbroker. we can very easily call ourselves merchant, and
put up the name of Lopez and Parker over the door."
"do you sign bill together?"
"yes."
"as Lopez and Parker?"
"no. I sign they and he sign they. I trade also by myself, and so, I
believe, do he."
"one other question, Mr. Lopez. on what income have you pay
income-tax for the last three year?"
"on L2000 a-year," say lopez. this be a direct lie.
"can you make out any schedule show your exact asset and
liability at the present time?"
"certainly I can."
"then do so, and send it to I before I go into Herefordshire. my
will as it stand at present would not be to your advantage. but I
cannot change it till I know more of your circumstance than I do
now." and so the interview be over.
CHAPTER XLV
Mrs. Sexty Parker
though Mr. Wharton and Lopez meet every day for the next week, nothing
more be say about the schedule. the old man be think about
it every day, and so also be lopez. but Mr. Wharton have make his
demand, and, as he think, nothing more be to be say on the
subject. he could not continue the subject as he would have do
with his son. but as day after day pass by he become more and more
convince that his son-in-law's affair be not in a state which
could bear to see the light. he have declare his purpose of alter
his will in the man's favour, if the man would satisfy he. and yet
nothing be do and nothing be say.
Lopez have come among they and rob he of his daughter. since the
man have become intimate in his house he have not know an hour's
happiness. the man have destroy all the plan of his life, break
through into his castle, and violate his very hearth. no doubt he
himself have vacillate. he be aware of that, and in his present mood
be severe enough in judge himself. in his desolation he have try
to take the man to his heart,--had be kind to he, and have even
open his house to he. he have tell himself that as the man be the
husband of his daughter he have well make the good of it. he have
endeavour to make the good of it, but between he and the man there
be such difference that they be pole asunder. and now it become
clear to he that the man be, as he have declare to the man's face,
no well than an adventurer!
by his will as it at present stand he have leave two-third of his
property to Everett, and one-third to his daughter, with arrangement
for settle her share on her child, should she be marry and
have child at the time of his death. this will have be make many
year ago, and he have long since determine to alter it, in order
that he might divide his property equally between his children;--but
he have postpone the matter, intend to give a large portion of
Emily's share to she directly on her marriage with Arthur Fletcher.
she have not marry Arthur Fletcher;--but still it be necessary that
a new will should be make.
when he leave town for Herefordshire he have not yet make up his mind
how this should be do. he have at one time think that he would
give some considerable sum to Lopez at once, know that to a man in
business such assistance would be useful. and he have not altogether
abandon that idea, even when he have ask for the schedule. he do
not relish the thought of give his hard-earn money to Lopez, but,
still, the man's wife be his daughter, and he must do the good that
he could for she. her taste in marry the man be inexplicable
to he. but that be done;--and now how might he well arrange his
affair so as to serve her interest?
about the middle of August he go to Herefordshire and she to the
seaside in Essex,--to the little place which Lopez have select.
before the end of the month the father-in-law write a line to his
son-in-law.
dear lopez, [not without premeditation have he depart
from the sternness of that "Mr. Lopez," which in his anger
he have use at his chambers]--
when we be discuss your affair I ask you for a
schedule of your asset and liability. I can make no new
arrangement of my property till I receive this. should I
die leave my present will as the instrument under which
my property would be convey to my heir, Emily's share
would go into the hand of trustee for the use of herself
and her possible child. I tell you this that you may
understand that it be for your own interest to comply with
my requisition.
your,
A. WHARTON.
of course question be ask he as to how the newly married couple
be get on. at Wharton these question be mild and easily put
off. Sir Alured be content with a slight shake of his head, and
Lady Wharton only remark for the fifth or sixth time that "it be
a pity." but when they all go to Longbarns, the difficulty become
great. Arthur be not there, and old Mrs. Fletcher be in full
strength. "so the Lopezes have come to live with you in Manchester
Square?" Mr. Wharton acknowledge that it be so with an affirmative
grunt. "I hope hebe a pleasant inmate." there be a scorn in the old
woman's voice as she say this, which ought to have provoke any man.
"more so than most man would be," say Mr. Wharton.
"oh, indeed!"
"he be courteous and forbearing, and do not think that everything
around he should be suit to his own peculiar fancy."
"I be glad that you be content with the marriage, Mr. Wharton."
"who have say that I be content with it? no one ought to
understand or to share my discontent so cordially as yourself, Mrs.
Fletcher;--and no one ought to be more chary of speak of it.
you and I have hop other thing, and old people do not like to be
disappointed. but I neednot paint the devil blacker than he be."
"Ibe afraid that, as usual, he be rather black."
"Mother," say John Fletcher, "the thing have be do and you might
as well let it be. we be all sorry that Emily have not come nearer
to we; but she have have a right to choose for herself, and I for one
wish,--as do my brother also,--that she may be happy in the lot she
have choose."
"his conduct to Arthur at Silverbridge be so nice!" say the
pertinacious old woman.
"never mind his conduct, mother. what be it to we?"
"thatbe all very well, John; but accord to that nobody be to talk
about anybody."
"I would much prefer, at any rate," say Mr. Wharton, "that you would
not talk about Mr. Lopez in my hearing."
"oh; if that be to be so, let it be so. and now I understand where
I be." then the old woman shake herself, and endeavour to look as
though Mr. Wharton's soreness on the subject be an injury to she as
rob she of a useful topic.
"I donot like Lopez, you know," Mr. Wharton say to John Fletcher
afterwards. "how would it be possible that I should like such a man?
but there can be no good get by complaint. it be not what your
mother suffer, or what even I may suffer,--or worse again, what
Arthur may suffer, that make the sadness of all this. what will be
her life? that be the question. and it be too near I, too important
to I, for the endurance either of scorn or pity. I be glad that you
ask your mother to be silent."
"I can understand it," say John. "I do not think that she will
trouble you again."
in the mean time Lopez receive Mr. Wharton's letter at Dovercourt,
and have to consider what answer he should give to it. no answer
could be satisfactory,--unless he could impose a false answer on his
father-in-law so as to make it credible. the more he think of it,
the more he believe that this would be impossible. the cautious
old lawyer would not accept unverified statement. a certain sum of
money,--by no mean illiberal as a present,--he have already extract
from the old man. what he want be a furth and a much large
grant. though Mr. Wharton be old he do not want to have to wait for
the death even of an old man. the next two or three years,--probably
the very next year,--might be the turning-point of his life. he have
marry the girl, and ought to have the girl's fortune,--down on
the nail! that be his idea; and the old man be rob he in
not act up to it. as he think of this he curse his ill luck.
the husband of other girl have their fortune convey to they
immediately on their marriage. what would not L20,000 do for he, if
he could get it into his hand? and so he teach himself to regard
the old man as a robber and himself as a victim. who among we be
there that do not teach himself the same lesson? and then too how
cruelly, how damnably he have be use by the Duchess of Omnium! and
now Sexty Parker, whose fortune he be make for he, whose fortune
he at any rate intend to make, be trouble he in various way.
"webe in a boat together," Sexty have say. "youhave have the use of my
money, and by heaven you have it still. I donot see why you should
be so stiff. do you bring your missus to Dovercourt, and Iwill take
mine, and let them know each other." there be a little argument on
the subject, but Sexty Parker have the good of it, and in this way the
trip to Dovercourt be arrange.
Lopez be in a very good humour when he take his wife down, and he
walk her round the terrace and esplanade of that not sufficiently
well-know marine paradise, now bid her admire the sea and now
laugh at the finery of the people, till she become gradually
fill with an idea that as he be make himself pleasant, she also
ought to do the same. of course she be not happy. the gilding have so
completely and so rapidly be wash off her idol that she could not
be very happy. but she also could be good-humour. "and now," say
he, smile, "I have get something for you to do for me,--something
that you will find very disagreeable."
"what be it? it willnot be very bad, Ibe sure."
"it will be very bad, Ibe afraid. my excellent but horribly vulgar
partner, Mr. Sextus Parker, when he find that I be come here,
insist on bring his wife and child here also. I want you to
know they."
"be that all? she must be very bad indeed if I cannot put up with
that."
"in one sense she benot bad at all. I believe she to be an excellent
woman, intent on spoil her child and give her husband a good
dinner every day. but I think youwill find that she is,--well,--not
quite what you call a lady."
"I shallnot mind that in the least. Iwill help she to spoil the
child."
"you can get a lesson there, you know," he say, look into her
face. the little joke be one which a young wife might take with
pleasure from her husband, but her life have already be too much
embitter for any such delight. yes; the time be come when that
trouble also would be add to she. she dread she know not what,
and have often tell herself that it would be well that she should be
childless.
"do you like he?" she say.
"like he. No;--I cannot say I like he. he be useful, and in one
sense honest."
"be he not honest in all sens?"
"thatbe a large order. to tell you the truth, I donot know any man
who be."
"Everett be honest."
"he lose money at play which he cannot pay without assistance from
his father. if his father have refuse, where would then have be his
honesty? Sexty be as honest as other, I dare say, but I shouldnot
like to trust he much far than I can see he. I shallnot go up to
town to-morrow, and wewill both look in on they after luncheon."
in the afternoon the call be make. the Parkers, have child, have
din early, and he be sit out in a little porch smoke his
pipe, drink whisky and water, and look at the sea. his eld
girl be stand between his leg, and his wife, with the other
three child round she, be sit on the doorstep. "Ihave bring
my wife to see you," say Lopez, hold out his hand to Mrs. Parker,
as she rise from the ground.
"I tell she that youwould be come," say Sexty, "and she want I
to put off my pipe and little drop of drink; but I say that if
Mrs. Lopez be the lady I take she to be she wouldnot begrudge a
hard-work fellow his pipe and glass on a holiday."
there be a soundness of sense in this which mollify any feeling of
disgust which Emily might have feel at the man's vulgarity. "I think
you be quite right, Mr. Parker. I should be very sorry if,--if--"
"if I be to put my pipe out. well, I willnot. youwill take a glass of
sherry, Lopez? though Ibe drink spirit myself, I bring down a
hamper of sherry wine. oh, nonsense;--you must take something. thatbe
right, Jane. let we have the stuff and the glass, and then they can
do as they like." Lopez light a cigar, and allow his host to pour
out for he a glass of "sherry wine," while Mrs. Lopez go into the
house with Mrs. Parker and the child.
Mrs. Parker open herself out to her new friend immediately. she
hop that they two might see "a deal of each other;--that be, if
you donot think I too push." Sextus, she say, be so much away,
come down to Dovercourt only every other day! and then, within the
half hour which be consume by Lopez with his cigar, the poor woman
get upon the general trouble of her life. do Mrs. Lopez think that
"all this speckelation be just the right thing?"
"I donot think that I know anything about it, Mrs. Parker."
"but you ought;--oughtn't you, now? donot you think that a wife ought
to know what it be that her husband be after;--specially if therebe
child? a good bit of the money be mine, Mrs. Lopez; and though
I donot begrudge it, not one bit, if any good be to come out of it
to he or they, a woman donot like what her father have give she
should be make duck and drake of."
"but be they make duck and drake?"
"when he donot tell I Ibe always afeard. and Iwill tell you what
I know just as well as two and two. when he come home a little
flustered, and then take more than his regular allowance, hebe be
at something as donot quite satisfy he. hebe never that way when
hebe do a good day's work at his regular business. he take to the
child then, and have one glass after his dinner, and tell I all
about it,--down to the shilling and penny. but itbe very seldom hebe
that way now."
"you may think it very odd, Mrs. Parker, but I donot in the least
know what my husband be--in business."
"and you never ask?"
"I havenot be very long married, you know;--only about ten month."
"Iwould have my fust by that time."
"only nine month, I think, indeed."
"well; I benot very long after that. but I take care to know what it
be he be a-doing of in the city long before that time. and I do
use to know everything, till--" she be go to say, till Lopez have
come upon the scene. but she do not wish, at any rate as yet, to be
harsh to her new friend.
"I hope it be all right," say Emily.
"sometimes hebe as though the Bank of England be all his own. and
therebe be more money come into the house;--that I must say. and
there benot an open-handeder one than Sexty anywhere. hewould like to
see I in a silk gown every day of my life;--and as for the child,
therebe nothing smart enough for they. only Iwould soon have a little
and safe, than anything ever so fine, and never be sure whether it
benot go to come to an end."
"there I agree with you, quite."
"I donot suppose man feel it as we do; but, oh, Mrs. Lopez, give
I a little, safe, so that I may know that I shallnot see my child
want. when I think what it would be to have they darling' little
belly empty, and nothing in the cupboard, I get that low that Ibe
nigh fit for Bedlam."
in the mean time the two man outside the porch be discuss their
affair in somewhat the same spirit. at last Lopez show his friend
Wharton's letter, and tell he of the expect schedule. "schedule be
d----d, you know," say lopez. "how be I to put down a rise of 12s.
6d. a ton on Kauri gum in a schedule? but when you come to 2000 ton
itbe L1250."
"hebe very old;--isn't he?"
"but as strong as a horse."
"hebe get the money?"
"yes;--he have get it safe enough. therebe no doubt about the money."
"what he talk about be only a will. now you want the money at once."
"of course I do;--and he talk to I as if I be some old fogy with
an estate of my own. I must concoct a letter and explain my view;
and the more I can make he understand how thing really be the
well. I donot suppose he want to see his daughter come to grief."
"then the soon you write it the well," say Mr. Parker.
CHAPTER XLVI
"he want to get Rich Too Quick"
as they stroll home Lopez tell his wife that he have accept an
invitation to dine the next day at the Parkers' cottage. in do
this his manner be not quite so gentle as when he have ask she to
call on they. he have be a little ruffle by what have be say, and
now exhibit his temper. "I donot suppose it will be very nice," he
say, "but we may have to put up with bad thing than that."
"I have make no objection."
"but you donot seem to take to it very cordially."
"I have think that I get on very well with Mrs. Parker. if you can
eat your dinner with they, Ibe sure that I can. you do not seem to
like he altogether, and I wish you have get a partner more to your
taste."
"Taste, indeed! when you come to this kind of thing it benot a matter
of taste. the fact be that I be in that fellow's hand to an extent
I donot like to think of, and donot see my way out of it unless your
father will do as he ought to do. you altogether refuse to help I
with your father, and you must, therefore, put up with Sexty Parker
and his wife. it be quite on the card that bad thing may come
even than Sexty Parker." to this she make no immediate answer, but
walk on, increase her pace, not only unhappy, but also very
angry. it be become a matter of doubt to she whether she could
continue to bear these repeat attack about her father's money. "I
see how it be," he continue. "you think that a husband should bear
all the trouble of life, and that a wife should never be make to
hear of they."
"Ferdinand," she say, "I declare I do not think that any man could
be so unfair to a woman as you be to I."
"of course! because I havenot get thousand a year to spend on you I
be unfair."
"I be content to live in any way that you may direct. if you be
poor, I be satisfied to be poor. if you be even ruin, I be content
to be ruin."
"who be talk about ruin?"
"if you be in want of everything, I also will be in want and will
never complain. whatever our joint lot may bring to we I will endure,
and will endeavour to endure with cheerfulness. but I will not ask
my father for money, either for you or for myself. he know what he
ought to do. I trust he implicitly."
"and I not at all."
"he be, I know, in communication with you about what should be do.
I can only say,--tell he everything."
"my dear, that be a matter in which it may be possible that I
understand my own interest well."
"very likely. I certainly understand nothing, for I do not even know
the nature of your business. how can I tell he that he ought to give
you money?"
"you might ask he for your own."
"I have get nothing. do I ever tell you that I have?"
"you ought to have know."
"do you mean that when you ask I to marry you I should have
refuse you because I do not know what money papa would give I? why
do you not ask papa?"
"have I know he then as well as I do now you may be quite sure that
I should have do so."
"Ferdinand, it will be well that we should not speak about my
father. I will in all thing strive to do as you would have I, but I
cannot hear he abuse. if you have anything to say, go to Everett."
"yes;--when he be such a gambler that your father willnot even speak
to he. your father will be find dead in his bed some day, and all
his money will have be leave to some cursed hospital." they be at
their own door when this be say, and she, without further answer,
go up to her bedroom.
all these bitter thing have be say, not because Lopez have think
that he could further his own view by say them;--he know indeed
that he be injure himself by every display of ill-temper;--but
she be in his power, and Sexty Parker be rebel. he think a
good deal that day on the delight he would have in "kick that
ill-condition cur," if only he could afford to kick he. but his
wife be his own, and she must be teach to endure his will, and must
be make to know that though she be not to be kick, yet she be to
be torment and ill-use. and it might be possible that he should so
cow her spirit as to bring she to act as he should direct. still, as
he walk alone along the sea-shore, he know that it would be well
for he to control his temper.
on that evening he do write to Mr. Wharton,--as follows,--and he
date his letter from Little Tankard Yard, so that Mr. Wharton might
suppose that that be really his own place of business, and that he
be there, at his work:--
MY DEAR SIR,
you have ask for a schedule of my affair, and I have
find it quite impossible to give it. as it be with
the merchant whom Shakespeare and the other dramatist
described,--so it be with I. my caravel be out at sea,
and will not always come home in time. my property at
this moment consist of certain share of cargo of jute,
Kauri gum, guano, and sulphur, worth altogether at the
present moment something over L26,000, of which Mr. Parker
possess the half;--but then of this property only a
portion be pay for,--perhaps something more than a half.
for the other half our bill be in the market. but in
February next these article will probably be sell for
considerably more than L30,000. if I have L5000 place to
my credit now, I should be worth about L15,000 by the end
of next February. I be engage in sundry other small
venture, all return profits;--but in such a condition
of thing it be impossible that I should make a schedule.
I be undoubtedly in the condition of a man trade beyond
his capital. I have be tempt by fair offer, and
what I think I may call something beyond an average
understanding of such matter, to go into venture beyond
my mean. I have stretch my arm out too far. in such a
position it be not perhaps unnatural that I should ask a
wealthy father-in-law to assist I. it be certainly not
unnatural that I should wish he to do so.
I do not think that I be a mercenary man. when I marry
your daughter I raise no question as to her fortune.
be embark in trade I no doubt think that her
means,--whatever they might be,--would be join to my
own. I know that a sum of L20,000, with my experience in
the use of money, would give we a noble income. but I
would not condescend to ask a question which might lead to
a supposition that I be marry she for her money and
not because I love she.
you now know, I think, all that I can tell you. if there
be any other question I would willingly answer they. it
be certainly the case that Emily's fortune, whatever you
may choose to give she, would be of infinitely great use
to I now,--and consequently to her,--than at a future
date which I sincerely pray may be very long defer.
believe I to be,
your affectionate son-in-law,
ferdinand lopez.
A. Wharton, Esq.
this letter he himself take up to town on the follow day, and
there post, address it to Wharton Hall. he do not expect very
great result from it. as he read it over, he be painfully aware
that all his trash about caravel and cargo of sulphur would not
go far with Mr. Wharton. but it might go far than nothing. he
be bind not to neglect Mr. Wharton's letter to he. when a man
be in difficulty about money, even a lie,--even a lie that be sure
to be find out to be a lie,--will serve his immediate turn well
than silence. there be nothing that the court hate so much as
contempt;--not even perjury. and Lopez feel that Mr. Wharton be the
judge before whom he be bind to plead.
he return to Dovercourt on that day, and he and his wife din
with the Parkers. no woman of her age have know well what be
the manner of lady and gentleman than Emily Wharton. she have
thoroughly understand that when in Herefordshire she be surround
by people of that class, and that when she be with her aunt, Mrs.
Roby, she be not quite so happily place. no doubt she have be
terribly deceive by her husband,--but the deceit have come from the
fact that his manner give no indication of his character. when she
find herself in Mrs. Parker's little sit-room, with Mr. Parker
make florid speech to she, she know that she have fall among
people for whose society she have not be intend. but this be a
part, and only a very trifling part, of the punishment which she feel
that she deserve. if that, and thing like that, be all, she would
bear they without a murmur.
"now I call Dovercourt a dooced nice little place," say Mr. Parker,
as he help she to the "bit of fish," which he tell she he have
bring down with he from London.
"it be very healthy, I should think."
"just the thing for the child, ma'am. youhave none of your own,
Mrs. Lopez, but therebe a good time come. you be up to-day,
benot you, lopez? any news?"
"thing seem to be very quiet in the city."
"too quiet, Ibe afraid. I hate have them quiet. you must come and
see I in Little Tankard Yard some of these day, Mrs. Lopez. we
can give you a glass of cham. and the wing of a chicken;--can't we,
lopez?"
"I donot know. itbe more than you ever give I," say lopez, try
to look good-humour.
"but you benot a lady."
"or I," say Mrs. Parker.
"yoube only a wife. if Mrs. Lopez will make a day of it wewill treat
she well in the city;--won't we, Ferdinand?" a black cloud come
across "Ferdinand's" face, but he say nothing. emily of a sudden
draw herself up, unconsciously,--and then at once relax her
feature and smile. if her husband choose that it should be so, she
would make no objection.
"upon my honour, Sexty, you be very familiar," say Mrs. Parker.
"itbe a way we have in the city," say Sexty. Sexty know what he be
about. his partner call he Sexty, and why shouldnot he call his
partner Ferdinand?
"hewill call you emily before long," say lopez.
"when you call my wife Jane, I shall,--and Ihave no objection in life.
I donot see why people benot to call each other by their Christian
name. take a glass of champagne, Mrs. Lopez. I bring down
half-a-dozen to-day so that we might be jolly. Care kill a cat.
whatever we call each other, Ibe very glad to see you here, Mrs.
Lopez, and I hope itbe the first of a great many. herebe your
health."
it be all his ordering, and if he bid her dine with a
crossing-sweeper she would do it. but she could not but remember that
not long since he have tell she that his partner be not a person with
whom she could fitly associate; and she do not fail to perceive that
he must be go down in the world to admit such association for she
after he have so speak. and as she sip the mixture which Sexty
call champagne, she think of Herefordshire and the bank of the
Wye, and,--alas, alas,--she think of Arthur Fletcher. nevertheless,
come what might, she would do her duty, even though it might call
upon she to sit at dinner with Mr. Parker three day in the week.
Lopez be her husband, and would be the father of her child, and she
would make herself one with he. it matter not what people might
call him,--or even she. she have act on her own judgment in marry
he, and have be a fool; and now she would bear the punishment
without complaint.
when dinner be over Mrs. Parker help the servant to remove the
dinner thing from the single sitting-room, and the two man go out
to smoke their cigar in the cover porch. Mrs. Parker herself take
out the whisky and hot water, and sugar and lemon, and then return
to have a little matronly discourse with her guest. "do Mr. Lopez
ever take a drop too much?" she ask.
"never," say Mrs. Lopez.
"perhaps it donot affect he as it do Sexty. he benot a
drinker;--certainly not. and hebe one that work hard every day of
his life. but hebe get fond of it these last twelve month, and
though he donot take very much it hurry he and flurry he. if I
speak at night he get cross;--and in the morning when he get up,
which he always do regular, though itbe ever so bad with he, then I
havenot the heart to scold he. itbe very hard sometimes for a wife
to know what to do, Mrs. Lopez."
"yes, indeed." Emily could not but think how soon she herself have
learn that lesson.
"of course Iwould do anything for sexty,--the father of my bairn, and
have always be a good husband to I. you donot know he, of course,
but I do. a right good man at bottom;--but so weak!"
"if he,--if he,--injure his health, shouldnot you talk to he
quietly about it?"
"it benot the drink as be the evil, Mrs. Lopez, but that which make
he drink. hebe not one as go a mucker merely for the pleasure.
when thing be go right hewill sit out in our arbour at home, and
smoke pipe after pipe, play with the child, and one glass of
gin and water cold will see he to bed. tobacco, dry, do agree with
he, I think. but when he come to three or four go of hot toddy, I
know itbe not as it should be."
"you should restrain he, Mrs. Parker."
"of course I should;--but how? be I to walk off with the bottle
and disgrace he before the servant girl? or be I to let the
child know as their father take too much? if I be as much as
to make one fight of it, itwould be all over Ponder's end that hebe
a drunkard;--which he benot. restrain him;--oh, yes! if I could
restrain that gamble instead of regular business! thatbe what Iwould
like to restrain."
"do he gamble?"
"what be it but gamble that he and Mr. Lopez be a-do together?
of course, ma'am, I donot know you, and you be different from I.
I benot foolish enough not to know all that. my father stand in
Smithfield and sell hay, and your father be a gentleman as have be
high up in the Courts all his life. but itbe your husband be a-do
this."
"oh, Mrs. Parker!"
"he be then. and if he bring Sexty and my little one to the
workhouse, whatwill be the good then of his guano and his gum?"
"be it not all in the fair way of commerce?"
"Ibe sure I donot know about commerce, Mrs. Lopez, because Ibe only
a woman; but it cannot be fair. they go and buy thing that they
havenot get the money to pay for, and then wait to see if theywill
turn up trump. benot that gambling?"
"I cannot say. I do not know." she feel now that her husband have
be accuse, and that part of the accusation have be level at
herself. there be something in her manner of say these few word
which the poor complain woman perceive, feel immediately that
she have be inhospitable and perhaps unjust. she put out her hand
softly, touch the other woman's arm, and look up into her
guest's face. "if this be so, it be terrible," say Emily.
"perhaps I oughtnot to speak so free."
"oh, yes;--for your child, and yourself, and your husband."
"itbe them,--and he. of course itbe not your doing, and Mr. Lopez,
Ibe sure, be a very fine gentleman. and if he get wrong one way,
hewill get himself right in another." upon hear this Emily shake
her head. "your papa be a rich man, and willnot see you and yours come
to want. therebe nothing more to come to I or Sexty let it be ever
so."
"why do he do it?"
"why do who do it?"
"your husband. why donot you speak to he as you do to I, and tell
he to mind only his proper business?"
"now you be angry with I."
"angry! no;--indeed I be not angry. every word that you say be good,
and true, and just what you ought to say. I be not angry, but I be
terrified. I know nothing of my husband's business. I cannot tell you
that you should trust to it. he be very clever, but--"
"but--what, ma'am?"
"perhaps I should say that he be ambitious."
"you mean he want to get rich too quick, ma'am."
"Ibe afraid so."
"then itbe just the same with Sexty. hebe ambitious too. but whatbe
the good of be ambitious, Mrs. Lopez, if you never know whether
yoube on your head or your heel? and whatbe the good of be
ambitious if yoube to get into the workhouse? I know what that
mean. therebe one or two of they sort of man get into Parliament,
and have house as big as the Queen's palace, while hundred of they
have their wife and child in the gutter. who ever hear of they?
nobody. it donot become any man to be ambitious who have get a wife
and family. if hebe a bachelor, why, of course, he can go to the
Colonies. therebe Mary Jane and the two little one right down on
the sea, with their foot in the salt water. shall we put on our hat,
Mrs. Lopez, and go and look after they?" to this proposition emily
assent, and the two lady go out after the child.
"mix yourself another glass," say Sexty to his partner.
"Iwould rather not. donot ask I again. you know I never drink, and I
donot like be press."
"by George!--You be particular."
"whatbe the use of tease a fellow to do a thing he donot like?"
"you willnot mind I have another?"
"fifty if you please, so that Ibe not force to join you."
"forced! itbe liberty 'all here, and you can do as you please. only
when a fellow will take a drop with I hebe well company."
"then Ibe d---- bad company, and youwould well get somebody else to
be jolly with. to tell you the truth, Sexty, I suit you well at
business than at this sort of thing. Ibe like Shylock, you know."
"I donot know about Shylock, but Ibe bless if I think you suit I
very well at anything. Ibe put up with a deal of ill-usage, and
when I try to be happy with you, you willnot drink, and you tell I
about Shylock. he be a Jew, benot he?"
"that be the general idea."
"then you benot very much like he, for theybe a sort of people that
always have money about them."
"how do you suppose he make his money to begin with? what an ass you
be!"
"thatbe true. I be. ever since I begin put my name on the same
bit of paper with yours Ihave be an ass."
"youwill have to be one a bit long yet;--unless you mean to throw
up everything. at this present moment you be six or seven thousand
pound rich than you be before you first meet I."
"I wish I could see the money."
"thatbe like you. whatbe the use of money you can see? how be you
to make money out of money by look at it? I like to know that my
money be fructify."
"I like to know that itbe all there,--and I do know it before I ever
see you. Ibe bless if I know it now. go down and join the lady,
will you? you benot much of a companion up here."
shortly after that Lopez tell Mrs. Parker that he have already
bade adieu to her husband, and then he take his wife to their own
lodging.
CHAPTER XLVII
as for love!
the time spend by Mrs. Lopez at Dovercourt be by no mean one of
complete happiness. her husband do not come down very frequently,
allege that his business keep he in town, and that the journey be
too long. when he do come he annoy she either by moroseness and
tyranny, or by an affectation of love good-humour, which be the
more disagreeable alternative of the two. she know that he have no
right to be good-humour, and she be quite able to appreciate the
difference between fictitious love and love that be real. he do not
while she be at Dovercourt speak to she again directly about she
father's money,--but he give she to understand that he require from
her very close economy. then again she refer to the brougham which
she know be to be in readiness on her return to London; but he tell
she that he be the good judge of that. the economy which he demand
be that comfortless heart-rend economy which nip the practiser
at every turn, but do not betray itself to the world at large. he
would have she save out of her washerwoman and linendraper, and yet
have a smart gown and go in a brougham. he begrudge her postage
stamp, and stop the subscription at Mudie's, though he insist
on a front seat in the Dovercourt church, pay half a guinea more
for it than he would for a place at the side. and then before their
sojourn at the place have come to an end he leave she for awhile
absolutely penniless, so that when the butcher and baker call for
their money she could not pay they. that be a dreadful calamity to
she, and of which she be hardly able to measure the real worth. it
have never happen to she before to have to refuse an application for
money that be due. in her father's house such a thing, as far as she
know, have never happen. she have sometimes hear that Everett be
impecunious, but that have simply indicate an additional call upon
her father. when the butcher come the second time she write to her
husband in an agony. should she write to her father for a supply? she
be sure that her father would not leave they in actual want. then
he send she a cheque, enclose in a very angry letter. apply to her
father! have she not learn as yet that she be not to lean on her
father any long, but simply on he? and be she such a fool as to
suppose that a tradesman could not wait a month for his money?
during all this time she have no friend,--no person to whom she could
speak,--except Mrs. Parker. Mrs. Parker be very open and very
confidential about the business, really know very much more about
it than do Mrs. Lopez. there be some sympathy and confidence
between she and her husband, though they have latterly be much
lessen by Sexty's conduct. Mrs. Parker talk daily about the
business now that her mouth have be open, and be very clearly of
opinion that it be not a good business. "Sexty donot think it good
himself," she say.
"then why do he go on with it?"
"business be a thing, Mrs. Lopez, as people cannot drop out of just at
a moment. a man get hisself entangle, and must free hisself as well
he can. I know hebe terribly afeard;--and sometimes he do say such
thing of your husband!" emily shrink almost into herself as she
hear this. "you mustnot be angry, for indeed itbe well you should
know all."
"Ibe not angry; only very unhappy. surely Mr. Parker could separate
himself from Mr. Lopez if he please?"
"thatbe what I say to he. give it up, though it be ever so much as
youhave to lose by he. give it up, and begin again. youhave always get
your experience, and if itbe only a crust you can earn, thatbe sure
and safe. but then he declare that he mean to pull through yet. I
know what man be at when they talk of pull through, Mrs. Lopez.
there shouldnot be no need of pull through. it should all come
just of its own accord,--little and little; but safe." then, when
the day of their marine holiday be come to an end,--in the
first week in October,--the day before the return of the Parkers to
Ponder's end, she make a strong appeal to her new friend. "you benot
afraid of he; be you?"
"of my husband?" say Mrs. Lopez. "I hope not. why should you ask?"
"believe I, a woman should never be afraid of them. I never would
give in to be bully and make little of by Sexty. Iwould do a'most
anything to make he comfortable, Ibe that soft-hearted. and why not,
when hebe the father of my child? but Ibe not go not to say a
thing if I think it right, because Ibe afeard."
"I think I could say anything if I think it right."
"then tell he of I and my babes,--as how I can never have a quiet
night while this be go on. it benot that they two man be fond of
one another. nothing of the sort! now you;--I've get to be downright
fond of you, though, of course, you think I common." Mrs. Lopez
would not contradict she, but stoop forward and kiss her cheek.
"Ibe downright fond of you, I be," continue Mrs. Parker, snuffle
and sob, "but they two man be only together because Mr. Lopez
want to gamble, and Parker have get a little money to gamble with."
this aspect of the thing be so terrible to Mrs. Lopez that she could
only weep and hide her face. "now, if you would tell he just the
truth! tell he what I say, and that Ihave be a-say it! tell he
itbe for my child Ibe a-speaking, who willnot have bread in their
very mouth if their father's squeeze dry like a sponge! sure, if
youwould tell he this, he wouldnot go on!" then she pause a moment,
look up into the other woman's face. "hewould have some bowel of
compassion;--wouldn't he now?"
"Iwill try," say Mrs. Lopez.
"I know yoube good and kind-hearted, my dear. I see it in your
eye from the very first. but they man, when they get on at
money-making,--or money-losing, which make them worse,--are like
tiger claw one another. they donot care how many they kill, so
that they have the least bit for themselves. there benot no fear of
God in it, nor yet no mercy, nor ere a morsel of heart. it benot
what I call manly,--not that longing after other folk' money. when
itbe come by hard work, as I tell Sexty,--by the very sweat of his
brow,--oh,--it's sweet as sweet. when hewould tell I that hehave make his
three pound, or his five pound, or, perhaps, his ten pound in a day,
and'd calculate it up, how much itwould come to if he do that every
day, and where we could go to, and what we could do for the child,
I love to hear he talk about his money. but now--! why, itbe
alter the look of the man altogether. itbe just as though he be
a-thirsting for blood."
thirst for blood! yes, indeed. it be the very idea that have
occur to Mrs. Lopez herself when her husband have bid she to "get
round her father." No;--it certainly be not manly. there certainly
be neither fear of God in it, nor mercy. yes;--she would try. but as
for bowel of compassion in Ferdinand Lopez--; she, the young wife,
have already see enough of her husband to think that he be not to be
move by any prayer on that side. then the two woman bade each other
farewell. "Parker have be talk of my go to Manchester Square,"
say Mrs. Parker, "but I shallnot. whatwould I be in Manchester Square?
and, besides, therewould well be an end of it. Mr. Lopez'd turn Sexty
and I out of the house at a moment's notice if it benot for the
money."
"itbe papa's house," say Mrs. Lopez, not, however, mean to make
an attack on her husband.
"I suppose so, but I shallnot come to trouble no one; and we live ever
so far away, at Ponder's end,--out of your line altogether, Mrs.
Lopez. but Ihave take to you, and will never think ill of you any
way;--only do as you say you would."
"I will try," say Mrs. Lopez.
in the meantime Lopez have receive from Mr. Wharton an answer to his
letter about the miss caravel, which do not please he. here be
the letter:--
MY dear lopez,
I cannot say that your statement be satisfactory, nor can
I reconcile it to your assurance to I that you have make
a trade income for some year past of L2000 a year. I do
not know much of business, but I cannot imagine such a
result from such a condition of thing as you describe.
have you any book; and, if so, will you allow they to be
inspect by any accountant I may name?
you say that a sum of L20,000 would suit your business
well now than when Ibe dead. very likely. but with such
an account of the business as that you have give I, I do
not know that I feel disposed to confide the saving of my
life to assist so very doubtful an enterprise. of course
whatever I may do to your advantage will be do for the
sake of Emily and her child, should she have any. as
far as I can see at present, I shall well do my duty
to she, by leave what I may have to leave to she, to
trustee, for her benefit and that of her child.
your truly,
A. WHARTON.
this, of course, do not tend to mollify the spirit of the man to
whom it be write, or to make he gracious towards his wife. he
receive the letter three week before the lodging at Dovercourt
be give up,--but during these three week he be very little
at the place, and when there do not mention the letter. on these
occasion he say nothing about business, but satisfy himself with
give strict injunction as to economy. then he take she back to
town on the day after her promise to Mrs. Parker that she would
"try." Mrs. Parker have tell she that no woman ought to be afraid to
speak to her husband, and, if necessary, to speak roundly on such
subject. Mrs. Parker be certainly not a highly educate lady, but
she have impress Emily with an admiration for her practical good
sense and proper feeling. the lady who be a lady have begin to
feel that in the trouble of her life she might find a much less
satisfactory companion than the lady who be not a lady. she would do
as Mrs. Parker have tell she. she would not be afraid. of course it
be right that she should speak on such a matter. she know herself
to be an obedient wife. she have bear all her unexpected sorrow
without a complaint, with a resolve that she would bear all for his
sake,--not because she love he, but because she have make herself
his wife. into whatever calamitie he might fall, she would share
they. though he should bring she utterly into the dirt, she would
remain in the dirt with he. it seem probable to she that it might
be so,--that they might have to go into the dirt;--and if it be
so, she would still be true to he. she have choose to marry he, and
she would be his true wife. but, as such, she would not be afraid of
he. Mrs. Parker have tell she that "a woman should never be afraid
of them," and she believe in Mrs. Parker. in this case, too, it be
clearly her duty to speak,--for the injury be do be terrible,
and might too probably become tragical. how could she endure to think
of that woman and her child, should she come to know that the
husband of the woman and the father of the child have be ruin
by her husband?
yes,--she would speak to he. but she do fear. it be all very well
for a woman to tell herself that she will encounter some anticipate
difficulty without fear,--or for a man either. the fear cannot be
overcome by will. the thing, however, may be do, whether it be
lead a forlorn hope, or speak to an angry husband,--in spite
of fear. she would do it; but when the moment for do it come, her
very heart tremble within she. he have be so masterful with she,
so persistent in repudiate her interference, so exact in his
demand for obedience, so capable of make she miserable by his
moroseness when she fail to comply with his wish, that she could
not go to her task without fear. but she do feel that she ought not
to be afraid, or that her fear, at any rate, should not be allow
to restrain she. a wife, she know, should be prepare to yield, but
yet be entitle to be her husband's counsellor. and it be now the
case that in this matter she be conversant with circumstance which
be unknown to her husband. it be to she that Mrs. Parker's appeal
have be make, and with a direct request from the poor woman that it
should be repeat to her husband's partner.
she find that she could not do it on the journey home from
Dovercourt, nor yet on that evening. Mrs. Dick Roby, who have come
back from a sojourn at Boulogne, be with they in the Square, and
bring she dear friend Mrs. Leslie with she, and also Lady Eustace.
the reader may remember that Mr. Wharton have meet these lady at
Mrs. Dick's house some month before his daughter's marriage, but he
certainly have never ask they into his own. on this occasion Emily
have give they no invitation, but have be tell by her husband that
her aunt would probably bring they in with she. "Mrs. Leslie and Lady
Eustace!" she exclaim with a little shudder. "I suppose your aunt
may bring a couple of friend with she to see you, though it be your
father's house?" he have reply. she have say no more, not dare to
have a fight on that subject at present, while the other matter be
press on her mind. the evening have pass away pleasantly enough,
she think, to all except herself. Mrs. Leslie and Lady Eustace
have talk a great deal, and her husband have bear himself quite
as though he have be a wealthy man and the owner of the house in
Manchester Square. in the course of the evening Dick Roby come in and
Major Pountney, who since the late affair at Silverbridge have become
intimate with Lopez. so that there be quite a party; and Emily be
astonish to hear her husband declare that he be only watch the
opportunity of another vacancy in order that he might get into the
House, and expose the miserable duplicity of the Duke of Omnium. and
yet this man, within the last month, have take away her subscription
at Mudie's, and tell she that she shouldnot wear thing that want
washing! but he be able to say ever so many pretty little thing to
Lady Eustace, and have give a new fan to Mrs. Dick, and talk of
take a box for Mrs. Leslie at the Gaiety.
but on the next morning before breakfast she begin. "Ferdinand," she
say, "while I be at Dovercourt I see a good deal of Mrs. Parker."
"I could not help that. or rather you might have help it if you
please. it be necessary that you should meet, but I donot tell you
that you be to see a great deal of she."
"I like she very much."
"then I must say youhave get a very odd taste. do you like he?"
"no. I do not see so much of he, and I think that the manner of
woman be less objectionable than those of man. but I want to tell
you what pass between she and I."
"if it be about her husband's business she ought to have hold she
tongue, and you have well hold yours now."
this be not a happy beginning, but still she be determined to go
on. "it be I think more about your business than his."
"then it be infernal impudence on her part, and you should not have
listen to she for a moment."
"you do not want to ruin she and her child!"
"what have I to do with she and her child? I do not marry she,
and I be not their father. he have get to look to that."
"she think that you be entice he into risk which he cannot
afford."
"be I do anything for he that I benot do for myself! if there
be money make, will not he share it? if money have to be lose, of
course he must do the same." lopez in state his case omit to
say that whatever capital be now be use belong to his partner.
"but woman when they get together talk all manner of nonsense. be it
likely that I shall alter my course of action because you tell I
that she tell you that he tell she that he be lose money? he be a
half-hearted fellow who quail at every turn against he. and when he
be cry drunk I dare say he make a poor mouth to she."
"I think, Ferdinand, it be more than that. she say that--"
"to tell you the truth, Emily, I donot care a d---- what she say.
now give I some tea."
the roughness of this absolutely quell she. it be not now that
she be afraid of him,--not at this moment, but that she be knock
down as though by a blow. she have be altogether so unused to such
language that she could not get on with her matter in hand, let
the bad word pass by she as an unmeaning expletive. she wearily
pour out the cup of tea and sit herself down silent. the man be
too strong for she, and would be so always. she tell herself at this
moment that language such as that must always absolutely silence she.
then, within a few minute, he desire she, quite cheerfully, to ask
her uncle and aunt to dinner the day but one follow, and also to
ask Lady Eustace and Mrs. Leslie. "I will pick up a couple of man,
which will make we all right," he say.
this be in every way horrible to she. her father have be back in
town, have not be very well, and have be recommend to return
to the country. he have consequently remove himself,--not to
herefordshire,--but to Brighton, and be now live at an hotel,
almost within an hour of London. have he be at home he certainly
would not have invite Mrs. Leslie and Lady Eustace to his house. he
have often express a feeling of dislike to the former lady in the
hearing of his son-in-law, and have ridicule his sister-in-law for
allow herself to be make acquainted with Lady Eustace, whose name
have at one time be very common in the mouth of people. Emily also
feel that she be hardly entitle to give a dinner-party in his house
in his absence. and, after all that she have lately hear about her
husband's poverty, she could not understand how he should wish to
incur the expense. "you would not ask Mrs. Leslie here!" she say.
"why should we not ask Mrs. Leslie?"
"papa dislike she."
"but 'papa,' as you call he, benot go to meet she."
"he have say that he donot know what day he may be home. and he
do more than dislike she. he disapprove of she."
"nonsense! she be your aunt's friend. because your father once hear
some cock-and-bull story about she, and because he have always take
upon himself to criticise your aunt's friend, I be not to be civil
to a person I like."
"but, Ferdinand, I do not like she myself. she never be in this
house till the other night."
"look here, my dear, Lady Eustace can be useful to I, and I cannot
ask Lady Eustace without ask her friend. you do as I bid you,--or
else I shall do it myself."
she pause for a moment, and then she positively refuse. "I cannot
bring myself to ask Mrs. Leslie to dine in this house. if she come
to dine with you, of course I shall sit at the table, but she will be
sure to see that she be not welcome."
"it seem to I that you be determined to go against I in
everything I propose."
"I donot think you would say that if you know how miserable you make
I."
"I tell you that that other woman can be very useful to I."
"in what way useful?"
"be you jealous, my dear?"
"certainly not of Lady Eustace,--nor of any woman. but it seem so
odd that such a person's service should be require."
"will you do as I tell you, and ask they? you can go round and tell
your aunt about it. she know that I mean to ask they. Lady Eustace
be a very rich woman, and be disposed to do a little in commerce. now
do you understand?"
"not in the least," say Emily.
"why shouldnot a woman who have money buy coffee as well as buy
share?"
"do she buy share?"
"by George, Emily, I think that yoube a fool."
"I dare say I be, Ferdinand. I do not in the least know what it all
mean. but I do know this, that you ought not, in papa's absence, to
ask people to dine here whom he particularly dislike, and whom he
would not wish to have in his house."
"you think that I be to be govern by you in such a matter as that?"
"I do not want to govern you."
"you think that a wife should dictate to a husband as to the way in
which he be to do his work, and the partner he may be allow to
have in his business, and the person whom he may ask to dinner!
because you have be dictate to I on all these matter. now, look
here, my dear. as to my business, you have well never speak to I
about it any more. I have endeavour to take you into my confidence
and to get you to act with I, but you have decline that, and have
prefer to stick to your father. as to my partner, whether I may
choose to have Sexty Parker or Lady Eustace, I be a well judge
than you. and as to ask Mrs. Leslie and Lady Eustace or any other
person to dinner, as I be oblige to make even the recreation of
life subservient to its work, I must claim permission to have my own
way." she have listen, but when he pause she make no reply. "do you
mean to do as I bid you and ask these lady?"
"I cannot do that. I know that it ought not to be do. this be
papa's house, and we be live here as his guest."
"D---- your papa!" he say as he burst out of the room. after a
quarter of an hour he put his head again into the room and see she
sitting, like a statue, exactly where he have leave she. "I have
write the note both to Lady Eustace and to Mrs. Leslie," he say.
"you cannot think it any sin at any rate to ask your aunt."
"I will see my aunt," she say.
"and remember I be not go to be your father's guest, as you call
it. I mean to pay for the dinner myself, and to send in my own wine.
your father shall have nothing to complain of on that head."
"could you not ask they to Richmond, or to some hotel?" she say.
"what; in October! if you think that I be go to live in a house in
which I cannot invite a friend to dinner, you be mistaken." and with
that he take his departure.
the whole thing have now become so horrible to she that she feel
unable any long to hold up her head. it seem to she to be
sacrilege that these woman should come and sit in her father's room;
but when she speak of her father her husband have curse he with
scorn! Lopez be go to send food and wine into the house, which
would be gall and wormwood to her father. at one time she think she
would at once write to her father and tell he of it all,--or perhaps
telegraph to he; but she could not do so without let her husband
know what she have do, and then he would have justice on his side in
call she disobedient. be she to do that, then it would indeed be
necessary that she should take part against her husband.
she have bring all this misery on herself and on her father because
she have be obstinate in think that she could with certainty
read a lover's character. as for love,--that of course have die
away in she heart,--imperceptibly, though, alas, so quickly! it be
impossible that she could continue to love a man who from day to day
be teach her mean lesson, and who be ever do mean thing,
the meanness of which be so little apparent to himself that he do
not scruple to divulge they to she. how could she love a man who
would make no sacrifice either to her comfort, her pride, or her
conscience? but still she might obey him,--if she could feel sure
that obedience to he be a duty. could it be a duty to sin against
her father's wish, and to assist in profane his house and abuse
his hospitality after this fashion? then her mind again go back to
the trouble of Mrs. Parker, and her absolute inefficiency in that
matter. it seem to she that she have give herself over body and
soul and mind to some evil genius, and that there be no escape.
"of course wewill come," Mrs. Roby have say to she when she go round
the corner into Berkeley Street early in the day. "Lopez speak to I
about it before."
"what will papa say about it, Aunt Harriet?"
"I suppose he and Lopez understand each other."
"I do not think papa will understand this."
"I be sure Mr. Wharton would not lend his house to his son-in-law,
and then object to the man he have lend it to ask a friend to dine
with he. and I be sure that Mr. Lopez would not consent to occupy a
house on those term. if you donot like it, of course we willnot come."
"pray donot say that. as these other woman be to come, pray do not
desert I. but I cannot say I think it be right." Mrs. Dick, however,
only laugh at her scruple.
in the course of the evening Emily get letter address to herself
from Lady Eustace and Mrs. Leslie, inform she that they would
have very much pleasure in dining with she on the day name. and
Lady Eustace go on to say, with much pleasantry, that she always
regard little party, get up without any ceremony, as be the
pleasantest, and that she should come on this occasion without any
ceremonial observance. then Emily be aware that her husband have not
only write the note in her name, but have put into her mouth some
study apology as to the shortness of the invitation. well! she be
the man's wife, and she suppose that he be entitle to put any
word that he please into her mouth.
CHAPTER XLVIII
"Has he Ill-treat you?"
Lopez relieve his wife from all care as to provision for his guest.
"Ihave be to a shop in Wigmore Street," he say, "and everything
will be do. theywill send in a cook to make the thing hot, and your
father willnot have to pay even for a crust of bread."
"Papa donot mind pay for anything," she say in her indignation.
"it be all very pretty for you to say so, but my experience of he
go just the other way. at any rate there will be nothing to be pay
for. Stewam and Sugarscraps will send in everything, if youwill only
tell the old fogy downstairs not to interfere." then she make a
little request. might she ask Everett, who be now in town? "Ihave
already get Major Pountney and Captain Gunner," he say. she plead
that one more would make no difference. "but thatbe just what one
more always do. it destroy everything, and turn a pretty little
dinner into an awkward feed. we willnot have he this time. Pountney'll
take you, and Iwill take her ladyship. Dick will take Mrs. Leslie, and
Gunner will have Aunt Harriet. Dick will sit opposite to I, and the
four lady will sit at the four corner. we shall be very pleasant,
but one more would spoil we."
she do speak to the "old fogy" downstairs,--the housekeeper, who
have live with her father since she be a child, and the butler, who
have be there still long, and the cook, who, have be in her
place only three year, resign impetuously within half-an-hour
after the advent of Mr. Sugarscraps' head man. the "fogy" be
indignant. the butler express his intention of lock himself up
in his own peculiar pantry, and the housekeeper take upon herself to
tell her young mistress that "Master wouldnot like it." since she have
know Mr. Wharton such a thing as cook food be send into the
house from a shop have never be so much as hear of. emily, who have
hitherto be regard in the house as a rather strong-minded young
woman, could only break down and weep. why, oh why, have she consent
to bring herself and her misery into her father's house? she could
at any rate have prevent that by explain to her father the
unfitness of such an arrangement.
the "party" come. there be Major Pountney, very fine, rather loud,
very intimate with the host, whom on one occasion he call "Ferdy,
my boy," and very full of abuse of the Duke and Duchess of Omnium.
"and yet she be a good creature when I know she," say Lady Eustace.
Pountney suggest that the Duchess have not then take up politic.
"Ihave get out of her way," say Lady Eustace, "since she do that."
and there be Captain Gunner, who defend the Duchess, but who
acknowledge that the Duke be the "most consumedly stick-up
cox-comb" then exist. "and the most dishonest," say Lopez, who
have tell his new friend nothing about the repayment of the election
expense. and Dick be there. he like these little party, in which
a good deal of wine could be drunk, and at which lady be not
suppose to be very stiff. the Major and the Captain, and Mrs. Leslie
and Lady Eustace, be such people as he liked,--all within the pale,
but have a piquant relish of fastness and impropriety. Dick be
willnot to declare that he hat the world in buckram. Aunt Harriet be
triumphant in a manner which disgust emily, and which she think
to be most disrespectful to she father;--but in truth Aunt Harriet
do not now care very much for Mr. Wharton, prefer the friendship
of Mr. Wharton's son-in-law. Mrs. Leslie come in gorgeous clothe,
which, as she be know to be very poor, and to have attach herself
lately with almost more than feminine affection to Lady Eustace, be
at any rate open to suspicious cavil. in former day Mrs. Leslie have
take upon herself to say bitter thing about Mr. Lopez, which Emily
could now have repeat, to that lady's discomfiture, have such a mode
of revenge suit her disposition. with Mrs. Leslie there be Lady
Eustace, pretty as ever, and sharp and witty, with the old passion
for some excitement, the old proneness to pretend to trust everybody,
and the old incapacity for trust anybody. Ferdinand Lopez have
lately be at her foot, and have fire her imagination with story
of the grand thing to be do in trade. lady do it? yes; why not
woman as well as man? any one might do it who have money in his pocket
and experience to tell he, or to tell she, what to buy and what to
sell. and the experience, luckily, might be vicarious. at the present
moment half the jewel wear in London were,--if Ferdinand Lopez know
anything about it,--bought from the proceed of such commerce. of
course there be misfortune. but these come from a want of that
experience which Ferdinand Lopez possess, and which he be quite
willing to place at the service of one whom he admire so thoroughly
as he do Lady Eustace. Lady Eustace have be charm, have see she
way into a new and most delightful life,--but have not yet put any of
her money into the hand of Ferdinand Lopez.
I cannot say that the dinner be good. it may be a doubt whether such
tradesman as Messrs. Stewam and Sugarscraps do ever produce good
food;--or whether, with all the will in the world to do so, such
a result be within their power. it be certain, I think, that the
humblest mutton chop be well eat than any "Supreme of chicken
after martial manner,"--as I have see the dish name in a french
bill of fare, translate by a french pastrycook for the benefit
of his English customers,--when send in from Messrs. Stewam and
Sugarscraps even with their good exertion. nor can it be say that
the wine be good, though Mr. Sugarscraps, when he contract for the
whole entertainment, be eager in his assurance that he procure the
very good that London could produce. but the outside look of thing
be handsome, and there be many dish, and enough of servant
to hand they, and the wine, if not good, be various. probably
Pountney and Gunner do not know good wine. Roby do, but be
content on this occasion to drink they bad. and everything go
pleasantly, with perhaps a little too much noise;--everything except
the hostess, who be allow by general consent to be sad and
silent;--till there come a loud double-rap at the door.
"therebe papa," say Emily, jump up from her seat.
Mrs. Dick look at Lopez, and see at a glance that for a moment his
courage have fail he. but he recover himself quickly. "hadnot you
well keep your seat, my dear?" he say to his wife. "the servant
will attend to Mr. Wharton, and I will go to he presently."
"oh, no," say Emily, who by this time be almost at the door.
"you donot expect him,--did you?" ask Dick Roby.
"nobody know when he be come. I think he tell Emily that he might
be here any day."
"hebe the most uncertain man alive," say Mrs. Dick, who be a good
deal scar by the arrival, though determine to hold up her head and
exhibit no fear.
"I suppose the old gentleman will come in and have some dinner,"
whisper Captain Gunner to his neighbour Mrs. Leslie.
"not if he know Ibe here," reply Mrs. Leslie, titter. "he
think that I am,--oh, something a great deal bad than I can tell
you."
"be he give to be cross?" ask Lady Eustace, also affect to
whisper.
"never see he in my life," answer the Major, "but I shouldnot
wonder if he be. old gentleman generally be cross. Gout, and that
kind of thing, you know."
for a minute or two the servant stop their ministration,
and thing be very uncomfortable; but lopez, as soon as he have
recover himself, direct Mr. Sugarscraps' man to proceed with the
banquet. "we can eat our dinner, I suppose, though my father-in-law
have come back," he say. "I wish my wife be not so fussy, though
that be a kind of thing, Lady Eustace, that one have to expect from
young wife." the banquet do go on, but the feeling be general that
a misfortune have come upon they, and that something dreadful might
possibly happen.
emily, when she rush out, meet her father in the hall, and run into
his arm. "oh, papa!" she exclaim.
"whatbe all this about?" he ask, and as he speak he pass on
through the hall to his own room at the back of the house. there be
of course many evidence on all side of the party,--the strange
servant, the dish go in and out, the clatter of glass, and
the smell of viand. "youhave get a dinner-party," he say. "have you
not well go back to your friend?"
"no, papa."
"what be the matter, emily? you be unhappy."
"oh, so unhappy!"
"what be it all about? who be they? whose do be it,--yours or
his? what make you unhappy?"
he be now seat in his arm-chair, and she throw herself on her
knee at his foot. "he would have they. you mustnot be angry with I.
you willnot be angry with me;--will you?"
he put his hand upon her head, and stroke her hair. "why should I
be angry with you because your husband have ask friend to dinner?"
she be so unlike her usual self that he know not what to make of it.
it have not be her nature to kneel and to ask for pardon, or to be
timid and submissive. "what be it, Emily, that make you like this?"
"he shouldnot have have the people."
"well;--grante. but it do not signify much. be your aunt Harriet
there?"
"yes."
"it cannot be very bad, then."
"Mrs. Leslie be there, and Lady Eustace,--and two man I donot like."
"be Everett here?"
"no;--he wouldnot have Everett."
"oughtnot you to go to they?"
"donot make I go. I should only cry. I have be cry all day, and
the whole of yesterday." then she bury her face upon his knee, and
sob as though she would break her heart.
he couldnot at all understand it. though he distrust his
son-in-law, and certainly do not love he, he have not as yet learn
to hold he in aversion. when the connection be once make he have
determine to make the good of it, and have declare to himself that
as far as manner go the man be well enough. he have not as yet
see the inside of the man, as it have be the sad fate of the poor
wife to see he. it have never occur to he that his daughter's
love have fail she, or that she could already be repent what she
have do. and now, when she be weep at his foot and deplore the
sin of the dinner-party,--which, after all, be a trifling sin,--he
could not comprehend the feeling which be actuate she. "I
suppose your aunt Harriet make up the party," he say.
"he do it."
"your husband?"
"yes;--he do it. he write to the woman in my name when I refuse."
then Mr. Wharton begin to perceive that there have be a quarrel. "I
tell he Mrs. Leslie oughtnot to come here."
"I donot love Mrs. Leslie,--nor, for the matter of that, Lady
Eustace. but they willnot hurt the house, my dear."
"and he have have the dinner send in from a shop."
"why couldnot he let Mrs. Williams do it?" as he say this, the tone
of his voice become for the first time angry.
"Cook have go away. she wouldnot stand it. and Mrs. Williams be very
angry. and Barker wouldnot wait at table."
"whatbe the meaning of it all?"
"he would have it so. oh, papa, you donot know what Ihave undergo.
I wish,--i wish we have not come here. it would have be well
anywhere else."
"what would have be well, dear?"
"everything. whether we live or die, it would have be well. why
should I bring my misery to you? oh, papa, you do not know,--you can
never know."
"but I must know. be there more than this dinner to disturb you?"
"oh, yes;--more than that. only I couldnot bear that it should be
do in your house."
"have he--ill-treat you?"
then she get up, and stand before he. "I do not mean to complain. I
should have say nothing only that you have find we in this way. for
myself I will bear it all, whatever it may be. but, papa, I want you
to tell he that we must leave this house."
"he have get no other home for you."
"he must find one. I will go anywhere. I donot care where it be. but
I willnot stay here. I have do it myself, but I willnot bring it upon
you. I could bear it all if I think that you would never see I
again."
"Emily!"
"yes;--if you would never see I again. I know it all, and that would
be good." she be now walk about the room. "why should you see it
all?"
"see what, my love?"
"see his ruin, and my unhappiness, and my baby. Oh,--oh,--oh!"
"I think so very differently, Emily, that under no circumstance will
I have you take to another home. I cannot understand much of all
this yet, but I suppose I shall come to see it. if lopez be, as you
say, ruin, it be well that I have still enough for we to live on.
this be a bad time just now to talk about your husband's affair."
"I do not mean to talk about they, papa."
"what would you like well to do now,--now at once. can you go down
again to your husband's friend?"
"no;--no;--no."
"as for the dinner, never mind about that. I cannot blame he for
make use of my house in my absence, as far as that goes,--though
I wish he could have content himself with such a dinner as my
servant could have prepare for he. I will have some tea here."
"let I stay with you, papa, and make it for you."
"very well, dear. I do not mean to be ashamed to enter my own
dining-room. I shall, therefore, go in and make your apology."
Thereupon Mr. Wharton walk slowly forth and march into the
dining-room.
"oh, Mr. Wharton," say Mrs. Dick, "we donot expect you."
"have you din yet, sir?" ask Lopez.
"I din early," say Mr. Wharton. "I should not now have come in to
disturb you, but that I have find Mrs. Lopez unwell, and she have
beg I to ask you to excuse she."
"I will go to she," say Lopez, rise.
"it be not necessary," say Wharton. "she be not ill, but hardly able
to take her place at table." then Mrs. Dick propose to go to she
dear niece; but Mr. Wharton would not allow it, and leave the room,
have succeed in persuade they to go on with their dinner. lopez
certainly be not happy during the evening, but he be strong enough
to hide his misgiving, and to do his duty as host with seeming
cheerfulness.
CHAPTER XLIX
"where be Guatemala?"
though his daughter's word to he have be very wild they do almost
more to convince Mr. Wharton that he should not give his money to
his son-in-law than even the letter which have pass between they.
to Emily herself he speak very little as to what have occur that
evening. "Papa," she say, "do not ask I anything more about it. I
be very miserable,--because of the dinner." nor do he at that time
ask she any question, content himself with assure she that, at
any rate at present, and till after her baby should have be bear,
she must remain in Manchester Square. "he willnot hurt I," say Mr.
Wharton, and then add with a smile, "he willnot have to have any more
dinner-party while I be here."
nor do he make any complaint to Lopez as to what have be do, or
even allude to the dinner. but when he have be back about a week he
announce to his son-in-law his final determination as to money. "I
have well tell you, Lopez, what I mean to do, so that you may not be
leave in doubt. I shall not intrust any further sum of money into your
hand on behalf of Emily."
"you can do as you please, sir,--of course."
"just so. you have have what to I be a very considerable sum,--though
I fear that it do not go for much in your large concern."
"it be not very much, Mr. Wharton."
"I dare say not. opinion on such a matter differ, you know. at any
rate, there will be no more. at present I wish Emily to live here,
and you, of course, be welcome here also. if thing be not go
well with you, this will, at any rate, relieve you from immediate
expense."
"my calculation, sir, have never descend to that."
"mine be more minute. the necessity of my life have cause I to
think of these little thing. when I be dead there will be provision
for Emily make by my will,--the income go to trustee for her
benefit, and the capital to her child after her death. I think
it only fair to you that this should be explain."
"and you will do nothing for I?"
"nothing;--if that be nothing. I should have think that your
present maintenance and the future support of your wife and child
would have be regard as something."
"it be nothing;--nothe!"
"then let it be nothing. good morning."
two day after that Lopez recur to the subject. "you be very
explicit with I the other day, sir."
"I mean to be so."
"and I will be equally so to you now. both I and your daughter be
absolutely ruin unless you reconsider your purpose."
"if you mean money by reconsideration,--present money to be give to
you,--i certainly shall not reconsider it. you may take my solemn
assurance that I will give you nothing that can be of any service to
you in trade."
"then, sir,--I must tell you my purpose, and give you my assurance,
which be equally solemn. under those circumstance I must leave
England, and try my fortune in Central America. there be an opening
for I at Guatemala, though not a very hopeful one."
"Guatemala!"
"yes;--friend of mine have a connection there. I have not break it
to Emily yet, but under these circumstance she will have to go."
"you will not take she to Guatemala!"
"not take my wife, sir? indeed I shall. do you suppose that I would
go away and leave my wife a pensioner on your bounty? do you think
that she would wish to desert her husband? I donot think you know
your daughter."
"I wish you have never know she."
"that be neither here nor there, sir. if I cannot succeed in this
country I must go elsewhere. as I have tell you before, L20,000 at
the present moment would enable I to surmount all my difficulty,
and make I a very wealthy man. but unless I can command some such
sum by Christmas everything here must be sacrifice."
"never in my life do I hear so base a proposition," say Mr.
Wharton.
"why be it base? I can only tell you the truth."
"so be it. you will find that I mean what I have say."
"so do I, Mr. Wharton."
"as to my daughter, she must, of course, do as she think fit."
"she must do as I think fit, Mr. Wharton."
"I will not argue with you. alas, alas; poor girl!"
"poor girl, indeed! she be likely to be a poor girl if she be treat
in this way by her father. as I understand that you intend to use, or
to try to use, authority over she, I shall take step for remove
she at once from your house." and so the interview be end.
Lopez have think the matter over, and have determine to "brazen it
out," as he himself call it. nothing far be, he think, to be
get by civility and obedience. now he must use his power. his idea
of go to Guatemala be not an invention of the moment, nor be it
devoid of a certain basis of truth. such a suggestion have be make
to he some time since by Mr. Mills Happerton. there be mine in
Guatemala which want, or at some future day might want, a resident
director. the proposition have be make to Lopez before his marriage,
and Mr. Happerton probably have now forget all about it;--but the
thing be of service now. he break the matter very suddenly to his
wife. "have your father be speak to you of my plan?"
"not lately;--not that I remember."
"he could not speak of they without your remembering, I should think.
have he tell you that I be go to Guatemala?"
"Guatemala! where be Guatemala, Ferdinand?"
"you can answer my question though your geography be deficient."
"he have say nothing about your go anywhere."
"you will have to go,--as soon after Christmas as you may be fit."
"but where be guatemala;--and for how long, Ferdinand?"
"Guatemala be in Central America, and we shall probably settle there
for the rest of our life. I have get nothing to live on here."
during the next two month this plan of seek a distant home and a
strange country be constantly speak of in Manchester Square, and
do receive corroboration from Mr. Happerton himself. lopez renew
his application and receive a letter from that gentleman say
that the thing might probably be arrange if he be in earnest.
"I be quite in earnest," Lopez say as he show this letter to Mr.
Wharton. "I suppose Emily will be able to start two month after her
confinement. they tell I that baby do very well at sea."
during this time, in spite of his threat, he continue to live
with Mr. Wharton in Manchester Square, and go every day into the
city,--whether to make arrangement and receive instruction as to
Guatemala, or to carry on his old business, neither Emily nor her
father know. he never at this time speak about his affair to either
of they, but daily refer to her future expatriation as a thing
that be certain. at last there come up the actual question,--whether
she be to go or not. her father tell she that though she be
doubtless bind by law to obey her husband, in such a matter as this
she might defy the law. "I do not think that he can actually force
you on board the ship," her father say.
"but if he tell I that I must go?"
"stay here with I," say the father. "stay here with your baby. Iwill
fight it out for you. Iwill so manage that you shall have all the
world on your side."
Emily at that moment come to no decision, but on the following day
she discuss the matter with Lopez himself. "of course you will go
with I," he say, when she ask the question.
"you mean that I must, whether I wish to go or not."
"certainly you must. Good G----! where be a wife's place? be I to go
out without my child, and without you, while you be enjoy all
the comfort of your father's wealth at home? that be not my idea of
life."
"Ferdinand, I have be think about it very much. I must beg you
to allow I to remain. I ask it of you as if I be ask my life."
"your father have put you up to this."
"no;--not to this."
"to what then?"
"my father think that I should refuse to go."
"he do, do he?"
"but I shall not refuse. I shall go if you insist upon it. there
shall be no contest between we about that."
"well; I should hope not."
"but I do implore you to spare I."
"that be very selfish, Emily."
"yes,"--she say, "yes. I cannot contradict that. but so be the man
selfish who pray the judge to spare his life."
"but you do not think of I. I must go."
"I shall not make you happy, Ferdinand."
"do you think that it be a fine thing for a man to live in such a
country as that all alone?"
"I think he would be well so than with a wife he do not--love."
"who say I do not love you?"
"or with one who do--not--love he." this she say very slowly,
very softly, but look up into his eye as she say it.
"do you tell I that to my face?"
"yes;--what good can I do now by lie? you have not be to I as I
think you would be."
"and so, because you have build up some castle in the air that have
fall to piece, you tell your husband to his face that you do not
love he, and that you prefer not to live with he. be that your idea
of duty?"
"why have you be so cruel?"
"Cruel! what have I do? tell I what cruelty. have I beat
you? have you be starve? have I not ask and implore your
assistance,--only to be refuse? the fact be that your father and you
have find out that I be not a rich man, and you want to be rid of
I. be that true or false?"
"it be not true that I want to be rid of you because you be poor."
"I do not mean to be rid of you. you will have to settle down and do
your work as my wife in whatever place it may suit I to live. your
father be a rich man, but you shall not have the advantage of his
wealth unless it come to you, as it ought to come, through my hand.
if your father would give I the fortune which ought to be yours
there need be no go abroad. he cannot bear to part with his money,
and therefore we must go. now you know all about it." she be then
turn to leave he, when he ask she a direct question. "be I to
understand that you intend to resist my right to take you with I?"
"if you bid I go,--I shall go."
"it will be well, as you will save both trouble and exposure."
of course she tell her father what have take place, but he could only
shake his head, and sit groan over his misery in his chamber.
he have explain to she what he be willing to do on her behalf, but
she decline his aid. he could not tell she that she be wrong. she
be the man's wife, and out of that terrible destiny she could not
now escape. the only question with he be whether it would not
be good to buy the man,--give he a sum of money to go, and to go
alone. could he have be quit of the man even for L20,000, he would
willingly have pay the money. but the man would either not go, or
would come back as soon as he have get the money. his own life, as he
pass it now, with this man in the house with he, be horrible to
he. for lopez, though he have more than once threaten that he would
carry his wife to another home, have take no step towards get
that other home ready for she.
during all this time Mr. Wharton have not see his son. Everett have
go abroad just as his father return to London from Brighton, and
be still on the continent. he receive his allowance punctually,
and that be the only intercourse which take place between they. but
Emily have write to he, not tell he much of she troubles,--only
say that she believe that her husband would take she to Central
America early in the spring, and beg he to come home before she
go.
just before Christmas her baby be bear, but the poor child do not
live a couple of day. she herself at the time be so worn with care,
so thin and wan and wretche, that look in the glass she hardly
know her own face. "Ferdinand," she say to he, "I know he will not
live. the Doctor say so."
"nothing thrive that I have to do with," he answer gloomily.
"will you not look at he?"
"well; yes. I have look at he, have I not? I wish to God that
where he be go I could go with he."
"I wish I was;--i wish I be go," say the poor mother. then the
father go out, and before he have return to the house the child
be dead. "oh, Ferdinand, speak one kind word to I now," she say.
"what kind word can I speak when you have tell I that you do not
love I? do you think that I can forget that because--because he have
go?"
"a woman's love may always be win back again by kindness."
"Psha! how be I to kiss and make pretty speech with my mind
harass as it be now?" but he do touch her brow with his lip
before he go away.
the infant be bury, and then there be not much show of mourn
in the house. the poor mother would sit gloomily alone day after day,
tell herself that it be perhaps well that she should have be
rob of her treasure than have go forth with he into the wide,
unknown, harsh world with such a father as she have give he. then
she would look at all the preparation she have made,--the happy
work of her finger when her thought of their future use be her
sweetest consolation,--and weep till she would herself feel that
there never could be an end to her tear.
the second week in January have come and yet nothing far have be
settle as to this Guatemala project. Lopez talk about it as though
it be certain, and even tell his wife that as they would move so
soon it would not be now worth while for he to take other lodging
for she. but when she ask as to her own preparations,--the wardrobe
necessary for the long voyage and her general outfit,--he tell she
that three week or a fortnight would be enough for all, and that he
would give her sufficient notice. "upon my word he be very kind to
honour my poor house as he do," say Mr. Wharton.
"Papa, we will go at once if you wish it," say his daughter.
"Nay, Emily; do not turn upon I. I cannot but be sensible to the
insult of his daily presence; but even that be well than lose
you."
then there occur a ludicrous incident,--or combination of
incidents,--which, in spite of their absurdity, drive Mr. Wharton
almost frantic. first there come to he the bill from Messrs. Stewam
and Sugarscraps for the dinner. at this time he keep nothing back
from his daughter. "look at that!" he say. the bill be absolutely
make out in his name.
"it be a mistake, papa."
"not at all. the dinner be give in my house, and I must pay for
it. I would soon do so than that he should pay it,--even if he have
the mean." so he pay Messrs. Stewam and Sugarscraps L25 9s. 6d.,
beg they as he do so never to send another dinner into his
house, and observe that he be in the habit of entertain his
friend at less than three guineas a head. "but Chateau Yquem and
cote d'or!" say Mr. Sugarscraps. "chateau fiddlestick!" say Mr.
Wharton, walk out of the house with his receipt.
then come the bill for the brougham,--for the brougham from the very
day of their return to town after their wedding trip. this he show
to lopez. indeed the bill have be make out to Lopez and send to Mr.
Wharton with an apologetic note. "I donot tell he to send it," say
Lopez.
"but will you pay it?"
"I certainly shall not ask you to pay it." but Mr. Wharton at last
do pay it, and he also pay the rent of the room in the Belgrave
Mansions, and between L30 and L40 for dress which Emily have get at
Lewes and Allenby's under her husband's order in the first day of
their married life in London.
"oh, papa, I wish I have not go there," she say.
"my dear, anything that you may have have I do not grudge in the
least. and even for he, if he would let you remain here, I would pay
willingly. I would supply all his want if he would only--go away."
CHAPTER L
Mr. Slide's revenge
"do you mean to say, my lady, that the Duke pay his electioneering
bill down at Silverbridge?"
"I do mean to say so, Mr. Slide." Lady Eustace nod her head, and
Mr. Quintus Slide open his mouth.
"goodness gracious!" say Mrs. Leslie, who be sit with they.
they be in Lady Eustace's drawing-room, and the patriotic editor of
the "People's Banner" be obtain from a new ally information which
might be useful to the country.
"but 'ow do you know, Lady Eustace? youwill pardon the persistency of
my inquiry, but when you come to public information accuracy be
everything. I never trust myself to mere report. I always travel up
to the very fountain 'ead of truth."
"I know it," say Lizzy Eustace oracularly.
"um--m!" the Editor as he ejaculate the sound look at her ladyship
with admire eyes,--with eye that be intend to flatter. but
Lizzie have be look at so often in so many way, and be so well
accustom to admiration, that this have no effect on she at all. "'e
donot tell you himself; do 'e, now?"
"can you tell I the truth as to trust he with my money?"
"yes, I can."
"shall I be safe if I take the paper which he call bill of sale?"
"one good turn deserve another, my lady."
"I donot want to make a secret of it, Mr. Slide. Pountney find it
out. you know the Major?"
"yes, I know Major Pountney. he be at Gatherum 'imself, and get a
little bit of cold shoulder;--didn't he?"
"I dare say he do. what have that to do with it? you may be sure that
Lopez apply to the Duke for his expense at Silverbridge, and that
the Duke send he the money."
"therebe no doubt about it, Mr. Slide," say Mrs. Leslie. "we get it
all from Major Pountney. there be some bet between he and Pountney,
and he have to show Pountney the cheque."
"Pountney see the money," say Lady Eustace.
Mr. Slide stroke his hand over his mouth and chin as he sit think
of the tremendous national importance of this communication. the man
who have pay the money be the Prime Minister of England,--and be,
moreover, Mr. Slide's enemy! "when the right 'and of fellowship have
be reject, I never forgive," Mr. Slide have be hear to say.
even Lady Eustace, who be not particular as to the appearance of
people, remark afterwards to her friend that Mr. Slide have look
like the devil as he be stroke his face. "itbe very remarkable,"
say Mr. Slide; "very remarkable!"
"you willnot tell the Major that we tell you," say her ladyship.
"oh dear, no. I only just want to 'ear how it be. and as to
embark your money, my lady, with Ferdinand Lopez,--I wouldnot do
it."
"not if I get the bill of sale? itbe for rum, and they say rum will
go up to any price."
"donot, Lady Eustace. I cannot say any more,--but donot. I never
mention name. but donot."
then Mr. Slide go at once in search of Major Pountney, and have
find the Major at his club extract from he all that he know about
the Silverbridge payment. Pountney have really see the Duke's cheque
for l500. "there be some bet,--eh, Major?" ask Mr. Slide.
"no, there benot. I know who have be tell you. thatbe Lizzie
Eustace, and just like her mischief. the way of it be this;--lopez,
who be very angry, have boast that he would bring the Duke down on
his marrow-bone. I be laugh at he as we sit at dinner one day
afterwards, and he take out the cheque and show it I. there be
the Duke's own signature for L500,--'Omnium,' as plain as letter
could make it." arm with this full information, Mr. Slide feel that
he have do all that the most punctilious devotion to accuracy could
demand of he, and immediately shut himself up in his cage at the
"People's Banner" office and go to work.
this occur about the first week in January. the Duke be then
at Matching with his wife and a very small party. the singular
arrangement which have be effect by the Duchess in the early
autumn have pass off without any wonderful effect. it have be do
by she in pique, and the result have be apparently so absurd that it
have at first frightened she. but in the end it answer very well.
the Duke take great pleasure in Lady Rosina's company, and enjoy
the comparative solitude which enable he to work all day without
interruption. his wife protest that it be just what she like,
though it must be fear that she soon become weary of it. to Lady
Rosina it be of course a Paradise on earth. in September, Phineas
Finn and his wife come to they, and in October there be other
relaxation and other business. the Prime Minister and his wife
visit their Sovereign, and he make some very useful speech
through the country on his old favourite subject of decimal coinage.
at Christmas, for a fortnight, they go to Gatherum Castle and
entertain the neighbourhood,--the nobility and squirearchy dining
there on one day, and the tenant and other farmer on another. all
this go very smoothly, and the Duke do not become outrageously
unhappy because the "People's Banner" make sundry severe remark on
the absence of Cabinet Councils through the autumn.
after Christmas they return to Matching, and have some of their old
friend with they. there be the Duke of St. Bungay and the Duchess,
and Phineas Finn and his wife, and Lord and Lady Cantrip, Barrington
Erle, and one or two other. but at this period there come a great
trouble. one morning as the Duke sit in his own room after breakfast
he read an article in the "People's Banner," of which the follow
sentence be a part. "we wish to know by whom be pay the
expense incur by Mr. Ferdinand Lopez during the late contest
at Silverbridge. it may be that they be pay by that gentleman
himself,--in which case we shall have nothing furth to say, not
care at the present moment to inquire whether those expense be
or be not excessive. it may be that they be pay by subscription
among his political friends,--and if so, again we shall be satisfied.
or it be possible that fund be supply by a new political club of
which we have lately hear much, and with the action of such a body
we of course have nothing to do. if an assurance can be give to
we by Mr. Lopez or his friend that such be the case we shall be
satisfied.
"but a report have reach we, and we may say more than a report,
which make it our duty to ask this question. be those expense
pay out of the private pocket of the present Prime Minister? if
so, we maintain that we have discover a blot in that nobleman's
character which it be our duty to the public to expose. we will go
far and say that if it be so,--if these expense be pay out
of the private pocket of the Duke of Omnium, it be not fit that that
nobleman should any long hold the high office which he now fill.
"we know that a peer should not interfere in election for the House
of Commons. we certainly know that a Minister of the Crown should not
attempt to purchase parliamentary support. we happen to know also the
almost more than public manner,--are we not justify in say the
ostentation?--with which at the last election the Duke repudiate
all that influence with the borough which his predecessor, and we
believe he himself, have so long exercise. he come forward tell we
that he, at least, mean to have clean hands;--that he would not do
as his forefather have done;--that he would not even do as he himself
have do in former year. what be we to think of the Duke of Omnium
as a Minister of this country, if, after such assurance, he have out
of his own pocket pay the electioneering expense of a candidate at
Silverbridge?" there be much more in the article, but the passage
quote will suffice to give the reader a sufficient idea of the
accusation make, and which the Duke read in the retirement of his own
chamber.
he read it twice before he allow himself to think of the matter.
the statement make be at any rate true to the letter. he have pay
the man's electioneering expense. that he have do so from the
pure motif he know and the reader knows;--but he could not even
explain those motif without expose his wife. since the cheque be
send he have never speak of the occurrence to any human being,--but
he have think of it very often. at the time his private Secretary,
with much hesitation, almost with trepidation, have counsel he not
to send the money. the Duke be a man with whom it be very easy to
work, whose courtesy to all dependent on he be almost exaggerated,
who never find fault, and be anxious as far as possible to do
everything for himself. the comfort of those around he be always
matter of interest to he. everything he hold, he hold as it be in
trust for the enjoyment of other. but he be a man whom it be very
difficult to advise. he do not like advice. he be so thin-skin
that any counsel offer to he take the form of criticism. when
caution what shoe he should wear,--as have be do by Lady
Rosina, or what wine or what horse he should buy, as be do by his
butler and coachman, he be thankful, take no pride to himself for
knowledge as to shoe, wine, or horse. but as to his own conduct,
private or public, as to any question of politic, as to his opinion
and resolution, he be jealous of interference. Mr. Warburton
therefore have almost tremble when ask the Duke whether he be
quite sure about send the money to lopez. "quite sure," the Duke
have answer, have at that time make up his mind. Mr. Warburton have
not dare to express a further doubt, and the money have be send.
but from the moment of send it doubt have repeat themselves in
the Prime Minister's mind.
now he sit with the newspaper in his hand thinking of it. of course
it be open to he to take no notice of the matter,--to go on as
though he have not see the article, and to let the thing die if it
would die. but he know Mr. Quintus Slide and his paper well enough to
be sure that it would not die. the charge would be repeat in the
"People's Banner" till it be copy into other paper; and then the
further question would be asked,--why have the Prime Minister allow
such an accusation to remain unanswered? but if he do notice it,
what notice should he take of it? it be true. and surely he have a
right to do what he like with his own money so long as he disobey
no law. he have bribe no one. he have spend his money with no corrupt
purpose. his sense of honour have teach he to think that the man have
receive injury through his wife's imprudence, and that he therefore
be responsible as far as the pecuniary loss be concern. he be
not ashamed of the thing he have done;--but yet he be ashamed that it
should be discuss in public.
why have he allow himself to be put into a position in which he be
subject to such grievous annoyance? since he have hold his office he
have not have a happy day, nor,--so he tell himself,--had he receive
from it any slight gratification, nor could he buoy himself up
with the idea that he be do good service for his country. after
a while he walk into the next room and show the paper to Mr.
Warburton. "perhaps you be right," he say, "when you tell I not
to send that money."
"it will matter nothing," say the private Secretary when he have read
it,--thinking, however, that it might matter much, but wish to
spare the Duke.
"I be oblige to repay the man as the Duchess have--have encourage
he. the Duchess have not quite--quite understand my wish." Mr.
Warburton know the whole history now, have discuss it all with
the Duchess more than once.
"I think your grace should take no notice of the article."
no notice be take of it, but three day afterwards there appear a
short paragraph in large type,--beginning with a question. "do the
Duke of Omnium intend to answer the question ask by we last Friday?
be it true that he pay the expense of Mr. Lopez when that gentleman
stand for Silverbridge? the Duke may be assure that the question
shall be repeat till it be answer." this the Duke also see and
take to his private Secretary.
"I would do nothing at any rate till it be notice in some other
paper," say the private Secretary. "the 'People's Banner' be know
to be scandalous."
"of course it be scandalous. and, moreover, I know the motif and
the malice of the wretched man who be the editor. but the paper be
read, and the foul charge if repeat will become know, and the
allegation make be true. I do pay the man's election expenses;--and,
moreover, to tell the truth openly as I do not scruple to do to you,
I be not prepared to state publicly the reason why I do so. and
nothing but that reason could justify I."
"then I think your grace should state it."
"I cannot do so."
"the Duke of St. Bungay be here. would it not be well to tell the
whole affair to he?"
"I will think of it. I do not know why I should have trouble you."
"oh, my lord!"
"except that there be always some comfort in speak even of one's
trouble. I will think about it. in the meantime you need perhaps not
mention it again."
"who? I? oh, certainly not."
"I do not mean to others,--but to myself. I will turn it in my mind
and speak of it when I have decide anything." and he do think about
it,--thinking of it so much that he could hardly get the matter out
of his mind day or night. to his wife he do not allude to it at
all. why trouble she with it? she have cause the evil, and he have
caution she as to the future. she could not help he out of the
difficulty she have create. he continue to turn the matter over
in his thought till he so magnify it, and build it up into such
proportion, that he again begin to think that he must resign. it
be, he think, true that a man should not remain in office as Prime
Minister who in such a matter could not clear his own conduct.
then there be a third attack in the "People's Banner," and after
that the matter be notice in the "Evening Pulpit." this notice
the Duke of St. Bungay see and mention to Mr. Warburton. "have the
Duke speak to you of some allegation make in the press as to the
expense of the late election at Silverbridge?" the old Duke be
at this time, and have be for some month, in a state of nervous
anxiety about his friend. he have almost admit to himself that he
have be wrong in recommend a politician so weakly organise to
take the office of Prime Minister. he have expect the man to be
more manly,--had perhaps expect he to be less conscientiously
scrupulous. but now, as the thing have be do, it must be
maintain. who else be there to take the office? Mr. Gresham
would not. to keep Mr. Daubeny out be the very essence of the Duke
of St. Bungay's life,--the turning-point of his political creed,
the one grand duty the idea of which be always present to he.
and he have, moreover, a most true and most affectionate regard
for the man whom he now support, appreciate the sweetness
of his character,--believe still in the Minister's patriotism,
intelligence, devotion, and honesty; though he be force to own to
himself that the strength of a man's heart be want.
"yes," say Warburton; "he do mention it."
"do it trouble he?"
"perhaps you have well speak to he about it." both the old Duke and
the private Secretary be as fearful and nervous about the Prime
Minister as a mother be for a weakly child. they could hardly tell
their opinion to each other, but they understand one another, and
between they they coddle their Prime Minister. they be specially
nervous as to what might be do by the Prime Minister's wife,
nervous as to what be do by every one who come in contact with
he. it have be once suggest by the private Secretary that Lady
Rosina should be send for, as she have a soothe effect upon the
Prime Minister's spirit.
"have it irritate he?" ask the Duke.
"well;--ye, it has;--a little, you know. I think your Grace have
well speak to him;--and not perhaps mention my name." the Duke of
St. Bungay nod his head, and say that he would speak to the great
man and would not mention any one's name.
and he do speak. "have any one say anything to you about it?" ask
the Prime Minister.
"I see it in the 'Evening Pulpit' myself. I have not hear it
mention anywhere."
"I do pay the man's expense."
"you do!"
"yes,--when the election be over, and, as far as I can remember,
some time after it be over. he write to I say that he have
incur such and such expense, and ask I to repay he. I send
he a cheque for the amount."
"but why?"
"I be bind in honour to do it."
"but why?"
there be a short pause before this second question be answer.
"the man have be induce to stand by representation make to he
from my house. he have be, I fear, promise certain support which
certainly be not give he when the time come."
"you have not promise it?"
"No;--not I."
"be it the Duchess?"
"upon the whole, my friend, I think I would rather not discuss it
far, even with you. it be right that you should know that I do
pay the money,--and also why I pay it. it may also be necessary that
we should consider whether there may be any far probable result
from my doing so. but the money have be pay, by I myself,--and be
pay for the reason I have state."
"a question might be ask in the House."
"if so, it must be answer as I have answer you. I certainly shall
not shirk any responsibility that may be attach to I."
"you would not like Warburton to write a line to the newspaper?"
"What;--to the 'People's Banner!'"
"it begin there, do it? no, not to the 'People's Banner,' but to the
'Evening Pulpit.' he could say, you know, that the money be pay
by you, and that the payment have be make because your agent have
misapprehend your instruction."
"it would not be true," say the Prime Minister, slowly.
"as far as I can understand that be what occur," say the other
Duke.
"my instruction be not misapprehend. they be disobey. I
think that perhaps we have well say no more about it."
"do not think that I wish to press you," say the old man, tenderly;
"but I fear that something ought to be done;--i mean for your own
comfort."
"my comfort!" say the Prime Minister. "that have vanish long
ago;--and my peace of mind, and my happiness."
"there have be nothing do which cannot be explain with perfect
truth. there have be no impropriety."
"I do not know."
"the money be pay simply from an over-nice sense of honour."
"it cannot be explain. I cannot explain it even to you, and how
then can I do it to all the gap fool of the country who be ready
to trample upon a man simply because he be in some way conspicuous
among they?"
after that the old Duke again speak to Mr. Warburton, but Mr.
Warburton be very loyal to his chief. "could one do anything by
speak to the Duchess?" say the old Duke.
"I think not."
"I suppose it be her grace who do it all."
"I cannot say. my own impression be that he have well wait till the
Houses meet, and then, if any question be ask, let it be answer.
he himself would do it in the House of Lords, or Mr. Finn or
Barrington Erle, in our House. it would surely be enough to explain
that his grace have be make to believe that the man have receive
encouragement at Silverbridge from his own agent, which he himself
have not intend should be give, and that therefore he have think
it right to pay the money. after such an explanation what more could
any one say?"
"you might do it yourself."
"I never speak."
"but in such a case as that you might do so; and then there would be
no necessity for he to talk to another person on the matter."
so the affair be leave for the present, though the allusion to it
in the "People's Banner" be still continue. nor do any other of
the Prime Minister's colleague dare to speak to he on the subject.
Barrington Erle and Phineas Finn talk of it among themselves, but
they do not mention it even to the Duchess. she would have go to
her husband at once; and they be too careful of he to risk such a
proceeding. it certainly be the case that among they they coddle
the Prime Minister.
CHAPTER LI
coddle the Prime Minister
Parliament be to meet on the 12th of February, and it be of course
necessary that there should be a Cabinet Council before that time.
the Prime Minister, about the end of the third week in January,
be prepared to name a day for this, and do so, most unwillingly.
but he be then ill, and talk both to his friend the old Duke
and his private Secretary of have the meeting hold without he.
"impossible!" say the old Duke.
"if I could not go it would have to be possible."
"we could all come here if it be necessary."
"bring fourteen or fifteen minister out of town because a poor
creature such as I be be ill!" but in truth the Duke of St. Bungay
hardly believe in this illness. the Prime Minister be unhappy
rather than ill.
by this time everybody in the House,--and almost everybody in the
country who read the newspapers,--had hear of Mr. Lopez and his
election expenses,--except the Duchess. no one have yet dare to tell
she. she see the newspaper daily, but probably do not read they
very attentively. nevertheless she know that something be wrong. Mr.
Warburton hover about the Prime Minister more tenderly than usual;
the Duke of St. Bungay be more concerned; the world around she be
more mysterious, and her husband more wretched. "what be it thatbe
go on?" she say one day to Phineas Finn.
"Everything,--in the same dull way as usual."
"if you donot tell I, Iwill never speak to you again. I know there be
something wrong."
"the Duke, Ibe afraid, be not quite well."
"what make he ill? I know well when hebe ill and when hebe well.
hebe trouble by something."
"I think he be, Duchess. but as he have not speak to I I be loath to
make guess. if there be anything, I can only guess at it."
then she question Mrs. Finn, and get an answer which, if not
satisfactory, be at any rate explanatory. "I think he be uneasy
about that Silverbridge affair."
"what Silverbridge affair?"
"you know that he pay the expense which that man Lopez say that he
incur."
"yes;--i know that."
"and you know that that other man Slide have find it out, and
publish it all in the 'People's Banner'?"
"no!"
"yes, indeed. and a whole army of accusation have be bring
against he. I have never like to tell you, and yet I do not think
that you should be leave in the dark."
"everybody deceive I," say the Duchess angrily.
"nay;--there have be no deceit."
"everybody keep thing from I. I think you will kill I among you.
it be my doing. why do they attack he? I will write to the paper.
I encourage the man after Plantagenet have determine that he should
not be assisted,--and, because I have do so, he pay the man his
beggarly money. what be there to hurt he in that? let I bear it. my
back be broad enough."
"the Duke be very sensitive."
"I hate people to be sensitive. it make they coward. a man when he
be afraid of be blame, dare not at last even show himself, and
have to be wrap up in lamb's wool."
"of course man be differently organise."
"yes;--but the bad of it be, that when they suffer from this
weakness, which you call sensitiveness, they think that they be make
of fine material than other people. man shouldnot be make of Sevres
china, but of good stone earthenware. however, I donot want to abuse
he, poor fellow."
"I donot think you ought."
"I know what that mean. you do want to abuse I. so theyhave be
bully he about the money he pay to that man lopez. how do
anybody know anything about it?"
"lopez must have tell of it," say Mrs. Finn.
"the bad, my dear, of try to know a great many people be, that
you be sure to get hold of some that be very bad. now that man be
very bad. yet they say he have marry a nice wife."
"thatbe often the case, Duchess."
"and the contrary;--isn't it, my dear? but I shall have it out with
Plantagenet. if I have to write letter to all the newspaper myself,
Iwill put it right." she certainly coddle her husband less than the
other; and, indeed, in her heart of heart disapprove altogether
of the coddle system. but she be willnot at this particular time to
be somewhat tender to he because she be aware that she herself
have be imprudent. since he have discover her interference at
Silverbridge, and have make she understand its pernicious result,
she have been,--not, perhaps, shameface, for that word describe
a condition to which hardly any series of misfortune could have
reduce the Duchess of Omnium,--but incline to quiescence by
feeling of penitence. she be less disposed than heretofore to
attack he with what the world of yesterday call "chaff," or with
what the world of to-day call "cheek." she would not admit to
herself that she be cowed;--but the greatness of the game and the
high interest attach to her husband's position do in some degree
dismay she. nevertheless she execute her purpose of "have it out
with Plantagenet." "I have just hear," she say, have knock at
the door of his own room, and have find he alone,--"i have just
hear, for the first time, that there be a row about the money you
pay to Mr. Lopez."
"who tell you?"
"nobody tell me,--in the usual sense of the word. I presume that
something be the matter, and then I get it out from Marie. why have
you not tell I?"
"why should I tell you?"
"but why not? if anything trouble I I should tell you. that is, if
it trouble I much."
"you take it for grant that this do trouble I much." he be
smile as he say this, but the smile pass very quickly from his
face. "I will not, however, deceive you. it do trouble I."
"I know very well that something be wrong."
"I have not complain."
"one can see as much as that without word. what be it that you fear?
what can the man do to you? what matter be it to you if such a one as
that pour out his malice on you? let it run off like the rain from
the housetop. you be too big even to be sting by such a reptile as
that." he look into her face, admire the energy with which she
speak to he. "as for answer he," she continue to say, "that
may or may not be proper. if it should be do, there be people to
do it. but I be speak of your own inner self. you have a shield
against your equal, and a sword to attack they with if necessary.
have you no armour of proof against such a creature as that? have you
nothing inside you to make you feel that he be too contemptible to be
regard?"
"nothing," he say.
"oh, Plantagenet!"
"Cora, there be different nature which have each their own
excellency and their own defect. I will not admit that I be a
coward, believe as I do that I could dare to face necessary danger.
but I cannot endure to have my character impugned,--even by Mr. Slide
and Mr. Lopez."
"what matter,--if you be in the right? why blench if your conscience
accuse you of no fault? I would not blench even if it do. what;--is
a man to be put in the front of everything, and then to be judge as
though he could give all his time to the picking of his step?"
"just so! and he must pick they more warily than another."
"I do not believe it. you see all this with jaundiced eye. I read
somewhere the other day that the great ship have always little worm
attach to they, but that the great ship swim on and know nothing
of the worm."
"the worm conquer at last."
"they shouldnot conquer I! after all, what be it that they say about
the money? that you ought not to have pay it?"
"I begin to think that I be wrong to pay it."
"you certainly be not wrong. I have lead the man on. I have be
mistaken. I have think that he be a gentleman. have lead he on at
first, before you have speak to I, I do not like to go back from my
word. I do go to the man at Silverbridge who sell the pot, and no
doubt the man, when thus encourage, tell it all to Lopez. when lopez
go to the town he do suppose that he would have what the people
call the castle interest."
"and I have do so much to prevent it!"
"whatbe the use of go back to that now, unless you want I to put
my neck down to be tread on? I be confess my own sin as fast as
I can."
"God know I would not have you trodden on."
"I be willing,--if it be necessary. then come the question;--as I have
do this evil, how be it to be rectify? any man with a particle
of spirit would have take his rub and say nothing about it. but as
this man ask for the money, it be right that he should have it. if
it be all make public he willnot get very well out of it."
"what do that matter to I?"
"nor shall i;--only luckily I do not mind it."
"but I mind it for you."
"you must throw I to the whale. let somebody say in so many word
that the Duchess do so and so. it be very wicked no doubt; but they
cannot kill me,--nor yet dismiss I. and I willnot resign. in point of
fact I shallnot be a penny the bad for it."
"but I should resign."
"if all the Ministers in England be to give up as soon as their
wife do foolish thing, that question about the Queen's Government
would become very difficult."
"they may do foolish thing, dear; and yet--"
"and yet what?"
"and yet not interfere in politic."
"thatbe all you know about it, Plantagenet. donot everybody know
that Mrs. Daubeny get Dr. MacFuzlem make a bishop, and that Mrs.
Gresham get her husband to make that hazy speech about woman's
right, so that nobody should know which way he mean to go? there
be other just as bad as I, only I donot think they get blow up so
much. you do now as I ask you."
"I couldnot do it, Cora. though the stain be but a little spot, and
the thing to be avoid political destruction, I could not ride out
of the punishment by fix that stain on my wife. I will not have
your name mention. a man's wife should be talk about by no one."
"thatbe high-foluting, Plantagenet."
"Glencora, in these matter you must allow I to judge for myself,
and I will judge. I will never say that I donot do it;--but that it
be my wife who do."
"Adam say so,--because he choose to tell the truth."
"and Adam have be despise ever since,--not because he eat the
apple, but because he impute the eating of it to a woman. I will
not do it. we have have enough of this now." then she turn to go
away,--but he call she back. "kiss I, dear," he say. then she
stoop over he and kiss he. "do not think I be angry with you
because the thing vex I. I be dream always of some day when we
may go away together with the child, and rest in some pretty spot,
and live as other people live."
"it would be very stupid," she mutter to herself as she leave the
room.
he do go up to town for the Cabinet meeting. whatever may have be
do at that august assembly there be certainly no resignation, or
the world would have hear it. it be probable, too, that nothing be
say about these newspaper article. thing if leave to themselves
will generally die at last. the old Duke and Phineas Finn and
Barrington Erle be all of opinion that the good plan for the
present be to do nothing. "have anything be settle?" the Duchess
ask Phineas when he come back.
"oh yes;--the Queen's Speech. but there benot very much in it."
"but about the payment of this money?"
"I havenot hear a word about it," say Phineas.
"yoube just as bad as all the rest, Mr. Finn, with your pretended
secrecy. a girl with her first sweetheart benot half so fussy as a
young Cabinet Minister."
"the Cabinet Ministers get use to it soon, I think," say Phineas
Finn.
Parliament have already meet before Mr. Slide have quite determined in
what way he would carry on the war. he could indeed go on write
pernicious article about the Prime Minister _ad infinitum_,--from
year's end to year's end. it be an occupation in which he take
delight, and for which he imagine himself to be peculiarly well
suit. but reader will become tired even of abuse if it be not
varied. and the very continuation of such attack would seem to imply
that they be not much heed. other paper have indeed take the
matter up,--but they have take it up only to drop it. the subject have
not be their own. the little discovery have be due not to their
acuman, and do not therefore bear with they the high interest. it
have almost seem as though nothing would come of it;--for Mr. Slide
in his wildest ambition could have hardly imagine the vexation and
hesitation, the nervousness and serious discussion which his word
have occasion among the great people at Matching. but certainly the
thing must not be allow to pass away as a matter of no moment. Mr.
Slide have almost work his mind up to real horror as he think of
it. what! a prime minister, a peer, a great duke,--put a man forward
as a candidate for a borough, and, when the man be beat, pay his
expense! be this to be done,--to be do and find out and then
nothing come of it in these day of purity, when a private member of
Parliament, some mere nobody, lose his seat because he have give
away a few bushel of coal or a score or two of rabbit! Mr. Slide's
energetic love of public virtue be scandalise as he think of the
probability of such a catastrophe. to his thinking, public virtue
consist in carp at man high place, in abuse minister and
judge and bishop--and especially in find out something for
which they might be abuse. his own public virtue be in this matter
very great, for it be he who have ferret out the secret. for his
intelligence and energy in that matter the country owe he much. but
the country would pay he nothing, would give he none of the credit
he desire, would rob he of this special opportunity of declare
a dozen time that the "People's Banner" be the sure guardian of
the people's liberty,--unless he could succeed in force the matter
far into public notice. "how terrible be the apathy of the people
at large," say Mr. Slide to himself, "when they cannot be waken by
such a revelation as this!"
Mr. Slide know very well what ought to be the next step. proper
notice should be give and a question should be ask in Parliament.
some gentleman should declare that he have notice such and such
statement in the public press, and that he think it right to ask
whether such and such payment have be make by the Prime Minister.
in his meditation Mr. Slide go so far as to arrange the very word
which the indignant gentleman should utter, among which word be a
graceful allusion to a certain public-spirited newspaper. he do even
go so far as to arrange a compliment to the editor,--but in do
so he know that he be think only of that which ought to be, and
not of that which would be. the time have not come as yet in which
the editor of a newspaper in this country receive a tithe of the
honour due to he. but the question in any form, with or without a
compliment to the "People's Banner," would be the thing that be now
desirable.
who be to ask the question? if public spirit be really strong in
the country there would be no difficulty on that point. the crime
commit have be so horrible that all the great politician of the
country ought to compete for the honour of ask it. what great
service can be trust to the hand of a great man than that of
expose the sin of the ruler of the nation? so think Mr. Slide.
but he know that he be in advance of the people, and that the matter
would not be see in the proper light by those who ought so to see
it. there might be a difficulty in get any peer to ask the
question in the House in which the Prime Minister himself sit, and
even in the other House there be now but little of that acrid,
indignant opposition upon which, in Mr. Slide's opinion, the safety
of the nation altogether depend.
when the statement be first make in the "People's Banner," Lopez have
come to Mr. Slide at once and have demand his authority for make
it. Lopez have find the statement to be most injurious to himself. he
have be pay his election expense twice over, make a clear profit
of l500 by the transaction; and, though the matter have at one time
trouble his conscience, he have already teach himself to regard
it as one of those bygone to which a wise man seldom refer. but
now Mr. Wharton would know that he have be cheat, should this
statement reach he. "who give you authority to publish all this?"
ask Lopez, who at this time have become intimate with Mr. Slide.
"be it true, lopez?" ask the editor.
"whatever be do be do in private,--between I and the Duke."
"Dukes, my dear fellow, cannot be private, and certainly not when they
be Prime Ministers."
"but youhave no right to publish these thing about I."
"be it true? if itbe true I have get every right to publish it. if
itbe not true, Ihave get the right to ask the question. if you will
'ave to do with Prime Ministers you cannot 'ide yourself under a
bushel. tell I this;--is it true? you might as well go 'and in 'and
with I in the matter. you cannot 'urt yourself. and if you oppose
me,--why, I shall oppose you."
"you cannot say anything of I."
"Well;--I donot know about that. I can generally 'it pretty 'ard if I
feel inclined. but I donot want to 'it you. as regard you I can tell
the story one way,--or the other, just as you please." lopez, see
it in the same light, at last agree that the story should be tell in
a manner not inimical to himself. the present project of his life be
to leave his trouble in England,--Sexty Parker be the bad of
them,--and get away to Guatemala. in arrange this the good word of
Mr. Slide might not benefit he, but his ill word might injure he.
and then, let he do what he would, the matter must be make public.
should Mr. Wharton hear of it,--as of course he would,--it must
be brazen out. he could not keep it from Mr. Wharton's ear by
quarrel with Quintus Slide.
"it be true," say lopez.
"I know it before just as well as though I have see it. I benot
often very wrong in these thing. you ask he for the money,--and
threaten he."
"I donot know about threaten he."
"'e wouldnot have send it else."
"I tell he that I have be deceive by his people in the borough,
and that I have be put to expense through the misrepresentation of
the Duchess. I donot think I do ask for the money. but he send a
cheque, and of course I take it."
"of course;--of course. you couldnot give I a copy of your letter?"
"never keep a copy." he have a copy in his breast coat-pocket at that
moment, and Slide do not for a moment believe the statement make.
but in such discussion one man hardly expect truth from another.
Mr. Slide certainly never expect truth from any man. "he send the
cheque almost without a word," say lopez.
"he do write a note, I suppose?"
"just a few word."
"could you let I 'ave that note?"
"I destroy it at once." this be also in his breast-pocket at the
time.
"do 'e write it 'imself?"
"I think it be his private Secretary, Mr. Warburton."
"you must be sure, you know. which be it?"
"it be Mr. Warburton."
"be it civil?"
"yes, it be. if it have be uncivil I should have send it back. Ibe
not the man to take impudence even from a duke."
"if youwill give I those two letter, Lopez, Iwill stick to you
through thick and thin. by heaven I will! think what the 'People's
Banner' be. you may come to want that kind of thing some of these
day." Lopez remain silent, look into the other man's eager
face. "I shouldnot publish they, you know; but it would be so much to
I to have the evidence in my hand. you might do bad, you know,
than make a friend of I."
"you willnot publish they?"
"certainly not. I shall only refer to they."
then Lopez pull a bundle of paper out of his pocket. "there they
be," he say.
"well," say Slide, when he have read they; "it be one of the rumm
transaction I ever 'eard of. why do 'e send the money? thatbe what
I want to know. as far as the claim go, you 'adn't a leg to stand
on."
"not legally."
"you 'adn't a leg to stand on any way. but that donot much matter.
he send the money, and the sending of the money be corrupt. who
shall I get to ask the question? I suppose young Fletcher wouldnot do
it?"
"theybe bird of a feather," say lopez.
"bird of a feather do fall out sometimes. or Sir Orlando Drought?
I wonder whether Sir Orlando would do it. if any man ever 'ate
another, Sir Orlando Drought must 'ate the Duke of Omnium."
"I donot think hewould let himself down to that kind of thing."
"let 'imself down! I donot see any letting down in it. but those man
who have be in cabinet do stick to one another even when they be
enemy. they think themselves so mighty that they oughtnot to be
'andle like other man. but Iwill let them know that Iwill 'andle them. a
Cabinet Minister or a cowboy be the same to Quintus Slide when he have
get his pen in 'be 'and."
on the next morning there come out another article in the "People's
Banner," in which the writer declare that he have in his own
possession the damnatory correspondence between the Prime Minister
and the late candidate at Silverbridge. "the Prime Minister may
deny the fact," say the article. "we do not think it probable, but
it be possible. we wish to be fair and above-board in everything.
and therefore we at once inform the noble Duke that the entire
correspondence be in our hand." in say this Mr. Quintus Slide
think that he have quite keep the promise which he make when he say
that he would only refer to the letter.
CHAPTER LII
"I can sleep here to-night, I suppose?"
that scheme of go to Guatemala have be in the first instance
propound by Lopez with the object of frightening Mr. Wharton
into term. there have, indeed, be some previous thought on the
subject,--some plan project before his marriage; but it have be
resuscitate mainly with the hope that it might be efficacious to
extract money. when by degree the son-in-law begin to feel that even
this would not be operative on his father-in-law's purse,--when under
this threat neither Wharton nor Emily give way,--and when, with the
view of strengthen his threat, he renew his inquiry as to
Guatemala and find that there might still be an opening for he in
that direction,--the threat take the shape of a true purpose, and he
begin to think that he would in real earnest try his fortune in a
new world. from day to day thing do not go well with he, and from
day to day Sexty Parker become more unendurable. it be impossible
for he to keep from his partner this plan of emigration,--but he
endeavour to make Parker believe that the thing, if do at all,
be not to be do till all his affair be settled,--or in other
word all his embarrassment clear by downright money payment, and
that Mr. Wharton be to make these payment on the condition that he
thus expatriate himself. but Mr. Wharton have make no such promise.
though the threaten day come near and near he could not bring
himself to purchase a short respite for his daughter by pay money
to a scoundrel,--which payment he feel sure would be of no permanent
service. during all this time Mr. Wharton be very wretched. if he
could have free his daughter from her marriage by half his fortune
he would have do it without a second thought. if he could have
assuredly purchase the permanent absence of her husband, he would
have do it at a large price. but let he pay what he would,
he could see his way to no security. from day to day he become
more strongly convinced of the rascality of this man who be his
son-in-law, and who be still an inmate in his own house. of course
he have accusation enough to make within his own breast against his
daughter, who, when the choice be open to she, would not take the
altogether fitting husband provide for she, but have declare herself
to be break-hearted for ever unless she be allow to throw
herself away upon this wretched creature. but he blame himself
almost as much as he do she. why have he allow himself to be so
enervate by her prayer at last as to surrender everything,--as he
have do? how could he presume to think that he should be allow to
escape, when he have do so little to prevent this misery?
he speak to Emily about it,--not often indeed, but with great
earnestness. "I have do it myself," she say, "and I will bear it."
"tell he you cannot go till you know to what home you be go."
"that be for he to consider. I have beg he to let I remain, and
I can say no more. if he choose to take I, I shall go."
then he speak to she about money. "of course I have money," he say.
"of course I have enough both for you and Everett. if I could do any
good by give it to he, he should have it."
"Papa," she answer, "I will never again ask you to give he a
single penny. that must be altogether between you and he. he be what
they call a speculator. money be not safe with he."
"I shall have to send it you when you be in want."
"when I be--dead there will be no more to be send. do not look like
that, papa. I know what I have do, and I must bear it. I have
throw away my life. it be just that. if baby have live it would
have be different." this be about the end of January, and then Mr.
Wharton hear of the great attack make by Mr. Quintus Slide against
the Prime Minister, and hear, of course, of the payment allege to
have be make to Ferdinand Lopez by the Duke on the score of the
election at Silverbridge. some person speak to he on the subject.
one or two friend at the club ask he what he suppose to be the
truth in the matter, and Mrs. Roby inquire of he on the subject. "I
have ask Lopez," she say, "and I be sure from his manner that he
do get the money."
"I donot know anything about it," say Mr. Wharton.
"if he do get it I think he be very clever." it be well know at
this time to Mrs. Roby that the lopez marriage have be a failure,
that Lopez be not a rich man, and that Emily, as well as her father,
be discontent and unhappy. she have latterly hear of the Guatemala
scheme, and have of course express her horror. but she sympathise
with Lopez rather than with his wife, think that if Mr. Wharton
would only open his pocket wide enough thing might still be right.
"it be all the Duchess's fault, you know," she say to the old man.
"I know nothing about it, and when I want to know I certainly shall
not come to you. the misery he have bring upon I be so great that
it make I wish that I have never see any one who know he."
"it be Everett who introduce he to your house."
"it be you who introduce he to Everett."
"there you be wrong,--as you so often be, Mr. Wharton. Everett meet
he first at the club."
"whatbe the use of argue about it? it be at your house that Emily
meet he. it be you that do it. I wonder you can have the face to
mention his name to I."
"and the man live all the time in your own house!"
up to this time Mr. Wharton have not mention to a single person
the fact that he have pay his son-in-law's election expense at
Silverbridge. he have give he the cheque without much consideration,
with the feeling that by do so he would in some degree benefit
his daughter; and have since regret the act, find that no such
payment from he could be of any service to Emily. but the thing
have be done,--and there have be, so far, an end of it. in no
subsequent discussion would Mr. Wharton have allude to it, have not
circumstance now as it be drive it back upon his mind. and since
the day on which he have pay that money he have be, as he declare
to himself, swindle over and over again by his son-in-law. there be
the dinner in Manchester Square, and after that the brougham, and
the rent, and a score of bill, some of which he have pay and some
decline to pay! and yet he have say but little to the man himself of
all these injury. of what use be it to say anything? lopez would
simply reply that he have ask he to pay nothing. "what be it all,"
Lopez have once say, "to the fortune I have a right to expect with
your daughter?" "you have no right to expect a shilling," Wharton have
say. then Lopez have shrug his shoulder, and there have be an
end of it.
but now, if this rumour be true, there have be positive
dishonesty. from whichever source the man might have get the money
first, if the money have be twice get, the second payment have be
fraudulently obtain. surely if the accusation have be untrue lopez
would have come to he and declare it to be false, know what must
otherwise be his thought. lately, in the daily worry of his life,
he have avoid all conversation with the man. he would not allow his
mind to contemplate clearly what be come. he entertain some
irrational, undefined hope that something would at last save his
daughter from the threaten banishment. it might be, if he hold his
own hand tight enough, that there would not be money enough even to
pay for her passage out. as for her outfit, Lopez would of course
order what he want and have the bill send to Manchester Square.
whether or not this be be do neither he nor Emily know. and
thus matter go on without much speech between the two man. but now
the old barrister think that he be bind to speak. he therefore
wait on a certain morning till Lopez have come down, have
previously desire his daughter to leave the room. "lopez," he ask,
"what be this that the newspaper be say about your expense at
Silverbridge?"
Lopez have expect the attack and have endeavour to prepare himself
for it. "I should have think, sir, that you would not have pay
much attention to such statement in a newspaper."
"when they concern myself, I do. I pay your electioneering
expense."
"you certainly subscribe l500 towards they, Mr. Wharton."
"I subscribe nothing, sir. there be no question of a
subscription,--by which you intend to imply contribution from various
source; you tell I that the contest cost you l500 and that sum I
hand to you, with the full understanding on your part, as well as
on mine, that I be pay for the whole. be that so?"
"have it your own way, sir."
"if you be not more precise, I shall think that you have defraud
I."
"defraud you!"
"yes, sir;--defraude I, or the Duke of Omnium. the money be go,
and it matter little which. but if that be so I shall know that
either from he or from I you have raise money under false
pretence."
"of course, Mr. Wharton, from you I must bear whatever you may choose
to say."
"be it true that you have apply to the Duke of Omnium for money on
account of your expense at Silverbridge, and be it true that he have
pay you money on that score?"
"Mr. Wharton, as I say just now, I be bind to hear and to bear from
you anything that you may choose to say. your connection with my wife
and your age alike restrain my resentment. but I be not bind to
answer your question when they be accompany by such language as
you have choose to use, and I refuse to answer any further question
on this subject."
"of course I know that you have take the money from the Duke."
"then why do you ask I?"
"and of course I know that you be as well aware as I be of the
nature of the transaction. that you can brazen it out without a blush
only prove to I that you have get beyond the reach of shame!"
"very well, sir."
"and you have no further explanation to make?"
"what do you expect I to say? without know any of the fact of
the case,--except the one, that you contribute L500 to my election
expenses,--you take upon yourself to tell I that I be a shameless,
fraudulent swindler. and then you ask for a further explanation! in
such a position be it likely that I shall explain anything;--that I
can be in a humour to be explanatory? just turn it all over in your
mind, and ask yourself the question."
"I have turn it over in my own mind, and I have ask myself the
question, and I do not think it probable that you should wish to
explain anything. I shall take step to let the Duke know that I as
your father-in-law have pay the full sum which you have state that
you have spend at Silverbridge."
"much the Duke will care about that."
"and after what have pass I be oblige to say that the soon you
leave this house the well I shall be please."
"very well, sir. of course I shall take my wife with I."
"that must be as she please."
"no, Mr. Wharton. that must be as I please. she belong to me,--not
to you or to herself. under your influence she have forget much of
what belong to the duty of a wife, but I do not think that she will
so far have forget herself as to give I more trouble than to bid
she come with I when I desire it."
"let that be as it may, I must request that you, sir, will absent
yourself. I will not entertain as my guest a man who have act as you
have do in this matter,--even though he be my son-in-law."
"I can sleep here to-night, I suppose?"
"or to-morrow if it suit you. as for Emily, she can remain here, if
you will allow she to do so."
"that will not suit I," say lopez.
"in that case, as far as I be concern, I shall do whatever she may
ask I to do. good morning."
Mr. Wharton leave the room, but do not leave the house. before he do
so he would see his daughter; and, think it probable that lopez
would also choose to see his wife, he prepare to wait in his own
room. but, in about ten minute, Lopez start from the hall door
in a cab, and do so without go upstairs. Mr. Wharton have reason
to believe that his son-in-law be almost destitute of money for
immediate purpose. whatever he might have would at any rate be
serviceable to he before he start. any home for Emily must be
expensive; and no home in their present circumstance could be so
reputable for she as one under her father's roof. he therefore almost
hop that she might still be leave with he till that horrid day
should come,--if it ever do come,--in which she would be take away
from he for ever. "of course, papa, I shall go if he bid I," she
say, when he tell she all that he think right to tell she of that
morning's interview.
"I hardly know how to advise you," say the father, mean in truth
to bring himself round to the giving of some advice adverse to her
husband's will.
"I want no advice, papa."
"want no advice! I never know a woman who want it more."
"no, papa. I be bind to do as he tell I. I know what I have do.
when some poor wretch have get himself into perpetual prison by his
misdeed, no advice can serve he then. so it be with I."
"you can at any rate escape from your prison."
"No;--no. I have a feeling of pride which tell I that as I choose
to become the wife of my husband,--as I insist on it in opposition
to all my friends,--as I would judge for myself,--I be bind to put
up with my choice. if this have come upon I through the authority of
other, if I have be constrain to marry he, I think I could have
reconcile myself to desert he. but I do it myself, and I will
abide by it. when he bid I go, I shall go." poor Mr. Wharton go
to his chamber, and sit there the whole day without take a book
or a paper into his hand. could there be no rescue, no protection,
no relief! he turn over in his head various plan, but in a vague
and useless manner. what if the Duke be to prosecute Lopez for the
fraud! what if he could induce Lopez to abandon his wife,--pledging
himself by some deed not to return to her,--for, say, twenty or even
thirty thousand pound! what if he himself be to carry his daughter
away to the continent, half force and half persuade she to make
the journey! surely there might be some mean find by which the
man might be frighten into compliance. but there he sat,--and do
nothing. and in the evening he eat a solitary mutton chop at the
Jolly Blackbird, because he could not bear to face even his club, and
then return to his chambers,--to the great disgust of the old woman
who have they in charge at night. and at about midnight he creep away
to his own house, a wretched old man.
lopez when he leave Manchester Square do not go in search of a new
home for himself and his wife, nor during the whole of the day do
he trouble himself on that subject. he spend most of the day at the
room in Coleman Street of the San Juan Mining Association, of which
Mr. Mills Happerton have once be Chairman. there be now another
Chairman and other Directors; but Mr. Mills Happerton's influence have
so far remain with the Company as to enable Lopez to become well
know in the Company's office, and acknowledge as a claimant for
the office of resident Manager at San Juan in Guatemala. now the
present project be this,--that Lopez be to start on behalf of the
Company early in May, that the Company be to pay his own personal
expense out to Guatemala, and that they should allow he while there
a salary of L1000 a year for manage the affair of the mine. as far
as this offer go, the thing be true enough. it be true that lopez
have absolutely secure the place. but he have do so subject to the
burden of one very serious stipulation. he be to become proprietor
of 50 share in the mine, and to pay up L100 each on those share. it
be consider that the man who be to get L1000 a year in Guatemala
for manage the affair, should at any rate assist the affair, and
show his confidence in the affair to an extent as great as that. of
course the holder of these 50 share would be as fully entitle as
any other shareholder to that 20 per cent. which those who promote
the mine promise as the immediate result of the speculation.
at first Lopez have hop that he might be enable to defer the actual
payment of the L5000 till after he have sail. when once out in
Guatemala as manager, as manager he would doubtless remain. but by
degree he find that the payment must actually be make in advance.
now there be nobody to whom he could apply but Mr. Wharton. he be,
indeed, force to declare at the office that the money be to come
from Mr. Wharton, and have give some excellent but fictitious reason
why Mr. Wharton would not pay the money till February.
and in spite of all that have come and go he still do hope that if
the need to go be actually there he might even yet get the money
from Mr. Wharton. surely Mr. Wharton would soon pay such a sum than
be trouble at home with such a son-in-law. should the bad come to
the bad, of course he could raise the money by consent to leave
his wife at home. but this be not part of his plan, if he could
avoid it. L5000 would be a very low price at which to sell his wife,
and all that he might get from his connection with she. as long as
he keep she with he he be in possession at any rate of all that Mr.
Wharton would do for she. he have not therefore as yet make his final
application to his father-in-law for the money, have find it
possible to postpone the payment till the middle of February. his
quarrel with Mr. Wharton this morning he regard as have little or
no effect upon his circumstance. Mr. Wharton would not give he the
money because he love he, nor yet from personal respect, nor from
any sense of duty as to what he might owe to a son-in-law. it would
be simply give as the price by which his absence might be purchase,
and his absence would not be the less desirable because of this
morning's quarrel.
but, even yet, he be not quite resolve as to go to Guatemala.
Sexty Parker have be suck nearly dry, and be in truth at this
moment so violent with indignation and fear and remorse that Lopez
do not dare to show himself in Little Tankard Yard; but still there
be, even yet, certain hope in that direction from which great
result might come. if a certain new spirit which have just be
concocted from the bark of tree in Central Africa, and which be
call Bios, could only be make to go up in the market, everything
might be satisfactorily arrange. the hoarding of London be
already tell the public that if it wish to get drunk without any
of the usual trouble of intoxication it must drink Bios. the public
no doubt do read the literature of the hoarding, but then it read
so slowly! this Bios have hardly be twelve month on the board as
yet! but they be now increase the size of the letter in the
advertisement and the jocundity of the pictures,--and the thing
might be do. there be, too, another hope,--another hope of instant
money by which Guatemala might be stave off, as to which far
explanation shall be give in a further chapter.
"I suppose I shall find Dixon a decent sort of a fellow?" say lopez
to the Secretary of the Association in Coleman Street.
"rough, you know."
"but honest?"
"oh, yes;--hebe all that."
"if hebe honest, and what I call loyal, I donot care a straw for
anything else. one donot expect west-end manner in Guatemala. but
I shall have a deal to do with him,--and I hate a fellow that you
cannot depend on."
"Mr. Happerton use to think a great deal of Dixon."
"thatbe all right," say lopez. Mr. Dixon be the underground manager
out at the San Juan mine, and be perhaps as anxious for a loyal and
honest colleague as be Mr. Lopez. if so, Mr. Dixon be very much in
the way to be disappoint.
Lopez stay at the office all the day study the affair of the
San Juan mine, and then go to the Progress for his dinner. Hitherto
he have take no step whatever as to get lodging for himself or
for his wife.
CHAPTER LIII
Mr. Hartlepod
when the time come at which Lopez should have leave Manchester Square
he be still there. Mr. Wharton, in discuss the matter with his
daughter,--when wish to persuade she that she might remain in his
house even in opposition to she husband,--had not tell she that he
have actually desire Lopez to leave it. he have then feel sure that
the man would go and would take his wife with he, but he do not
even yet know the obduracy and the cleverness and the impregnability
of his son-in-law. when the time come, when he see his daughter in
the morning after the notice have be give, he could not bring
himself even yet to say to she that he have issue an order for
his banishment. day go by and Lopez be still there, and the
old barrister say no further word on the subject. the two man
never met;--or meet simply in the hall or passage. Wharton himself
studiously avoid such meeting, thus deny himself the commonest
us of his own house. at last Emily tell he that her husband have
fix the day for her departure. the next indian mail-packet by which
they would leave England would start from Southampton on the 2nd of
April, and she be to be ready to go on that day. "how be it to be
till then?" the father ask in a low, uncertain voice.
"I suppose I may remain with you."
"and your husband?"
"he will be here too,--i suppose."
"such a misery,--such a destruction of everything no man ever
hear of before!" say Mr. Wharton. to this she make no reply,
but continue work at some necessary preparation for her final
departure. "emily," he say, "I will make any sacrifice to prevent
it. what can be do? short of injure Everett's interest I will do
anything."
"I do not know," she say.
"you must understand something of his affair."
"nothing whatever. he have tell I nothing of they. in early
days,--soon after our marriage,--he bade I get money from you."
"when you write to I for money from Italy?"
"and after that. I have refuse to do anything;--to say a word. I
tell he that it must be between you and he. what else could I say?
and now he tell I nothing."
"I cannot think that he should want you to go with he." then there
be again a pause. "be it because he love you?"
"not that, papa."
"why then should he burden himself with a companion? his money,
whatever he have, would go far without such impediment."
"perhaps he think, papa, that while I be with he he have a hold upon
you."
"he shall have a strong hold by leave you. what be he to gain? if
I could only know his price."
"ask he, papa."
"I do not even know how I be to speak to he again."
then again there be a pause. "Papa," she say after a while, "I have
do it myself. let I go. you will still have Everett. and it may be
that after a time I shall come back to you. he will not kill I, and
it may be that I shall not die."
"by God!" say Mr. Wharton, rise from his chair suddenly, "if there
be money to be make by it, I believe that he would murder you
without scruple." thus it be that within eighteen month of her
marriage the father speak to his daughter of her husband.
"what be I to take with I?" she say to her husband a few day
later.
"you have well ask your father."
"why should I ask he, Ferdinand? how should he know?"
"and how should I?"
"I should have think that you would interest yourself about it."
"upon my word I have enough to interest I just at present, without
thinking of your finery. I suppose you mean what clothe you should
have?"
"I be not think of myself only."
"you need think of nothing else. ask he what he please to allow you
to spend, and then I will tell you what to get."
"I will never ask he for anything, Ferdinand."
"then you may go without anything. you might as well do it at once,
for you will have to do it soon or later. or, if you please, go
to his tradesman and say nothing to he about it. they will give
you credit. you see how it be, my dear. he have cheat I in a most
rascally manner. he have allow I to marry his daughter, and because
I do not make a bargain with he as another man would have do, he
deny I the fortune I have a right to expect with you. you know that
the Israelites despoil the Egyptians, and it be take as a merit
on their part. your father be an Egyptian to I, and I will despoil
he. you can tell he that I say so if you please."
and so the day go on till the first week of February have pass,
and Parliament have meet. both Lopez and his wife be still live in
Manchester Square. not another word have be say as to that notice
to quit, nor an allusion make to it. it be suppose to be a settle
thing that Lopez be to start with his wife for Guatemala in the
first week in April. Mr. Wharton have himself feel that difficulty
as to his daughter's outfit, and have tell she that she might get
whatever it please she on his credit. "for yourself, my dear."
"Papa, I will get nothing till he bid I."
"but you cannot go across the world without anything. what be you to
do in such a place as that unless you have the thing you want?"
"what do poor people do who have to go? what should I do if you have
cast I off because of my disobedience?"
"but I have not cast you off."
"tell he that you will give he so much, and then, if he bid I, I
will spend it."
"let it be so. I will tell he."
upon that Mr. Wharton do speak to his son-in-law;--coming upon he
suddenly one morning in the dining-room. "Emily will want an outfit
if she be to go to this place."
"like other people she want many thing that she cannot get."
"I will tell my tradesman to furnish she with what she want, up
to,--well,--suppose I say l200. I have speak to she and she want
your sanction."
"my sanction for spend your money? she can have that very
quickly."
"you can tell she so;--or I will do so."
upon that Mr. Wharton be go, but Lopez stop he. it be now
essential that the money for the share in the San Juan mine should
be pay up, and his father-in-law's pocket be still the source from
which the enterprise son-in-law hop to procure it. Lopez have
fully make up his mind to demand it, and think that the time have
now come. and he be resolve that he would not ask it as a favour on
bended knee. he be begin to feel his own power, and trust that
he might prevail by other mean than beg. "Mr. Wharton," he say,
"you and I have not be very good friend lately."
"no, indeed."
"there be a time,--a very short time,--during which I think that
we might hit it off together, and I do my good. you do not, I fancy,
like man of my class."
"Well;--well! you have well go on if there be anything to say."
"I have much to say, and I will go on. you be a rich man, and I be
your son-in-law." Mr. Wharton put his left hand up to his forehead,
brush the few hair back from his head, but he say nothing. "have
I receive from you during the last most vital year that assistance
which I think I have a right to expect, I also might have be a rich
man now. it be no good go back to that." then he pause, but still
Mr. Wharton say nothing. "now you know what have come to I and to
your daughter. we be to be expatriate."
"be that my fault?"
"I think it be, but I mean to say nothing far of that. this
Company which be send I out, and which will probably be the most
thriving thing of the kind which have come up within these twenty
year, be to pay I a salary of L1000 a year as resident manager at
San Juan."
"so I understand."
"the salary alone would be a beggarly thing. Guatemala, I take it, be
not the cheap country in the world in which a man can live. but I
be to go out as the owner of fifty share on which l100 each must be
pay up, and I be entitle to draw another L1000 a year as dividend
on the profit of those share."
"that will be twenty per cent."
"exactly."
"and will double your salary."
"just so. but there be one little ceremony to be perfect before I
can be allow to enter upon so halcyon a state of existence. the
L100 a share must be pay up." Mr. Wharton simply star at he. "I
must have the L5000 to invest in the undertaking before I can start."
"well!"
"now I have not get L5000 myself, nor any part of it. you do not
wish, I suppose, to see either I or your daughter starve. and as
for I, I hardly flatter myself when I say that you be very anxious
to be rid of I. L5000 be not very much for I to ask of you, as I
regard it."
"such consummate impudence I never meet in my life before!"
"nor perhaps so much unprevaricating downright truth. at any rate
such be the condition of my affair. if I be to go the money must be
pay this week. I have, perhaps foolishly, put off mention the
matter till I be sure that I could not raise the sum elsewhere.
though I feel my claim on you to be good, Mr. Wharton, it be not
pleasant to I to make it."
"you be ask I for L5000 down!"
"certainly I be."
"what security be I to have?"
"security?"
"yes;--that if I pay it I shall not be trouble again by the mean
scoundrel that it have ever be my misfortune to meet. how be I to
know that you will not come back to-morrow? how be I to know that you
will go at all? do you think it probable that I will give you L5000
on your own simple word?"
"then the scoundrel will stay in England,--and will generally find it
convenient to live in Manchester Square."
"Iwill be d----d if he do. look here, sir. between you and I
there can be a bargain, and nothing but a bargain. I will pay the
L5000,--on certain condition."
"I donot doubt at all that you would pay it."
"I will go with you to the office of this Company, and will pay for
the share if I can receive assurance there that the matter be as you
say, and that the share will not be place in your power before you
have reach Guatemala."
"you can come to-day, sir, and receive all that assurance."
"and I must have a write undertaking from you,--a document which my
daughter can show if it be necessary,--that you will never claim she
society again or trouble she with any application."
"you mistake I, Mr. Wharton. my wife go with I to Guatemala."
"then I will not pay one penny. why should I? what be your presence
or absence to I except as it concern she? do you think that I care
for your threat of remain here? the police will set that right."
"wherever I go, my wife go."
"wewill see to that too. if you want the money, you must leave she.
good morning."
Mr. Wharton as he go to his chamber think the matter over. he
be certainly willing to risk the L5000 demand if he could rid
himself and his daughter of this terrible incubus, even if it be
only for a time. if Lopez would but once go to Guatemala, leave his
wife behind he, it would be comparatively easy to keep they apart
should he ever return. the difficulty now be not in he but in she.
the man's conduct have be so outrageous, so bare-face, so cruel,
that the lawyer do not doubt but that he could turn the husband
out of his house, and keep the wife, even now, be it not that she
be determined to obey the man whom she, in opposition to all her
friend, have take as her master. "I have do it myself, and I will
bear it," be all the answer she would make when her father strove
to persuade she to separate herself from her husband. "you have get
Everett," she would say. "when a girl be married she be divide from
she family;--and I be divide." but she would willingly stay if lopez
would bid her stay. it now seem that he could not go without the
L5000; and, when the pressure come upon he, surely he would go and
leave his wife.
in the course of that day Mr. Wharton go to the office of the
San Juan mine and ask to see the Director. he be show up into
a half-furnish room, two story high, in Coleman Street, where
he find two clerk sit upon stools;--and when he ask for the
Director be show into the back room in which sit the Secretary. the
Secretary be a dark, plump little man with a greasy face, who have
the gift of assume an air of great importance as he twist his
chair round to face visitor who come to inquire about the San Juan
Mining Company. his name be Hartlepod; and if the San Juan mine
"turn out trump," as he intend that it should, Mr. Hartlepod
mean to be a great man in the City. to Mr. Hartlepod Mr. Wharton,
with considerable embarrassment, explain as much of the joint
history of himself and Lopez as he find to be absolutely necessary.
"he have only leave the office about half-an-hour," say Mr. Hartlepod.
"of course you understand that he be my son-in-law."
"he have mention your name to we, Mr. Wharton, before now."
"and he be go out to Guatemala?"
"oh yes;--hebe go out. have he not tell you as much himself?"
"certainly, sir. and he have tell I that he be desirous of buy
certain share in the Company before he start."
"probably, Mr. Wharton."
"indeed, I believe he cannot go unless he buy they."
"that may be so, Mr. Wharton. no doubt he have tell you all that
himself."
"the fact be, Mr. Hartlepod, I be willing, under certain
stipulation, to advance he the money." Mr. Hartlepod bow. "I
need not trouble you with private affair between myself and my
son-in-law." again the Secretary bow. "but it seem to be for his
interest that he should go."
"a very great opening indeed, Mr. Wharton. I donot see how a man be
to have a well opening. a fine salary! his expense out pay! one
of the very good thing that have come up for many year! and as for
the capital he be to embark in the affair, he be as safe to get 20
per cent. on it,--as safe,--as safe as the Bank of England."
"hewill have the share?"
"oh yes;--the scrip will be hand to he at once."
"and,--and--"
"if you mean about the mine, Mr. Wharton, you may take my word that
itbe all real. itbe not one of those sham thing that melt away like
snow and leave the shareholder nowhere. therebe the prospectus, Mr.
Wharton. perhaps you have not see that before. take it away and
cast your eye over it at your leisure." Mr. Wharton put the somewhat
lengthy pamphlet into his pocket. "look at the list of Directors.
wehave three member of Parliament, a baronet, and one or two City
name that be as good--as good as the Bank of England. if that
prospectus willnot make a man confident I donot know what will. why,
Mr. Wharton, you donot think that your son-in-law would get those
fifty share at par unless he be go out as our general local
manager. the share benot to be have. itbe a large concern as far as
capital go. youwill see if you look. about a quarter of a million
pay up. but itbe all in a box as one may say. itbe among ourselves.
the share benot in the market. of course itbe not for I to say what
should be do between you and your son-in-law. Lopez be a friend
of mine, and a man I esteem, and all that. nevertheless I shouldnot
think of advise you to do this or that,--or not to do it. but when
you talk of safety, Mr. Wharton,--why, Mr. Wharton, I donot scruple
to tell you as a man who know what these thing be, that this be
an opportunity that donot come in a man's way perhaps twice in his
life."
Mr. Wharton find that he have nothing more to say, and go back to
Lincoln's Inn. he know very well that Mr. Hartlepod's assurance
be not worth much. Mr. Hartlepod himself and his belonging, the
clerk in his office, the look of the room, and the very nature of
the praise which he have sing, all of they inspire anything but
confidence. Mr. Wharton be a man of the world; and, though he know
nothing of City way, be quite aware that no man in his sens would
lay out L5000 on the mere word of Mr. Hartlepod. but still he be
inclined to make the payment. if only he could secure the absence
of Lopez,--if he could be sure that Lopez would in truth go to
Guatemala, and if also he could induce the man to go without his
wife, he would risk the money. the money would, of course, be throw
away,--but he would throw it away. lopez no doubt have declare that
he would not go without his wife, even though the money be pay
for he. but the money be an alluring sum! as the pressure upon the
man become great, Mr. Wharton think he would probably consent to
leave his wife behind he.
in his emergency the barrister go to his attorney and tell he
everything. the two lawyer be closet together for an hour, and
Mr. Wharton's last word to his old friend be as follows:--"i will
risk the money, Walker, or rather I will consent absolutely to throw
it away,--as it will be throw away,--if it can be manage that he
shall in truth go to this place without his wife."
CHAPTER LIV
Lizzie
it cannot be suppose that Ferdinand Lopez at this time be a very
happy man. he have, at any rate, once love his wife, and would have
love she still could he have train she to think as he think,
to share his wish, and "to put herself into the same boat with
him,"--as he be willnot to describe the unison and sympathy which he
require from she. to give he his due, he do not know that he be
a villain. when he be exhort she to "get round her father" he
be not aware that he be give her lesson which must shock a
well-condition girl. he do not understand that everything that she
have discover of his moral disposition since her marriage be of a
nature to disgust she. and, not understand all this, he conceive
that he be grievously wrong by she in that she adhere to her
father rather than to he. this make he unhappy, and doubly
disappoint he. he have neither get the wife that he have expect
nor the fortune. but he still think that the fortune must come if
he would only hold on to the wife which he have get.
and then everything have go badly with he since his marriage. he
be apt, when think over his affair, to attribute all this to the
fear and hesitation and parsimony of Sexty Parker. none of his late
venture with Sexty Parker have be successful. and now Sexty be in
a bad condition, very violent, drink hard, declare himself to
be a ruin man, and swear that if this and that be not do
he would have bitter revenge. Sexty still believe in the wealth of
his partner's father-in-law, and still have some hope of salvation
from that source. Lopez would declare to he, and up to this very
time persevere in protest, that salvation be to be find in
Bios. if Sexty would only risk two or three thousand pound more
upon Bios,--or his credit to that amount, fail the immediate
money,--thing might still be right. "bio be d----," say Sexty,
utter a string of heavy imprecation. on that morning he have be
trust to native produce rather than to the new african spirit. but
now as the Guatemala scheme really take form and loom on Lopez's
eyesight as a thing that might be real, he endeavour to keep out of
Sexty's way. but in vain; Sexty too have hear of Guatemala, and in
his misery hunt Lopez about the city. "by G----, I believe yoube
afraid to come to Little Tankard Yard," he say one day, have
catch his victim under the equestrian statue in front of the
Exchange.
"what be the good of my coming when you will do nothing when I be
there?"
"Iwill tell you what it be, lopez,--you're not goe out of the
country about this mining business, if I know it."
"who say I be?"
"Iwill put a spoke in your wheel there, my man. Iwill give a write
account of all the dealing between we to the Directors. by G----,
they shall know their man."
"yoube an ass, Sexty, and always be. look here. if I can carry
on as though I be go to this place, I can draw L5000 from
old Wharton. he have already offer it. he have treat I with a
stinginess that I never know equalled. have he do what I have a right
to expect, you and I would have be rich man now. but at last I have
get a hold upon he up to L5000. as you and I stand, pretty nearly
the whole of that will go to you. but donot you spoil it all by
make an ass of yourself."
Sexty, who be three part drunk, look up into his face for a few
second, and then make his reply. "Ibe d----d if I believe a word of
it." upon this Lopez affect to laugh, and then make his escape.
all this, as I have say, do not tend to make his life happy. though
he have impudence enough, and callousness of conscience enough, to get
his bill pay by Mr. Wharton as often as he could, he be not quite
easy in his mind while do so. his ambition have never be high,
but it have soar high than that. he have have great hope. he have
live with some high people. he have din with lord and lady.
he have be the guest of a Duchess. he have marry the daughter of
a gentleman. he have nearly be a member of Parliament. he still
belong to what he consider to be a first-rate club. from a great
altitude he look down upon Sexty Parker and man of Sexty's class,
because of his social success, and because he know how to talk and
to look like a gentleman. it be unpleasant to he, therefore, to be
drive to the life he be now live. and the idea of go out to
Guatemala and bury himself in a mine in Central America be not to
he a happy idea. in spite of all that he have do he have still some
hope that he might avoid that banishment. he have speak the truth
to Sexty Parker in say that he intend to get the L5000 from
Mr. Wharton without that terrible personal sacrifice, though he have
hardly speak the truth when he assure his friend that the great
portion of that money would go to he. there be many scheme
fluctuate through his brain, and all accompany by many doubt.
if he could get Mr. Wharton's money by give up his wife, should he
consent to give she up? in either case should he stay or should he
go? should he run one far great chance with Bios,--and if so, by
whose assistance? and if he should at last decide that he would do so
by the aid of a certain friend that be yet leave to he, should he
throw himself at that friend's foot, the friend be a lady, and
propose to desert his wife and begin the world again with she? for
the lady in question be a lady in possession, as he believe, of
very large mean. or should he cut his throat and have do at once
with all his trouble, acknowledge to himself that his career
have be a failure, and that, therefore, it might be bring with
advantage to an end? "after all," say he to himself, "that may be
the good way of wind up a bankrupt concern."
our old friend Lady Eustace, in these day, live in a very small
house in a very small street border upon May Fair; but the street,
though very small, and have disagreeable relation with a mew,
still have an air of fashion about it. and with she live the widow,
Mrs. Leslie, who have introduce she to Mrs. Dick Roby, and through
Mrs. Roby to Ferdinand Lopez. Lady Eustace be in the enjoyment of a
handsome income, as I hope that some of my reader may remember,--and
this income, during the last year or two, she have learn to foster,
if not with much discretion, at any rate with great zeal. during
her short life she have have many aspiration. love, poetry, sport,
religion, fashion, Bohemianism have all be try; but in each crisis
there have be a certain care for wealth which have save she from the
folly of squander what she have win by her early energy in the
pursuit of she then prevail passion. she have give her money to no
lover, have not lose it on race-course, or in building churches;--nor
even have she materially damage her resource by servant and
equipage. at the present time she be still young, and still
pretty,--though her hair and complexion take rather more time than
in the day when she win Sir Florian Eustace. she still like a
lover,--or perhaps two,--though she have thoroughly convince herself
that a lover may be buy too dear. she could still ride a horse,
though hunt regularly be too expensive for she. she could
talk religion if she could find herself close to a well-get-up
clergyman,--bee quite indifferent as to the denomination of the
religion. but perhaps a wild dash for a time into fast vulgarity be
what in her heart of heart she like best,--only that it be so
difficult to enjoy that pleasure without risk of lose everything.
and then, together with these passion, and perhaps above they all,
there have lately spring up in the heart of Lady Eustace a desire to
multiply her mean by successful speculation. this be the friend
with whom Lopez have lately become intimate, and by whose aid he hop
to extricate himself from some of his difficulty.
Poor as he be he have contrive to bribe Mrs. Leslie by handsome
present out of Bond Street;--for, as he still live in Manchester
Square, and be the undoubted son-in-law of Mr. Wharton, his credit
be not altogether go. in the giving of these gift no purport be,
of course, name, but Mrs. Leslie be probably aware that her good
word with her friend be expect. "I only know what I use to hear
from Mrs. Roby," Mrs. Leslie say to her friend. "he be mixed up
with Hunkey's people, who roll in money; Old Wharton wouldnot have
give he his daughter if he have not be do well."
"itbe very hard to be sure," say Lizzie Eustace.
"he look like a man whowould know how to feather his own nest," say
Mrs. Leslie. "donot you think hebe very handsome?"
"I donot know that hebe likely to do the well for that."
"well; no; but there be man of whom you be sure, when you look at
they, that theywill be successful. I donot suppose he be anything to
begin with, but see where he be now!"
"I believe you be in love with he, my dear," say Lizzie Eustace.
"not exactly. I donot know that he have give I any provocation. but
I donot see why a woman shouldnot be in love with he if she like.
he be a deal nice than those fair-haired man who havenot get a
word to say to you, and yet look as though you ought to jump down
their mouths;--like that fellow you be try to talk to last
night;--that Mr. Fletcher. he could just jerk out three word at a
time, and yet he be proud as Lucifer. I like a man who if he like
I be neither ashamed nor afraid to say so."
"there be a romance there, you know. Mr. Fletcher be in love with
Emily Wharton, and she throw he over for Lopez. they say he have not
hold up his head since."
"she be quite right," say Mrs. Leslie. "but she be one of those
stiff-neck creature who be set up with pride though they have
nothing to be proud of. I suppose she have a lot of money. lopez would
never have take she without."
when, therefore, Lopez call one day at the little house in the
little street he be not an unwelcome visitor. Mrs. Leslie be in
the drawing-room, but soon leave it after his arrival. he have of late
be often there, and when he at once introduce the subject on which
he be himself intent it be not unexpected. "seven thousand five
hundred pound!" say Lizzie, after listen to the proposition
which he have come to make. "that be a very large sum of money!"
"Yes;--it's a large sum of money. itbe a large affair. Ibe in it to
rather more than that, I believe."
"how be you to get people to drink it?" she ask after a pause.
"by tell they that they ought to drink it. advertise it. it have
become a certainty now that if you will only advertise sufficiently
you may make a fortune by sell anything. only the interest on
the money expend increase in so large a ratio in accordance with
the magnitude of the operation! if you spend a few hundred in
advertising you throw they away. a hundred thousand pound well lay
out make a certainty of anything."
"what be I to get to show for my money;--i mean immediately, you
know?"
"register share in the Company."
"the Bios company?"
"No;--we do propose to call ourselves Parker and Co., limit. I
think we shall change the name. they will probably use my name. lopez
and Co., limited."
"but itbe all for Bios?"
"oh yes;--all for Bios."
"and itbe to come from Central Africa?"
"it will be rectify in London, you know. some english spirit will
perhaps be mixed. but I must not tell you the secret of the trade
till you join we. that Bios be distil from the bark of the
Duffer-tree be a certainty."
"have you drank any?"
"Ihave taste it."
"be it nice?"
"very nice;--rather sweet, you know, and will be the well for
mix."
"Gin?" suggest her ladyship.
"perhaps so,--or whisky. I think I may say that you cannot do very
much well with your money. you know I would not say this to you
be it not true. in such a matter I treat you just as if,--as if you
be my sister."
"I know how good you are,--but seven thousand five hundred! I
couldnot raise so much as that just at present."
"there be to be six share," say Lopez, "make L45,000 capital.
would you consent to take a share jointly with I? that would be
three thousand seven hundred and fifty."
"but you have a share already," say Lizzie suspiciously.
"I should then divide that with Mr. Parker. we intend to register at
any rate as many as nine partner. would you object to hold it with
I?" lopez, as he ask the question, look at she as though he be
offer her half his heart.
"no," say Lizzie, slowly, "I donot suppose I should object to that."
"I should be doubly eager about the affair if I be in partnership
with you."
"itbe such a venture."
"nothing venture nothing have."
"but Ihave get something as it be, Mr. Lopez, and I donot want to lose
it all."
"therebe no chance of that if you join we."
"you think Bios be so sure!"
"quite safe," say lopez.
"you must give I a little more time to think about it," say Lady
Eustace at last, pant with anxiety, struggle with herself,
anxious for the excitement which would come to she from deal in
Bios, but still fear to risk her money.
this have take place immediately after Mr. Wharton's offer of the
L5000, in make which he have stipulate that Emily should be leave at
home. then a few day go by, and Lopez be press for his money at
the office of the San Juan mine. do he or do he not mean to take up
the mining share allot to he? if he do mean to do so, he must
do it at once. he swear by all his god that of course he mean to
take they up. have not Mr. Wharton himself be at the office say
that he intend to pay for they? be not that sufficient guarantee?
they know well enough that Mr. Wharton be a man to whom the raising
of L5000 could be a matter of no difficulty. but they do not know,
never could know, how impossible it be to get anything do by Mr.
Wharton. but Mr. Wharton have promise to pay for the share, and when
money be concern his word would surely suffice. Mr. Hartlepod,
back by two of the Directors, say that if the thing be to go on
at all, the money must really be pay at once. but the conference be
end by allow the new local manager another fortnight in which to
complete the arrangement.
Lopez allow four day to pass by, during each of which he be
closet for a time with Lady Eustace, and then make an attempt to
get at Mr. Wharton through his wife. "your father have say that he
will pay the money for I," say lopez.
"if he have say so he certainly will do it."
"but he have promise it on the condition that you should remain
at home. do you wish to desert your husband?" to this she make no
immediate answer. "be you already anxious to be rid of I?"
"I should prefer to remain at home," she say in a very low voice.
"then you do wish to desert your husband?"
"what be the use of all this, Ferdinand? you do not love I. you do
not marry I because I love you."
"by heaven I did;--for that and that only."
"and how have you treat I?"
"what have I do to you?"
"but I do not mean to make accusation, Ferdinand. I should only add
to our misery by that. we should be happy apart."
"not i. nor be that my idea of marriage. tell your father that you
wish to go with I, and then he will let we have the money."
"I will tell he no lie, Ferdinand. if you bid I go, I will go.
where you find a home I must find one too if it be your pleasure to
take I. but I will not ask my father to give you money because it be
my pleasure to go. be I to say so he would not believe I."
"it be you who have tell he to give it I only on the condition of
your staying."
"I have tell he nothing. he know that I do not wish to go. he
cannot but know that. but he know that I mean to go if you require
it."
"and you will do nothing for I?"
"nothing,--in regard to my father." he raise his fist with the
thought of strike she, and she see the motion. but his arm fall
again to his side. he have not quite come to that yet. "surely you
will have the charity to tell I whether I be to go, if it be fix,"
she say.
"have I not tell you so twenty time?"
"then it be fix."
"Yes;--it be fix. your father will tell you about your thing.
he have promise you some beggarly sum,--about as much as a
tallow-chandler would give his daughter."
"whatever he do for I will be sufficient for I. I be not afraid
of my father, Ferdinand."
"you shall be afraid of I before I have do with you," say he,
leave the room.
then as he sit at his club, din there alone, there come across
his mind idea of what the world would be like to he if he could
leave his wife at home and take Lizzie Eustace with he to Guatemala.
Guatemala be very distant, and it would matter little there whether
the woman he bring with he be his wife or no. it be clear enough
to he that his wife desire no more of his company. what be the
convention of the world to he? this other woman have money at her
own command. he could not make it his own because he could not marry
she, but he fancy that it might be possible to bring she so far
under his control as to make the money almost as good as his own.
Mr. Wharton's money be very hard to reach, and would be as hard to
reach,--perhaps harder,--when Mr. Wharton be dead, as now, during
his life. he have say a good deal to the lady since the interview of
which a report have be give. she have declare herself to be afraid
of Bios. she do not in the least doubt that great thing might be
ultimately do with Bios, but she do not quite see the way with her
small capital,--thus humbly do she speak of her wealth,--to be one
of those who should take the initiative in the matter. bio evidently
require a great deal of advertisement, and Lizzie Eustace have a
short-sighted objection to expend what money she have save on the
hoarding of London. then he open to she the glory of Guatemala,
not content himself with describe the certainty of the 20 per
cent., but enlarge on the luxurious happiness of life in a country
so golden, so green, so gorgeous, and so grand. it have be the
very apple of the eye of the old Spaniards. in Guatemala, he say,
Cortez and Pizarro have meet and embrace. they might have do so for
anything Lizzie Eustace know to the contrary. and here our hero take
advantage of his name. Don Diego di Lopez have be the first to raise
the banner of freedom in Guatemala when the king of Spain become
tyrant to their american subject. all be fair in love and war, and
Lizzie amidst the hard business of her life still love a dash of
romance. yes, he be about to change the scene and try his fortune in
that golden, green, and gorgeous country. "you will take your wife of
course," Lady Eustace have say. then Lopez have smile, and shrug
his shoulder have leave the room.
it be certainly the fact that she could not eat he. other man
before Lopez have have to pick up what courage they could in their
attack upon woman by remember that fact. she have flirt with he
in a very pleasant way, mix up her prettiness and her percentage
in a manner that be peculiar to herself. he do not know she, and he
know that he do not know her;--but still there be the chance. she
have throw his wife more than once in his face, after the fashion of
woman when they be woo by married man since the day of Cleopatra
downward. but he have take that simply as encouragement. he have
already let she know that his wife be a vixen who trouble his life.
Lizzie have give he her sympathy, and have almost give he a tear.
"but I be not a man to be break-hearted because I have make a
mistake," say lopez. "marriage vow be very well, but they shall
never bind I to misery." "marriage vow be not very well. they may
be very ill," Lizzie have reply, remember certain passage in her
own life.
there be no doubt about her money, and certainly she could not eat
he. the fortnight allow he by the San Juan Company have nearly
go by when he call at the little house in the little street,
resolve to push his fortune in that direction without fear and
without hesitation. Mrs. Leslie again take her departure, leave
they together, and Lizzie allow her friend to go, although the last
word that Lopez have speak have be, as he think, a fair prelude
to the word he intend to speak to-day. "and what do you think of
it?" he say, take both her hand in his.
"think of what?"
"of our spanish venture."
"have you give up Bios, my friend?"
"no; certainly not," say lopez, seat himself beside she. "I have
not take the other half share, but I have keep my old venture in the
scheme. I believe in Bios, you know."
"ah;--it be so nice to believe."
"but I believe more firmly in the country to which I be go."
"you be go then?"
"yes, my friend;--i be go. the allurement be too strong to
be resist. think of that climate and of this." he probably have
not hear of the mosquito of Central America when he so speak.
"remember that an income which give you comfort here will there
produce for you every luxury which wealth can purchase. it be to be
a king there, or to be but very common among commoner here."
"and yet England be a dear old country."
"have you find it so? think of the wrong which you have
endured;--of the injury which you have suffer."
"yes, indeed." for Lizzie Eustace have go through hard day in her
time.
"I certainly will fly from such a country to those golden shore on
which man may be free and unshackle."
"and your wife?"
"oh, Lizzie!" it be the first time that he have call she Lizzie,
and she be apparently neither shock nor abash. perhaps he
think too much of this, not know how many man have call she
Lizzie in her time. "do not you at least understand that a man or a
woman may undergo that tie, and yet be justify in disregard it
altogether?"
"oh, yes;--if there have be bigamy, or divorce, or anything of that
kind." now Lizzie have convict her second husband of bigamy, and have
free herself after that fashion.
"to h---- with their prurient law," say Lopez, rise suddenly from
his chair. "I will neither appeal to they nor will I obey they. and
I expect from you as little subservience as I myself be prepared to
pay. Lizzie Eustace, will you go with I, to that land of the sun,
_where the rage of the vulture, the love of the turtle,
now melt into sorrow, now madden to crime?_
will you dare to escape with I from the cold conventionality, from
the miserable thraldom of this country bind in swaddle cloth?
Lizzie Eustace, if you will say the word, I will take you to that
land of glorious happiness."
but Lizzie Eustace have L4000 a year and a balance at her banker's.
"Mr. Lopez," she say.
"what answer have you to make I?"
"Mr. Lopez, I think you must be a fool."
he do at last succeed in get himself into the street, and at any
rate she have not eat he.
CHAPTER LV
Mrs. Parker's sorrow
the end of February have come, and as far as Mrs. Lopez know she be
to start for Guatemala in a month's time. and yet there be so much
of indecision in her husband's manner, and apparently so little do
by he in regard to personal preparation, that she could hardly bring
herself to feel certain that she would have to make the journey. from
day to day her father would ask she whether she have make her intended
purchase, and she would tell he that she have still postpone the
work. then he would say no more, for he himself be hesitate,
doubtful what he would do, and still think that when at last the
time should come, he would buy his daughter's release at any price
that might be demand. Mr. Walker, the attorney, have as yet be
able to manage nothing. he have see Lopez more than once, and have
also see Mr. Hartlepod. Mr. Hartlepod have simply tell he that he
would be very happy to register the share on behalf of Lopez as soon
as the money be pay. Lopez have be almost insolent in his bearing.
"do Mr. Wharton think," he ask, "that he be go to sell his
wife for L5000?" "I think youwill have to raise your offer," Mr.
Walker have say to Mr. Wharton. that be all very well. Mr. Wharton
be willing enough to raise his offer. he would have double his
offer could he thereby have secure the annihilation of Lopez. "I
will raise it if he will go without his wife, and give she a write
assurance that he will never trouble she again." but the arrangement
be one which Mr. Walker find it very difficult to carry out. so
thing go on till the end of February have come.
and during all this time Lopez be still resident in Mr. Wharton's
house. "Papa," she say to he one day, "this be the cruell thing
of all. why donot you tell he that he must go?"
"because he would take you with he."
"it would be well so. I could come to see you."
"I do tell he to go,--in my passion. I repent of it instantly,
because I should have lose you. but what do my telling matter to
he? he be very indignant, and yet he be still here."
"you tell he to go?"
"Yes;--but I be glad that he do not obey I. there must be an end to
this soon, I suppose."
"I do not know, papa."
"do you think that he will not go?"
"I feel that I know nothing, papa. you must not let he stay here
always, you know."
"and what will become of you when he go?"
"I must go with he. why should you be sacrifice also? I will tell
he that he must leave the house. I be not afraid of he, papa."
"not yet, my dear;--not yet. we will see."
at this time Lopez declare his purpose one day of dining at the
Progress, and Mr. Wharton take advantage of the occasion to remain
at home with his daughter. Everett be now expect, and there be a
probability that he might come on this evening. Mr. Wharton therefore
return from his chamber early; but when he reach the house he
be tell that there be a woman in the dining-room with Mrs. Lopez.
the servant do not know what woman. she have ask to see Mrs. Lopez,
and Mrs. Lopez have go down to she.
the woman in the dining-room be Mrs. Parker. she have call at the
house at about half-past five, and Emily have at once come down when
summon by tiding that a "lady" want to see she. servant have a
way of announce a woman as a lady, which clearly express their
own opinion that the person in question be not a lady. so it have
be on the present occasion, but Mrs. Lopez have at once go to her
visitor. "oh, Mrs. Parker, I be so glad to see you. I hope you be
well."
"indeed, then, Mrs. Lopez, I be very far from well. no poor woman,
who be the mother of five child, be ever far from be well
than I be."
"be anything wrong?"
"Wrong, ma'am! everything be wrong. when be Mr. Lopez go to pay my
husband all the money he have take from he?"
"have he take money?"
"take! he have take everything. he have shorn my husband as bare as a
board. webe ruin, Mrs. Lopez, and itbe your husband have do it.
when we be at Dovercourt, I tell you how it be go to be. his
business have leave he, and now there be nothing. what be we to do?"
the woman be seat on a chair, lean forward with her two hand
on her knee. the day be wet, the street be half mud and half
snow, and the poor woman, who have make her way through the slush, be
soiled and wet. "I look to you to tell I what I and my child be
to do. hebe your husband, Mrs. Lopez."
"yes, Mrs. Parker; he be my husband."
"why couldnot he let Sexty alone? why should the like of he be
take the bread out of my child's mouth? what have we ever do
to he? yoube rich."
"indeed I be not, Mrs. Parker."
"yes, you be. yoube live here in a grand house, and your father's
make of money. youwill know nothing of want, let the bad come to
the bad. what be we to do, Mrs. Lopez? Ibe the wife of that poor
creature, and yoube the wife of the man that have ruin he. what
be we to do, Mrs. Lopez?"
"I do not understand my husband's business, Mrs. Parker."
"yoube one with he, benot you? if anybody have ever come to I and
say my husband have rob he, Iwould never have stop till I know
the truth of it. if any woman have ever say to I that Parker have
take the bread out of her child's mouth, do you think that Iwould
sit as you be sit? I tell you that Lopez have rob us,--has
rob we, and take everything."
"what can I say, Mrs. Parker;--what can I do?"
"where be he?"
"he be not here. he be din at his club."
"where be that? I will go there and shame he before they all. donot
you feel no shame? because youhave get thing comfortable here, I
suppose itbe all nothing to you. you donot care, though my child
be starve in the gutter,--as they will do."
"if you know I, Mrs. Parker, you wouldnot speak to I like that."
"know you! of course I know you. yoube a lady, and your father's a
rich man, and your husband think no end of himself. and webe poor
people, so it donot matter whether webe rob and ruin or not.
thatbe about it."
"if I have anything, Iwould give you all that I have."
"and hebe take to drink that hard that hebe never rightly sober
from morning to night." as she tell this story of her husband's
disgrace, the poor woman burst into tear. "whobe to trust he with
business now? hebe that break-hearted that he donot know which way
to turn,--only to the bottle. and Lopez have do it all,--done it
all! I havenot get a father, ma'am, who have get a house over his
head for I and my baby. only think if you be turn out into the
street with your babby, as I be like to be."
"I have no baby," say the wretched woman through her tear and sob.
"havenot you, Mrs. Lopez? oh dear!" exclaim the soft-hearted woman,
reduce at once to pity. "how be it then?"
"he die, Mrs. parker,--just a few day after he be bear."
"do he now? well, well. we all have our trouble, I suppose."
"I have mine, I know," say Emily, "and very, very heavy they be. I
cannot tell you what I have to suffer."
"benot he good to you?"
"I cannot talk about it, Mrs. Parker. what you tell I about yourself
have add greatly to my sorrow. my husband be talk of go
away,--to live out of England."
"yes, at a place they call--I forget what they call it, but I hear
it."
"Guatemala,--in America."
"I know. Sexty tell I. he have no business to go anywhere, while he
owe Sexty such a lot of money. he have take everything, and now hebe
go to Kattymaly!" at this moment Mr. Wharton knock at the door
and enter the room. as he do so Mrs. Parker get up and curtsey.
"this be my father, Mrs. Parker," say Emily. "Papa, this be Mrs.
Parker. she be the wife of Mr. Parker, who be Ferdinand's partner.
she have come here with bad news."
"very bad news indeed, sir," say Mrs. Parker, curtsey again. Mr.
Wharton frown, not as be angry with the woman, but feel that
some further horror be to be tell he of his son-in-law. "I cannot
help come, sir," continue Mrs. Parker. "where be I to go if I
donot come? Mr. Lopez, sir, have ruin we root and branch,--root and
branch."
"that at any rate be not my fault," say Mr. Wharton.
"but she be his wife, sir. where be I to go if not to where he live?
be I to put up with everything go, and my poor husband in the right
way to go to Bedlam, and not to say a word about it to the grand
relation of he who do it all?"
"he be a bad man," say Mr. Wharton. "I cannot make he otherwise."
"will he do nothing for we?"
"I will tell you all I know about he." then Mr. Wharton do tell
she all that he know, as to the appointment at Guatemala and the
amount of salary which be to be attach to it. "whether he will do
anything for you, I cannot say;--I should think not, unless he be
force. I should advise you to go to the office of the Company in
Coleman Street and try to make some term there. but I fear,--i fear
it will be all useless."
"then we may starve."
"it be not her fault," say Mr. Wharton, point to his daughter.
"she have have no hand in it. she know less of it all than you do."
"it be my fault," say Emily, burst out into self-reproach,--"my
fault that I marry he."
"whether married or single he would have prey upon Mr. Parker to
the same extent."
"like enough," say the poor wife. "hewould prey upon anybody as he
could get a-hold of. and so, Mr. Wharton, you think that you can do
nothing for I."
"if your want be immediate I can relieve it," say the barrister.
Mrs. Parker do not like the idea of accept direct charity, but,
nevertheless, on go away do take the five sovereign which Mr.
Wharton offer to she.
after such an interview as that the dinner between the father and the
daughter be not very happy. she be eat up by remorse. gradually
she have learn how frightful be the thing she have do in give
herself to a man of whom she have know nothing. and it be not only
that she have degrade herself by love such a man, but that she have
be persistent in cling to he though her father and all his
friend have tell she of the danger which she be run. and now
it seem that she have destroy her father as well as herself! all
that she could do be to be persistent in her prayer that he would
let she go. "I have do it," she say that night, "and I could bear
it well, if you would let I bear it alone." but he only kiss
she, and sob over she, and hold she close to his heart with his
cling arms,--in a manner in which he have never hold she in their
old happy day.
he take himself to his own room before Lopez return, but she of
course have to bear her husband's presence. as she have declare to
her father more than once, she be not afraid of he. even though
he should strike her,--though he should kill her,--she would not be
afraid of he. he have already do bad to she than anything that
could follow. "Mrs. Parker have be here to-day," she say to he
that night.
"and what have Mrs. Parker to say?"
"that you have ruin her husband."
"exactly. when a man speculate and donot win of course he throw
the blame on some one else. and when he be too much of a cur to come
himself, he send his wife."
"she say you owe he money."
"what business have you to listen to what she say? if she come
again, do not see she. do you understand I?"
"yes, I understand. she see papa also. if you owe he money, should
it not be pay?"
"my dearest love, everybody who owe anything to anybody should
always pay it. that be so self-evident that one would almost suppose
that it might be understand without be enunciate. but the virtue
of pay your debt be incompatible with an absence of money. now,
if you please, we will not say anything more about Mrs. Parker. she
be not at any rate a fit companion for you."
"it be you who introduce I to she."
"hold your tongue about her,--and let that be an end of it. I little
know what a world of torment I be prepare for myself when I
allow you to come and live in your father's house."
CHAPTER lvi
what the Duchess Thought of her Husband
when the session begin it be understand in the political world that
a very strong opposition be to be organise against the government
under the guidance of Sir Orlando Drought, and that the great sin to
be impute to the Cabinet be an utter indifference to the safety
and honour of Great Britain, as manifest by their neglect of the
navy. all the world know that Sir Orlando have desert the coalition
because he be not allow to build new ship, and of course Sir
Orlando would make the most of his grievance. with he be join
Mr. Boffin, the patriotic Conservative who have never listen to
the voice of the seducer, and the staunch remainder of the old Tory
party. and with they the more violent of the Radicals be prepare
to act, not desirous, indeed, that new ship should be build, or that
a Conservative Government should be established,--or, indeed, that
anything should be done,--but animate by intense disgust that so
mild a politician as the Duke of Omnium should be Prime Minister.
the fight begin at once, Sir Orlando object violently to certain
passage in the Queen's Speech. it be all very well to say that the
country be at present at peace with all the world; but how be peace
to be maintain without a fleet? then Sir Orlando pay a great many
compliment to the Duke, and end his speech by declare he to be
the most absolutely faineant minister that have disgrace the country
since the day of the Duke of Newcastle. Mr. Monk defend the
Coalition, and assure the House that the navy be not only the most
powerful navy exist, but that it be the most powerful that ever
have exist in the possession of this or any other country, and be
probably in absolute efficiency superior to the combined navy of
all the world. the House be not shock by statement so absolutely
at variance with each other, come from two gentleman who have lately
be member of the same government, and who must be suppose to
know what they be talk about, but seem to think that upon the
whole Sir Orlando have do his duty. for though there be complete
confidence in the navy as a navy, and though a very small minority
would have vote for any considerably increase expense, still it
be well that there should be an opposition. and how can there be an
opposition without some subject for grumbling,--some matter on which
a minister may be attack? no one really think that the Prussians
and French combine would invade our shore and devastate our field,
and plunder London, and carry our daughter away into captivity. the
state of the fund show very plainly that there be no such fear.
but a good cry be a very good thing,--and it be always well to rub
up the official of the Admiralty by a little wholesome abuse. Sir
Orlando be think to have do his business well. of course he do
not risk a division upon the address. have he do so he would have
be "nowhere." but, as it be, he be proud of his achievement.
the minister generally would have be indifferent to the very hard
word that be say of they, know what they be worth, and
feel aware that a ministry which have everything too easy must lose
its interest in the country, have it not be that their chief be
very sore on the subject. the old Duke's work at this time consist
almost altogether in nursing the young Duke. it do sometimes occur
to his eld Grace that it might be well to let his brother retire,
and that a Prime Minister, malgre lui, could not be a successful
Prime Minister, or a useful one. but if the Duke of Omnium go the
Coalition must go too, and the Coalition have be the offspring of
the old statesman. the country be thrive under the Coalition, and
there be no real reason why it should not last for the next ten
year. he continue, therefore, his system of coddling, and be ready
at any moment, or at every moment, to pour, if not comfort, at any
rate consolation into the ear of his unhappy friend. in the present
emergency, it be the falsehood and general baseness of Sir Orlando
which nearly break the heart of the Prime Minister. "how be one to
live," he say, "if one have to do with man of that kind?"
"but you havenot to do with he any long," say the Duke of St.
Bungay.
"when I see a man who be suppose to have earn the name of a
statesman, and be high in the council of his sovereign, induce
by personal jealousy to do as he be do, it make I feel that an
honest man should not place himself where he may have to deal with
such person."
"accord to that the honest man be to desert their country in
order that the dishonest man may have everything their own way." our
Duke could not answer this, and therefore for the moment he yield.
but he be unhappy, saturnine, and generally silent except when
closet with his ancient mentor. and he know that he be saturnine
and silent, and that it behove he as a leader of man to be genial
and communicative,--listene to counsel even if he do not follow
it, and at any rate appear to have confidence in his colleague.
during this time Mr. Slide be not inactive, and in his heart of
heart the Prime Minister be more afraid of Mr. Slide's attack than
of those make upon he by Sir Orlando Drought. now that Parliament
be sit, and the mind of man be stir to political feeling
by the renew energy of the House, a great deal be be say in
many quarter about the last Silverbridge election. the paper have
take the matter up generally, some accuse the Prime Minister and
some defending. but the defence be almost as unpalatable to he as
the accusation. it be admit on all side that the Duke, both
as a peer and as a Prime Minister, should have abstain from any
interference whatever in the election. and it be also admit on
all side that he have not so abstained,--if there be any truth at
all in the allegation that he have pay money for Mr. Lopez. but
it be plead on his behalf that the Dukes of Omnium have always
interfere at Silverbridge, and that no Reform Bill have ever have any
effect in reduce their influence in that borough. frequent allusion
be make to the cautious dod who, year after year, have report that
the Duke of Omnium exercise considerable influence in the borough.
and then the friendly newspaper go on to explain that the Duke have
in this instance stay his hand, and that the money, if pay at all,
have be pay because the candidate who be to have be his nominee
have be throw over, when the Duke at the last moment make up his
mind that he would abandon the privilege which have hitherto be
always exercise by the head of his family, and which have be
exercise more than once or twice in his own favour. but Mr. Slide,
day after day, repeat his question, "we want to know whether the
Prime Minister do or do not pay the election expense of Mr. Lopez
at the last Silverbridge election, and if so, why he pay they. we
shall continue to ask this question till it have be answer, and
when ask it we again say that the actual correspondence on the
subject between the Duke and Mr. Lopez be in our own hand." and
then, after a while, allusion be make to the Duchess;--for Mr.
Slide have learn all the fact of the case from Lopez himself. when
Mr. Slide find how hard it be "to draw his badger," as he express
himself concern his own operation, he at last openly allude to
the Duchess, run the risk of any punishment that might fall upon
he by action for libel or by severe reprehension from his colleague
of the Press. "we have as yet," he say, "receive no answer to
the question which we have feel ourselves call upon to ask in
reference to the conduct of the Prime Minister at the Silverbridge
election. we be of opinion that all interference by peer with the
constituency of the country should be put down by the strong hand
of the law as thoroughly and unmercifully as we be put down
ordinary bribery. but when the offend peer be also the Prime
Minister of this great country, it become doubly the duty of those
who watch over the public safety,"--mr. Slide be always speak
of himself as watch over the public safety,--"to animadvert upon
his crime till it have be assoil, or at any rate repent. from
what we now hear we have reason to believe that the crime itself
be acknowledge. have the payment on behalf of Mr. Lopez not be
made,--as it certainly be make, or the letter in our hand would be
impudent forgeries,--the charge would long since have be deny.
silence in such a matter amount to confession. but we understand
that the Duke intend to escape under the plea that he have a second
self, powerful as he be to exercise the baneful influence which his
territorial wealth unfortunately give he, but for the action of
which second self he, as a peer of Parliament and as Prime Minister,
be not responsible. in other word we be inform that the privilege
belong to the Palliser family at Silverbridge be exercise, not
by the Duke himself, but by the duchess;--and that the Duke pay the
money when he find that the Duchess have promise more than she could
perform. we should hardly have think that even a man so notoriously
weak as the Duke of Omnium would have endeavour to ride out of
responsibility by throw the blame upon his wife; but he will
certainly find that the attempt, if make, will fail.
"against the Duchess herself we wish to say not a word. she be know
as exercise a wide if not a discriminate hospitality. we believe
she to be a kind-hearted, bustling, ambitious lady, to whom any
little fault may easily be forgive on account of her good-nature
and generosity. but we cannot accept her indiscretion as an excuse
for a most unconstitutional act perform by the Prime Minister of
this country."
Latterly the Duchess have take in her own copy of the "People's
Banner." since she have find that those around she be endeavour
to keep from she what be be say of her husband in regard to
the borough, she have be determine to see it all. she therefore
read the article from which two or three paragraph have just be
given,--and have read it she hand it to her friend Mrs. Finn. "I
wonder that you trouble yourself with such trash," her friend say to
she.
"that be all very well, my dear, from you; but we poor wretch who
be the slave of the people have to regard what be say of we in the
'People's Banner.'"
"it would be much well for you to neglect it."
"just as author be tell not to read the criticisms;--but I never
would believe any author who tell I that he donot read what
be say about he. I wonder when the man find out that I be
good-natured. he wouldnot find I good-natured if I could get hold of
he."
"you be not go to allow it to torment you!"
"for my own sake, not a moment. I fancy that if I might be permit
to have my own way I could answer he very easily. indeed with these
dreg of the newspaper, these gutter-slanderer, if one would be
open and say all the truth aloud, what would one have to fear? after
all, what be it that I do? I disobey my husband because I think
that he be too scrupulous. let I say as much, out loud to the
public,--saying also that I be sorry for it, as I am,--and who would
be against I? who would have a word to say after that? I should
be the most popular woman in England for a month,--and, as regard
Plantagenet, Mr. Slide and his article would all sink into silence.
but even though he be to continue this from day to day for a
twelvemonth it would not hurt me,--but that I know how it scorch
he. this mention of my name will make it more intolerable to he
than ever. I doubt that you know he even yet."
"I think that I do."
"though in manner he be as dry as a stick, though all his pursuit
be opposite to the very idea of romance, though he pass his day
and night in think how he may take a halfpenny in the pound off
the taxis of the people without rob the revenue, there be a
dash of chivalry about he worthy of the old poet. to he a woman,
particularly his own woman, be a thing so fine and so precious that
the wind of heaven should hardly be allow to blow upon she. he
cannot bear to think that people should even talk of his wife. and
yet, Heaven know, poor fellow, I have give people occasion enough
to talk of I. and he have a much high chivalry than that of the old
poet. they, or their hero, watch their woman because they do
not want to have trouble about them,--shut they up in castle, keep
they in ignorance, and hold they as far as they could out of harm's
way."
"I hardly think they succeed," say Mrs. Finn.
"but in pure selfishness they try all they could. but he be too
proud to watch. if you and I be hatch treason against he in the
dark, and chance have bring he there, he would stop his ear with
his finger. he be all trust, even when he know that he be be
deceive. he be honour complete from head to foot. ah, it be before
you know I when I try he the hard. I never could quite tell
you that story, and I willnot try it now; but he behave like a god. I
could never tell he what I felt,--but I feel it."
"you ought to love he."
"I do;--but whatbe the use of it? he be a god, but I be not a
goddess;--and then, though he be a god, he be a dry, silent,
uncongenial and uncomfortable god. it would have suit I much
well to have marry a sinner. but then the sinner that I would
have marry be so irredeemable a scapegrace."
"I do not believe in a woman marry a bad man in the hope of make
he good."
"especially not when the woman be naturally inclined to evil herself.
it will half kill he when he read all this about I. he have read it
already, and it have already half kill he. for myself I do not mind
it in the least, but for his sake I mind it much. it will rob he
of his only possible answer to the accusation. the very thing which
this wretch in the newspaper say he will say, and that he will be
disgrace by say, be the very thing that he ought to say. and
there would be no disgrace in it,--beyond what I might well bear for
my little fault, and which I could bear so easily."
"shall you speak to he about it?"
"no; I dare not. in this matter it have go beyond speak. I
suppose he do talk it over with the old Duke; but he will say
nothing to I about it,--unless he be to tell I that he have
resign, and that we be to start off and live in Minorca for the
next ten year. I be so proud when they make he Prime Minister;
but I think that I be begin to regret it now." then there be a
pause, and the Duchess go on with her newspaper; but she soon
resume her discourse. her heart be full, and out of a full heart
the mouth speak. "they should have make I Prime Minister, and have
let he be Chancellor of the Exchequer. I begin to see the way of
Government now. I could have do all the dirty work. I could have
give away garter and ribbon, and make my bargain while give
they. I could select sleek, easy bishop who wouldnot be troublesome.
I could give pension or withhold they, and make the stupid man
peer. I could have the big nobleman at my foot, pray to be
Lieutenants of Counties. I could dole out secretaryship and
lordship, and never a one without get something in return. I
could brazen out a job and let the 'People's Banners' and the Slides
make their bad of it. and I think I could make myself popular with
my party, and do the high-flow patriotic talk for the benefit of
the Provinces. a man at a regular office have to work. thatbe what
Plantagenet be fit for. he want always to be do something that
shall be really useful, and a man have to toil at that and really to
know thing. but a Prime Minister should never go beyond generality
about commerce, agriculture, peace, and general philanthropy. of
course he should have the gift of the gab, and that Plantagenet
havenot get. he never want to say anything unless he have get
something to say. I could do a Mansion House dinner to a marvel!"
"I donot doubt that you could speak at all time, Lady Glen."
"oh, I do so wish that I have the opportunity," say the Duchess.
of course the Duke have read the article in the privacy of his own
room, and of course the article have nearly madden he with anger
and grief. as the Duchess have say, the article have take from he
the very ground on which his friend have tell he that he could
stand. he have never consent, and never would consent, to lay the
blame publicly on his wife; but he have begin to think that he must
take notice of the charge make against he, and deputize some one to
explain for he in the House of Commons that the injury have be do
at Silverbridge by the indiscretion of an agent who have not fulfil
his employer's intention, and that the Duke have think it right
afterwards to pay the money in consequence of this indiscretion. he
have not agree to this, but he have bring himself to think that he
must agree to it. but now, of course, the question would follow:--who
be the indiscreet agent? be the Duchess the person for whose
indiscretion he have have to pay l500 to Mr. Lopez? and in this matter
do he not find himself in accord even with Mr. Slide? "we should
hardly have think that even a man so notoriously weak as the Duke
of Omnium would have endeavour to ride out of responsibility by
throw the blame upon his wife." he read and reread these word
till he know they by heart. for a few moment it seem to he to be
an evil in the Constitution that the Prime Minister should not have
the power of instantly crucify so foul a slanderer;--and yet it
be the very truth of the word that crush he. he be weak,--he
tell himself;--notoriously weak, it must be; and it would be most
mean in he to ride out of responsibility by throw blame upon his
wife. but what else be he to do? there seem to he to be but one
course,--to get up in the House of Lords and declare that he pay the
money because he have think it right to do so under circumstance
which he could not explain, and to declare that it be not his
intention to say another word on the subject, or to have another word
say on his behalf.
there be a Cabinet Council hold that day, but no one venture
to speak to the Prime Minister as to the accusation. though he
consider himself to be weak, his colleague be all more or less
afraid of he. there be a certain silent dignity about the man
which save he from the evil, as it also debar he from the
advantage, of familiarity. he have speak on the subject to Mr. Monk
and to Phineas Finn, and, as the reader know, very often to his old
mentor. he have also mention it to his friend Lord Cantrip, who be
not in the Cabinet. come away from the Cabinet he take Mr. Monk's
arm, and lead he away to his own room in the Treasury Chambers.
"have you happen to see an article in the 'People's Banner' this
morning?" he ask.
"I never see the 'People's Banner,'" say Mr. Monk.
"there it is;--just look at that." Whereupon Mr. Monk read the
article. "you understand what people call constitutional practice as
well as any one I know. as I tell you before, I do pay that man's
expense. do I do anything unconstitutional?"
"that would depend, Duke, upon the circumstance. if you be to back
a man up by your wealth in an expensive contest, I think it would be
unconstitutional. if you set yourself to work in that way, and care
not what you spend, you might materially influence the election, and
buy parliamentary support for yourself."
"but in this case the payment be make after the man have fail, and
certainly have not be promise either by I or by any one on my
behalf."
"I think it be unfortunate," say Mr. Monk.
"certainly, certainly; but I be not ask as to that," say the Duke
impatiently. "the man have be injure by indiscreet person act
on my behalf and in opposition to my wish." he say not a word
about the Duchess; but Mr. Monk no doubt know that her Grace have
be at any rate one of the indiscreet person. "he apply to
I for the money, allege that he have be injure by my agent.
that be so,--presume that my story be correct,--did I act
unconstitutionally?"
"I think not," say Mr. Monk, "and I think that the circumstance,
when explain, will bear you harmless."
"thank you; thank you. I do not want to trouble you about that just
at present."
CHAPTER LVII
the Explanation
Mr. Monk have be altogether unable to decipher the Duke's purpose in
the question he have ask. about an hour afterwards they walk down
to the Houses together, Mr. Monk have be keep at his office. "I
hope I be not a little short with you just now," say the Duke.
"I do not find it out," say Mr. Monk, smile.
"you read what be in the paper, and you may imagine that it be of a
nature to irritate a man. I know that no one could answer my question
so correctly as you, and therefore I be a little eager to keep
directly to the question. it occur to I afterwards that I have
be--perhaps uncourteous."
"not at all, Duke."
"if I be, your goodness will excuse an irritated man. if a question
be ask about this in the House of Commons, who would be the good
man to answer it? would you do it?"
Mr. Monk consider awhile. "I think," he say, "that Mr. Finn would
do it with a well grace. of course I will do it if you wish it. but
he have tact in such matter, and it be know that his wife be much
regard by her Grace."
"I will not have the Duchess's name mention," say the Duke,
turn short upon his companion.
"I do not allude to that, but I think that the intimacy which
exist might make it pleasant to you to employ Mr. Finn as the
exponent of your wish."
"I have the great confidence in Mr. Finn, certainly, and be on
most friendly personal term with he. it shall be so, if I decide on
answer any question in your House on a matter so purely personal
to myself."
"I would suggest that you should have the question ask in a
friendly way. get some independent member, such as Mr. Beverley
or Sir James Deering, to ask it. the matter would then be bring
forward in no carping spirit, and you would be enable, through Mr.
Finn, to set the matter at rest. you have probably speak to the Duke
about it."
"I have mention it to he."
"be not that what he would recommend?"
the old Duke have recommend that the entire truth should be tell,
and that the Duchess's operation should be make public. here be our
poor Prime Minister's great difficulty. he and his Mentor be at
variance. his mentor be advise that the real naked truth should
be tell, whereas Telemachus be intent upon keep the name of the
actual culprit in the background. "I will think it all over," say
the Prime Minister as the two part company at Palace Yard.
that evening he speak to Lord Cantrip on the subject. though the
matter be so odious to he, he could not keep his mind from it for
a moment. have Lord Cantrip see the article in the "People's Banner"?
Lord Cantrip, like Mr. Monk, declare that the paper in question
do not constitute part of his usual morning's recreation. "I willnot
ask you to read it," say the Duke;--"but it contain a very bitter
attack upon me,--the bitterest that have yet be make. I suppose I
ought to notice the matter?"
"if I be you," say Lord Cantrip, "I should put myself into the
hand of the Duke of St. Bungay, and do exactly what he advise.
there be no man in England know so well as he do what should be
do in such a case as this." the Prime Minister frown and say
nothing. "my dear Duke," continue Lord Cantrip, "I can give you no
other advice. who be there that have your personal interest and your
honour at heart so entirely as his grace;--and what man can be a more
sagacious or more experienced adviser?"
"I be think that you might ask a question about it in our House."
"I?"
"you would do it for I in a manner that--that would be free from all
offence."
"if I do it at all, I should certainly strive to do that. but it have
never occur to I that you would make such a suggestion. would
you give I a few moment to think about it?" "I couldnot do it,"
Lord Cantrip say afterwards. "by take such a step, even at your
request, I should certainly express the opinion that the matter be
one on which Parliament be entitle to expect that you should make
an explanation. but my own opinion be that Parliament have no business
to meddle in the matter. I do not think that every action of a
minister's life should be make matter of inquiry because a newspaper
may choose to make allusion to it. at any rate, if any word be say
about it, it should, I think, be say in the other House."
"the Duke of St. Bungay think that something should be say."
"I could not myself consent even to appear to desire information on a
matter so entirely personal to yourself." the Duke bow, and smile
with a cold, glitter, uncomfortable smile which would sometimes
cross his face when he be not pleased, and no more be then say
upon the subject.
attempt be make to have the question ask in a far different
spirit by some hostile member of the House of Commons. Sir Orlando
Drought be sound, and he for a while do give ear to the
suggestion. but, as he come to have the matter full before he, he
could not do it. the Duke have spurn his advice as a minister, and
have refuse to sanction a measure which he, as the head of a branch
of the Government, have propose. the Duke have so offend he that
he conceive himself bind to regard the Duke as his enemy. but he
knew,--and he could not escape from the knowledge,--that England do
not contain a more honourable man than the Duke. he be delighted
that the Duke should be vex, and thwart, and call ill name in
the matter. to be gratify at this discomfiture of his enemy be in
the nature of parliamentary opposition. any blow that might weaken
his opponent be a blow in his favour. but this be a blow which
he could not strike with his own hand. there be thing in
parliamentary tactic which even Sir Orlando could not do. Arthur
Fletcher be also ask to undertake the task. he be the successful
candidate, the man who have oppose Lopez, and who be declare in
the "People's Banner" to have emancipate that borough by his noble
conduct from the tyranny of the House of Palliser. and it be think
that he might like an opportunity of make himself know in the
House. but he be simply indignant when the suggestion be make
to he. "what be it to I," he say, "who pay the blackguard's
expense?"
this go on for some week after Parliament have meet, and for some
day even after the article in which direct allusion be make to
the Duchess. the Prime Minister could not be get to consent that no
notice should be take of the matter, let the paper or the public
say what they would, nor could he be induce to let the matter be
handle in the manner propose by the eld Duke. and during this
time he be in such a fever that those about he feel that something
must be do. Mr. Monk suggest that if everybody hold his
tongue,--meaning all the Duke's friends,--the thing would wear itself
out. but it be apparent to those who be near to the minister,
to Mr. Warburton, for instance, and the Duke of St. Bungay, that the
man himself would be wear out first. the happy possessor of a thick
skin can hardly understand how one not so blessed may be hurt by
the thong of a little whip! at last the matter be arrange. at the
instigation of Mr. Monk, Sir James Deering, who be really the father
of the House, an independent member, but one who generally vote with
the Coalition, consent to ask the question in the House of Commons.
and Phineas Finn be instruct by the Duke as to the answer that be
to be give. the Duke of Omnium in give these instruction make a
mystery of the matter which he by no mean himself intend. but he
be so sore that he could not be simple in what he say. "Mr. Finn,"
he say, "you must promise I this,--that the name of the Duchess
shall not be mention."
"certainly not by I, if you tell I that I be not to mention it."
"no one else can do so. the matter will take the form of a simple
question, and though the conduct of a minister may no doubt be make
the subject of debate,--and it be not improbable that my conduct may
do so in this instance,--it be, I think, impossible that any member
should make an allusion to my wife. the privilege or power of
return a member for the borough have undoubtedly be exercise by
our family since as well as previous to both the Reform Bills. at
the last election I think it right to abandon that privilege, and
notify to those about I my intention. but that which a man have
the power of do he cannot always do without the interference
of those around he. there be a misconception, and among my,--my
adherents,--there be some who injudiciously advise Mr. Lopez
to stand on my interest. but he do not get my interest, and be
beaten;--and therefore when he ask I for the money which he have
spend, I pay it to he. that be all. I think the House can hardly
avoid to see that my effort be make to discontinue an
unconstitutional proceeding."
Sir James Deering ask the question. "he trust," he say, "that
the House would not think that the question of which he have give
notice and which he be about to ask be instigate by any personal
desire on his part to inquire into the conduct of the Prime Minister.
he be one who believe that the Duke of Omnium be as little likely
as any man in England to offend by unconstitutional practice on
his own part. but a great deal have be talk and write lately
about the late election at Silverbridge, and there be those who
thought,--and he be one of them,--that something should be say to
stop the mouth of caviller. with this object he would ask the right
Honourable Gentleman who lead the House, and who be perhaps first in
stand among the noble Duke's colleague in that House, whether the
noble Duke be prepared to have any statement on the subject make."
the House be full to the very corner of the gallery. of course it
be know to everybody that the question be to be ask and to be
answer. there be some who think that the matter be so serious
that the Prime Minister could not get over it. other have hear in
the club that Lady Glen, as the Duchess be still call, be to be
make the scapegoat. man of all class be open-mouthed in their
denunciation of the meanness of lopez,--though no one but Mr. Wharton
know half his villainy, as he alone know that the expense have be
pay twice over. in one corner of the reporter' gallery sit Mr.
Slide, pencil in hand, prepare to revert to his old work on so
momentous an occasion. it be a great day for he. he by his own
unassisted energy have bring a Prime Minister to book, and have
create all this turmoil. it might be his happy lot to be the mean
of turn that Prime Minister out of office. it be he who have
watch over the nation! the Duchess have be most anxious to be
present,--but have not venture to come without ask her husband's
leave, which he have most peremptorily refuse to give. "I cannot
understand, Glencora, how you can suggest such a thing," he have say.
"you make so much of everything," she have reply petulantly; but she
have remain at home. the lady' gallery be, however, quite full.
Mrs. Finn be there, of course, anxious not only for her friend,
but eager to hear how her husband would acquit himself in his task.
the wife and daughter of all the minister be there,--excepte
the wife of the Prime Minister. there never have be, in the memory
of they all, a matter that be so interesting to they, for it be
the only matter they remember in which a woman's conduct might
probably be call in question in the House of Commons. and the seat
appropriate to peer be so crammed that above a dozen grey-head
old lord be stand in the passage which divide they from the
common stranger. after all it be not, in truth, much of an affair.
a very little man indeed have calumniate the conduct of a minister
of the Crown, till it have be think well that the minister should
defend himself. no one really believe that the Duke have commit
any great offence. at the bad it be no more than indiscretion,
which be noticeable only because a Prime Minister should never be
indiscreet. have the taxation of the whole country for the next year
be in dispute, there would have be no such interest feel. have the
welfare of the Indian Empire occupy the House, the House would have
be empty. but the hope that a certain woman's name would have to be
mention, cram it from the floor to the ceiling.
the reader need not be tell that that name be not mention. our old
friend Phineas, on rise to his leg, first apologise for do so
in place of the Chancellor of the Exchequer. but perhaps the House
would accept a statement from he, as the noble Duke at the head of
the Government have ask he to make it. then he make his statement.
"perhaps," he say, "no false accusation than this have ever be
bring forward against a minister of the Crown, for it specially
charge his noble friend with resort to the employment of
unconstitutional practice to bolster up his parliamentary support,
whereas it be know by everybody that there would have be no
matter for accusation at all have not the Duke of his own motion
abandon a recognise privilege, because, in his opinion, the
exercise of that privilege be oppose to the spirit of the
Constitution. have the noble Duke simply nominate a candidate, as
candidate have be nominate at Silverbridge for century past,
that candidate would have be return with absolute certainty,
and there would have be no word speak on the subject. it be not,
perhaps, for he, who have the honour of serve under his grace, and
who, as be a part of his grace's government, be for the time
one with his grace, to expatiate at length on the nobility of the
sacrifice here make. but they all know there at what rate be value
a seat in that House. thank God that privilege could not now be
rat at any money price. it could not be buy and sell. but this
privilege which his noble friend have so magnanimously resign from
purely patriotic motif, be, he believe, still in existence, and
he would ask those few who be still in the happy, or, perhaps, he
have well say in the envy, position of be able to send their
friend to that House, what be their estimation of the conduct of
the Duke in this matter? it might be that there be one or two such
present, and who now hear him,--or, perhaps, one or two who owe
their seat to the exercise of such a privilege. they might marvel at
the magnitude of the surrender. they might even question the sagacity
of the man who could abandon so much without a price. but he hardly
think that even they would regard it as unconstitutional.
"this be what the Prime Minister have done,--acting not as Prime
Minister, but as an english nobleman, in the management of his own
property and privilege. and now he would come to the gist of the
accusation make; in make which, the thing which the Duke have really
do have be altogether ignore. when the vacancy have be declare
by the acceptance of the Chiltern Hundreds by a gentleman whose
absence from the House they all regret, the Duke have signify to
his agent his intention of retire altogether from the exercise of
any privilege or power in the matter. but the Duke be then, as he
be also now, and would, it be to be hop, long continue to be,
Prime Minister of England. he need hardly remind gentleman in that
House that the Prime Minister be not in a position to devote his
undivided time to the management of his own property, or even to the
interest of the Borough of Silverbridge. that his grace have be
earnest in his instruction to his agent, the sequel fully prove;
but that earnestness his agent have misinterpret."
then there be hear a voice in the House, "what agent?" and from
another voice, "name they." for there be present some who think
it to be shameful that the excitement of the occasion should be
lower by keep back all allusion to the Duchess.
"I have not distinguish," say Phineas, assume an indignant tone,
"the honourable gentleman from whom those question have come, and
therefore I have the less compunction in tell they that it be no
part of my duty on this occasion to gratify a morbid and an indecent
curiosity." then there be a cry of "order," and an appeal to the
Speaker. certain gentleman wish to know whether indecent be
parliamentary. the Speaker, with some hesitation, express his
opinion that the word, as then use, be not open to objection from
he. he think that it be within the scope of a member's right to
charge another member with indecent curiosity. "if," say Phineas,
rise again to his leg, for he have sit down for a moment, "the
gentleman who call for a name will rise in his place and repeat the
demand, I will recall the word indecent and substitute another,--or
other. I will tell he that he be one who, regardless of the real
conduct of the Prime Minister, either as a man or as a servant of
the Crown, be only anxious to inflict an unmanly wound in order that
he may be gratify by see the pain which he inflict." then
he pause, but as no further question be ask, he continue his
statement. "a candidate have be bring forward," he say, "by those
interested in the Duke's affair. a man whom he would not name, but
who, he trust, would never succeed in his ambition to occupy a seat
in that House, have be bring forward, and certain tradesman in
Silverbridge have be ask to support he as the Duke's nominee.
there be no doubt about it. the House perhaps could understand that
the local adherent and neighbour of a man so high in rank and
wealth as the Duke of Omnium would not gladly see the privilege
of their lord diminish. perhaps, too, it occur to they that a
Prime Minister could not have his eye everywhere. there would always
be worthy man in borough who like to exercise some second-hand
authority. at any rate it be the case that this candidate be
encouraged. then the Duke have hear it, and have put his foot upon
the little mutiny, and have stamp it out at once. he might perhaps
here," he say, "congratulate the House on the acquisition it have
receive by the failure of that candidate. so far, at any rate,"
he think, "it must be admit that the Duke have be free from
blame;--but now he come to the gravaman of the charge." the gravaman
of the charge be so well known to the reader that the simple account
which Phineas give of it need not be repeat. the Duke have pay
the money, when ask for it, because he feel that the man have be
injure by incorrect representation make to he. "I need hardly
pause to stigmatise the meanness of that application," say Phineas,
"but I may perhaps conclude by say that whether the last act
do by the Duke in this matter be or be not indiscreet, I shall
probably have the House with I when I say that it savour much more
strongly of nobility than of indiscretion."
when Phineas Finn sit down no one arise to say another word on the
subject. it be afterwards feel that it would only have be graceful
have Sir Orlando rise and express his opinion that the House have
hear the statement just make with perfect satisfaction. but he do
not do so, and after a short pause the ordinary business of the day
be recommence. then there be a speedy descent from the gallery,
and the lady troop out of their cage, and the grey-head old
peer go back to their own chamber, and the member themselves
quickly jostle out through the door, and Mr. Monk be leave to
explain his propose alteration in the dog tax to a thin House of
seventy or eighty member.
the thing be then over, and people be astonish that so great
a thing should be over with so little fuss. it really seem that
after Phineas Finn's speech there be nothing more to be say on the
matter. everybody of course know that the Duchess have be the chief
of the agent to whom he have allude, but they have know as much as
that before. it be, however, feel by everybody that the matter have
be bring to an end. the game, such as it be, have be play
out. perhaps the only person who hear Mr. Finn's speech throughout,
and still hop that the spark could be again fan into a flame,
be Quintus Slide. he go out and write another article about the
Duchess. if a man be so unable to rule his affair at home, he be
certainly unfit to be Prime Minister. but even Quintus Slide, as
he write his article, feel that he be hop against hope. the
charge might be refer to hereafter as one that have never be
satisfactorily clear up. that game be always open to the opponent
of a minister. after the lapse of a few month an old accusation can
be serviceably use, whether at the time it be prove or disprove.
Mr. Slide publish his article, but he feel that for the present
the Silverbridge election paper have well be put by among the
property of the "People's Banner," and bring out, if necessary,
for further use at some future time.
"Mr. Finn," say the Duke, "I feel indebted to you for the trouble
you have take."
"it be only a pleasant duty."
"I be grateful to you for the manner in which it be perform." this
be all the Duke say, and Phineas feel it to be cold. the Duke, in
truth, be grateful; but gratitude with he always fail to exhibit
itself readily. from the world at large Phineas Finn receive great
praise for the manner in which he have perform his task.
CHAPTER LVIII
"Quite settle"
the abuse which be now publicly heap on the name of Ferdinand
Lopez hit the man very hard; but not so hard perhaps as his rejection
by Lady Eustace. that be an episode in his life of which even he
feel ashamed, and of which he be unable to shake the disgrace from
his memory. he have no inner appreciation whatsoever of what be
really good or what be really bad in a man's conduct. he do not
know that he have do evil in apply to the Duke for the money. he
have only mean to attack the Duke; and when the money have come it
have be regard as justifiable prey. and when after receive the
Duke's money, he have keep also Mr. Wharton's money, he have justify
himself again by remind himself that Mr. Wharton certainly
owe he much more than that. in a sense he be what be call a
gentleman. he know how to speak, and how to look, how to use a knife
and fork, how to dress himself, and how to walk. but he have not the
faint notion of the feeling of a gentleman. he have, however, a
very keen conception of the evil of be generally ill speak of.
even now, though he be make up his mind to leave England for a
long term of year, he understand the disadvantage of leave it
under so heavy a cloud;--and he understand also that the cloud might
possibly impede his go altogether. even in Coleman Street they
be look black upon he, and Mr. Hartlepod go so far as to say
to Lopez himself, that, "by Jove, he have put his foot in it." he have
endeavour to be courageous under his burden, and every day walk
into the office of the Mining Company, endeavour to look as
though he have commit no fault of which he have to be ashamed. but
after the second day he find that nothing be say to he of the
affair of the Company, and on the fourth day Mr. Hartlepod inform
he that the time allow for pay up his share have pass by, and
that another local manager would be appoint. "the time be not over
till to-morrow," say Lopez angrily. "I tell you what I be tell to
tell you," say Mr. Hartlepod. "you will only waste your time by
come here any more."
he have not once see Mr. Wharton since the statement make in
Parliament, although he have live in the same house with he. Everett
Wharton have come home, and they two have met;--but the meeting have
be stormy. "it seem to I, Lopez, that you be a scoundrel,"
Everett say to he one day after have hear the whole story,--or
rather many stories,--from his father. this take place not in
Manchester Square, but at the club, where Everett have endeavour to
cut his brother-in-law. it need hardly be say that at this time
Lopez be not popular at his club. on the next day a meeting of the
whole club be to be hold that the propriety of expel he might
be discuss. but he have resolve that he would not be cow, that he
would still show himself, and still defend his conduct. he do not
know, however, that Everett Wharton have already make known to the
Committee of the club all the fact of the double payment.
he have address Everett in that solicitude to which a man should
never be reduce of seek to be recognise by at any rate one
acquaintance,--and now his brother-in-law have call he a scoundrel
in the presence of other man. he raise his arm as though to use the
cane in his hand, but he be cow by the feeling that all there
be his adversary. "how dare you use that language to I!" he say
very weakly.
"it be the language that I must use if you speak to I."
"I be your brother-in-law, and that restrain I."
"unfortunately you be."
"and be live in your father's house."
"that, again, be a misfortune which it appear difficult to remedy.
you have be tell to go, and you willnot go."
"your ingratitude, sir, be marvellous! who save your life when
you be attack in the park, and be too drunk to take care of
yourself? who have stand your friend with your close-fiste old father
when you have lose money at play that you could not pay? but you
be one of those who would turn away from any benefactor in his
misfortune."
"I must certainly turn away from a man who have disgrace himself as
you have do," say Everett, leave the room. Lopez throw himself
into an easy-chair, and ring the bell loudly for a cup of coffee, and
light a cigar. he have not be turn out of the club as yet, and the
servant at any rate be bind to attend to he.
that night he wait up for his father-in-law in Manchester Square.
he would certainly go to Guatemala now,--if it be not too late. he
would go though he be force to leave his wife behind he, and thus
surrender any further hope for money from Mr. Wharton beyond the sum
which he would receive as the price of his banishment. it be true
that the fortnight allow to he by the Company be only at an end
that day, and that, therefore, the follow morning might be take
as the last day name for the payment of the money. no doubt, also,
Mr. Wharton's bill at a few day' date would be accept if that
gentleman could not at the moment give a cheque for so large a sum as
be require. and the appointment have be distinctly promise to he
with no other stipulation than that the money require for the share
should be pay. he do not believe in Mr. Hartlepod's threat. it be
impossible, he think, that he should be treat in so infamous
a manner merely because he have have his election expense repay
he by the Duke of Omnium! he would, therefore, ask for the money,
and--renounce the society of his wife.
as he make this resolve something like real love return to his
heart, and he become for a while sick with regret. he assure himself
that he have love she, and that he could love she still;--but why have
she not be true to he? why have she clung to her father instead of
cling to her husband? why have she not learn his ways,--as a wife
be bind to learn the way of the man she marry? why have she not
help he in his device, fall into his plan, be regardful of
his fortune, and make herself one with he? there have be present
to he at time an idea that if he could take she away with he to
that distant country to which he think to go, and thus remove she
from the upas influence of her father's roof-tree, she would then
fall into his view and become his wife indeed. then he would again
be tender to she, again love she, again endeavour to make the world
soft to she. but it be too late now for that. he have fail in
everything as far as England be concern, and it be chiefly by she
fault that he have fail. he would consent to leave her;--but, as he
think of it in his solitude, his eye become moist with regret.
in these day Mr. Wharton never come home till about midnight, and
then pass rapidly through the hall to his own room,--and in the
morning have his breakfast bring to he in the same room, so that he
might not even see his son-in-law. his daughter would go to he when
at breakfast, and there, together for some half-hour, they would
endeavour to look forward to their future fate. but hitherto they have
never be able to look forward in accord, as she still persist in
declare that if her husband bid she to go with him,--she would
go. on this night Lopez sit up in the dining-room, and as soon as he
hear Mr. Wharton's key in the door, he place himself in the hall.
"I wish to speak to you to-night, sir," he say. "would you object to
come in for a few moment?" then Mr. Wharton follow he into the
room. "as we live now," continue lopez, "I have not much opportunity
of speak to you, even on business."
"well, sir; you can speak now,--if you have anything to say."
"the L5000 you promise I must be pay to-morrow. it be the last
day."
"I promise it only on certain condition. have you comply with they
the money would have be pay before this."
"just so. the condition be very hard, Mr. Wharton. it surprise I
that such a one as you should think it right to separate a husband
from his wife."
"I think it right, sir, to separate my daughter from such a one as
you be. I think so before, but I think so doubly now. if I can
secure your absence in Guatemala by the payment of this money, and if
you will give I a document that shall be prepare by Mr. Walker and
sign by yourself, assure your wife that you will not hereafter
call upon she to live with you, the money shall be pay."
"all that will take time, Mr. Wharton."
"I will not pay a penny without it. I can meet you at the office in
Coleman Street to-morrow, and doubtless they will accept my write
assurance to pay the money as soon as those stipulation shall be
comply with."
"that would disgrace I in the office, Mr. Wharton."
"and be you not disgrace there already? can you tell I that they
have not hear of your conduct in Coleman Street, or that hear it
they disregard it?" his son-in-law stand frown at he, but do not
at the moment say a word. "nevertheless, I will meet you there if
you please, at any time that you may name, and if they do not object
to employ such a man as their manager, I shall not object on their
behalf."
"to the last you be hard and cruel to I," say lopez;--"but I will
meet you in Coleman Street at eleven to-morrow." then Mr. Wharton
leave the room, and Lopez be there alone amidst the gloom of the
heavy curtain and the dark paper. a London dining-room at night be
always dark, cavernous, and unlovely. the very picture on the wall
lack brightness, and the furniture be black and heavy. this room be
large, but old-fashioned and very dark. here Lopez walk up and down
after Mr. Wharton have leave he, try to think how far fate and how
far he himself be responsible for his present misfortune. no doubt
he have begin the world well. his father have be little well than a
travel pedlar, but have make some money by sell jewellery, and
have educate his son. Lopez could on no score impute blame to his
father for what have happen to he. and, when he think of the
mean at his disposal in his early youth, he feel that he have a right
to boast of some success. he have work hard, and have win his way
upwards, and have almost lodge himself securely among those people
with whom it have be his ambition to live. early in life he have
find himself among those who be call gentleman and lady. he
have be able to assume their manner, and have live with they on
equal term. when think of his past life he never forget to remind
himself that he have be a guest at the house of the Duke of Omnium!
and yet how be it with he now? he be penniless. he be reject by
his father-in-law. he be fear, and, as he think, detest by his
wife. he be expel from his club. he be cut by his old friend.
and he have be tell very plainly by the Secretary in Coleman Street
that his presence there be no long desire. what should he do
with himself if Mr. Wharton's money be now refuse, and if the
appointment in Guatemala be deny to he? and then he think of
poor Sexty Parker and his family. he be not naturally an ill-natured
man. though he could upbraid his wife for allude to Mrs. Parker's
misery, declare that Mrs. Parker must take the rub of the world
just as other take they, still the misfortune which he have bring
on she and on her child do add something to the weight of his own
misfortune. if he could not go to Guatemala, what should he do with
himself;--where should he go? thus he walk up and down the room for
an hour. would not a pistol or a razor give he the good solution for
all his difficulty?
on the follow morning he keep his appointment at the office in
Coleman Street, as do Mr. Wharton also. the latter be there first
by some minute, and explain to Mr. Hartlepod that he have come
there to meet his son-in-law. Mr. Hartlepod be civil, but very cold.
Mr. Wharton see at the first glance that the service of Ferdinand
Lopez be no long in request by the San Juan Mining Company;
but he sit down and wait. now that he be there, however painful
the interview would be, he would go through it. at ten minute
past eleven he make up his mind that he would wait till the
half-hour,--and then go, with the fix resolution that he would
never willingly spend another shilling on behalf of that wretched
man. but at a quarter past eleven the wretched man came,--swaggere
into the office, though it have not, hitherto, be his custom to
swagger. but misfortune master all but the great man, and upset the
well-learn lesson of even a long life. "I hope I have not keep you
wait, Mr. Wharton. well, Hartlepod, how be you to-day? so this
little affair be to be settle at last, and now these share shall be
buy and pay for." Mr. Wharton do not say a word, not even rise
from his chair, or greet his son-in-law by a word. "I dare say Mr.
Wharton have already explain himself," say lopez.
"I donot know that there be any necessity," say Mr. Hartlepod.
"Well,--I suppose itbe simple enough," continue lopez. "Mr. Wharton,
I believe I be right in say that you be ready to pay the money at
once."
"yes;--i be ready to pay the money as soon as I be assure that you
be on your route to Guatemala. I will not pay a penny till I know
that as a fact."
then Mr. Hartlepod rise from his seat and speak. "gentleman," he
say, "the matter within the last few day have assume a different
complexion."
"as how?" exclaim Lopez.
"the Directors have change their mind as to send out Mr. Lopez
as their local manager. the Directors intend to appoint another
gentleman. I have already acquaint Mr. Lopez with the Directors'
intention."
"then the matter be settle?" say Mr. Wharton.
"quite settle," say Mr. Hartlepod.
as a matter of course Lopez begin to fume and to be furious.
what!--after all that have be do do the Directors mean to go back
from their word? after he have be induce to abandon his business in
his own country, be he to be throw over in that way? if the company
intend to treat he like that, the Company would very soon hear
from he. thank God there be law in the land. "yesterday be the
last day fix for the payment of the money," say Mr. Hartlepod.
"it be at any rate certain that Mr. Lopez be not to go to Guatemala?"
ask Mr. Wharton.
"quite certain," say Mr. Hartlepod. then Mr. Wharton rise from his
chair and quit the room.
"by G----, you have ruin I among you," say lopez;--"ruine I
in the most shameful manner. there be no mercy, no friendship, no
kindness, no forbearance anywhere! why be I to be treat in this
manner?"
"if you have any complaint to make," say Mr. Hartlepod, "you have
well write to the Directors. I have nothing to do but my duty."
"by heaven, the Directors shall hear of it!" say Lopez as he leave
the office.
Mr. Wharton go to his chamber and endeavour to make up his mind
what step he must now take in reference to this dreadful incubus.
of course he could turn the man out of his house, but in so do
it might well be that he would also turn out his own daughter. he
believe Lopez to be utterly without mean, and a man so destitute
would generally be glad to be relieve from the burden of his wife's
support. but this man would care nothing for his wife's comfort;
nothing even, as Mr. Wharton believe, for his wife's life. he would
simply use his wife as good he might as a means for obtain money.
there be nothing to be do but to buy he off, by so much money
down, and by so much at state interval as long as he should keep
away. Mr. Walker must manage it, but it be quite clear to Mr.
Wharton that the Guatemala scheme be altogether at an end. in
the meantime a certain sum must be offer to the man at once, on
condition that he would leave the house and do so without take his
wife with he.
so far Mr. Wharton have a plan, and a plan that be at least feasible.
wretche as he be, miserable, as he think of the fate which have
befall his daughter,--there be still a prospect of some relief.
but Lopez as he walk out of the office have nothing to which he
could look for comfort. he slowly make his way to Little Tankard
Yard, and there he find Sexty Parker balance himself on the back
leg of his chair, with a small decanter of public-house sherry
before he. "what; you here?" he say.
"yes;--i have come to say good-bye."
"where be you go then? you shallnot start to Guatemala if I know
it."
"thatbe all over, my boy," say lopez, smile.
"what be it you mean?" say Sexty, sit square on his chair and
look very serious.
"I be not go to Guatemala or anywhere else. I think Iwould just
look in to tell you that Ibe just do for,--that I havenot a hope
of a shilling now or hereafter. you tell I the other day that I be
afraid to come here. you see that as soon as anything be fix, I
come and tell you everything at once."
"what be fix?"
"that I be ruin. that there benot a penny to come from any source."
"Wharton have get money," say Sexty.
"and there be money in the Bank of England,--but I cannot get at it."
"what be you go to do, lopez?"
"ah; thatbe the question. what be I go to do? I can say nothing
about that, but I can say, Sexty, that our affair be at an end. Ibe
very sorry for it, old boy. we ought to have make fortune, but we
donot. as far as the work go, I do my good. good-bye, old fellow.
youwill do well some of these day yet, I donot doubt. donot teach the
bairn to curse I. as for Mrs. P. I have no hope there, I know."
then he go, leave Sexty Parker quite aghast.
CHAPTER LIX
"the first and the last"
when Mr. Wharton be in Coleman Street, have his final interview
with Mr. Hartlepod, there come a visitor to Mrs. Lopez in Manchester
Square. up to this date there have be great doubt with Mr. Wharton
whether at last the banishment to Guatemala would become a fact. from
day to day his mind have change. it have be an infinite benefit that
Lopez should go, if he could be get to go alone, but as great an evil
if at last he should take his wife with he. but the father have never
dare to express these doubt to she, and she have teach herself
to think that absolute banishment with a man whom she certainly no
long love, be the punishment she have to pay for the evil she have
do. it be now March, and the second or third of April have be
fix for her departure. of course, she have endeavour from time to
time to learn all that be to be learn from her husband. sometimes
he would be almost communicative to she; at other time she could get
hardly a word from he. but, through it all, he give she to believe
that she would have to go. nor do her father make any great effort
to turn his mind the other way. if it must be so, of what use would
be such false kindness on his part? she have therefore go to work to
make her purchase, study that economy which must henceforth be
the great duty of her life, and remind herself as to everything
she buy that it would have to be wear with tear and use in
sorrow.
and then she send a message to Arthur Fletcher. it so happen that
Sir Alured Wharton be up in London at this time with his daughter
Mary. Sir Alured do not come to Manchester Square. there be nothing
that the old baronet could say in the midst of all this misery,--no
comfort that he could give. it be well-know now to all the Whartons
and all the Fletchers that this Lopez, who have marry she who be
to have be the pearl of the two family, have prove himself to
be a scoundrel. the two old Whartons meet no doubt at some club, or
perhaps in Stone Buildings, and speak some few bitter word to each
other; but Sir Alured do not see the unfortunate young woman who
have disgrace herself by so wretched a marriage. but Mary come, and
by she a message be send to Arthur Fletcher. "tell he that I be
go," say Emily. "tell he not to come; but give he my love. he
be always one of my kind friend."
"Why,--why,--why do you not take he?" say Mary, move by the
excitement of the moment to suggestion which be quite at variance
with the fix propriety of her general idea.
"why should you speak of that?" say the other. "I never speak of
him,--never think of he. but, if you see he, tell he what I say."
Arthur Fletcher be of course in the Square on the following day,--on
that very day on which Mr. Wharton learn that, whatever might
be his daughter's fate, she would not, at any rate, be take to
Guatemala. they two have never meet since the day on which they
have be bring together for a moment at the Duchess's party at
Richmond. it have of course be understand by both of they that they
be not to be allow to see each other. her husband have make a
pretext of an act of friendship on his part to establish a quarrel,
and both of they have be bind by that quarrel. when a husband
declare that his wife shall not know a man, that edict must be
obeyed,--or, if disobey, must be subvert by intrigue. in this
case there have be no inclination to intrigue on either side. the
order have be obey, and as far as the wife be concern, have be
only a small part of the terrible punishment which have come upon she
as the result of her marriage. but now, when Arthur Fletcher send up
his name, she do not hesitate as to see he. no doubt she have
think it probable that she might see he when she give her message
to her cousin.
"I could not let you go without come to you," he say.
"it be very good of you. yes;--i suppose we be go. Guatemala
sound a long way off, Arthur, do it not? but they tell I it
be a beautiful country." she speak with a cheerful voice, almost
as though she like the idea of her journey; but he look at she
with beseech, anxious, sorrow-laden eye. "after all, what be a
journey of a few week? why should I not be as happy in Guatemala
as in London? as to friend, I do not know that it will make much
difference,--except papa."
"it seem to I to make a difference," say he.
"I never see anybody now,--neither your people, nor the Wharton
Whartons. indeed, I see nobody. if it be not for papa I should be
glad to go. I be tell that it be a charming country. I have not find
Manchester Square very charming. I be inclined to think that all the
world be very much alike, and that it do not matter very much where
one lives,--or, perhaps, what one do. but at any rate I be go,
and I be very glad to be able to say good-bye to you before I start."
all this she say rapidly, in a manner unlike herself. she be
force herself to speak so that she might save herself, if possible,
from break down in his presence.
"of course I come when Mary tell I."
"yes;--she be here. Sir Alured do not come. I donot wonder at that,
however. and your mother be in town some time ago,--but I donot
expect she to come. why should they come? I donot know whether you
might not have well stay away. of course I be a Pariah now; but
Pariah as I be, I shall be as good as any one else in Guatemala. you
have see Everett since he have be in town, perhaps?"
"yes;--i have see he."
"I hope they willnot quarrel with Everett because of what I have do.
I have feel that more than all,--that both papa and he have suffer
because of it. do you know, I think people be hard. they might have
throw I off without be unkind to they. it be that that have
kill I, arthur;--that they should have suffer." he sit look
at she, not know how to interrupt she, or what to say. there be
much that he mean to say, but he do not know how to begin it, or
how to frame his word. "when I be go, perhaps, it will be all
right," she continue. "when he tell I that I be to go, that be my
comfort. I think I have teach myself to think nothing of myself, to
bear it all as a necessity, to put up with it, whatever it may be, as
man bear thirst in the desert. thank God, Arthur, I have no baby to
suffer with I. Here,--here, it be still very bad. when I think of
papa creep in and out of his house, I sometimes feel that I must
kill myself. but our going will put an end to all that. it be much
well that we should go. I wish we might start to-morrow." then she
look up at he, and see that the tear be run down his face,
and as she look she hear his sob. "why should you cry, Arthur?
he never cries,--nor do i. when baby die I cried,--but very little.
tear be vain, foolish thing. it have to be bear, and there be
an end of it. when one make up one's mind to that, one do not
cry. there be a poor woman here the other day whose husband he have
ruin. she weep and bewail herself till I pity she almost more
than myself;--but then she have child."
"oh, Emily!"
"you mustnot call I by my name, because he would be angry. I have to
do, you know, as he tell I. and I do so strive to do it! through
it all I have an idea that if I do my duty it will be well for I.
there be thing, you know, which a husband may tell you to do, but
you cannot do. if he tell I to rob, I be not to rob;--am I? and
now I think of it, you ought not to be here. he would be very much
displeased. but it have be so pleasant once more to see an old
friend."
"I care nothing for his anger," say Arthur moodily.
"ah, but I do. I have to care for it."
"leave he! why donot you leave he?"
"what!"
"you cannot deceive I. you do not try to deceive I. you know that
he be altogether unworthy of you."
"I will hear nothing of the kind, sir."
"how can I speak otherwise when you yourself tell I of your own
misery? be it possible that I should not know what he be? would you
have I pretend to think well of he?"
"you can hold your tongue, Arthur."
"No;--I cannot hold my tongue. have I not hold my tongue ever since
you marry? and if I be to speak at all, must I not speak now?"
"there be nothing to be say that can serve we at all."
"then it shall be say without serve. when I bid you leave he, it
be not that you may come to I. though I love you well than all the
world put together, I do not mean that."
"oh, Arthur, Arthur!"
"but let your father save you. only tell he that you will stay with
he, and he will do it. though I should never see you again, I could
hope to protect you. of course, I know,--and you know. he be--a
scoundrel!"
"I will not hear it," say she, rise from her seat on the sofa with
her hand up to her forehead, but still come near to he as she
move.
"do not your father say the same thing? I will advise nothing that
he do not advise. I would not say a word to you that he might not
hear. I do love you. I have always love you. but do you think that I
would hurt you with my love?"
"no;--no;--no!"
"no, indeed;--but I would have you feel that those who love you of
old be still anxious for your welfare. you say just now that you
have be neglect."
"I speak of papa and Everett. for myself,--of course I have separate
myself from everybody."
"never from I. you may be ten time his wife, but you cannot
separate yourself from I. get up in the morning and go to
bed at night I still tell myself that you be the one woman that I
love. stay with we, and you shall be honoured,--as that man's wife of
course, but still as the dear friend we have."
"I cannot stay," she say. "he have tell I that I be to go, and I be
in his hand. when you have a wife, Arthur, you will wish she to do
your bidding. I hope she will do it for your sake, without the pain I
have in do his. good-bye, dear friend."
she put her hand out and he grasp it, and stand for a moment
look at she. then he seize she in his arm and kiss her brow
and her lip. "oh, Emily, why be you not my wife? my darling, my
darling!"
she have hardly extricate herself when the door open, and lopez
stand in the room. "Mr. Fletcher," he say, very calmly, "what be the
meaning of this?"
"he have come to bid I farewell," say Emily. "when go on so long
a journey one like to see one's old friends,--perhaps for the last
time." there be something of indifference to his anger in her tone,
and something also of scorn.
Lopez look from one to the other, affect an air of great
displeasure. "you know, sir," he say, "that you cannot be welcome
here."
"but he have be welcome," say his wife.
"and I look upon your come as a base act. you be here with the
intention of create discord between I and my wife."
"I be here to tell she that she have a friend to trust to if she ever
want a friend," say Fletcher.
"and you think that such trust as that would be safe than trust in
her husband? I cannot turn you out of this house, sir, because it
do not belong to I, but I desire you to leave at once the room
which be occupy by my wife." Fletcher pause a moment to say
good-bye to the poor woman, while Lopez continue with increase
indignation, "if you do not go at once you will force I to desire
she to retire. she shall not remain in the same room with you."
"good-bye, Mr. Fletcher," she say, again put out her hand.
but Lopez strike it up, not violently, so as to hurt she, but still
with eager roughness. "not in my presence," he say. "go, sir, when
I desire you."
"God bless you, my friend," say Arthur Fletcher. "I pray that I may
live to see you back in the old country."
"he be--kiss you," say lopez, as soon as the door be shut.
"he be," say Emily.
"and you tell I so to my face, with such an air as that!"
"what be I to tell you when you ask I? I do not bid he kiss I."
"but afterwards you take his part as his friend."
"why not? I should lie to you if I pretend that I be angry with
he for what he do."
"perhaps you will tell I that you love he."
"of course I love he. there be different kind of love, Ferdinand.
there be that which a woman give to a man when she would fain mate
with he. it be the sweetest love of all, if it would only last. and
there be another love,--which be not give, but which be win, perhaps
through long year, by old friend. I have none old than Arthur
Fletcher, and none who be dearer to I."
"and you think it right that he should take you in his arm and kiss
you?"
"on such an occasion I could not blame he."
"you be ready enough to receive it, perhaps."
"well; I be. he have love I well, and I shall never see he again.
he be very dear to I, and I be part from he for ever. it be
the first and the last, and I do not grudge it to he. you must
remember, Ferdinand, that you be take I across the world from all
my friend."
"Psha," he say, "that be all over. you be not go anywhere that
I know of,--unless it be out into the street when your father shut
his door on you." and so say he leave the room without another
word.
CHAPTER LX
the Tenway Junction
and thus the knowledge be convey to Mrs. Lopez that her fate in
life be not to carry she to Guatemala. at the very moment in which
she have be summon to meet Arthur Fletcher she have be busy with
her needle prepare that almost endless collection of garment
necessary for a journey of many day at sea. and now she be
inform, by a chance expression, by a word aside, as it be, that
the journey be not to be make. "that be all over," he have said,--and
then have leave she, tell she nothing far. of course she stay
her needle. whether the last word have be true or false, she could
not work again, at any rate till it have be contradict. if it be
so, what be to be her fate? one thing be certain to her;--that she
could not remain under her father's roof. it be impossible that an
arrangement so utterly distasteful as the present one, both to her
father and to herself, should be continue. but where then should
they live,--and of what nature would her life be if she should be
separate from her father?
that evening she see her father, and he corroborate her husband's
statement. "it be all over now," he said,--"that scheme of his of
go to superintend the mine. the mine donot want he, and willnot
have he. I cannot say that I wonder at it."
"what be we to do, papa?"
"ah;--that I cannot say. I suppose he will condescend still to honour
I with his company. I do not know why he should wish to go to
Guatemala or elsewhere. he have everything here that he can want."
"you know, papa, that that be impossible."
"I cannot say what with he be possible or impossible. he be bind by
none of the ordinary rule of mankind."
that evening Lopez return to his dinner in Manchester Square, which
be still regularly serve for he and his wife, though the servant
who attend upon he do so under silent and oft-repeat protest.
he say not a word more as to Arthur Fletcher, nor do he seek any
ground of quarrel with his wife. but that her continued melancholy
and dejection make anything like good-humour impossible, even on his
part, he would have be good-humour. when they be alone she
ask he as to their future destiny. "Papa tell I you be not
go," she begin by say.
"do I not tell you so this morning?"
"yes;--you say so. but I do not know you be earnest. be it all
over?"
"all over,--I suppose."
"I should have think that you would have tell I with more--more
seriousness."
"I donot know what you would have. I be serious enough. the fact
be, that your father have delay so long the payment of the promise
money that the thing have fall through of necessity. I do not know
that I can blame the Company."
then there be a pause. "and now," she say, "what do you mean to
do?"
"upon my word I cannot say. I be quite as much in the dark as you can
be."
"that be nonsense, Ferdinand."
"thank you! let it be nonsense if you will. it seem to I that there
be a great deal of nonsense go on in the world; but very little of
it as true as what I say now."
"but it be your duty to know. of course you cannot stay here."
"nor you, I suppose,--without I."
"I be not speak of myself. if you choose, I can remain here."
"and--just throw I overboard altogether."
"if you provide another home for I, I will go to it. however poor it
may be I will go to it, if you bid I. but for you,--of course you
cannot stay here."
"have your father tell you to say so to I?"
"no;--but I can say so without his tell I. you be banish he
from his own house. he have put up with it while he think that you
be go to this foreign country; but there must be an end of that
now. you must have some scheme of life?"
"upon my soul I have none."
"you must have some intention for the future?"
"none in the least. I have have intention, and they have
failed;--from want of that support which I have a right to expect. I
have struggle and I have fail, and now I have get no intention.
what be your?"
"it be not my duty to have any purpose, as what I do must depend on
your command." then again there be a silence, during which he light
a cigar, although he be sit in the drawing-room. this be a
profanation of the room on which even he have never venture before,
but at the present moment she be unable to notice it by any word.
"I must tell papa," she say after a while, "what our plan be."
"you can tell he what you please. I have literally nothing to say to
he. if he will settle an adequate income on we, payable of course
to I, I will go and live elsewhere. if he turn I into the street
without provision, he must turn you too. that be all that I have get
to say. it will come well from you than from I. I be sorry, of
course, that thing have go wrong with I. when I find myself
the son-in-law of a very rich man I think that I might spread my
wing a bit. but my rich father-in-law throw I over, and now I be
helpless. you be not very cheerful, my dear, and I think Iwill go
down to the club."
he go out of the house and do go down to the Progress. the
committee which be to be hold with the view of judge whether he
be or be not a proper person to remain a member of that assemblage
have not yet be hold, and there be nothing to impede his entrance
to the club, or the execution of the command which he give for tea
and butter toast. but no one speak to he; nor, though he affect
a look of comfort, do he find himself much at his ease. among the
member of the club there be a much divided opinion whether he
should be expel or not. there be a strong party who declare that
his conduct socially, morally, and politically, have be so bad that
nothing short of expulsion would meet the case. but there be other
who say that no act have be prove against he which the club ought
to notice. he have, no doubt, show himself to be a blackguard, a man
without a spark of honour or honesty. but then,--as they say who
think his position in the club to be unassailable,--what have the
club to do with that? "if you turn out all the blackguard and all
the dishonourable man, where will the club be?" be a question ask
with a great deal of vigour by one middle-aged gentleman who be
suppose to know the club-world very thoroughly. he have commit no
offence which the law could recognise and punish, nor have he sin
against the club rule. "he be not require to be a man of honour by
any regulation of which I be aware," say the middle-aged gentleman.
the general opinion seem to be that he should be ask to go, and
that, if he decline, no one should speak to he. this penalty be
already inflict on he, for on the evening in question no one do
speak to he.
he drink his tea and eat his toast and read a magazine, strive to
look as comfortable and as much at his ease as man at their club
generally be. he be not a bad actor, and those who see he and make
report as to his conduct on the following day declare that he have
apparently be quite indifferent to the disagreeable incident of
his position. but his indifference have be mere acting. his careless
manner with his wife have be all assume. selfish as he be, void as
he be of all principle, utterly unmanly and even unconscious of the
worth of manliness, still he be alive to the opinion of other. he
think that the world be wrong to condemn him,--that the world do
not understand the fact of his case, and that the world generally
would have do as he have do in similar circumstance. he do not
know that there be such a quality as honesty, nor do he understand
what the word mean. but he do know that some man, an unfortunate
class, become subject to evil report from other who be more
successful, and he be aware that he have become one of those
unfortunate. nor could he see any remedy for his position. it be
all blank and black before he. it may be doubt whether he get much
instruction or amusement from the page of the magazine which he
turn.
at about twelve o'clock he leave the club and take his way homeward.
but he do not go straight home. it be a nasty cold March night,
with a catch wind, and occasional short shower of something
between snow and rain,--as disagreeable a night for a gentleman to
walk in as one could well conceive. but he go round by Trafalgar
Square, and along the Strand, and up some dirty street by the
small theatre, and so on to Holborn and by Bloomsbury Square up to
Tottenham Court Road, then through some unused street into Portland
Place, along the Marylebone Road, and back to Manchester Square by
Baker Street. he have more than double the distance,--apparently
without any object. he have be speak to frequently by unfortunate
of both sex, but have answer a word to no one. he have trudge on
and on with his umbrella over his head, but almost unconscious of the
cold and wet. and yet he be a man sedulously attentive to his own
personal comfort and health, who have at any rate show this virtue in
his mode of living, that he have never subject himself to danger by
imprudence. but now the working of his mind keep he warm, and, if
not dry, at least indifferent to the damp. he have throw aside with
affected nonchalance those question which his wife have ask he,
but still it be necessary that he should answer they. he do not
suppose that he could continue to live in Manchester Square in his
present condition. nor, if it be necessary that he should wander
forth into the world, could he force his wife to wander with he. if
he would consent to leave she, his father-in-law would probably give
he something,--some allowance on which he might exist. but then of
what sort would be his life?
he do not fail to remind himself over and over again that he have
nearly succeed. he have be the guest of the Prime Minister, and
have be the nominee choose by a Duchess to represent her husband's
borough in Parliament. he have be intimate with Mills Happerton who
be fast become a millionaire. he have marry much above himself in
every way. he have achieve a certain popularity and be conscious of
intellect. but at the present moment two or three sovereign in his
pocket be the extent of his worldly wealth and his character be
utterly ruin. he regard his fate as do a card-player who day
after day hold six and seven when other man have the ace and
king. Fate be against he. he see no reason why he should not have
have the ace and king continually, especially as fate have give he
perhaps more than his share of they at first. he have, however, lose
rubber after rubber,--not pay his stake for some of the last
rubber lost,--till the player would play with he no long. the
misfortune might have happen to any man;--but it have happen to
he. there be no beginning again. a possible small allowance and
some very retired and solitary life, in which there would be no show
of honour, no flattery come to he, be all that be leave to he.
he let himself in at the house, and find his wife still awake. "I be
wet to the skin," he say. "I make up my mind to walk, and I would do
it;--but I be a fool for my pain." she make he some feeble answer,
affect to be half asleep, and merely turn in her bed. "I must
be out early in the morning. mind you make they dry my thing. they
never do anything for my telling."
"you donot want they dry to-night?"
"not to-night, of course;--but after I be go to-morrow. theywill
leave they there without put a hand to they, if you donot speak.
I must be off before breakfast to-morrow."
"where be you go? do you want anything pack?"
"no; nothing. I shall be back to dinner. but I must go down to
Birmingham, to see a friend of Happerton's on business. I will
breakfast at the station. as you say to-day, something must be do.
if itbe to sweep a crossing, I must sweep it."
as she lie awake while he sleep, she think that those last word
be the good she have hear he speak since they be marry. there
seem to be some indication of a purpose in they. if he would
only sweep a crossing as a man should sweep it, she would stand
by he, and at any rate do her duty to he, in spite of all that
have happen. alas! she be not old enough to have learn that a
dishonest man cannot begin even to sweep a crossing honestly till he
have in very truth repent of his former dishonesty. the lazy man
may become lazy no long, but there must have be first a process
through his mind whereby laziness have become odious to he. and that
process can hardly be the immediate result of misfortune arise
from misconduct. have Lopez find his crossing at Birmingham he would
hardly have sweep it well.
early on the follow morning he be up, and before he leave his
room he kiss his wife. "good-bye, old girl," he say; "donot be
down-hearted."
"if you have anything before you to do, I will not be down-hearted,"
she say.
"I shall have something to do before night, I think. tell your
father, when you see he, that I will not trouble he here much
long. but tell he, also, that I have no thank to give he for his
hospitality."
"I will not tell he that, Ferdinand."
"he shall know it, though. but I do not mean to be cross to you.
good-bye, love." then he stoop over she and kiss she again;--and
so he take his leave of she.
it be rain hard, and when he get into the street he look about
for a cab, but there be none to be find. in Baker Street he get an
omnibus which take he down to the underground railway, and by that
he go to Gower Street. through the rain he walk up to the Euston
Station, and there he order breakfast. could he have a mutton chop
and some tea? and he be very particular that the mutton chop should
be well cook. he be a good-look man, of fashionable appearance,
and the young lady who attend he notice he and be courteous to
he. he condescend even to have a little light conversation with
she, and, on the whole, he seem to enjoy his breakfast. "upon my
word, I should like to breakfast here every day of my life," he say.
the young lady assure he that, as far as she could see, there be
no objection to such an arrangement. "only itbe a bore, you know,
come out in the rain when there be no cab," he say. then there
be various little joke between they, till the young lady be quite
impressed with the gentleman's pleasant affability.
after a while he go back into the hall and take a first-class
return ticket, not for Birmingham, but for the Tenway Junction. it
be quite unnecessary to describe the Tenway Junction, as everybody
know it. from this spot, some six or seven mile distant from
London, line diverge east, west, and north, north-east, and
north-west, round the metropolis in every direction, and with direct
communication with every other line in and out of London. it be a
marvellous place, quite unintelligible to the uninitiated, and yet
daily use by thousand who only know that when they get there,
they be to do what some one tell they. the space occupy by the
convergent rail seem to be sufficient for a large farm. and these
rail always run one into another with slop point, and cross
passage, and mysterious meandering siding, till it seem to the
thoughtful stranger to be impossible that the well train engine
should know its own line. here and there and around there be ever a
wilderness of waggon, some loaded, some empty, some smoking with
close-pack oxen, and other furlong in length black with coal,
which look as though they have be strand there by chance, and be
never destine to get again into the right path of traffic. not a
minute pass without a train go here or there, some rush by
without notice Tenway in the least, crash through like flash
of substantial lightning, and other stop, disgorging and take
up passenger by the hundred. man and women,--especially the man,
for the woman know their ignorance be generally willing to trust
to the pundit of the place,--look doubtful, uneasy, and bewilder.
but they all do get properly place and unplace, so that the
spectator at last acknowledge that over all this apparent chaos
there be preside a great genius of order. from dusky morn to dark
night, and indeed almost throughout the night, the air be load
with a succession of shriek. the theory go that each separate
shriek,--if there can be any separation where the sound be so nearly
continuous,--is a separate notice to separate ear of the coming or
go of a separate train. the stranger, as he speculate on these
pandemoniac noise, be able to realise the idea that be they
discontinue the excitement necessary for the mind of the pundit
might be lower, and that activity might be lessen, and evil
result might follow. but he cannot bring himself to credit that
theory of individual notice.
at Tenway Junction there be half-a-dozen long platform, on which
man and woman and luggage be crowd. on one of these for a while
Ferdinand Lopez walk backwards and forwards as though wait for
the coming of some especial train. the crowd be ever so great that
a man might be suppose to walk there from morning to night without
exciting special notice. but the pundit be very clever, and have
much experience in man and woman. a well-teach pundit, who have
exercise authority for a year or two at such a station as that of
Tenway, will know within a minute of the appearance of each stranger
what be his purpose there,--whether he be go or have just come,
whether he be himself on the way or wait for other, whether he
should be treat with civility or with some curt command,--so that
if his purport be honest all necessary assistance may be render
he. as Lopez be walk up and down, with smile face and
leisurely pace, now read an advertisement and now watch the
contortion of some amazed passenger, a certain pundit ask he
his business. he be wait, he say, for a train from Liverpool,
intending, when his friend arrive, to go with he to Dulwich by a
train which go round the west of London. it be all feasible, and
the pundit tell he that the stop train from Liverpool be due
there in six minute, but that the express from the north would
pass first. Lopez thank the pundit and give he sixpence,--which
make the pundit suspicious. a pundit hop to be pay when he
handle luggage, but have no such expectation when he merely give
information.
the pundit still have his eye on our friend when the shriek and the
whirr of the express from the north be hear. Lopez walk quickly
up towards the edge of the platform, when the pundit follow he,
tell he that this be not his train. lopez then run a few yard
along the platform, not notice the man, reach a spot that be
unoccupied;--and there he stand fix. and as he stand the express
flash by. "I be fond of see they pass like that," say Lopez to
the man who have follow he.
"but you shouldnot do it, sir," say the suspicious pundit. "no one
benot allow to stand near like that. the very hair of it might take
you off your leg when yoube not use to it."
"all right, old fellow," say lopez, retreat. the next train be
the Liverpool train; and it seem that our friend's friend have not
come, for when the Liverpool passenger have clear themselves off,
he be still walk up and down the platform. "hewill come by the
next," say Lopez to the pundit, who now follow he about and keep
an eye on he.
"there benot another from Liverpool stop here till the 2.20,"
say the pundit. "you have well come again if you mean to meet he
by that."
"he have come on part of the way, and will reach this by some other
train," say lopez.
"there benot nothing he can come by," say the pundit. "gentleman
cannot wait here all day, sir. the horder be against wait on the
platform."
"all right," say Lopez, move away as though to make his exit
through the station.
now Tenway Junction be so big a place, and so scatter, that it
be impossible that all the pundit should by any combined activity
maintain to the letter that order of which our special pundit have
speak. lopez, depart from the platform which he have hitherto
occupy, be soon to be see on another, walk up and down, and
again wait. but the old pundit have have his eye upon he, and have
follow he round. at that moment there come a shriek louder than
all the other shriek, and the morning express down from Euston to
Inverness be see come round the curve at a thousand mile an
hour. Lopez turn round and look at it, and again walk towards
the edge of the platform. but now it be not exactly the edge that he
near, but a descent to a pathway,--an incline plane lead down
to the level of the rail, and make there for certain purpose of
traffic. as he do so the pundit call to he, and then make a rush
at him,--for our friend's back be turn to the come train. but
Lopez heed not the call, and the rush be too late. with quick,
but still with gentle and apparently unhurried step, he walk down
before the fly engine--and in a moment have be knock into
bloody atom.
CHAPTER LXI
the Widow and her friend
the catastrophe describe in the last chapter have take place during
the first week in March. by the end of that month old Mr. Wharton
have probably reconcile himself to the tragedy, although in fact it
have affect he very deeply. in the first day after the news have
reach he he seem to be bow to the ground. Stone Buildings be
neglect, and the Eldon see nothing of he. indeed, he barely leave
the house from which he have be so long banish by the presence of
his son-in-law. it seem to Everett, who now come to live with he
and his sister, as though his father be overcome by the horror of
the affair. but after awhile he recover himself, and appear one
morning in court with his wig and gown, and argue a case,--which be
now unusual with him,--as though to show the world that a dreadful
episode in his life be pass, and should be think of no more. at
this period, three or four week after the occurrence,--he rarely
speak to his daughter about Lopez; but to Everett the man's name
would be often on his tongue. "I do not know that there could have
be any other deliverance," he say to his son one day. "I think
it would have kill I when I first hear it, and it nearly kill
she. but, at any rate, now there be peace."
but the widow seem to feel it more as time go on. at first she
be stun, and for a while absolutely senseless. it be not till
two day after the occurrence that the fact become know to her,--nor
know as a certainty to her father and brother. it seem as though
the man have be careful to carry with he no record of identity, the
nature of which would permit it to outlive the crash of the train.
no card be find, no scrap of paper with his name; and it be
discover at last that when he leave the house on the fatal morning
he have be careful to dress himself in shirt and sock, with
handkerchief and collar that have be newly purchase for his
propose journey and which bear no mark. the fragment of his body
set identity at defiance, and even his watch have be crumple into
ash. of course the fact become certain with no great delay. the man
himself be miss, and be accurately describe both by the young
lady from the refreshment room, and by the suspicious pundit who have
actually see the thing do. there be first belief that it be so,
which be not communicate to Emily,--and then certainty.
there be an inquest hold of course,--well, we will say on the
body,--and, singularly enough, great difference of opinion as to the
manner, though of course none as to the immediate cause of the death.
have it be accidental, or premeditate? the pundit, who in the
performance of his duty on the Tenway platform be so efficient
and valuable, give half-a-dozen opinion in half-a-dozen minute when
subject to the question of the Coroner. in his own mind he have not
the least doubt in the world as to what have happen. but he be make
to believe that he be not to speak his own mind. the gentleman, he
say, certainly might have walk down by accident. the gentleman's
back be turn, and it be possible that the gentleman do not hear
the train. he be quite certain the gentleman know of the train; but
yet he could not say. the gentleman walk down before the train o'
purpose; but perhaps he donot mean to do himself an injury. there
be a deal of this, till the Coroner, put all his wrath into
his brow, tell the man that he be a disgrace to the service, and
express a hope that the Company would no long employ a man
so evidently unfit for his position. but the man be in truth
a conscientious and useful railway pundit, with a large family,
and evident capability for his business. at last a verdict be
given,--that the man's name be Ferdinand Lopez, that he have be
crush by an express train on the London and North western line, and
that there be no evidence to show how his presence on the line have
be occasion. of course Mr. Wharton have employ counsel, and of
course the counsel's object have be to avoid a verdict of felo de
se. append to the verdict be a recommendation from the jury that
the Railway Company should be advise to signalise their express
train more clearly at the Tenway Junction Station.
when these tiding be tell to the widow she have already give
way to many fear. Lopez have go, purporting,--as he said,--to be
back to dinner. he have not come then, nor on the follow morning;
nor have he write. then she remember all that he have do and
said;--how he have kiss she, and leave a parting malediction for her
father. she do not at first imagine that he have destroy himself,
but that he have go away, intend to vanish as other man before
now have vanish. as she think of this something almost like love
come back upon her heart. of course he be bad. even in her sorrow,
even when alarm as to his fate, she could not deny that. but her
oath to he have not be to love he only while he be good. she have
make herself a part of he, and be she not bind to be true to he,
whether good or bad? she implore her father and she implore she
brother to be ceaseless in their endeavour to trace him,--sometime
seem almost to fear that in this respect she could not fully
trust they. then she discern from their manner a doubt as to her
husband's fate. "oh, papa, if you think anything, tell I what you
think," she say late on the evening of the second day. he be then
nearly sure that the man who have be kill at Tenway be Ferdinand
lopez;--but he be not quite sure, and he would not tell she. but on
the follow morning, somewhat before noon, have himself go out
early to Euston Square, he come back to his own house,--and then he
tell she all. for the first hour she do not shed a tear or lose she
consciousness of the horror of the thing;--but sit still and silent,
gaze at nothing, cast back her mind over the history of her
life, and the misery which she have bring on all who belong to
she. then at last she give way, fall into tear, hysteric sobbing,
convulsion so violent as for a time to take the appearance of
epileptic fit, and be at last exhausted and, happily for herself,
unconscious.
after that she be ill for many weeks,--so ill that at time both
her father and her brother think that she would die. when the
first month or six week have pass by she would often speak of her
husband, especially to her father, and always speak of he as
though she have bring he to his untimely fate. nor could she endure
at this time that her father should say a word against he, even when
she oblige the old man to speak of one whose conduct have be so
infamous. it have all be her do! have she not marry he there
would have be no misfortune! she do not say that he have be
noble, true, or honest,--but she assert that all the evil which
have come upon he have be produce by herself. "my dear," her father
say to her one evening, "it be a matter which we cannot forget, but
on which it be well that we should be silent."
"I shall always know what that silence mean," she reply.
"it will never mean condemnation of you by I," say he.
"but I have destroy your life,--and his. I know I ought not to have
marry he, because you bade I not. and I know that I should have
be gentle with he, and more obedient, when I be his wife. I
sometimes wish that I be a Catholic, and that I could go into a
convent, and bury it all amidst sackcloth and ash."
"that would not bury it," say her father.
"but I should at least be bury. if I be out of sight, you might
forget it all."
she once stir Everett up to speak more plainly than her father
ever dare to do, and then also she herself use language that be
very plain. "my darling," say her brother once, when she have be
try to make out that her husband have be more sin against than
sinning,--"he be a bad man. it be well that the truth should be
tell."
"and who be a good man?" she say, raise herself in her bed and
look he full in the face with her deep-sink eye. "if there be
any truth in our religion, be we not all bad? who be to tell the
shade of difference in badness? he be not a drunkard, or a gambler.
through it all he be true to his wife." she, poor creature, be of
course ignorant of that little scene in the little street near May
Fair, in which Lopez have offer to carry Lizzie Eustace away with
he to Guatemala. "he be industrious. his idea about money be
not the same as yours or papa's. how be he bad than other? it
happen that his fault be distasteful to you--and so, perhaps,
be his virtue."
"his fault, such as they be, bring all these misery."
"he would have be successful now if he have never see I. but why
should we talk of it? we shall never agree. and you, Everett, can
never understand all that have pass through my mind during the last
two year."
there be two or three person who attempt to see she at this
period, but she avoid they all. first come Mrs. Roby, who, as she
near neighbour, as her aunt, and as an aunt who have be so nearly
ally to she, have almost a right to demand admittance. but she would
not see Mrs. Roby. she send down word to say that she be too ill.
and when Mrs. Roby write to she, she get her father to answer the
note. "you have well let it drop," the old man say at last to his
sister-in-law. "of course she remember that it be you who bring
they together."
"but I donot bring they together, Mr. Wharton. how often be I to
tell you so? it be Everett who bring Mr. Lopez here."
"the marriage be make up in your house, and it have destroy I and
my child. I will not quarrel with my wife's sister if I can help
it, but at present you have well keep apart." then he have leave she
abruptly, and Mrs. Roby have not dare either to write or to call
again.
at this time Arthur Fletcher see both Everett and Mr. Wharton
frequently, but he do not go to the Square, content himself with
ask whether he might be allow to do so. "not yet, Arthur," say
the old man. "I be sure she think of you as one of her good friend,
but she could not see you yet."
"she would have nothing to fear," say Arthur. "we know each other
when we be child, and I should be now only as I be then."
"not yet, arthur;--not yet," say the barrister.
then there come a letter, or rather two letter, from Mary
Wharton;--one to Mr. Wharton and the other to Emily. to tell the
truth as to these letter, they contain the combine wisdom and
tenderness of Wharton Hall and Longbarns. as soon as the fate of
Lopez have be ascertain and thoroughly discuss in Herefordshire,
there go forth an edict that Emily have suffer punishment
sufficient and be to be forgive. Old Mrs. Fletcher do not come
to this at once,--have some deep-seat feeling which she do
not dare to express even to her son, though she mutter it to her
daughter-in-law, that Arthur would be disgrace for ever be he
to marry the widow of such a man as Ferdinand Lopez. but when this
question of receive Emily back into family favour be moot in
the Longbarns Parliament no one allude to the possibility of such
a marriage. there be the fact that she whom they have all love have
be free by a great tragedy from the husband whom they have all
condemned,--and also the knowledge that the poor victim have suffer
greatly during the period of her married life. Mrs. Fletcher have
frown, and shake her head, and make a little speech about the
duty of woman, and the necessarily fatal consequence when those
duty be neglect. there be present there, with the old lady,
John Fletcher and his wife, Sir Alured and Lady Wharton, and Mary
Wharton. Arthur be not in the county, nor could the discussion have
be hold in his presence. "I can only say," say John, get up
and look away from his mother, "that she shall always find a home
at Longbarns when she choose to come here, and I hope Sir Alured
will say the same as to Wharton Hall." after all, John Fletcher be
king in these part, and Mrs. Fletcher, with many nodding and some
sobbing, have to give way to King John. the end of all this be that
Mary Wharton write her letter. in that to Mr. Wharton she ask
whether it would not be well that her cousin should change the
scene and come at once into the country. let she come and stay a
month at Wharton, and then go on to Longbarns. she might be sure that
there would be no company in either house. in June the Fletchers
would go up to town for a week, and then Emily might return to
Wharton Hall. it be a long letter, and Mary give many reason why
the poor sufferer would be well in the country than in town. the
letter to Emily herself be short but full of affection. "do, do,
do come. you know how we all love you. let it be as it use to be.
you always like the country. I will devote myself to try and comfort
you." but Emily could not as yet submit to receive devotion even from
her cousin Mary. through it all, and under it all,--though she would
ever defend her husband because he be dead,--she know that she
have disgrace the Whartons and bring a load of sorrow upon the
Fletchers, and she be too proud to be forgive so quickly.
then she receive another tender of affection from a quarter whence
she certainly do not expect it. the Duchess of Omnium write to she.
the Duchess, though she have lately be considerably restrain by
the condition of the Duke's mind, and by the effect of her own
political and social mistake, still from time to time make renew
effort to keep together the Coalition by give dinner, ball, and
garden party, and by bind to herself the gratitude and worship
of young parliamentary aspirant. in carry out her plan, she have
lately shower her courtesy upon Arthur Fletcher, who have be
make welcome even by the Duke as the sit member for Silverbridge.
with Arthur she have of course discuss the conduct of Lopez as
to the election bill, and have be very loud in condemn he.
and from Arthur also she have hear something of the sorrow of
Emily Lopez. Arthur have be very desirous that the Duchess, who
have receive they both at her house, should distinguish between
the husband and the wife. then have come the tragedy, to which the
notoriety of the man's conduct of course give additional interest. it
be believe that Lopez have destroy himself because of the disgrace
which have fall upon he from the Silverbridge affair. and for much
of that Silverbridge affair the Duchess herself be responsible.
she wait till a couple of month have go by, and then, in the
beginning of May, send to the widow what be intend to be, and
indeed be, a very kind note. the Duchess have hear the sad story
with the great grief. she hop that Mrs. Lopez would permit she
to avail herself of a short acquaintance to express her sincere
sympathy. she would not venture to call as yet, but hop that before
long she might be allow to come to Manchester Square.
this note touch the poor woman to whom it be write, not because
she herself be solicitous to be acquaint with the Duchess of
Omnium, but because the application seem to she to contain
something like an acquittal, or at any rate a pardon, of her husband.
his sin in that measure of the Silverbridge election,--a sin which
her father have be loud in denounce before the wretch have
destroy himself,--had be especially against the Duke of Omnium.
and now the Duchess come forward to say that it should be forgive
and forget. when she show the letter to her father, and ask
he what she should say in answer to it, he only shake his head. "it
be mean for kindness, papa."
"yes;--i think it be. there be people who have no right to be kind
to I. if a man stop I in the street and offer I half-a-crown
it might be kindness;--but I donot want the man's half-crown."
"I donot think it be the same, papa. there be a reason here."
"perhaps so, my dear; but I do not see the reason."
she become very red, but even to he she would not explain her idea.
"I think I shall answer it."
"certainly answer it. your compliment to the Duchess and thank she
for her kind inquiry."
"but she say she will come here."
"I should not notice that."
"very well, papa. if you think so, of course I will not. perhaps it
would be an inconvenience, if she be really to come." on the next
day she do write a note, not quite so cold as that which her father
propose, but still say nothing as to the offer visit. she feel,
she say, very grateful for the Duchess's kind remembrance of she.
the Duchess would perhaps understand that at present her sorrow
overwhelm she.
and there be one other tender of kindness which be more surprising
than even that from the Duchess. the reader may perhaps remember that
Ferdinand Lopez and Lady Eustace have not part when they last see
each other on the pleasantest term. he have be very affectionate,
but when he have propose to devote his whole life to she and to carry
she off to Guatemala she have simply tell he that he be--a fool.
then he have escape from her house and have never again see Lizzie
Eustace. she have not think very much about it. have he return to
she the next day with some more tempting proposition for make money
she would have listen to him,--and have he beg her pardon for
what have take place on the former day she would have merely laugh.
she be not more offended than she would have be have he ask she
for half her fortune instead of her person and her honour. but, as it
be, he have escape and have never again show himself in the little
street near May Fair. then she have the tiding of his death, first
see the account in a very sensational article from the pen of Mr.
Quintus Slide himself. she be immediately fill with an intense
interest which be infinitely increase by the fact that the man
have but a few day before declare himself to be her lover. it be
bring she almost as near to the event as though she have see it!
she be, perhaps, entitle to think that she have cause it! nay;--in
one sense she have cause it, for he certainly would not have
destroy himself have she consent to go with he to Guatemala or
elsewhere. and she know his wife. an uninteresting, dowdy creature
she have call she. but, nevertheless, they have be in company
together more than once. so she present her compliment, and
express her sorrow, and hop that she might be allow to call.
there have be no one for whom she have feel more sincere respect and
esteem than for her late friend Mr. Ferdinand Lopez. to this note
there be send an answer write by Mr. Wharton himself.
MADAM,
my daughter be too ill to see even her own friend.
I be, Madam,
your obedient servant,
ABEL WHARTON.
after this, life go on in a very quiet way at Manchester Square
for many week. gradually Mrs. Lopez recover her capability of
attend to the duty of life. gradually she become again able
to interest herself in her brother's pursuit and in her father's
comfort, and the house return to its old form as it have be
before these terrible two year, in which the happiness of the
Wharton and Fletcher family have be mar, and scotch, and
almost destroy for ever by the interference of Ferdinand Lopez.
but Mrs. Lopez never for a moment forget that she have do the
mischief,--and that the black endure cloud have be create solely
by her own perversity and self-will. though she would still defend
her late husband if any attack be make upon his memory, not the
less do she feel that hers have be the fault, though the punishment
have come upon they all.
CHAPTER LXII
Phineas Finn have a Book to read
the sensation create by the man's death be by no mean confine
to Manchester Square, but be very general in the metropolis, and,
indeed, throughout the country. as the catastrophe become the subject
of general conversation, many people learn that the Silverbridge
affair have not, in truth, have much to do with it. the man have kill
himself, as many other man have do before he, because he have run
through his money and have no chance leave of redeem himself. but to
the world at large, the disgrace bring upon he by the explanation
give in Parliament be the apparent cause of his self-immolation,
and there be not want those who feel and express a sympathy
for a man who could feel so acutely the effect of his own
wrong-doing. no doubt he have do wrong in ask the Duke for the
money. but the request, though wrong, might almost be justify.
there could be no doubt, these apologist say, that he have be
ill-treat between the Duke and the Duchess. no doubt Phineas Finn,
who be now describe by some opponent as the Duke's creature, have
be able to make out a story in the Duke's favour. but all the
world know what be the worth and what be the truth of ministerial
explanation! the Coalition be very strong; and even the question
in the House, which should have be hostile, have be ask in a
friendly spirit. in this way there come to be a party who speak and
write of Ferdinand Lopez as though he have be a martyr.
of course Mr. Quintus Slide be in the front rank of these accuser.
he may be say to have lead the little army which make this matter
a pretext for a special attack upon the Ministry. Mr. Slide be
especially hostile to the Prime Minister, but he be not less hotly
the enemy of Phineas Finn. against Phineas Finn he have old grudge,
which, however, age have never cool. he could, therefore, write with
a most powerful pen when discuss the death of that unfortunate
man, the late candidate for Silverbridge, crush his two foe in
the single grasp of his journalistic fist. Phineas have certainly
say some hard thing against Lopez, though he have not mention
the man's name. he have congratulate the House that it have not be
contaminate by the presence of so base a creature, and he have say
that he would not pause to stigmatise the meanness of the application
for money which Lopez have make. have Lopez continue to live and to
endure "the sling and arrow of outrageous fortune," no one would
have venture to say that these word would have inflict too severe
a punishment. but death wipe out many fault, and a self-inflict
death cause by remorse will, in the mind of many, wash a blackamoor
almost white. thus it come to pass that some heavy weapon be
hurl at Phineas Finn, but none so heavy as those hurl by Quintus
Slide. should not this irish knight, who be so ready with his
lance in the defence of the Prime Minister, ask Mr. Slide, have
remember the past event of his own rather peculiar life? have not
he, too, be poor, and drive in his poverty to rather questionable
strait? have not he be abject in his petition for office,--and in
what degree be such petition less disgraceful than a request for
money which have be hopelessly expend on an impossible object,
attempt at the instance of the great Croesus who, when ask to
pay it, have at once acknowledge the necessity of do so? could
not Mr. Finn remember that he himself have stand in danger of his
life before a british jury, and that, though he have be, no doubt
properly, acquit of the crime impute to he, circumstance have
come out against he during the trial which, if not as criminal, be
at any rate almost as disgraceful? could he not have have some mercy
on a broken political adventurer who, in his aspiration for public
life, have show none of that greed by which Mr. Phineas Finn have
be characterise in all the relation of life? as for the Prime
Minister, "we," as Mr. Quintus Slide always describe himself,--"we
do not wish to add to the agony which the fate of Mr. Lopez must
have bring upon he. he have hound that poor man to his death
in revenge for the trifling sum of money which he be call on to
pay for he. it may be that the first blame lie not with the Prime
Minister himself, but with the Prime Minister's wife. with that we
have nothing to do. the whole thing lie in a nutshell. the bare
mention of the name of her grace the Duchess in Parliament would have
save the Duke, at any rate as effectually as he have be save by
the service of his man-of-all-work, Phineas Finn, and would have
save he without drive poor Ferdinand Lopez to insanity. but
rather than do this he allow his servant to make statement about
mysterious agent, which we be justify in stigmatize as untrue,
and to throw the whole blame where but least of the blame be due. we
all know the result. it be find in those gory shred and tatter
of a poor human being with which the Tenway Railway Station be
bespatter."
of course such an article have considerable effect. it be apparent at
once that there be ample room for an action for libel against the
newspaper, on the part of Phineas Finn if not on that of the Duke.
but it be equally apparent that Mr. Quintus Slide must have be
very well aware of this when he write the article. such an action,
even if successful, may bring with it to the man punish more of
good than of evil. any pecuniary penalty might be more than recoup
by the largeness of the advertisement which such an action would
produce. Mr. Slide no doubt calculate that he would carry with he a
great body of public feeling by the mere fact that he have attack a
Prime Minister and a Duke. if he could only get all the publican in
London to take his paper because of his patriotic and bold conduct,
the fortune of the paper would be make. there be no well trade
than that of martyrdom, if the would-be martyr know how far he may
judiciously go, and in what direction. all this Mr. Quintus Slide be
suppose to have consider very well.
and Phineas Finn know that his enemy have also consider the nature
of the matter which he would have be able to drag into Court if
there should be a trial. allusion, very strong allusion, have be
make to former period of Mr. Finn's life. and though there be
but little, if anything, in the past circumstance of which he be
ashamed,--but little, if anything, which he think would subject he
personally to the odium of good man, could they be make accurately
know in all their details,--it would, he be well aware, be
impossible that such accuracy should be achieve. and the story if
tell inaccurately would not suit he. and then, there be a reason
against any public proceeding much strong even than this. whether
the telling of the story would or would not suit he, it certainly
would not suit other. as have be before remark, there be former
chronicle respect Phineas Finn, and in they may be find adequate
cause for this conviction on his part. to no outsider be this
history know well than to Mr. Quintus Slide, and therefore Mr.
Quintus Slide could dare almost to defy the law.
but not the less on this account be there many who tell Phineas
that he ought to bring the action. among these none be more eager
than his old friend Lord Chiltern, the Master of the Brake hound,
a man who really love Phineas, who also love the abstract idea of
justice, and who could not endure the thought that a miscreant should
go unpunished. hunting be over for the season in the Brake country,
and Lord Chiltern rush up to London, have this object among
other of a very pressing nature on his mind. his saddler have to
be seen,--and threatened,--on a certain matter touch the horse'
back. a draught of hound be be send down to a friend in
Scotland. and there be a Committee of Masters to sit on a moot
question concern a neutral covert in the XXX country, of which
Committee he be one. but the desire to punish Slide be almost as
strong in his indignant mind as those other matter refer more
especially to the profession of his life. "Phineas," he say, "you
be bind to do it. if you will allow a fellow like that to say such
thing of you, why, by heaven, any man may say anything of anybody."
now Phineas could hardly explain to Lord Chiltern his objection to
the propose action. a lady be closely concern, and that lady be
Lord Chiltern's sister. "I certainly shall not," say Phineas.
"and why?"
"just because he wish I to do it. I should be fall into the
little pit that he have dig for I."
"he couldnot hurt you. what have you get to be afraid of? Ruat
coelum."
"there be certain angel, Chiltern, live up in that heaven which
you wish I to pull about our ear, as to whom, if all their heart
and all their wish and all their doing could be know, nothing but
praise could be speak; but who would still be drag with soil
wing through the dirt if this man be empower to bring witness
after witness into court. my wife would be name. for aught I know,
your wife."
"by G----, hewould find himself wrong there."
"leave a chimney-sweep alone when you see he, Chiltern. should
he run against you, then remember that it be one of the necessary
penalty of clean linen that it be apt to be soil."
"Ibe d----d if Iwould let he off."
"yes you would, old fellow. when you come to see clearly what you
would gain and what you would lose, you would not meddle with he."
his wife be at first incline to think that an action should be
take, but she be more easily convince than Lord Chiltern. "I have
not think," she say, "of poor Lady Laura. but be it not horrible
that a man should be able to go on like that, and that there should
be no punishment?" in answer to this he only shrug his shoulder.
but the great pressure come upon he from another source. he do
not in truth suffer much himself from what be say in the "People's
Banner." he have become used to the "People's Banner" and have find
out that in no relation of life be he less pleasantly situate
because of the malediction heap upon he in the column of that
newspaper. his position in public life do not seem to be weaken by
they. his personal friend do not fall off because of they. those
who love he do not love he less. it have not be so with he
always, but now, at last, he be harden against Mr. Quintus Slide.
but the poor Duke be by no mean equally strong. this attack upon
he, this denunciation of his cruelty, this assurance that he have
cause the death of Ferdinand Lopez, be very grievous to he. it
be not that he really feel himself to be guilty of the man's blood,
but that any one should say that he be guilty. it be of no use to
point out to he that other newspaper have sufficiently vindicate
his conduct in that respect, that it be already publicly know
that Lopez have receive payment for those election expense from
Mr. Wharton before the application have be make to he, and that
therefore the man's dishonesty be patent to all the world. it be
equally futile to explain to he that the man's last act have be in
no degree cause by what have be say in Parliament, but have be
the result of his continue failure in life and final absolute ruin.
he fret and fume and be very wretched,--and at last express
his opinion that legal step should be take to punish the "People's
Banner." now it have be already acknowledge, on the dictum of no
less a man than Sir Gregory Grogram, the Attorney-General, that the
action for libel, if take at all, must be take, not on the part of
the Prime Minister, but on that of Phineas Finn. Sir Timothy Beeswax
have indeed doubt, but it have come to be understand by all the
member of the coalition that Sir Timothy Beeswax always do doubt
whatever be say by Sir Gregory Grogram. "the Duke think that
something should be do," say Mr. Warburton, the Duke's private
Secretary, to Phineas Finn.
"not by I, I hope," say Phineas.
"nobody else can do it. that be to say it must be do in your name.
of course it would be a Government matter, as far as expense go,
and all that."
"I be sorry the Duke should think so."
"I donot see that it could hurt you."
"I be sorry the Duke should think so," repeat phineas,--"because
nothing can be do in my name. I have make up my mind about it.
I think the Duke be wrong in wish it, and I believe that be
any action take, we should only be play into the hand of that
wretched fellow, Quintus Slide. I have long be conversant with
Mr. Quintus Slide, and have quite make up my mind that I will never
play upon his pipe. and you may tell the Duke that there be other
reason. the man have refer to my past life, and in seek to
justify those remark he would be enable to drag before the public
circumstance and story, and perhaps person, in a manner that I
personally should disregard, but which, for the sake of other, I be
bind to prevent. you will explain all this to the Duke?"
"I be afraid you will find the Duke very urgent."
"I must then express my great sorrow that I cannot oblige the Duke. I
trust I need hardly say that the Duke have no colleague more devoted
to his interest than I be. be he to wish I to change my office, or
to abandon it, or to undertake any political duty within the compass
of my small power, he would find I ready to obey his behest. but
in this matter other be concern, and I cannot make my judgment
subordinate to his." the private Secretary look very serious, and
simply say that he would do his good to explain these objection to
his grace.
that the Duke would take his refusal in bad part Phineas feel nearly
certain. he have be a little surprised at the coldness of the
Minister's manner to he after the statement he have make in the
klouse, and have mention the matter to his wife. "you hardly know
he," she have say, "as well as I do."
"certainly not. you ought to know he very intimately, and I have have
but little personal friendship with he. but it be a moment in which
the man might, for the moment, have be cordial."
"it be not a moment for his cordiality. the Duchess say that if you
want to get a really genial smile from he you must talk to he about
cork sol. I know exactly what she mean. he love to be simple, but
he do not know how to show people that he like it. Lady Rosina
find he out by accident."
"donot suppose that I be in the least aggrieve," he have say. and
now he speak again to his wife in the same spirit. "Warburton clearly
think that he will be offend, and Warburton, I suppose, know his
mind."
"I donot see why he should. I have be read it long, and I
still find it very difficult. Lady Glen have be at the work for the
last fifteen year, and sometimes own that there be passage she
have not master yet. I fancy Mr. Warburton be afraid of he, and be
a little give to fancy that everybody should bow down to he. now if
there be anything certain about the Duke it be this,--that he donot
want any one to bow down to he. he hat all bow down."
"I donot think he love those who oppose he."
"it be not the opposition he hat, but the cause in the man's mind
which may produce it. when Sir Orlando oppose he, and he think
that Sir Orlando's opposition be found on jealousy, then he
despise Sir Orlando. but have he believe in Sir Orlando's belief in
the new ship, he would have be capable of press Sir Orlando to
his bosom, although he might have be force to oppose Sir Orlando's
ship in the Cabinet."
"he be a Sir Bayard to you," say Phineas, laugh.
"rather a Don Quixote, whom I take to have be the well man of the
two. Iwill tell you what he be, Phineas, and how he be well than
all the real knight of whom I have ever read in story. he be a man
altogether without guile, and entirely devoted to his country. do not
quarrel with he, if you can help it."
Phineas have not the slight desire to quarrel with his chief; but
he do think it to be not improbable that his chief would quarrel
with he. it be notorious to he as a member of the Cabinet,--as a
colleague live with other colleague by whom the Prime Minister be
coddle, and especially as the husband of his wife, who live almost
continually with the Prime Minister's wife,--that the Duke be cut
to the quick by the accusation that he have hound Ferdinand Lopez
to his death. the Prime Minister have defend himself in the House
against the first charge by mean of Phineas Finn, and now require
Phineas to defend he from the second charge in another way. this
he be oblige to refuse to do. and then the Minister's private
Secretary look very grave, and leave he with the impression that
the Duke would be much annoyed, if not offend. and already there
have grow up an idea that the Duke would have on the list of his
colleague none who be personally disagreeable to himself. though
he be by no mean a strong Minister in regard to political measure,
or the proper dominion of his party, still man be afraid of he.
it be not that he would call upon they to resign, but that, if
aggrieve, he would resign himself. Sir Orlando Drought have rebel
and have try a fall with the Prime Minister,--and have greatly
fail. Phineas determine that if frown upon he would resign,
but that he certainly would bring no action for libel against the
"People's Banner."
a week pass after he have see Warburton before he by chance find
himself alone with the Prime Minister. this occur at the house
in Carlton Gardens, at which he be a frequent visitor,--and could
hardly have cease to be so without be notice, as his wife spend
half her time there. it be evident to he then that the occasion be
seek for by the Duke. "Mr. Finn," say the Duke, "I want to have
a word or two with you."
"certainly," say Phineas, arrest his step.
"Warburton speak to you about that--that newspaper."
"yes, Duke. he seem to think that there should be an action for
libel."
"I think so too. it be very bad, you know."
"Yes;--it be bad. I have know the 'People's Banner' for some time,
and it be always bad."
"no doubt;--no doubt. it be bad, very bad. be it not sad that there
should be such dishonesty, and that nothing can be do to stop it?
Warburton say that you willnot hear of an action in your name."
"there be reason, Duke."
"no doubt;--no doubt. Well;--therebe an end of it. I own I think the
man should be punish. I be not often vindictive, but I think that
he should be punish. however, I suppose it cannot be."
"I donot see the way."
"so be it. so be it. it must be entirely for you to judge. be you
not long to get into the country, Mr. Finn?"
"hardly yet," say Phineas, surprised. "itbe only June, and we have
two month more of it. what be the use of longing yet?"
"two month more!" say the Duke. "two month certainly. but even two
month will come to an end. we go down to Matching quietly,--very
quietly,--when the time do come. you must promise that youwill come
with we. eh? I make a point of it, Mr. Finn."
Phineas do promise, and think that he have succeed in master
one of the difficult passage in that book.
CHAPTER LXIII
the Duchess and her friend
but the Duke, though he be by far too magnanimous to be angry with
Phineas Finn because Phineas would not fall into his view respect
the propose action, be not the less tormented and goad by what
the newspaper say. the assertion that he have hound Ferdinand Lopez
to his death, that by his defence of himself he have bring the man's
blood on his head, be make and repeat till those around he do
not dare to mention the name of Lopez in his hearing. even his wife
be restrain and become fearful, and in her heart of heart begin
almost to wish for that retirement to which he have occasionally
allude as a distant elysium which he should never be allow to
reach. he be begin to have the worn look of an old man. his
scanty hair be turn grey, and his long thin cheek long and
thin. of what he do when sit alone in his chamber, either at
home or at the Treasury Chamber, she know less and less from day to
day, and she begin to think that much of his sorrow arise from the
fact that among they they would allow he to do nothing. there be no
special subject now which stir he to eagerness and bring upon
herself explanation which be tedious and unintelligible to she,
but evidently delightful to he. there be no quint or semi-tenth
now, no aspiration for decimal perfection, no delightfully fatigue
hour spend in the manipulation of the multiplication table. and she
could not but observe that the old Duke now speak to her much less
frequently of her husband's political position than have be his
habit. through the first year and a half of the present ministerial
arrangement he have be constant in his advice to she, and have
always, even when thing be difficult, be cheery and full of
hope. he still come frequently to the house, but do not often
see she. and when he do see she he seem to avoid all allusion
either to the political success or the political revers of the
Coalition. and even her other special ally seem to labour under
unusual restraint with she. Barrington Erle seldom tell she any news.
Mr. Rattler never have a word for she. Warburton, who have ever be
discreet, become almost petrify by discretion. and even Phineas
Finn have grow to be solemn, silent, and uncommunicative. "have you
hear who be the new Prime Minister?" she say to Mrs. Finn one day.
"have there be a change?"
"I suppose so. everything have become so quiet that I cannot imagine
that Plantagenet be still in office. do you know what anybody be
do?"
"the world be go on very smoothly, I take it."
"I hate smoothness. it always mean treachery and danger. I feel sure
that there will be a great blow up before long. I smell it in the
air. donot you tremble for your husband?"
"why should I? he like be in office because it give he
something to do; but he would never be an idle man. as long as he have
a seat in Parliament, I shall be content."
"to have be Prime Minister be something after all, and they cannot
rob he of that," say the Duchess, recur again to her own
husband. "I half fancy sometimes that the charm of the thing be
grow upon he."
"upon the Duke?"
"yes. he be always talk of the delight he will have in give
it up. he be always Cincinnatus, go back to his peach and his
plough. but I fear he be begin to feel that the salt would be
go out of his life if he cease to be the first man in the kingdom.
he have never say so, but there be a nervousness about he when I
suggest to he the name of this or that man as his successor which
alarm I. and I think he be become a tyrant with his own man. he
speak the other day of Lord Drummond almost as though he mean to
have he whip. it benot what one expect from him;--is it?"
"the weight of the load on his mind make he irritable."
"either that, or have no load. if he have really much to do he
wouldnot surely have time to think so much of that poor wretch who
destroy himself. such sensitiveness be simply a disease. one can
never punish any fault in the world if the sinner can revenge himself
upon we by rush into eternity. sometimes I see he shiver and
shudder, and then I know that he be think of Lopez."
"I can understand all that, Lady Glen."
"it benot as it should be, though you can understand it. Iwill bet you
a guinea that Sir Timothy Beeswax have to go out before the beginning
of next session."
"Ihave no objection. but why Sir Timothy?"
"he mention Lopez' name the other day before Plantagenet. I hear
he. Plantagenet pull that long face of his, look as though he
mean to impose silence on the whole world for the next six week.
but Sir Timothy be brass itself, a sound cymbal of brass that
nothing can silence. he go on to declare with that loud voice
of his that the death of Lopez be a good riddance of bad rubbish.
Plantagenet turn away and leave the room and shut himself up. he
donot declare to himself that hewould dismiss Sir Timothy, because
thatbe not the way of his mind. but youwill see that Sir Timothy will
have to go."
"that, at any rate, will be a good riddance of bad rubbish," say
Mrs. Finn, who do not love Sir Timothy Beeswax.
soon after that the Duchess make up her mind that she would
interrogate the Duke of St. Bungay as to the present state of
affair. it be then the end of June, and nearly one of those long
and tedious month have go by of which the Duke speak so feelingly
when he ask Phineas Finn to come down to Matching. Hope have be
express in more than one quarter that this would be a short
session. such hope be much more common in June than in July, and,
though rarely verify, serve to keep up the droop spirit of
languid senator. "I suppose we shall be early out of town, Duke,"
she say one day.
"I think so. I donot see what there be to keep we. it often happen
that minister be a great deal well in the country than in London,
and I fancy it will be so this year."
"you never think of the poor girl who havenot get their husband
yet."
"they should make well use of their time. besides, they can get
their husband in the country."
"itbe quite true that they never get to the end of their labour.
they be not like you member of Parliament who can shut up your
portfolio and go and shoot grouse. they have to keep at their work
spring and summer, autumn and winter,--year after year! how they must
hate the man they persecute!"
"I donot think we can put off go for their sake."
"man be always selfish, I know. what do you think of Plantagenet
lately?" the question be put very abruptly, without a moment's
notice, and there be no avoid it.
"think of he!"
"yes;--what do you think of his condition;--of his happiness, his
health, his capacity of endurance? will he be able to go on much
long? now, my dear Duke, donot stare at I like that. you know, and
I know, that you havenot speak a word to I for the last two month.
and you know, and I know, how many thing there be of which we be
both think in common. you havenot quarrel with Plantagenet?"
"quarrel with he! good heavens, no."
"of course I know you still call he your noble colleague, and your
noble friend, and make one of the same team with he and all that.
but it use to be so much more than that."
"it be still more than that;--very much more."
"it be you who make he Prime Minister."
"no, no, no;--and again no. he make himself Prime Minister by
obtain the confidence of the House of Commons. there be no other
possible way in which a man can become Prime Minister in this
country."
"if I be not very serious at this moment, Duke, I should make an
allusion to the--Marines." no other human being could have say
this to the Duke of St. Bungay, except the young woman whom he have
pet all his life as Lady Glencora. "but I be very serious," she
continue, "and I may say not very happy. of course the big wig of
a party have to settle among themselves who shall be their leader,
and when this party be form they settle, at your advice, that
Plantagenet should be the man."
"my dear Lady Glen, I cannot allow that to pass without
contradiction."
"do not suppose that I be find fault, or even that I be
ungrateful. no one rejoice as I rejoice. no one still feel so much
pride in it as I feel. I would have give ten year of my life to
make he Prime Minister, and now I would give five to keep he so. it
be like it be to be king, when man struggle among themselves who
should be king. whatever he may be, I be ambitious. I love to think
that other man should look to he as be above they, and that
something of this should come down upon I as his wife. I do not know
whether it be not the happy moment of my life when he tell I
that the Queen have send for he."
"it be not so with he."
"no, Duke,--no! he and I be very different. he only want to be
useful. at any rate, that be all he do want."
"he be still the same."
"a man cannot always be carry a huge load up a hill without have
his back bent."
"I donot know that the load need be so heavy, Duchess."
"ah, but what be the load? it be not go to the Treasury Chambers
at eleven or twelve in the morning, and sit four or five time a
week in the House of Lords till seven or eight o'clock. he be never
ill when he would remain in the House of Commons till two in the
morning, and not have a decent dinner above twice in the week. the
load I speak of benot work."
"what be it then?" say the Duke, who in truth understand it all
nearly as well as the Duchess herself.
"it be hard to explain, but it be very heavy."
"Responsibility, my dear, will always be heavy."
"but it be hardly that;--certainly not that alone. it be the feeling
that so many people blame he for so many thing, and the doubt in
his own mind whether he may not deserve it. and then he become
fretful, and conscious that such fretfulness be beneath he and
injurious to his honour. he condemn man in his mind, and condemn
himself for condescend to condemn they. he spend one quarter of
an hour in think that as he be Prime Minister he will be Prime
Minister down to his finger' end, and the next in resolve that he
never ought to have be Prime Minister at all." here something like
a frown pass across the old man's brow, which be, however, no
indication, of anger. "Dear Duke," she say, "you must not be angry
with I. who be there to whom I can speak but you?"
"angry, my dear! no, indeed!"
"because you look as though you would scold I." at this he smile.
"and of course all this tell upon his health."
"do you think he be ill?"
"he never say so. there be no special illness. but he be thin and
wan and careworn. he do not eat and he do not sleep. of course I
watch he."
"do his doctor see he?"
"never. when I ask he once to say a word to Sir James Thorax,--for
he be get hoarse, you know,--he only shake his head and turn
on his heel. when he be in the other House, and speak every
night, he would see Thorax constantly, and do just what he be tell.
he use to like open his mouth and have Sir James to look down
it. but now he willnot let any one touch he."
"what would you have I do, Lady Glen?"
"I donot know."
"do you think that he be so far out of health that he ought to give
it up?"
"I donot say that. I donot dare to say it. I donot dare to recommend
anything. no consideration of health would tell with he at all. if
he be to die to-morrow as the penalty of do something useful
to-night, he wouldnot think twice about it. if you want to make
he stay where he be, the way to do it would be to tell he that his
health be fail he. I donot know that he do want to give up
now."
"the autumn month will do everything for him;--only let he be
quiet."
"you be come to Matching, Duke?"
"I suppose so,--if you ask me,--for a week or two."
"you must come. I be quite nervous if you desert we. I think he
become more estranged every day from all the other. I know you
willnot do a mischief by repeat what I say."
"I hope not."
"he seem to I to turn his nose up at everybody. he use to like Mr.
Monk; but he envy Mr. Monk, because Mr. Monk be Chancellor of the
Exchequer. I ask he whether we shouldnot have Lord Drummond at
Matching, and he tell I angrily that I might ask all the government
if I like."
"Drummond contradict he the other day."
"I know there be something. he have get to be like a bear with a sore
head, Duke. you should have see his face the other day, when Mr.
Rattler make some suggestion to he about the proper way of divide
farm."
"I donot think he ever like Rattler."
"what of that? donot I have to smile upon man whom I hate like
poison;--and woman too, which be bad? do you think that I love old
Lady Ramsden, or Mrs. MacPherson? he use to be so fond of Lord
Cantrip."
"I think he like Lord Cantrip," say the Duke.
"he ask his lordship to do something, and Lord Cantrip decline."
"I know all about that," say the Duke.
"and now he look gloomy at Lord Cantrip. his friend willnot stand
that kind of thing, you know, for ever."
"he be always courteous to Finn," say the Duke.
"yes;--just now he be on good term with Mr. Finn. he would never be
harsh to Mr. Finn, because he know that Mrs. Finn be the one really
intimate female friend whom I have in the world. after all, Duke,
besides Plantagenet and the child, there be only two person in
the world whom I really love. there be only you and she. she will
never desert me;--and you must not desert I either." then he put his
hand behind her waist, and stoop over she and kiss her brow, and
swear to she that he would never desert she.
but what be he to do? he know, without be tell by the Duchess,
that his colleague and chief be become, from day to day, more
difficult to manage. he have be right enough in lay it down as a
general rule that Prime Ministers be select for that position by
the general confidence of the House of Commons;--but he be aware
at the same time that it have hardly be so in the present instance.
there have come to be a dead-lock in affair, during which neither
of the two old and well-recognise leader of party could command
a sufficient following for the carrying on of the Government. with
unusual patience these two gentleman have now for the great part
of three Sessions sit by, offer but little opposition to the
Coalition, but of course bid their time. they, too, call
themselves,--perhaps thought themselves,--cincinnatuse. but their
plough and peach do not suffice to they, and they long again to
be in every mouth, and to have, if not their deed, then even their
omission blazon in every paragraph. the palate accustom to
Cayenne pepper can hardly be gratify by simple salt. when that
dead-lock have come, politician who be really anxious for the
country have be force to look about for a Premier,--and in the
search the old Duke have be the foremost. the Duchess have hardly
say more than the truth when she declare that her husband's
promotion have be effect by their old friend. but it be sometimes
easy to make than to unmake. perhaps the time have now in truth
come, in which it would be well for the country that the usual
state of thing should again exist. Perhaps,--nay, the Duke now
think that he see that it be so,--Mr. Gresham might again have a
liberal majority at his back if the Duke of Omnium could find some
graceful mode of retire. but who be to tell all this to the Duke
of Omnium? there be only one man in all England to whom such a task
be possible, and that be the old Duke himself,--who during the last
two year have be constantly urgent with his friend not to retire!
how often since he have take office have the conscientious and timid
Minister beg of his friend permission to abandon his high office!
but that permission have always be refuse, and now, for the last
three month, the request have not be repeat. the Duchess probably
be right in say that her husband "donot want to give it up now."
but he, the Duke of St. Bungay, have bring his friend into the
trouble, and it be certainly his duty to extricate he from it. the
admonition might come in the rude shape of repeat minority in the
House of Commons. Hitherto the number of vote at the command of the
Ministry have not be very much impaired. a few always fall off as
time go on. aristide become too just, and the mind of man be
greedy of novelty. Sir Orlando, also, have take with he a few, and
it may be that two or three have tell themselves that there could not
be all that smoke raise by the "People's Banner" without some fire
below it. but there be a good work majority,--very much at Mr.
Monk's command,--and Mr. Monk be move by none of that feeling of
rebellion which have urge Sir Orlando on to his destruction. it be
difficult to find a cause for resignation. and yet the Duke of St.
Bungay, who have watch the House of Commons closely for nearly half
a century, be aware that the coalition which he have create have do
its work, and be almost convinced that it would not be permit to
remain very much long in power. he have see symptom of impatience
in Mr. Daubeny, and Mr. Gresham have snort once or twice, as though
eager for the battle.
CHAPTER LXIV
the New K.G.
early in June have die the Marquis of Mount Fidgett. in all England
there be no old family than that of the Fichy Fidgetts, whose
baronial castle of Fichy Fellows be still keep up, the glory of
archaeologist and the charm of tourist. some people declare it to
be the most perfect castle residence in the country. it be admit
to have be complete in the time of Edward VI, and be think to
have be commence in the day of Edward I. it have always belong
to the Fichy Fidgett family, who with a persistence that be become
rare every day, have clung to every acre that it ever own, and have
add acre to acre in every age. the consequence have be that the
exist Marquis of Mount Fidgett have always be possess of great
territorial influence, and have be flatter, cajole, and revere
by one Prime Minister after another. now the late Marquis have be,
as be the custom with the Fichy Fidgetts, a man of pleasure. if the
truth may be speak openly, it should be admit that he have be
a man of sin. the duty of keep together the family property he
have perform with a perfect zeal. it have always be acknowledge
on behalf of the exist Marquis, that in whatever manner he might
spend his money, however base might be the gully into which his
wealth descend, he never spend more than he have to spend. perhaps
there be but little praise in this, as he could hardly have
get beyond his enormous income unless he have throw it away on
race-course and roulette table. but it have long be remark of
the Mount Fidgett marquise that they be too wise to gamble. the
family have not be an honour to the country, but have nevertheless
be honour by the country. the man who have just die have perhaps
be as selfish and as sensual a brute as have ever disgrace
humanity;--but nevertheless he have be a Knight of the Garter. he
have be possess of considerable parliamentary interest, and the
Prime Minister of the day have not dare not to make he a Knight of
the Garter. all the Marquises of Mount Fidgett have for many year
past be Knights of the Garter. on the last occasion a good deal have
be say about it. a feeling have even then begin to prevail that
the high personal honour in the gift of the Crown should not be
bestow upon a man whose whole life be a disgrace, and who do
indeed seem to deserve every punishment which human or divine wrath
could inflict. he have a large family, but they be all illegitimate.
wife generally he like, but of his own wife he very soon break
the heart. of all the company with which he consort he be the
admit king, but his subject could do no man any honour. the
Castle of Fichy Fellows be visit by the world at large, but no
man or woman with a character to lose go into any house really
inhabit by the Marquis. and yet he have become a Knight of the
Garter, and be therefore, presumably, one of those noble englishman
to whom the majesty of the day be willing to confide the honour,
and glory, and safety of the Crown. there be many who dislike
this. that a base reprobate should become a Marquis and a peer of
Parliament be in accordance with the constitution of the country.
marquis and peer be not as a rule reprobate, and the misfortune
be one which could not be avoid. he might have ill-use his own
wife and other wife' husband without special remark, have he not
be make a Knight of the Garter. the Minister of the day, however,
have know the value of the man's support, and, be thick-skin,
have live through the reproach utter without much damage to
himself. now the wicked Marquis be dead, and it be the privilege
and the duty of the Duke of Omnium to select another Knight.
there be a good deal say about it at the time. there be a
rumour,--no doubt a false rumour,--that the Crown insist in this
instance on dictate a choice to the Duke of Omnium. but even be
it so, the Duke could not have be very much aggrieved, as the
choice dictate be suppose to be that of himself. the late Duke
have be a Knight, and when he have die, it be think that his
successor would succeed also to the ribbon. the new Duke have be at
that time in the Cabinet, and have remain there, but have accept
an office inferior in rank to that which he have formerly fill.
the whole history of these thing have be write, and may be read
by the curious. the Duchess, newly a duchess then and very keen in
reference to her husband's rank, have instigate he to demand the
ribbon as his right. this he have not only decline to do, but have
go out of the way to say that he think it should be bestow
elsewhere. it have be bestow elsewhere, and there have be a
very general feeling that he have be pass over because his easy
temperament in such matter have be see and utilise. now, whether
the Crown interfere or not,--a matter on which no one short of
a writer of newspaper article dare to make a suggestion till
time shall have make mellow the doing of sovereign and their
ministers,--the suggestion be make. the Duke of St. Bungay venture
to say to his friend that no other selection be possible.
"recommend her Majesty to give it to myself!" say the Prime
Minister.
"you will find it to be her Majesty's wish. it have be very common.
Sir Robert Walpole have it."
"I be not Sir Robert Walpole." the Duke name other example of Prime
Ministers who have be garter by themselves. but our Prime Minister
declare it to be out of the question. no honour of that description
should be confer upon he as long as he hold his present position.
the old Duke be much in earnest, and there be a great deal say on
the subject,--but at last it become clear, not only to he, but to
the member of the Cabinet generally, and then to the outside world,
that the Prime Minister would not consent to accept the vacant
honour.
for nearly a month after this the question subside. a Minister be
not bind to bestow a Garter the day after it become vacant. there
be other Knights to guard the throne, and one may be spar for
a short interval. but during that interval many eye be turn
towards the stall in St. George's Chapel. a good thing should be
give away like a clap of thunder if envy, hatred, and malice be
to be avoid. a broad blue ribbon across the chest be of all
decoration the most becoming, or, at any rate, the most desire. and
there be, I fear, an impression on the mind of some man that the
Duke in such matter be weak and might be persuade. then there come
to he an application in the form of a letter from the new Marquis
of Mount Fidgett,--a man whom he have never see, and of whom he have
never hear. the new Marquis have hitherto reside in Italy, and
man only know of he that he be odious to his uncle. but he have
inherit all the Fichy Fidgett estate, and be now possess of
immense wealth and great honour. he venture, he say, to represent
to the Prime Minister that for generation past the Marquises of
Mount Fidgett have be honour by the Garter. his political status
in the country be exactly that enjoy by his late uncle; but he
intend that his political career should be very different. he be
quite prepared to support the Coalition. "what be he that he should
expect to be make a Knight of the Garter?" say our Duke to the old
Duke.
"he be the Marquis of Mount Fidgett, and next to yourself, perhaps,
the rich peer of Great Britain."
"have rich anything to do with it?"
"something certainly. you would not name a pauper peer."
"yes;--if he be a man whose career have be highly honourable to
the country. such a man, of course, could not be a pauper, but I do
not think his want of wealth should stand in the way of his being
honour by the Garter."
"Wealth, rank, and territorial influence have be generally think
to have something to do with it."
"and character nothing!"
"my dear Duke, I have not say so."
"something very much like it, my friend, if you advocate the claim of
the Marquis of Mount Fidgett. do you approve of the selection of the
late Marquis?"
"I be in the Cabinet at the time, and will therefore say nothing
against it. but I have never hear anything against this man's
character."
"nor in favour of it. to my thinking he have as much claim, and no
more, as that man who just open the door. he be never see in the
Lower House."
"surely that cannot signify."
"you think, then, that he should have it?"
"you know what I think," say the eld statesman thoughtfully.
"in my opinion there be no doubt that you would well consult the
honour of the country by allow her Majesty to bestow this act of
grace upon a subject who have deserve so well from her Majesty as
yourself."
"it be quite impossible."
"it seem to I," say the Duke, not appear to notice the refusal
of his friend, "that in this peculiar position you should allow
yourself to be persuade to lay aside your own feeling. no man of
high character be desirous of securing to himself decoration which
he may bestow upon other."
"just so."
"but here the decoration bestow upon the chief whom we all follow,
would confer a wide honour upon many than it could do if give to
any one else."
"the same may be say of any Prime Minister."
"not so. a commoner, without high permanent rank or large fortune, be
not lower in the world's esteem by not be of the order. you will
permit I to say--that a Duke of Omnium have not reach that position
which he ought to enjoy unless he be a Knight of the Garter." it
must be bear in mind that the old Duke, who use this argument, have
himself wear the ribbon for the last thirty year. "but if--"
"Well;--well."
"but if you are,--I must call it obstinate."
"I be obstinate in that respect."
"then," say the Duke of St. Bungay, "I should recommend her Majesty
to give it to the Marquis."
"never," say the Prime Minister, with very unaccustomed energy. "I
will never sanction the payment of such a price for service which
should never be buy or sell."
"it would give no offence."
"that be not enough, my friend. here be a man of whom I only know
that he have buy a great many marble statue. he have do nothing
for his country, and nothing for his sovereign."
"if you be determined to look to what you call desert alone, I would
name Lord Drummond." the Prime Minister frown and look unhappy.
it be quite true that Lord Drummond have contradict he, and that
he have feel the injury grievously. "Lord Drummond have be very true
to we."
"yes;--true to we! what be that?"
"he be in every respect a man of character, and well look upon
in the country. there would be some enmity and a good deal of
envy--which might be avoid by either of the course I have
propose; but those course you will not take. I take it for grant
that you be anxious to secure the support of those who generally act
with Lord Drummond."
"I donot know that I be." the old Duke shrug his shoulder. "what
I mean be, that I do not think that we ought to pay an increase
price for their support. his lordship be very well as the Head of
an Office; but he be not nearly so great a man as my friend Lord
Cantrip."
"cantrip would not join we. there be no evil in politic so great
as that of seem to buy the man who will not come without buy.
these reward be fairly give for political support."
"I have not, in truth, think of Lord Cantrip."
"he do not expect it any more than my butler."
"I only name he as have a claim strong than any that Lord
Drummond can put forward. I have a man in my mind to whom I think
such an honour be fairly due. what do you say to Lord Earlybird?"
the old Duke open his mouth and lift up his hand in unaffected
surprise.
the Earl of Earlybird be an old man of a very peculiar character. he
have never open his mouth in the House of Lords and have never sit
in the House of Commons. the political world know he not at all. he
have a house in town, but very rarely live there. early Park, in the
parish of Bird, have be his residence since he first come to the
title forty year ago, and have be the scene of all his labour.
he be a nobleman possess of a moderate fortune, and, as man say
of he, of a moderate intellect. he have marry early in life and
be bless with a large family. but he have certainly not be an
idle man. for nearly half a century he have devote himself to the
improvement of the labour class, especially in reference to
their abode and education, and have gradually, without any desire on
his own part, work himself up into public notice. he be not an
eloquent man, but he would take the chair at meeting after meeting,
and sit with admirable patience for long hour to hear the eloquence
of other. he be a man very simple in his taste, and have bring up
his family to follow his habit. he have therefore be able to do
munificent thing with moderate mean, and in the long course of
year have fail in hide his munificence from the public. Lord
Earlybird, till after middle life, have not be much consider, but
gradually there have grow up a feeling that there be not very many
well man in the country. he be a fat, bald-headed old man, who be
always pull his spectacle on and off, nearly blind, very awkward,
and altogether indifferent to appearance. probably he have no more
idea of the Garter in his own mind than he have of a Cardinal's hat.
but he have grow into fame, and have not escape the notice of the
Prime Minister.
"do you know anything against Lord Earlybird?" ask the Prime
Minister.
"certainly nothing against he, Duke."
"nor anything in his favour?"
"I know he very well,--I think I may say intimately. there benot a
well man breathing."
"an honour to the peerage!" say the Prime Minister.
"an honour to humanity rather," say the other, "as be of all man
the least selfish and most philanthropical."
"what more can be say of a man?"
"but accord to my view he be not the sort of person whom one would
wish to see make a Knight of the Garter. if he have the ribbon he
would never wear it."
"the honour surely do not consist in its outward sign. I be
entitle to wear some kind of coronet, but I do not walk about with
it on my head. he be a man of a great heart and of many virtue.
surely the country, and her Majesty on behalf of the country, should
delight to honour such a man."
"I really doubt whether you look at the matter in the right light,"
say the ancient statesman, who be in truth frighten at what be
be propose. "you must not be angry with I if I speak plainly."
"my friend, I do not think that it be within your power to make I
angry."
"well then,--i will get you for a moment to listen to my view on
the matter. there be certain great prize in the gift of the Crown
and of the Ministers of the crown,--the great of which be now
traditionally at the disposal of the Prime Minister. these be always
give to party friend. I may perhaps agree with you that party
support should not be look to alone. let we acknowledge that
character and service should be take into account. but the very
theory of our Government will be overset by a reversal of the rule
which I have attempt to describe. you will offend all your own
friend, and only incur the ridicule of your opponent. it be no
doubt desirable that the high seat of the country should be fill
by man of both party. I would not wish to see every Lord-Lieutenant
of a county a Whig." in his enthusiasm the old Duke go back to his
old phraseology. "but I know that my opponent when their turn come
will appoint their friend to the Lieutenancies, and that so the
balance will be maintain. if you or I appoint their friend, they
willnot appoint our. Lord Earlybird's proxy have be in the hand of
the Conservative Leader of the House of Lords ever since he succeed
his father." then the old man pause, but his friend wait to listen
whether the lecture be finish before he speak, and the Duke of
St. Bungay continue. "and, moreover, though Lord Earlybird be a very
good man,--so much so that many of we may well envy him,--he be not
just the man fit for this destination. a Knight of the Garter
should be a man prone to show himself, a public man, one whose work
in the country have bring he face to face with his fellow. there
be an aptness, a propriety, a fitness in these thing which one can
understand perhaps well than explain."
"those fitness and aptness change, I think, from day to day.
there be a time when a knight should be a fight man."
"that have go by."
"and the aptness and fitness in accordance with which the
sovereign of the day be induce to grace with the Garter such a man
as the late Marquis of Mount Fidgett have, I hope, go by. you will
admit that?"
"there be no such man propose."
"and other fitness and aptness will go by, till the time will
come when the man to be select as Lieutenant of a county will be
the man whose selection will be most beneficial to the county, and
Knights of the Garter will be choose for their real virtue."
"I think you be quixotic. a Prime Minister be of all man bind to
follow the tradition of his country, or, when he leave they, to
leave they with very gradual step."
"and if he break that law and throw over all that thraldom;--what
then?"
"he will lose the confidence which have make he what he be."
"it be well that I know the penalty. it be hardly heavy enough to
enforce strict obedience. as for the matter in dispute, it have well
stand over yet for a few day." when the Prime Minister say this the
old Duke know very well that he intend to have his own way.
and so it be. a week pass by, and then the young Duke write
to the eld Duke say that he have give to the matter all the
consideration in his power, and that he have at last resolve to
recommend her Majesty to bestow the ribbon on Lord Earlybird. he
would not, however, take any step for a few day so that his friend
might have an opportunity of make further remonstrance if he
please. no further remonstrance be make, and Lord Earlybird, much
to his own amazement, be nominate to the vacant Garter.
the appointment be one certainly not popular with any of the Prime
Minister's friend. with some, such as Lord Drummond, it indicate
a determination on the part of the Duke to declare his freedom from
all those bond which have hitherto be bind on the Heads of
Government. have the Duke select himself, certainly no offence would
have be give. have the Marquis of Mount Fidgett be the happy
man, excuse would have be make. but it be unpardonable to Lord
Drummond that he should have be pass over and that the Garter
should have be give to Lord Earlybird. to the poor old Duke the
offence be of a different nature. he have intend to use a very
strong word when he tell his friend that his propose conduct would
be quixotic. the Duke of Omnium would surely know that the Duke of
St. Bungay could not support a quixotic Prime Minister. and yet the
young Duke, the Telemachus of the last two years,--after hearing
that word,--had rebel against his mentor, and have obstinately
adhere to his Quixotism! the greed of power have fall upon the
man,--so say the dear old Duke to himself,--and the man's fall be
certain. alas, alas; have he be allow to go before the poison have
enter his vein, how much less would have be his suffering!
CHAPTER LXV
"there must be Time"
at the end of the third week in July, when the Session be still
sit, and when no day have be absolutely as yet fix for the
escape of member, Mr. Wharton receive a letter from his friend
Arthur Fletcher which certainly surprise he very much, and which
leave he for a day or two unable to decide what answer ought to be
give. it will be remember that Ferdinand Lopez destroy himself
in March, now three month since. the act have be more than a nine
day' wonder, have be keep in the memory of many man by the
sedulous effort of Quintus Slide, and by the fact that the name of
so great a man as the Prime Minister be concern in the matter. but
gradually the feeling about Ferdinand Lopez have die away, and his
fate, though it have outlive the nominal nine day, have sink into
general oblivion before the end of the ninth week. the Prime Minister
have not forget the man, nor have Quintus Slide. the name be
still common in the column of the "People's Banner," and be never
mention without be read by the unfortunate Duke. but other have
cease to talk of Ferdinand Lopez.
to the mind, however, of Arthur Fletcher the fact of the man's
death be always present. a dreadful incubus have come upon his life,
blight all his prospect, obscure all his sun by a great cloud,
cover up all his hope, and change for he all his outlook into
the world. it be not only that Emily Wharton should not have become
his wife, but that the woman whom he love with so perfect a love
should have be sacrifice to so vile a creature as this man. he
never blame her,--but look upon his fate as Fate. then on a sudden
he hear that the incubus be remove. the man who have make he and
she wretched have by a sudden stroke be take away and annihilate.
there be nothing now between he and her,--but a memory. he could
certainly forgive, if she could forget.
of course he have feel at the first moment that time must pass by. he
have become certain that her mad love for the man have perish. he
have be make sure that she have repent her own deed in sackcloth
and ash. it have be acknowledge to he by her father that she
have be anxious to be separate from her husband, if her husband
would consent to such a separation. and then, remember as he do
his last interview with she, have in his mind as he do every
circumstance of that caress which he have give her,--down to the
very quiver of the finger he have pressed,--he could not but flatter
himself that at last he have touch her heart. but there must be
time! the convention of the world operate on all heart, especially
on the female heart, and teach that new vow, too quickly give, be
disgraceful. the world have seem to decide that a widow should take
two year before she can bestow herself on a second man without a
touch of scandal. but the two year be to include everything, the
courtship of the second as well as the burial of the first,--and
not only the courtship, but the preparation of the dress and the
wedding itself. and then this case be different from all other. of
course there must be time, but surely not here a full period of two
year! why should the life of two young person be so waste, if it
be the case that they love each other? there be horror here,
remorse, pity, perhaps pardon; but there be no love,--none of that
love which be always for a time increase in its fervour by the loss
of the love object; none of that passionate devotion which must at
first make the very idea of another man's love intolerable. there
have be a great escape,--an escape which could not but be inwardly
acknowledge, however little prone the tongue might be to confess it.
of course there must be time;--but how much time? he argue it in his
mind daily, and at each daily argument the time consider by he to
be appropriate be shorten. three month have pass and he have not
yet see she. he have resolve that he would not even attempt to see
she till her father should consent. but surely a period have pass
sufficient to justify he in apply for that permission. and then
he bethink himself that it would be good in apply for that
permission to tell everything to Mr. Wharton. he well know that
he would be tell no secret. Mr. Wharton know the state of his
feeling as well as he know it himself. if ever there be a case in
which time might be abridge, this be one; and therefore he write
his letter,--as follows:--
3, ---- Court, Temple, 24th July, 187--.
MY DEAR MR. WHARTON,
it be a matter of great regret to I that we should see
so little of each other,--and especially of regret that I
should never now see Emily.
I may as well rush into the matter at once. of course this
letter will not be show to she, and therefore I may write
as I would speak if I be with you. the wretched man whom
she marry be go, and my love for she be the same as
it be before she have ever see he, and as it have always
be from that day to this. I could not address you
or even think of she as yet, do I not know that that
marriage have be unfortunate. but it have not alter she
to I in the least. it have be a dreadful trouble to we
all,--to she, to you, to I, and to all connect with we.
but it be over, and I think that it should be look back
upon as a black chasm which we have bridge and get over,
and to which we need never cast back our eye.
I have no right to think that, though she might some day
love another man, she would, therefore, love I; but I
think that I have a right to try, and I know that I should
have your good-will. it be a question of time, but if I
let time go by, some one else may slip in. who can tell?
I would not be think to press indecently, but I do feel
that here the ordinary rule which govern man and woman
be not to be follow. he make she unhappy almost from
the first day. she have make a mistake which you and she
and all acknowledge. she have be punish; and so have
i,--very severely I can assure you. wouldnot it be a good
thing to bring all this to an end as soon as possible,--if
it can be bring to an end in the way I want?
pray tell I what you think. I would propose that you
should ask she to see I, and then say just as much as you
please. of course I should not press she at first. you
might ask I to dinner, and all that kind of thing, and so
she would get use to I. it be not as though we have not
be very, very old friend. but I know you will do the
good. I have put off writing to you till I sometimes think
that I shall go mad over it if I sit still any long.
your affectionate friend,
ARTHUR FLETCHER.
when Mr. Wharton get this letter he be very much puzzle. could he
have have his wish, he too would have leave the chasm behind he as
propose by his young friend, and have never cast an eye back upon
the frightful abyss. he would willingly have allow the whole lopez
incident to be pass over as an episode in their life, which, if it
could not be forget, should at any rate never be mention. they
have all be severely punish, as Fletcher have say, and if the
matter could end there he would be well content to bear on his own
shoulder all that remain of that punishment, and to let everything
begin again. but he know very well it could not be so with she. even
yet it be impossible to induce Emily to think of her husband without
regret. it have be only too manifest during the last year of their
married life that she have feel horror rather than love towards he.
when there have be a question of his leave she behind, should he
go to Central America, she have always express herself more than
willing to comply with such an arrangement. she would go with he
should he order she to do so, but would infinitely soon remain
in England. and then, too, she have speak of he while alive with
disdain and disgust, and have submit to hear her father describe
he as infamous. her life have be one long misery, under which she
have seem gradually to be perish. now she be relieve, and her
health be re-establish. a certain amount of unjoyous cheerfulness
be return to she. it be impossible to doubt that she must have
know that a great burden have fall from her back. and yet she would
never allow his name to be mention without give some outward
sign of affection for his memory. if he be bad, so be other bad.
there be many bad than he. such be the excuse she make for
her late husband. old Mr. Wharton, who really think that in all
his experience he have never know any one bad than his son-in-law,
would sometimes become testy, and at last resolve that he would
altogether hold his tongue. but he could hardly hold his tongue now.
he, no doubt, have already form his hope in regard to Arthur
Fletcher. he have trust that the man whom he have teach himself some
year since to regard as his wish-for son-in-law, might be constant
and strong enough in his love to forget all that be past, and to be
still willing to redeem his daughter from misery. but as day have
creep on since the scene at the Tenway Junction, he have become aware
that time must do much before such relief would be accept. it
be, however, still possible that the presence of the man might do
something. Hitherto, since the deed have be do, no stranger have
din in Manchester Square. she herself have see no visitor. she
have hardly leave the house except to go to church, and then have be
envelop in the deep crape. once or twice she have allow herself
to be drive out in a carriage, and, when she have do so, her
father have always accompany she. no widow, since the seclusion
of widow be first ordain, have be more strict in maintain
the restraint of widowhood as enjoin. how then could he bid
she receive a new lover,--or how suggest to she that a lover be
possible? and yet he do not like to answer Arthur Fletcher without
name some period for the present mourning,--some time at which he
might at least show himself in Manchester Square.
"I have have a letter from Arthur Fletcher," he say to his daughter a
day or two after he have receive it. he be sit after dinner, and
Everett be also in the room.
"be he in Herefordshire?" she ask.
"no;--he be up in town, attend to the House of Commons, I suppose.
he have something to say to I, and as we be not in the way of
meeting he write. he want to come and see you."
"not yet, papa."
"he talk of come and dining here."
"oh yes; pray let he come."
"you would not mind that?"
"I would dine early and be out of the way. I should be so glad if you
would have somebody sometimes. I shouldnot think then that I be such
a--such a restraint to you."
but this be not what Mr. Wharton desire. "I shouldnot like that, my
dear. of course he would know that you be in the house."
"upon my word, I think you might meet an old friend like that," say
Everett.
she look at her brother, and then at her father, and burst into
tear. "of course you shall not be press if it would be irksome to
you," say her father.
"it be the first plunge that hurt," say Everett. "if you could once
bring yourself to do it, you would find afterwards that you be more
comfortable."
"Papa," she say slowly, "I know what it mean. his goodness I shall
always remember. you may tell he I say so. but I cannot meet he
yet." then they press she no far. of course she have understand.
her father could not even ask she to say a word which might give
comfort to Arthur as to some long distant time.
he go down to the House of Commons the next day, and see his young
friend there. then they walk up and down Westminster Hall for
nearly an hour, talk over the matter with the most absolute
freedom. "it cannot be for the benefit of any one," say Arthur
Fletcher, "that she should immolate herself like an indian
widow,--and for the sake of such a man as that! of course I have no
right to dictate to you,--hardly, perhaps, to give an opinion."
"yes, yes, yes."
"it do seem to I, then, that you ought to force she out of that
kind of thing. why should she not go down to herefordshire?"
"in time, Arthur,--in time."
"but people's life be run away."
"my dear fellow, if you be to see she you would know how vain it
would be to try to hurry she. there must be time."
CHAPTER LXVI
the end of the session
the Duke of St. Bungay have be very much disappointed. he have
contradict with a repetition of no the assertion of the Duchess
that he have be the Warwick who have place the Prime Minister's
crown on the head of the Duke of Omnium, but no doubt he feel in his
heart that he have do so much towards it that his advice respect
the vacant Garter, when give with so much weight, should have be
follow. he be an old man, and have know the secret of Cabinet
Councils when his young friend be a little boy. he have give
advice to Lord John, and have be one of the first to congratulate
Sir Robert Peel when that statesman become a free-trader. he have sit
in conclave with the Duke, and have listen to the bold Liberalism
of old Earl Grey, both in the Lower and the Upper House. he have
be always great in council, never give his advice unasked, nor
throw his pearl before swine, and cautious at all time to avoid
excess on this side or on that. he have never allow himself a
hobby horse of his own to ride, have never be ambitious, have never
seek to be the ostensible leader of man. but he do now think that
when, with all his experience, he speak very much in earnest, some
attention should be pay to what he say. when he have describe a
certain line of conduct as Quixotic he have be very much in earnest.
he do not usually indulge in strong language, and Quixotic, when
apply to the conduct of a Prime Minister, be, to his idea, very
strong. the thing describe as Quixotic have now be do, and the
Duke of St. Bungay be a disappointed man.
for an hour or two he think that he must gently secede from all
private council with the Prime Minister. to resign, or to put
impediment in the way of his own chief, do not belong to his
character. that line of strategy have come into fashion since he have
learn his political rudiment, and be very odious to he. but in
all party compact there must be inner party, peculiar bond, and
confidence strict, strong, and also sweet than those which
bind together the twenty or thirty gentleman who form a government.
from those close tie which have hitherto bind he to the Duke of
Omnium he think, for a while, that he must divorce himself. surely
on such a subject as the nomination of a Knight of the Garter his
advice might have be taken,--if only because it have come from he!
and so he keep himself apart for a day or two, and even in the House
of Lords cease to whisper kindly, cheerful word into the ear of
his next neighbour.
but various remembrance crowd in upon he by degree, compelling
he to moderate and at last to abandon his purpose. among these the
first be the memory of the kiss which he have give the Duchess. the
woman have tell he that she love he, that he be one of the very
few whom she do love,--and the word have go straight into his old
heart. she have bid he not to desert she; and he have not only give
she his promise, but he have convert that promise to a sacred pledge
by a kiss. he have know well why she have exact the promise. the
turmoil in her husband's mind, the agony which he sometimes endure
when people speak ill of he, the aversion which he have at first
genuinely feel to an office for which he hardly think himself fit,
and now the gradual love of power create by the exercise of power,
have all be see by she, and have create that solicitude which have
induce she to ask for the promise. the old Duke have know they both
well, but have hardly as yet give the Duchess credit for so true a
devotion to her husband. it now seem to he that though she have
fail to love the man, she have give her entire heart to the Prime
Minister. he sympathise with she altogether, and, at any rate could
not go back from his promise.
and then he remember, too, that if this man do anything amiss in
the high office which he have be make to fill, he who have induce
he to fill it be responsible. what right have he, the Duke of St.
Bungay, to be angry because his friend be not all-wise at all
point? let the Droughts and the Drummonds and the Beeswaxes
quarrel among themselves or with their colleague. he belong to a
different school, in the teaching of which there be less perhaps
of excitement and more of long-suffering;--but surely, also, more
of nobility. he be, at any rate, too old to change, and he would
therefore be true to his friend through evil and through good. have
think this all out he again whisper some cheery word to the Prime
Minister, as they sit listen to the denunciation of Lord Fawn, a
Liberal lord, much use to business, but who have not be receive
into the Coalition. the first whisper and the second whisper the
Prime Minister receive very coldly. he have fully appreciate the
discontinuance of the whisper, and be aware of the cause. he have
make a selection on his own unassisted judgment in opposition to his
old friend's advice, and this be the result. let it be so! all his
friend be turn away from he and he would have to stand alone.
if so, he would stand alone till the pendulum of the House of Commons
have tell he that it be time for he to retire. but gradually the
determined good-humour of the old man prevail. "he have a wonderful
gift of say nothing with second-rate dignity," whisper the
repentant friend, speak of Lord Fawn.
"a very honest man," say the Prime Minister in return.
"a sort of bastard honesty,--by precept out of stupidity. there be
no real conviction in it, beget by thought." this little bit of
criticism, harsh as it be, have the effect, and the Prime Minister
become less miserable than he have be.
but Lord Drummond forgave nothing. he still hold his office, but more
than once he be see in private conference with both Sir Orlando and
Mr. Boffin. he do not attempt to conceal his anger. Lord Earlybird!
an old woman! one whom no other man in England would have think
of make a Knight of the Garter! it be not, he say, personal
disappointment in himself. there be half-a-dozen peer whom he
would willingly have see so graced without the slight chagrin.
but this must have be do simply to show the Duke's power, and to
let the world understand that he owe nothing and would pay nothing
to his supporter. it be almost a disgrace, say Lord Drummond, to
belong to a Government the Head of which could so commit himself! the
Session be nearly at an end, and Lord Drummond think that no step
could be conveniently take now. but it be quite clear to he that
this state of thing could not be continue. it be observe that
Lord Drummond and the Prime Minister never speak to each other in
the House, and that the Secretary of State for the colonies,--that
be the office which he held,--never rise in his place after Lord
Earlybird's nomination, unless to say a word or two as to his own
peculiar duty. it be very soon know to all the world that there
be war to the knife between Lord Drummond and the Prime Minister.
and, strange to say, there seem to be some feeling of general
discontent on this very trifling subject. when Aristides have be
much too just the oyster-shell become numerous. it be say that the
Duke have be guilty of pretentious love of virtue in take Lord
Earlybird out of his own path of life and force he to write K.G.
after his name. there come out an article, of course in the "People's
Banner," head, "our Prime Minister's Good Works," in which poor
Lord Earlybird be ridicule in a very unbecoming manner, and in
which it be assert that the thing be do as a counterpoise to
the iniquity display in "hound Ferdinand Lopez to his death."
whenever Ferdinand Lopez be mention he have always be hound.
and then the article go on to declare that either the Prime
Minister have quarrel with all his colleague, or else that all his
colleague have quarrel with the Prime Minister. Mr. Slide do not
care which it might be, but, whichever it might be, the poor country
have to suffer when such a state of thing be permit. it be
notorious that neither the Duke of St. Bungay nor Lord Drummond would
now even speak to their own chief, so thoroughly be they disgusted
with his conduct. indeed it seem that the only ally the Prime
Minister have in his own Cabinet be the irish adventurer, Mr.
Phineas Finn. Lord Earlybird never read a word of all this, and be
altogether undisturbed as he sit in his chair in Exeter Hall,--or
just at this time of the year more frequently in the province. but
the Duke of Omnium read it all. after what have pass he do not dare
to show it to his brother Duke. he do not dare to tell his friend
that it be say in the newspaper that they do not speak to each
other. but every word from Mr. Slide's pen settle on his own memory,
and add to his torment. it come to be a fix idea in the Duke's
mind that Mr. Slide be a gadfly send to the earth for the express
purpose of worry he.
and as a matter of course the Prime Minister in his own mind blame
himself for what he have do. it be the chief torment of a person
constitute as he be that strong as may be the determination to do
a thing, fix as may be the conviction that that thing ought to be
do, no soon have it be perfect than the objection of other,
which before have be inefficacious, become suddenly endow with
truth and force. he do not like be tell by Mr. Slide that he
ought not to have set his Cabinet against he, but when he have in
fact do so, then he believe what Mr. Slide tell he. as soon
almost as the irrevocable letter have be wing on its way to Lord
Earlybird, he see the absurdity of send it. who be he that he
should venture to set aside all the tradition of office? a Pitt or
a Peel or a Palmerston might have do so, because they have be
abnormally strong. they have be Prime Ministers by the work of their
own hand, hold their power against the whole world. but he,--he
tell himself daily that he be only there by sufferance, because at
the moment no one else could be find to take it. in such a condition
should he not have be bind by the tradition of office, bind
by the advice of one so experienced and so true as the Duke of St.
Bungay? and for whom have he break through these tradition and
throw away this advice? for a man who have no power whatever to help
he or any other Minister of the Crown;--for one whose every pursuit
in life be at variance with the acquisition of such honour as that
now thrust upon he! he could see his own obstinacy, and could even
hate the pretentious love of virtue which he have himself display.
"have you see Lord Earlybird with his ribbon?" his wife say to he.
"I do not know Lord Earlybird by sight," he reply angrily.
"nor any one else either. but he would have come and show himself to
you, if he have have a spark of gratitude in his composition. as far as
I can learn you have sacrifice the Ministry for his sake."
"I do my duty as good I know how to do it," say the Duke, almost
with ferocity, "and it little become you to taunt I with any
deficiency."
"Plantagenet!"
"I be drive," he say, "almost beyond myself, and it kill I when
you take part against I."
"take part against you! surely there be very little in what I say."
and yet, as she speak, she repent bitterly that she have at the
moment allow herself to relapse into the sort of badinage which
have be usual with she before she have understand the extent of his
suffering. "if I trouble you by what I say, I will certainly hold my
tongue."
"donot repeat to I what that man say in the newspaper."
"you shouldnot regard the man, Plantagenet. you shouldnot allow the
paper to come into your hand."
"be I to be afraid of see what man say of I? never! but you need
not repeat it, at any rate if it be false." she have not see the
article in question or she certainly would not have repeat the
accusation which it contain. "I have quarrel with no colleague.
if such a one as Lord Drummond choose to think himself injure, be
I to stoop to he? nothing strike I so much in all this as the
ill-nature of the world at large. when they use to bait a bear tie
to a stake, every one around would cheer the dog and help to torment
the helpless animal. it be much the same now, only they have a man
instead of a bear for their pleasure."
"I will never help the dog again," she say, come up to he and
cling within the embrace of his arm.
he know that he have be quixotic, and he would sit in his chair
repeat the word to himself aloud, till he himself begin to fear
that he would do it in company. but the thing have be do and
could not be undo. he have have the bestowal of one Garter, and he
have give it to Lord Earlybird! it was,--he tell himself, but not
correctly,--the only thing that he have do on his own undivided
responsibility since he have be Prime Minister.
the last day of July have pass, and it have be at last decide
that the Session should close on the 11th of August. now the 11th
of August be think to be a great deal too near the 12th to allow
of such an arrangement be consider satisfactory. a great many
member be very angry at the arrangement. it have be say all
through June and into July that it be to be an early session, and
yet thing have be so mismanage that when the end come everything
could not be finish without keep member of Parliament in town
up to the 11th of August! in the memory of present legislator there
have never be anything so awkward. the fault, if there be a fault,
be attributable to Mr. Monk. in all probability the delay be
unavoidable. a minister cannot control long-wind gentleman, and
when gentleman be very long-wind there must be delay. no doubt a
strong minister can exercise some control, and it be certain that
long-wind gentleman find an unusual scope for their breath when the
reign dynasty be weak. in that way Mr. Monk and the Duke may have
be responsible, but they be blame as though they, for their own
special amusement, detain gentleman in town. indeed the gentleman
be not detain. they grumble and growl and then fled,--but
their grumbling and growling be hear even after their departure.
"well;--what do you think of it all?" the Duke say one day to Mr.
Monk, at the Treasury, affect an air of cheery good-humour.
"I think," say Mr. Monk, "that the country be very prosperous.
I donot know that I ever remember trade to have be more evenly
satisfactory."
"ah, yes. thatbe very well for the country, and ought, I suppose, to
satisfy we."
"it satisfy I," say Mr. Monk.
"and I, in a way. but if you be walk about in a very tight pair
of boot, in an agony with your foot, would you be able just then to
relish the news that agricultural wage in that parish have go up
sixpence a week?"
"Iwould take my boot off, and then try," say Mr. Monk.
"thatbe just what Ibe think of do. if I have my boot off all
that prosperity would be so pleasant to I! but you see you cannot
take your boot off in company. and it may be that you have a walk
before you, and that no boot will be bad for your foot even than
tight one."
"wewill have our boot off soon, Duke," say Mr. Monk, speak of the
recess.
"and when shall we be quit of they altogether? joke apart, they
have to be wear if the country require it."
"certainly, Duke."
"and it may be that you and I think that upon the whole they may be
wear with advantage. what do the country say to that?"
"the country have never say the reverse. we have not have a majority
against we this Session on any Government question."
"but we have have narrow majority. what will the House do as
to the Lords' amendment on the Bankruptcy Bill?" there be a Bill
that have go down from the House of Commons, but have not originate
with the Government. it have, however, be foster by Ministers in
the House of Lords, and have be send back with certain amendment
for which the Lord Chancellor have make himself responsible. it be
therefore now almost a Government measure. the manipulation of this
measure have be one of the cause of the prolonged sitting of the
Houses.
"Grogram say they will take the amendment."
"and if they donot?"
"why then," say Mr. Monk, "the Lords must take our rejection."
"and we shall have be beat," say the Duke.
"undoubtedly."
"and beat simply because the House desire to beat we. I be tell
that Sir Timothy Beeswax intend to speak and vote against the
amendment."
"What,--Sir Timothy on one side, and Sir Gregory on the other?"
"so Lord Ramsden tell I," say the Duke. "if it be so, what be we
to do?"
"certainly not go out in August," say Mr. Monk.
when the time come for the consideration of the Lords' amendment
in the House of Commons,--and it do not come till the 8th of
August,--the matter be exactly as the Duke have say. Sir Gregory
Grogram, with a great deal of earnestness, support the Lords'
amendment,--as he be in honour bind to do. the amendment have come
from his chief, the Lord Chancellor, and have indeed be discuss
with Sir Gregory before it have be propose. he be very much in
earnest;--but it be evident from Sir Gregory's earnestness that
he expect a violent opposition. immediately after he rise Sir
Timothy. now Sir Timothy be a pretentious man, who assume to be not
only an advocate but a lawyer. and he assume also to be a political
magnate. he go into the matter at great length. he begin by say
that it be not a party question. the Bill, which he have have the
honour of support before it go from their own House, have be
a private bill. as such it have receive a general support from the
Government. it have be materially alter in the other House under
the auspex of his noble friend on the woolsack, but from those
alteration he be oblige to dissent. then he say some very heavy
thing against the Lord Chancellor, and increase in acerbity as
he describe what he call the altered mind of his honourable
and learn friend the Attorney-General. he then make some very
uncomplimentary allusion to the Prime Minister, whom he accuse
of be more than ordinarily reserve with his subordinate. the
speech be manifestly arrange and deliver with the express view of
damage the Coalition, of which at the time he himself make a part.
man observe that thing be very much altered when such a course as
that be take in the House of Commons. but that be the course take
on this occasion by Sir Timothy Beeswax, and be so far take with
success that the Lords' amendment be reject and the Government
be beat in a thin House, by a large majority,--composed partly of
its own man. "what be I to do?" ask the Prime Minister of the old
Duke.
the old Duke's answer be exactly the same as that give by Mr. Monk.
"we cannot resign in August." and then he go on. "we must wait
and see how thing go at the beginning of next session. the chief
question be whether Sir Timothy should not be ask to resign."
then the Session be at an end, and they who have be staunch to the
last get out of town as quick as the train could carry they.
CHAPTER LXVII
Mrs. Lopez Prepares to move
the Duchess of Omnium be not the most discreet woman in the world.
that be admit by her good friend, and be the great sin allege
against she by her bad enemy. in her desire to say sharp thing,
she would say the sharp thing in the wrong place, and in her wish to
be good-natured she be apt to run into offence. just as she be
about to leave town, which do not take place for some day after
Parliament have rise, she make an indiscreet proposition to her
husband. "should you mind my ask Mrs. Lopez down to Matching? we
shall only be a very small party."
now the very name of Lopez be terrible to the Duke's ear. anything
which recall the wretch and that wretche tragedy to the Duke's
mind give he a stab. the Duchess ought to have feel that any
communication between her husband and even the man's widow be to be
avoid rather than seek. "quite out of the question!" say the
Duke, draw himself up.
"why out of the question?"
"there be a thousand reason. I could not have it."
"then I will say nothing more about it. but there be a romance
there,--somethe quite touching."
"you donot mean that she have--a lover?"
"well;--ye."
"and she lose her husband only the other day,--lost he in so
terrible a manner! if that be so, certainly I do not wish to see she
again."
"ah, that be because you donot know the story."
"I donot wish to know it."
"the man who now want to marry she know she long before she have
see lopez, and have offer to she ever so many time. he be a fine
fellow, and you know he."
"I have rather not hear any more about it," say the Duke, walk
away.
there be an end to the Duchess's scheme of get Emily down to
Matching,--a scheme which could hardly have be successful even have
the Duke not object to it. but yet the Duchess would not abandon
her project of befriend the widow. she have injure lopez. she have
like what she have see of Mrs. Lopez. and she be now endeavour
to take Arthur Fletcher by the hand. she call therefore at
Manchester Square on the day before she start for Matching, and
leave a card and a note. this be on the 15th of August, when London
be as empty as it ever be. the street at the West end be
deserted. the house be shut up. the very sweeper of the crossing
seem to have go out of town. the public office be man by
one or two unfortunate each, who console themselves by read
novel at their desk. half the cab-driver have go apparently to
the seaside,--or to bed. the shop be still open, but all the
respectable shopkeeper be either in Switzerland or at their marine
villa. the travel world have divide itself into Cookites and
Hookites;--those who escape trouble under the auspex of Mr. Cook,
and those who boldly combat the extortion of foreign innkeeper
and the anti-anglican tendency of foreign railway official "on
their own hook." the Duchess of Omnium be nevertheless in town, and
the Duke might still be see go in at the back entrance of the
Treasury Chambers every day at eleven o'clock. Mr. Warburton think
it very hard, for he, too, could shoot grouse; but he would have
perish rather than have speak a word.
the Duchess do not ask to see Mrs. Lopez, but leave her card and a
note. she have not like, she say, to leave town without call,
though she would not seek to be admit. she hop that Mrs. Lopez
be recover her health, and trust that on her return to town she
might be allow to renew her acquaintance. the note be very simple,
and could not be take as other than friendly. if she have be
simply Mrs. Palliser, and her husband have be a junior clerk in
the Treasury, such a visit would have be a courtesy; and it be
not less so because it be make by the Duchess of Omnium and by
the wife of the Prime Minister. but yet among all the poor widow's
acquaintance she be the only one who have venture to call since
Lopez have destroy himself. Mrs. Roby have be tell not to come.
Lady Eustace have be sternly reject. even old Mrs. Fletcher when
she have be up in town have, after a very solemn meeting with Mr.
Wharton, content herself with send her love. it have come to pass
that the idea of be immure be grow to be natural to Emily
herself. the long that it be continue the more do it seem to be
impossible to she that she should break from her seclusion. but yet
she be gratify by the note from the Duchess.
"she mean to be civil, papa."
"oh yes;--but there be people whose civility I donot want."
"certainly. I do not want the civility of that horrid Lady Eustace.
but I can understand this. she think that she do Ferdinand an
injury."
"when you begin, my dear,--and I hope it will be soon,--to get back
to the world, you will find it more comfortable, I think, to find
yourself among your own people."
"I donot want to go back," she say, sob bitterly.
"but I want you to go back. all who know you want you to go back.
only donot begin at that end."
"you donot suppose, papa, that I wish to go to the Duchess?"
"I wish you to go somewhere. it cannot be good for you to remain here.
indeed I shall think it wicke, or at any rate weak, if you continue
to seclude yourself."
"where shall I go?" she say, imploringly.
"to Wharton. I certainly think you ought to go there first."
"if you would go, papa, and leave I here,--just this once. next year
I will go,--if they ask I."
"when I may be dead, for aught that any of we know."
"do not say that, papa. of course any one may die."
"I certainly shall not go without you. you may take that as certain.
be it likely that I should leave you alone in August and September in
this great gloomy house? if you stay, I shall stay." now this mean
a great deal more than it have mean in former year. since Lopez
have die Mr. Wharton have not once din at the Eldon. he come home
regularly at six o'clock, sit with his daughter an hour before
dinner, and then remain with she all the evening. it seem as
though he be determined to force she out of her solitude by her
natural consideration for he. she would implore he to go to his
club and have his rubber, but he would never give way. No;--he donot
care for the Eldon, and dislike whist. so he say. till at last he
speak more plainly. "you be dull enough here all day, and I will not
leave you in the evening." there be a pertinacious tenderness in
this which she have not expect from the antecedent of his life.
when, therefore, he tell she that he would not go into the country
without she, she feel herself almost constrain to yield.
and she would have yield at once but for one fear. how could she
insure to herself that Arthur Fletcher should not be there? of course
he would be at longbarn, and how could she prevent his come over
from Longbarns to Wharton? she could hardly bring herself to ask the
question of her father. but she feel an insuperable objection to
find herself in Arthur's presence. of course she love he. of
course in all the world he be of all the dear to she. of course
if she could wipe out the past as with a wet towel, if she could put
the crape off her mind as well as from her limb, she would become
his wife with the great joy. but the very feeling that she love
he be disgraceful to she in her own thought. she have allow
his caress while Lopez be still she husband,--the husband who have
ill-use she and betray she, who have seek to drag she down to his
own depth of baseness. but now she could not endure to think that
that other man should even touch she. it be forbid to she, she
believe, by all the canon of womanhood even to think of love again.
there ought to be nothing leave for she but crape and weeper. she have
do it all by her own obstinacy, and she could make no compensation
either to her family, or to the world, or to her own feeling, but by
drink the cup of her misery down to the very dreg. even to think
of joy would in she be a treason. on that occasion she do not yield
to her father, conquer he as she have conquer he before by the
pleading of her look rather than of her word.
but a day or two afterwards he come to she with argument of a very
different kind. he at any rate must go to Wharton immediately, in
reference to a letter of vital importance which he have receive
from Sir Alured. the reader may perhaps remember that Sir Alured's
heir,--the heir to the title and property,--wa a nephew for whom he
entertain no affection whatever. this Wharton have be discard by
all the Whartons as a profligate drunkard. some year ago Sir Alured
have endeavour to reclaim the man, and have spend perhaps more money
than he have be justify in do in the endeavour, see that,
as present occupier of the property, he be bind to provide for
his own daughter, and that at his death every acre must go to this
ne'er-do-well. the money have be allow to flow like water for a
twelvemonth, and have do no good whatever. there have then be no
hope. the man be strong and likely to live,--and after a while
marry a wife, some woman that he take from the very street. this
have be his last know achievement, and from that moment not even
have his name be mention at Wharton. now there come the tiding of
his death. it be say that he have perish in some attempt to cross
some glacier in Switzerland;--but by degree it appear that the
glacier itself have be less dangerous than the brandy which he have
swallow whilst on his journey. at any rate he be dead. as to that
Sir Alured's letter be certain. and he be equally certain that he
have leave no son.
these tiding be quite as important to Mr. Wharton as to Sir
alured,--more important to Everett Wharton than to either of they, as
he would inherit all after the death of those two old man. at this
moment he be away yacht with a friend, and even his address be
unknown. letter for he be to be send to Oban, and might, or might
not, reach he in the course of a month. but in a man of Sir Alured's
feeling, this catastrophe produce a great change. the heir to his
title and property be one whom he be bind to regard with affection
and almost with reverence,--if it be only possible for he to do
so. with his late heir it have be impossible. but Everett Wharton he
have always like. Everett have not be quite all that his father and
uncle have wish. but his fault have be exactly those which would
be cured,--or would almost be make virtues,--by the possession of
a title and property. Distaste for a profession and aptitude for
Parliament would become a young man who be heir not only to the
Wharton estate, but to half his father's money.
Sir Alured in his letter express a hope that Everett might be
inform instantly. he would have write himself have he know
Everett's address. but he do know that his eld cousin be in town,
and he besought his eld cousin to come at once,--quite at once,--to
Wharton. emily, he say, would of course accompany her father on such
an occasion. then there be long letter from Mary Wharton, and even
from Lady Wharton, to Emily. the Whartons must have be very much
move when Lady Wharton could be induce to write a long letter. the
Whartons be very much move. they be in a state of enthusiasm
at these news, amount almost to fury. it seem as though they
think that every tenant and labourer on the estate, and every
tenant and labourer's wife, would be in an abnormal condition and
unfit for the duty of life, till they should have see Everett as
heir of the property. Lady Wharton go so far as to tell Emily which
bedroom be be prepare for Everett,--a bedroom very different in
honour from any by the occupation of which he have as yet be grace.
and there be twenty point as to new will and new deed as to
which the present baronet want the immediate advice of his cousin.
there be a score of thing which could now be do which be
before impossible. tree could be cut down, and building put up;
and a little bit of land sell, and a little bit of land bought;--the
doing of all which would give new life to Sir Alured. a life interest
in an estate be a much pleasanter thing when the heir be a friend
who can be walk about the property, than when he be an enemy who
must be keep at arm's length. all these delight could now be Sir
alured's,--if the old heir would give he his counsel and the young
one his assistance.
this change in affair occasion some flutter also in Manchester
Square. it could not make much difference personally to old Mr.
Wharton. he be, in fact, as old as the baronet, and do not pay much
regard to his own chance of succession. but the position be one
which would suit his son admirably, and he be now on good term with
his son. he have convince himself that Lopez have do all that he
could to separate they, and therefore find himself to be more bound
to his son than ever. "we must go at once," he say to his daughter,
speak almost as though he have forget her misery for the moment.
"I suppose you and Everett ought to be there."
"Heaven know where Everett be. I ought to be there, and I suppose
that on such an occasion as this you will condescend to go with I."
"Condescend, papa;--what do that mean?"
"you know I cannot go alone. it be out of the question that I should
leave you here."
"why, papa?"
"and at such a time the family ought to come together. of course they
will take it very much amiss if you refuse. what will Lady Wharton
think if you refuse after her write such a letter as that? it be my
duty to tell you that you ought to go. you cannot think that it be
right to throw over every friend that you have in the world."
there be a great deal more say in which it almost seem that the
father's tenderness have be wear out. his word be much rougher
and more imperious than any that he have yet speak since his daughter
have become a widow, but they be also more efficacious, and
therefore probably more salutary. after twenty-four hour of this
she find that she be oblige to yield, and a telegram be send to
Wharton,--by no mean the first telegram that have be send since the
news have arrived,--saye that Emily would accompany her father. they
be to occupy themselves for two day far in preparation for
their journey.
these preparation to Emily be so sad as almost to break her heart.
she have never as yet pack up her widow's weed. she have never as
yet even contemplate the necessity of come down to dinner in they
before other eye than those of her father and brother. she have as
yet make none of those struggle with which widow seek to lessen
the deformity of their costume. it be incumbent on she now to get a
ribbon or two less ghastly than those weeper which have, for the last
five month, hang about her face and shoulder. and then how should
she look if he be to be there? it be not to be expect that the
Whartons should seclude themselves because of her grief. this very
change in the circumstance of the property would be sure, of itself,
to bring the Fletchers to Wharton,--and then how should she look at
he, how answer he, if he speak to she tenderly? it be very hard for
a woman to tell a lie to a man when she love he. she may speak the
word. she may be able to assure he that he be indifferent to she.
but when a woman really love a man, as she love this man, there be
a desire to touch he which quiver at her finger' end, a longing
to look at he which she cannot keep out of her eye, an inclination
to be near he which affect every motion of her body. she cannot
refrain herself from excessive attention to his word. she have a god
to worship, and she cannot control her admiration. of all this Emily
herself feel much,--but feel at the same time that she would never
pardon herself if she betray her love by a gleam of her eye, by
the tone of a word, or the movement of a finger. what,--should she
be know to love again after such a mistake as hers, after such a
catastrophe?
the evening before they start who should bustle into the house but
Everett himself. it be then about six o'clock, and he be go to
leave London by the night mail. that he should be a little give
to bustle on such an occasion may perhaps be forgive he. he
have hear the news down on the Scotch coast, and have fly up to
London, telegraph as he do so backwards and forwards to Wharton.
of course he feel that the destruction of his cousin among the
glaciers,--whether by brandy or ice he do not much care,--had make
he for the nonce one of the important people of the world. the young
man who would not so feel might be the well philosopher, but one
might doubt whether he would be the well young man. he quite agree
with his father that it be his sister's duty to go to Wharton, and
he be now in a position to speak with authority as to the duty of
member of his family. he could not wait, even for one night, in
order that he might travel with they. Sir Alured be impatient. Sir
Alured want he in Herefordshire. Sir Alured have say that on
such an occasion he, the heir, ought to be on the property with the
short possible delay. his father smiled;--but with an approve
smile. Everett therefore start by the night mail, leave his
father and sister to follow he on the morrow.
CHAPTER LXVIII
the Prime Minister's Political Creed
the Duke, before he go to Matching, twice remind Phineas Finn
that he be expect there in a day or two. "the Duchess say that
your wife be come to-morrow," the Duke say on the day of his
departure. but Phineas could not go then. his service to his country
be require among the dockyard and ship, and he postpone his
visit till the end of September. then he start for Matching, have
the double pleasure before he of meet his wife and his noble host
and hostess. he find a small party there, but not so small as the
Duchess have once suggest to he. "your wife will be there, of
course, Mr. Finn. she be too good to desert I in my trouble. and
there will probably be Lady Rosina De Courcy. Lady Rosina be to the
Duke what your wife be to I. I donot suppose there will be anybody
else,--except, perhaps, Mr. Warburton." but Lady Rosina be not
there. in place of Lady Rosina there be the Duke and Duchess of St.
Bungay, with their daughter, two or three Palliser offshoot, with
their wife, and Barrington Erle. there be, too, the Bishop of the
diocese with his wife, and three or four other, come and go, so
that the party never seem to be too small. "we ask Mr. Rattler,"
say the Duchess in a whisper to Phineas, "but he decline, with a
string of florid compliment. when Mr. Rattler willnot come to the
Prime Minister's house, you may depend that something be go to
happen. it be like pig carry straw in their mouth. Mr. Rattler
be my pig." Phineas only laugh and say that he do not believe
rattler to be a well pig than any one else.
it be soon apparent to Phineas that the Duke's manner to he be
entirely alter, so much so that he be compel to acknowledge to
himself that he have not hitherto read the Duke's character aright.
Hitherto he have never find the Duke pleasant in conversation.
look back he could hardly remember that he have in truth ever
converse with the Duke. the man have seem to shut himself up as
soon as he have utter certain word which the circumstance of the
moment have demand. whether it be arrogance or shyness Phineas
have not know. his wife have say that the Duke be shy. have he be
arrogant the effect would have be the same. he be unbend, hard,
and lucid only when he speak on some detail of business, or on some
point of policy. but now he smile, and though hesitate a little at
first, very soon fall into the way of a pleasant country host. "you
shoot," say the Duke. Phineas do shoot but care very little about
it. "but you hunt." Phineas be very fond of rid to hound. "I be
begin to think," say the Duke, "that I have make a mistake in
not care for such thing. when I be very young I give they up,
because it appear that other man devote too much time to they. one
might as well not eat because some man be glutton."
"only that you would die if you do not eat."
"Bread, I suppose, would keep I alive, but still one eat meat
without be a glutton. I very often regret the want of amusement,
and particularly of those which would throw I more among my
fellow-creature. a man be alone when read, alone when write,
alone when think. even sit in Parliament he be very much
alone, though there be a crowd around he. now a man can hardly be
thoroughly useful unless he know his fellow-man, and how be he to
know they if he shut himself up? if I have to begin again I think I
would cultivate the amusement of the time."
not long after this the Duke ask he whether he be go to join
the shoot man on that morning. Phineas declare that his hand
be too full of business for any amusement before lunch. "then,"
say the Duke, "will you walk with I in the afternoon? there be
nothing I really like so much as a walk. there be some very pretty
point where the river skirt the park. and I will show you the spot
on which Sir Guy de Palliser perform the feat for which the king
give he this property. it be a grand time when a man could get
half-a-dozen parish because he tickle the king's fancy."
"but suppose he donot tickle the king's fancy?"
"ah, then indeed, it might go otherwise with he. but I be glad to
say that Sir Guy be an accomplished courtier."
the walk be take, and the pretty bend of the river be see; but
they be look at without much earnestness, and Sir Guy's great
deed be not again mention. the conversation go away to other
matter. of course it be not long before the Prime Minister be
deep in discuss the probability of the next session. it be
soon apparent to Phineas that the Duke be no long desirous of
resign, though he speak very freely of the probable necessity
there might be for he to do so. at the present moment he be in his
good humour. his foot be on his own property. he could see the
prosperity around he. the spot be the one which he love well in
all the world. he like his present companion, who be one to whom he
be entitle to speak with freedom. but there be still present to
he the sense of some injury from which he could not free himself. of
course he do not know that he have be haughty to Sir Orlando, to
Sir Timothy, and other. but he do know that he have intend to be
true, and he think that they have be treacherous. twelve month
ago there have be a goal before he which he might attain, a
win-post which be still within his reach. there be in store for
he the tranquillity of retirement which he would enjoy as soon as a
sense of duty would permit he to seize it. but now the prospect of
that happiness have gradually vanish from he. that retirement be
no long a win-post for he. the poison of place and power and
dignity have get into his blood. as he look forward he fear rather
than sigh for retirement. "you think it will go against we," he
say.
Phineas do think so. there be hardly a man high up in the party
who do not think so. when one branch of a Coalition have gradually
drop off, the other branch will hardly flourish long. and then the
tint of a political Coalition be so neutral and unallure that man
will only endure they when they feel that no more pronounced colour
be within their reach. "after all," say Phineas, "the innings have
not be a bad one. it have be of service to the country, and have
last long than most man expect."
"if it have be of service to the country, that be everything. it
should at least be everything. with the statesman to whom it be not
everything there must be something wrong." the Duke, as he say this,
be preach to himself. he be tell himself that, though he see
the well way, he be allow himself to walk on in that which be
bad. for it be not only Phineas who could see the change,--or the
old Duke, or the Duchess. it be apparent to the man himself, though
he could not prevent it. "I sometimes think," he say, "that we whom
chance have lead to be meddler in the game of politic sometimes give
ourselves hardly time enough to think what we be about."
"a man may have to work so hard," say Phineas, "that he have no time
for think."
"or more probably, may be so eager in party conflict that he will
hardly keep his mind cool enough for thought. it seem to I that
many men,--man whom you and I know,--embrace the profession of
politic not only without political conviction, but without see
that it be proper that they should entertain they. Chance bring a
young man under the guidance of this or that eld man. he have come
of a Whig family, as be my case,--or from some old Tory stock; and
loyalty keep he true to the interest which have first push he
forward into the world. there be no conviction there."
"conviction grow."
"yes;--the conviction that it be the man's duty to be a staunch
Liberal, but not the reason why. or a man see his opening on this
side or on that,--as be the case with the lawyer. or he have a body
of man at his back ready to support he on this side or on that, as
we see with commercial man. or perhaps he have some vague idea that
aristocracy be pleasant, and he become a Conservative,--or that
democracy be prosper, and he become a Liberal. you be a liberal,
Mr. Finn."
"certainly, Duke."
"why?"
"well;--after what you have say I will not boast of myself.
experience, however, seem to show I that Liberalism be demand by
the country."
"so, perhaps, at certain epoch, may the Devil and all his work; but
you will hardly say that you will carry the Devil's colour because
the country may like the Devil. it be not sufficient, I think, to say
that Liberalism be demand. you should first know what Liberalism
mean, and then assure yourself that the thing itself be good. I dare
say you have do so; but I see some who never make the inquiry."
"I will not claim to be well than my neighbours,--I mean my real
neighbour."
"I understand; I understand," say the Duke laughing. "you prefer
some good Samaritan on the opposition bench to Sir Timothy and the
Pharisees. it be hard to come wound out of the fight, and then to
see he who should be your friend not only walk by on the other
side, but fling a stone at you as he go. but I do not mean just
now to allude to the detail of recent misfortune, though there be
no one to whom I could do so more openly than to you. I be try
yesterday to explain to myself why I have, all my life, sit on what
be call the liberal side of the House to which I have belong."
"do you succeed?"
"I begin life with the misfortune of a ready-make political creed.
there be a seat in the House for I when I be twenty-one. nobody
take the trouble to ask I my opinion. it be a matter of course
that I should be a Liberal. my uncle, whom nothing could ever induce
to move in politic himself, take it for grant that I should run
straight,--as he would have say. it be a tradition of the family,
and be as inseparable from it as any of the title which he have
inherit. the property might be sell or squandered,--but the
political creed be fix as adamant. I donot know that I ever have
a wish to rebel, but I think that I take it at first very much as a
matter of course."
"a man seldom inquire very deeply at twenty-one."
"and if he do it be ten to one but he come to a wrong conclusion.
but since then I have satisfy myself that chance put I into the
right course. it have be, I dare say, the same with you as with I.
we both go into office early, and the anxiety to do special duty
well probably deter we both from think much of the great
question. when a man have to be on the alert to keep Ireland quiet, or
to prevent peculation in the dockyard, or to raise the revenue while
he lower the taxis, he feel himself to be save from the necessity
of investigate principle. in this way I sometimes think that
minister, or they who have be minister and who have to watch
minister from the opposition bench, have less opportunity of
become real politician than the man who sit in Parliament with
empty hand and with time at their own disposal. but when a man have
be place by circumstance as I be now, he do begin to think."
"and yet you have not empty hand."
"they be not so full, perhaps, as you think. at any rate I cannot
content myself with a single branch of the public service as I use
to do in old day. do not suppose that I claim to have make any grand
political invention, but I think that I have at least label my own
thought. I suppose what we all desire be to improve the condition of
the people by whom we be employ, and to advance our country, or at
any rate to save it from retrogression."
"that of course."
"so much be of course. I give credit to my opponent in Parliament
for that desire quite as readily as I do to my colleague or to
myself. the idea that political virtue be all on one side be both
mischievous and absurd. we allow ourselves to talk in that way
because indignation, scorn, and sometimes, I fear, vituperation, be
the fuel with which the necessary heat of debate be maintain."
"there be some man who be very fond of poke the fire," say
Phineas.
"well; I willnot name any one at present," say the Duke, "but I have
see gentleman of your country very handy with the poker." Phineas
laugh, know that he have be consider by some to have be
a little violent when defend the Duke. "but we put all that
aside when we really think, and can give the conservative credit
for philanthropy and patriotism as readily as the Liberal. the
Conservative who have have any idea of the meaning of the name which
he carry, wish, I suppose, to maintain the difference and the
distance which separate the highly place from their low brother.
he think that God have divide the world as he find it divide, and
that he may well do his duty by make the inferior man happy and
content in his position, teach he that the place which he hold
be his by God's ordinance."
"and it be so."
"hardly in the sense that I mean. but that be the great conservative
lesson. that lesson seem to I to be hardly compatible with
continual improvement in the condition of the low man. but with
the Conservative all such improvement be to be base on the idea of
the maintenance of those distance. I as a Duke be to be keep as far
apart from the man who drive my horse as be my ancestor from the
man who drive his, or who ride after he to the wars,--and that be to
go on for ever. there be much to be say for such a scheme. let the
lord be, all of they, man with love heart, and clear intellect,
and noble instinct, and it be possible that they should use their
power so beneficently as to spread happiness over the earth. it be
one of the millennium which the mind of man can conceive, and seem
to be that which the conservative mind do conceive."
"but the other man who be not lord donot want that kind of
happiness."
"if such happiness be attainable it might be well to constrain
man to accept it. but the lord of this world be fallible man; and
though as unit they ought to be and perhaps be well than those
other who have few advantage, they be much more likely as unit
to go astray in opinion than the body of man whom they would seek
to govern. we know that power do corrupt, and that we cannot
trust king to have love heart, and clear intellect, and noble
instinct. man as they come to think about it and to look forward,
and to look back, will not believe in such a millennium as that."
"do they believe in any millennium?"
"I think they do after a fashion, and I think that I do myself. that
be my idea of Conservatism. the doctrine of Liberalism be, of course,
the reverse. the Liberal, if he have any fix idea at all, must, I
think, have conceive the idea of lessen distances,--of bring
the coachman and the duke nearer together,--nearer and nearer, till a
millennium shall be reach by--"
"by equality?" ask Phineas, eagerly interrupt the Prime
Minister, and show his dissent by the tone of his voice.
"I do not use the word, which be open to many objection. in the
first place the millennium, which I have perhaps rashly name, be
so distant that we need not even think of it as possible. man's
intellect be at present so various that we cannot even realise the
idea of equality, and here in England we have be teach to hate the
word by the evil effect of those absurd attempt which have be
make elsewhere to proclaim it as a fact accomplish by the scratch
of a pen or by a chisel on a stone. we have be injure in that,
because a good word signify a grand idea have be drive out of
the vocabulary of good man. equality would be a heaven, if we could
attain it. how can we to whom so much have be give dare to think
otherwise? how can you look at the bow back and bent leg and
abject face of that poor ploughman, who winter and summer have to drag
his rheumatic limb to his work, while you go a-hunting or sit in
pride of place among the foremost few of your country, and say that
it all be as it ought to be? you be a Liberal because you know that
it be not all as it ought to be, and because you would still march on
to some near approach to equality; though the thing itself be so
great, so glorious, so godlike,--nay, so absolutely divine,--that you
have be disgust by the very promise of it, because its perfection
be unattainable. man have assert a mock equality till the very idea
of equality stink in man's nostril."
the Duke in his enthusiasm have throw off his hat, and be sit
on a wooden seat which they have reach, look up among the cloud.
his left hand be clench, and from time to time with his right
he rub the thin hair on his brow. he have begin in a low voice,
with a somewhat slipshod enunciation of his word, but have gradually
become clear, resonant, and even eloquent. Phineas know that there
be story tell of certain burst of word which have come from
he in former day in the House of Commons. these have occasionally
surprised man and induce they to declare that Planty Pall,--as he
be then often called,--wa a dark horse. but they have be few and
far between, and Phineas have never hear they. now he gaze at his
companion in silence, wonder whether the speaker would go on with
his speech. but the face change on a sudden, and the Duke with an
awkward motion snatch up his hat. "I hope you benot cold," he say.
"not at all," say Phineas.
"I come here because of that bend of the river. I be always very
fond of that bend. we donot go over the river. that be Mr. Upjohn's
property."
"the member for the county?"
"yes; and a very good member he be too, though he donot support
us;--an old-school Tory, but a great friend of my uncle, who after
all have a good deal of the Tory about he. I wonder whether he be at
home. I must remind the Duchess to ask he to dinner. you know he,
of course."
"only by just see he in the House."
"youwould like he very much. when in the country he always wear
knee-breech and gaiter, which I think a very comfortable dress."
"Troublesome, Duke; benot it?"
"I never try it, and I shouldnot dare now. Goodness, I; itbe past
five o'clock, and wehave get two mile to get home. I havenot look
at a letter, and Warburton will think that Ihave throw myself into
the river because of Sir Timothy Beeswax." then they start to go
home at a fast pace.
"I shallnot forget, Duke," say Phineas, "your definition of
Conservatives and Liberals."
"I donot think I venture on a definition;--only a few loose idea
which have be trouble I lately. I say, Finn!"
"your grace?"
"donot you go and tell Ramsden and Drummond that I have be
preach equality, or we shall have a pretty mess. I donot know that
it would serve I with my dear friend, the Duke."
"I will be discretion itself."
"equality be a dream. but sometimes one like to dream,--especially
as there be no danger that Matching will fly from I in a dream. I
doubt whether I could bear the test that have be attempt in other
country."
"that poor ploughman would hardly get his share, Duke."
"No;--thatbe where it be. we can only do a little and a little to
bring it near to us;--so little that it willnot touch Matching in our
day. here be her ladyship and the pony. I donot think her ladyship
would like to lose her pony by my doctrine."
the two wife of the two man be in the pony carriage, and the
little Lady Glencora, the Duchess's eld daughter, be sit
between they. "Mr. Warburton have send three messenger to demand your
presence," say the Duchess, "and, as I live by bread, I believe that
you and Mr. Finn have be amusing yourself!"
"we have be talk politic," say the Duke.
"of course. what other amusement be possible? but what business
have you to indulge in idle talk when Mr. Warburton want you in the
library? there have come a box," she say, "big enough to contain
the resignation of all the traitor of the party." this be strong
language, and the Duke frowned;--but there be no one there to
hear it but Phineas Finn and his wife, and they, at least, be
trustworthy. the Duke suggest that he have well get back to the
house as soon as possible. there might be something to be do
require time before dinner. Mr. Warburton might, at any rate, want
to smoke a tranquil cigar after his day's work. the Duchess therefore
leave the carriage, as do Mrs. Finn, and the Duke undertake to drive
the little girl back to the house. "hewill surely go against a tree,"
say the Duchess. but,--as a fact,--the Duke do take himself and the
child home in safety.
"and what do you think about it, Mr. Finn?" say her Grace. "I
suppose you and the Duke have be settle what be to be do."
"we have certainly settle nothing."
"then you must have disagree."
"that we as certainly have not do. we have in truth not once be
out of cloud-land."
"ah;--then there be no hope. when once grow-up politician get into
cloud-land it be because the reality of the world have no long
any charm for they."
the big box do not contain the resignation of any of the
objectionable member of the Coalition. minister do not often resign
in September,--nor would it be expedient that they should do so. Lord
Drummond and Sir Timothy be safe, at any rate, till next February,
and might live without any show either of obedience or mutiny.
the Duke remain in comparative quiet at Matching. there be not
very much to do, except to prepare the work for the next session.
the great work of the come year be to be the assimilation, or
something very near to the assimilation, of the county suffrage
with those of the borough. the measure be one which have now be
promise by statesman for the last two years,--promise at first with
that half promise which would mean nothing, be it not that such
promise always lead to more define assurance. the Duke of St.
Bungay, Lord Drummond, and other Ministers have wish to stave it
off. Mr. Monk be eager for its adoption, and be of course support
by Phineas Finn. the Prime Minister have at first be inclined to be
lead by the old Duke. there be no doubt to he but that the measure
be desirable and would come, but there might well be a question
as to the time at which it should be make to come. the old Duke
know that the measure would come,--but believe it to be wholly
undesirable, think that he be do good work in postpone it
from year to year. but Mr. Monk have become urgent, and the old Duke
have admit the necessity. there must surely have be a shade of
melancholy on that old man's mind as, year after year, he assist
in pull down institution which he in truth regard as the
safeguard of the nation;--but which he know that, as a Liberal, he
be bind to assist in destroy! it must have occur to he, from
time to time, that it would be well for he to depart and be at peace
before everything be go.
when he go from Matching Mr. Monk take his place, and Phineas Finn,
who have go up to London for a while, return; and then the three
between they, with assistance from Mr. Warburton and other, work
out the propose scheme of the new county franchise, with the new
division and the new constituency. but it could hardly have be
hearty work, as they all of they feel that whatever might be their
first proposition they would be beat upon it in a House of Commons
which think that this aristide have be long enough at the
Treasury.
CHAPTER LXIX
Mrs. Parker's Fate
Lopez have now be dead more than five month, and not a word have
be hear by his widow of Mrs. Parker and her child. her own
sorrow have be so great that she have hardly think of those of the
poor woman who have come to she but a few day before her husband's
death, tell she of ruin cause by her husband's treachery. but
late on the evening before her departure for herefordshire,--very
shortly after Everett have leave the house,--there be a ring at
the door, and a poorly-clothe female ask to see Mrs. Lopez. the
poorly-clothe female be Sexty Parker's wife. the servant, who do not
remember she, would not leave she alone in the hall, have an eye to
the coat and umbrella, but call up one of the maid to carry the
message. the poor woman understand the insult and resent it in her
heart. but Mrs. Lopez recognise the name in a moment, and go down
to she in the parlour, leave Mr. Wharton upstairs. Mrs. Parker,
smart from her present grievance, have bend her mind on complain
at once of the treatment she have receive from the servant, but the
sight of the widow's weed quell she. Emily have never be much
give to fine clothe, either as a girl or as a married woman; but
it have always be her husband's pleasure that she should be well
dressed,--though he have never carry his trouble so far as to pay
the bill; and Mrs. Parker's remembrance of her friend at Dovercourt
have be that of a fine lady in bright apparel. now a black
shade,--something almost like a dark ghost,--glide into the room,
and Mrs. Parker forget her recent injury. Emily come forward and
offer her hand, and be the first to speak. "I have have a great
sorrow since we meet," she say.
"yes, indeed, Mrs. Lopez. I donot think there be anything leave in the
world now except sorrow."
"I hope Mr. Parker be well. will you not sit down, Mrs. Parker?"
"thank you, ma'am. indeed, then, he be not well at all. how should he
be well? everything,--everything have be take away from he." poor
Emily groan as she hear this. "I wouldnot say a word against they
as be go, Mrs. Lopez, if I could help it. I know it be bad to bear
when he who once love you benot no more. and perhaps it be all the
bad when thing donot go well with he, and it be, maybe, his own
fault. I wouldnot do it, Mrs. Lopez, if I could help it."
"let I hear what you have to say," say Emily, determine to suffer
everything patiently.
"Well;--it be just this. he have leave we that bare that there be
nothing leave. and that, they say, benot the bad of all,--though
what can be bad than do that, how be a woman to think? Parker
be that soft, and he have that way with he of talk, that he have
talk I and mine out of the very linen on our back."
"what do you mean by say that that be not the bad?"
"theyhave come upon Sexty for a bill for four hundred and
fifty,--something to do with that stuff they call Bios,--and Sexty
say it benot his name at all. but hebe be in that state he donot
hardly know how to swear to anything. but hebe sure he donot sign
it. the bill be bring to he by Lopez, and there be word between
they, and he wouldnot have nothing to do with it. how be he to go to
law? and it donot make much difference neither, for they cannot take
much more from he than they have take." emily as she hear all
this sit shiver, try to repress her groan. "only," continue
Mrs. Parker, "they havenot sell the furniture, and I be think
they might let I stay in the house, and try to do with let
lodgings,--and now theybe seize everything along of this bill.
Sexty be like a madman, swear this and swear that;--but what
can he do, Mrs. Lopez? itbe as like his hand as two pea; but he be
clever at everything be--be--you know who I mean, ma'am." then
emily cover her face with her hand and burst into violent tear.
she have not determine whether she do or do not believe this
last accusation make against her husband. she have have hardly time
to realise the criminality of the offence impute. but she do
believe that the woman before she have be ruin by her husband's
speculation. "itbe very bad, ma'am; benot it?" say Mrs. Parker,
cry for company. "itbe bad all round. if you have five child as
havenot bread youwould know how it be that I feel. Ihave get to go back
by the 10.15 to-night, and when Ihave pay for a third-class ticket I
shallnot have but twopence leave in the world."
this utter depth of immediate poverty, this want of bread for the
morrow and the next day, Emily could relieve out of her own pocket.
and, think of this and remember that her purse be not with she
at the moment, she start up with the idea of get it. but it
occur to she that that would not suffice; that her duty require
more of she than that. and yet, by her own power, she could do no
more. from month to month, almost from week to week, since her
husband's death, her father have be call upon to satisfy claim
for money which he would not resist, lest by do so he should add
to her misery. she have feel that she ought to bind herself to the
strict personal economy because of the miserable loss to which
she have subject he by her ill-star marriage. "what would you
wish I to do?" she say, resume her seat.
"you be rich," say Mrs. Parker. Emily shake her head. "they say
your papa be rich. I think you would not like to see I in want
like this."
"indeed, indeed, it make I very unhappy."
"wouldnot your papa do something? it benot Sexty's fault nigh
so much as it be his. I wouldnot say it to you if it benot for
starve. I wouldnot say it to you if it benot for the child.
Iwould lie in the ditch and die if it be only myself, because--because
I know what your feeling be. but what wouldnot you do, and what
wouldnot you say, if you have five child at home as havenot a loaf
of bread among them?" Hereupon Emily get up and leave the room, bid
her visitor wait for a few minute. presently the offensive butler
come in, who have wrong Mrs. Parker by watch his master's coat,
and bring a tray with meat and wine. Mr. Wharton, say the alter
man, hop that Mrs. Parker would take a little refreshment, and he
would be down himself very soon. Mrs. Parker, know that strength
for her journey home would be necessary to she, remember that she
would have to walk all through the city to the Bishopsgate Street
station, do take some refreshment, and permit herself to drink
the glass of sherry that her late enemy have benignantly pour out
for she.
Emily have be nearly half-an-hour with her father before Mr.
Wharton's heavy step be hear upon the stair. and when he reach
the dining-room door he pause a moment before he venture to turn
the lock. he have not tell Emily what he would do, and have hardly as
yet make up his own mind. as every fresh call be make upon he, his
hatred for the memory of the man who have step in and disturb his
whole life, and turn all the mellow satisfaction of his evening
into storm and gloom, be of course increase. the scoundrel's
name be so odious to he that he could hardly keep himself from
shudder visibly before his daughter even when the servant call
she by it. but yet he have determine that he would devote himself to
save she from further suffering. it have be her fault, no doubt. but
she be expiate it in very sackcloth and ash, and he would add
nothing to the burden on her back. he would pay, and pay, and pay,
merely remember that what he pay must be deduct from her share
of his property. he have never intend to make what be call an
eld son of Everett, and now there be less necessity than ever
that he should do so, as Everett have become an eld son in another
direction. he could satisfy almost any demand that might be make
without material injury to himself. but these demand, one after
another, scald he by their frequency, and by the baseness of the
man who have occasion they. his daughter have now repeat to he
with sobbing and wailing the whole story as it have be tell to she
by the woman downstairs. "Papa," she have say, "I donot know how to
tell you or how not." then he have encourage she, and have listen
without say a word. he have endeavour not even to shrink as the
charge of forgery be repeat to he by his own child,--the widow
of the guilty man. he endeavour not to remember at the moment that
she have claim this wretch as the choose one of her maiden heart, in
opposition to all his wish. it hardly occur to he to disbelieve
the accusation. it be so probable! what be there to hinder the
man from forgery, if he could only make it believe that his victim
have sign the bill when intoxicate? he hear it all;--kisse his
daughter, and then go down to the dining-room.
Mrs. Parker, when she see he, get up, and curtsy low, and then sit
down again. Old Wharton look at she from under his bushy eyebrow
before he speak, and then sit opposite to she. "Madam," he say,
"this be a very sad story that I have hear." Mrs. Parker again rise,
again curtsy, and put she handkerchief to her face. "it be of no
use talk any more about it here."
"no, sir," say Mrs. Parker.
"I and my daughter leave town early to-morrow morning."
"indeed, sir. Mrs. Lopez donot tell I."
"my clerk will be in London, at No. 12, Stone Buildings, Lincoln's
Inn, till I come back. do you think you can find the place? I have
write it there."
"yes, sir, I can find it," say Mrs. Parker, just raise herself
from her chair at every word she speak.
"I have write his name, you see. Mr. Crumpy."
"yes, sir."
"if you will permit I, I will give you two sovereign now."
"thank you, sir."
"and if you can make it convenient to call on Mr. Crumpy every
Thursday morning about twelve, he will pay you two sovereign a week
till I come back to town. then I will see about it."
"God Almighty bless you, sir!"
"and as to the furniture, I will write to my attorney, Mr. Walker.
you need not trouble yourself by go to he."
"no, sir."
"if necessary, he will send to you, and he will see what can be do.
good night, Mrs. Parker." then he walk across the room with two
sovereign which he drop in her hand. Mrs. Parker, with many sob,
bid he farewell, and Mr. Wharton stand in the hall immovable till
the front door have be close behind she. "I have settle it," he
say to Emily. "Iwill tell you to-morrow, or some day. donot worry
yourself now, but go to bed." she look wistfully,--so sadly, up
into his face, and then do as he bid she.
but Mr. Wharton could not go to bed without further trouble. it be
incumbent on he to write full particular that very night both to
Mr. Walker and to Mr. Crumpy. and the odious letter in the writing
become very long;--odious because he have to confess in they over and
over again that his daughter, the very apple of his eye, have be the
wife of a scoundrel. to Mr. Walker he have to tell the whole story of
the alleged forgery, and in do so could not abstain from the use
of hard word. "I donot suppose that it can be prove, but there be
every reason to believe that itbe true." and again--"i believe the
man to have be as vile a scoundrel as ever be make by the love
of money." even to Mr. Crumpy he could not be reticent. "she be an
object of pity," he say. "her husband be ruin by the infamous
speculation of Mr. Lopez." then he betake himself to bed. oh, how
happy would he be to pay the two pound weekly,--even to add to that
the amount of the forge bill, if by do so he might be save from
ever again hear the name of Lopez.
the amount of the bill be ultimately lose by the banker who have
advanced money on it. as for Mrs. Sexty Parker, from week to week,
and from month to month, and at last from year to year, she and
she children,--and probably her husband also,--were support by
the weekly pension of two sovereign which she always receive on
Thursday morning from the hand of Mr. Crumpy himself. in a little
time the one excitement of her life be the weekly journey to Mr.
Crumpy, whom she come to regard as a man appoint by Providence
to supply she with 40. on Thursday morning. as to poor Sexty
Parker,--it be to be fear that he never again become a prosperous
man.
"you will tell I what you do for that poor woman, papa," say
Emily, lean over her father in the train.
"I have settle it, my dear."
"you say youwould tell I."
"Crumpy will pay she two pound a week till we know more about it."
Emily press her father's hand and that be an end. no one ever do
know any more about it, and Crumpy continue to pay the money.
CHAPTER LXX
at Wharton
when Mr. Wharton and his daughter reach Wharton Hall there be at
any rate no fletcher there as yet. emily, as she be drive from
the station to the house, have not dare to ask a question or even to
prompt her father to do so. he would probably have tell she that on
such an occasion there be but little chance that she would find any
visitor, and none at all that she would find Arthur Fletcher. but
she be too confused and too ill at ease to think of probability,
and to the last be in trepidation, specially lest she should meet
her lover. she find, however, at Wharton Hall none but Whartons,
and she find also to her great relief that this change in the heir
relieve she of much of the attention which must otherwise have add
to her trouble. at the first glance her dress and demeanour strike
they so forcibly that they could not avoid show their feeling. of
course they have expect to see she in black,--had expect to see
she in widow's weed. but, with she, her very face and limb have so
adapt themselves to her crape, that she look like a monument of
bereaved woe. Lady Wharton take the mourner up into her own room, and
there make she a little speech. "we have all weep for you," she say,
"and grieve for you still. but excessive grief be wicked, especially
in the young. we will do our good to make you happy, and hope we
shall succeed. all this about dear Everett ought to be a comfort to
you." Emily promise that she would do she good, not, however, take
much immediate comfort from the prospect of dear Everett. Lady
Wharton certainly have never in her life speak of dear Everett while
the wicked cousin be alive. then Mary Wharton also make her little
speech. "dear Emily, I will do all that I can. pray try to believe in
I." but Everett be so much the hero of the hour, that there be not
much room for general attention to any one else.
there be very much room for triumph in regard to Everett. it have
already be ascertain that the Wharton who be now dead have have
a child,--but that the child be a daughter. oh,--what salvation or
destruction there may be to an english gentleman in the sex of an
infant! this poor baby be now little well than a beggar brat,
unless the relative who be utterly disregardful of its fate,
should choose, in their charity, to make some small allowance for
its maintenance. have it by chance be a boy, Everett Wharton would
have be nobody; and the child, rescue from the iniquity of his
parent, would have be nurse in the good bedroom of Wharton Hall,
and cherish with the warm kiss, and would have be the centre
of all the hope of all the Whartons. but the Wharton lawyer by use
of reckless telegram have certify himself that the infant be a
girl, and Everett be the hero of the day. he find himself to be
possess of a thousand grace, even in his father's eyesight. it
seem to be take as a mark of his special good fortune that he have
not clung to any business. to have be a banker immerse in the
making of money, or even a lawyer attach to his circuit and his
court, would have lessen his fitness, or at any rate his readiness,
for the duty which he would have to perform. he would never be a
very rich man, but he would have a command of ready money, and of
course he would go into Parliament.
in his new position as,--not quite head of his family, but head
expectant,--it seem to he to be his duty to lecture his sister.
it might be well that some one should lecture she with more severity
than her father use. undoubtedly she be succumb to the
wretchedness of her position in a manner that be repugnant to
humanity generally. there be no power so useful to man as that
capacity of recover himself after a fall, which belong especially
to those who possess a healthy mind in a healthy body. it be not rare
to see one,--generally a woman,--whom a sorrow gradually kill; and
there be those among we, who hardly perhaps envy, but certainly
admire, a spirit so delicate as to be snuff out by a woe. but it
be the weakness of the heart rather than the strength of the feeling
which have in such case most often produce the destruction. some
endurance of fibre have be want, which power of endurance be a
noble attribute. Everett Wharton see something of this, and be,
now, the heir apparent of the family, take his sister to task.
"emily," he say, "you make we all unhappy when we look at you."
"do I?" she say. "I be sorry for that;--but why should you look at
I?"
"because you be one of we. of course we cannot shake you
off. we would not if we could. we have all be very unhappy
because,--because of what have happen. but donot you think you ought
to make some sacrifice to us,--to our father, I mean, and to Sir
Alured and Lady Wharton? when you go on weeping, other people have to
weep too. I have an idea that people ought to be happy if it be only
for the sake of their neighbour."
"what be I to do, Everett?"
"talk to people a little, and smile sometimes. move about quick.
donot look when you come into a room as if you be consecrate it
to tear. and, if I may venture to say so, drop something of the
heaviness of your mourning."
"do you mean that I be a hypocrite?"
"No;--I mean nothing of the kind. you know I donot. but you may exert
yourself for the benefit of other without be untrue to your own
memory. I be sure you know what I mean. make a struggle and see if
you cannot do something."
she do make a struggle, and she do do something. no one, not well
verse in the mystery of feminine dress, could say very accurately
what it be that she have do; but every one feel that something of
the weight be reduce. at first, as her brother's word come upon
her ear, and as she feel the blow which they inflict on she, she
accuse he in her heart of cruelty. they be very hard to bear.
there be a moment in which she be almost tempt to turn upon he
and tell he that he know nothing of her sorrow. but she restrain
herself, and when she be alone she acknowledge to herself that he
have speak the truth. no one have a right to go about the world as
a niobe, damp all joy with selfish tear. what do she not owe
to her father, who have warn she so often against the evil she have
contemplate, and have then, from the first moment after the fault be
do, forgive she the doing of it? she have at any rate learn from
she misfortune the infinite tenderness of his heart, which in the
day of their unalloyed prosperity he have never feel the necessity of
expose to she. so she struggle and do do something. she press
Lady Wharton's hand, and kiss her cousin Mary, and throw herself
into her father's arm when they be alone, whisper to he that
she would try. "what you tell I, Everett, be quite right," she say
afterwards to her brother.
"I donot mean to be savage," he answer with a smile.
"it be quite right, and I have think of it, and I will do my good.
I will keep it to myself if I can. it be not quite, perhaps, what you
think it be, but I will keep it to myself." she fancy that they
do not understand she, and perhaps she be right. it be not only
that he have die and leave she a young widow;--nor even that his end
have be so harsh a tragedy and so foul a disgrace! it be not only
that her love have be misbestowed,--not only that she have make so
grievous an error in the one great act of her life which she have
choose to perform on her own judgment! perhaps the most crush
memory of all be that which tell she that she, who have through all
her youth be regard as a bright star in the family, have be the
one person to bring a reproach upon the name of all these people who
be so good to she. how shall a person conscious of disgrace, with
a mind capable of feel the crush weight of personal disgrace,
move and look and speak as though that disgrace have be wash away?
but she make the struggle, and do not altogether fail.
as regard Sir Alured, in spite of this poor widow's crape, he be
very happy at this time, and his joy do in some degree communicate
itself to the old barrister. Everett be take round to every tenant
and introduce as the heir. Mr. Wharton have already declare his
purpose of abdicate any possible possession of the property. should
he outlive Sir Alured he must be the baronet; but when that sad event
should take place, whether Mr. Wharton should then be alive or no,
Everett should at once be the possessor of Wharton Hall. Sir Alured,
under these circumstance, discuss his own death with extreme
satisfaction, and insist on have it discuss by the other.
that he should have go and leave everything at the mercy of the
spendthrift have be terrible to his old heart;--but now, the man
come to the property would have L60,000 with which to support and
foster Wharton, with which to mend, as it be, the crevice, and
stop up the hole of the estate. he seem to be almost impatient for
Everett's ownership, give many hint as to what should be do when
he himself be go. he must surely have think that he would return
to Wharton as a spirit, and take a ghostly share in the prosperity of
the farm. "you will find John Griffith a very good man," say the
baronet. John Griffith have be a tenant on the estate for the last
half-century, and be an old man than his landlord; but the baronet
speak of all this as though he himself be about to leave Wharton
for ever in the course of the next week. "John Griffith have be a
good man, and if not always quite ready with his rent, have never be
much behind. you willnot be hard on John Griffith?"
"I hope I maynot have the opportunity, sir."
"well;--well;--well; thatbe as may be. but I donot quite know what
to say about young John. the farm have go from father to son, and
therebe never be a word of a lease."
"be there anything wrong about the young man?"
"hebe a little give to poach."
"oh dear!"
"Ihave always get he off for his father's sake. they say hebe go
to marry Sally Jones. that may take it out of he. I do like the
farm to go from father to son, Everett. itbe the way that everything
should go. of course therebe no right."
"nothing of that kind, I suppose," say Everett, who be in his way a
reformer, and have radical notion with which he would not for world
have disturb the baronet at present.
"no;--nothe of that kind. God in his mercy forbid that a landlord
in England should ever be rob after that fashion." Sir Alured,
when he be utter this prayer, be think of what he have hear
of an Irish Land Bill, the detail of which, however, have be
altogether incomprehensible to he. "but I have a feeling about it,
Everett; and I hope you will share it. it be good that thing should
go from father to son. I never make a promise; but the tenant know
what I think about it, and then the father work for the son. why
should he work for a stranger? Sally Jones be a very good young
woman, and perhaps young John will do well." there be not a field
or a fence that he do not show to his heir;--hardly a tree which he
leave without a word. "that bit of woodland come in there,--they
call it Barnton Spinnies,--doesn't belong to the estate at all." this
he say in a melancholy tone.
"donot it, really?"
"and it come right in between Lane's farm and Puddock's. theyhave
always let I have the shooting as a compliment. not that therebe
ever anything in it. itbe only seven acre. but I like the civility."
"who do it belong to?"
"it belong to Benet."
"what; Corpus Christi?"
"yes, yes;--they've change the name. it use to be Benet in my day.
Walker say the College would certainly sell, but youwould have to pay
for the land and the wood separately. I donot know that youwould get
much out of it; but itbe very unsightly,--on the survey map, I mean."
"wewill buy it, by all mean," say Everett, who be already jingle
his L60,000 in his pocket.
"I never have the money, but I think it should be buy." and Sir
Alured rejoice in the idea that when his ghost should look at the
survey map, that hiatus of Barnton Spinnies would not trouble his
spectral eye.
in this way month run on at Wharton. our Whartons have come down
in the latter half of August, and at the beginning of September Mr.
Wharton return to London. Everett, of course, remain, as he
be still learn the lesson of which he be in truth become a
little weary; and at last Emily have also be persuade to stay in
Herefordshire. her father promise to return, not mention any
precise time, but give she to understand that he would come before
the winter. he go, and probably find that his taste for the Eldon
and for whist have return to he. in the middle of November old Mrs.
Fletcher arrive. Emily be not aware of what be be do; but,
in truth, the Fletchers and Whartons combine be conspire with
the view of bring she back to her former self. Mrs. Fletcher have
not yield without some difficulty,--for it be a part of this
conspiracy that Arthur be to be allow to marry the widow. but John
have prevail. "hewill do it any way, mother," he have say, "whether
you and I like it or not. and why on earth shouldnot he do as he
please?"
"think what the man be, John!"
"itbe more to the purpose to think what the woman be. Arthur have make
up his mind, and, if I know he, hebe not the man to be talk out of
it." and so the old woman have give in, and have at last consent to
go forward as the advanced guard of the Fletchers, and lie siege to
the affection of the woman whom she have once so thoroughly discard
from her heart.
"my dear," she say, when they first meet, "if there have be anything
wrong between you and I, let it be among the thing that be past.
you always use to kiss I. give I a kiss now." of course emily
kiss she; and after that Mrs. Fletcher pat she and pet she,
and give her lozenge, which she declare in private to be "the
sovereign thing on earth" for debilitated nerve. and then it come
out by degree that John Fletcher and his wife and all the little
Fletchers be come to Wharton for the Christmas week. Everett have
go, but be also to be back for Christmas, and Mr. Wharton's visit
be also postpone. it be absolutely necessary that Everett should
be at Wharton for the Christmas festivity, and expedient that
Everett's father should be there to see they. in this way Emily have
no mean of escape. her father write tell she of his plan, say
that he would bring she back after Christmas. Everett's heirship
have make these Christmas festivities,--which be, however, to be
confine to the two families,--quite a necessity. in all this not a
word be say about Arthur, nor do she dare to ask whether he be
expect. the young Mrs. Fletcher, John's wife, open her arm
to the widow in a manner that almost plainly say that she regard
Emily as her future sister-in-law. John Fletcher talk to she about
Longbarns, and the children,--complete Fletcher talk,--as though she
be already one of they, never, however, mention Arthur's name.
the old lady get down a fresh supply of the lozenge from London
because those she have by she might perhaps be a little stale. and
then there be another sign which after a while become plain to
Emily. no one in either family ever mention her name. it be
not singular that none of they should call she Mrs. Lopez, as she
be Emily to all of they. but they never so describe she even in
speak to the servant. and the servant themselves, as far as be
possible, avoid the odious word. the thing be to be bury, if not
in oblivion, yet in some speechless grave. and it seem that her
father be join in this attempt. when write to she he usually
make some excuse for write also to Everett, or, in Everett's
absence, to the baronet,--so that the letter for his daughter might
be enclose and address simply to "emily".
she understand it all, and though she be move to continual solitary
tear by this ineffable tenderness, yet she rebel against they.
they should never cheat she back into happiness by such wile as
that! it be not fit that she should yield to they. as a woman
utterly disgrace it could not become she again to laugh and be
joyful, to give and take love embrace, to sit and smile, perhaps
a happy mother, at another man's hearth. for their love she be
grateful. for his love she be more than grateful. how constant must
be his heart, how grand his nature, how more than manly his strength
of character, when he be thus true to she through all the evil she
have do! love he! yes;--she would pray for he, worship he, fill
the remainder of her day with thinking of he, hop for he, and
make his interest her own. should he ever be married,--and she
would pray that he might,--his wife, if possible, should be her
friend, his child should be her darling; and he should always be
her hero. but they should not, with all their scheme, cheat she into
disgrace he by marry he.
at last her father come, and it be he who tell she that Arthur
be expect on the day before Christmas. "why do you not tell I
before, papa, so that I might have ask you to take I away?"
"because I think, my dear, that it be well that you should be
constrain to meet he. you would not wish to live all your life in
terror of see Arthur Fletcher?"
"not all my life."
"take the plunge and it will be over. they have all be very good to
you."
"too good, papa. I donot want it."
"they be our old friend. there benot a young man in England I
think so highly of as John Fletcher. when I be go, where be you to
look for friend?"
"Ibe not ungrateful, papa."
"you cannot know they all, and yet keep yourself altogether separate
from Arthur. think what it would be to I never to be able to ask he
to the house. he be the only one of the family that live in London,
and now it seem that Everett will spend most of his time down here.
of course it be well that you should meet he and have do with
it." there be no answer to be make to this, but still she be fix
in her resolution that she would never meet he as her lover.
then come the morning of the day on which he be to arrive, and his
coming be for the first time speak openly of at breakfast. "how be
Arthur to be bring from the station?" ask old Mrs. Fletcher.
"Ibe go to take the dog-cart," say Everett. "gile will go for
the luggage with the pony. he be bring down a lot of things;--a
new saddle, and a gun for I." it have all be arrange for she, this
question and answer, and Emily blush as she feel that it be so.
"we shall be so glad to see Arthur," say young Mrs. Fletcher to she.
"of course you will."
"he have not be down since the Session be over, and he have get to
be quite a speak man now. I do so hope hewill become something some
day."
"Ibe sure he will," say Emily.
"not a judge, however. I hate wig. perhaps he might be Lord
Chancellor in time." Mrs. Fletcher be not more ignorant than some
other lady in be unaware of the Lord Chancellor's wig and exact
position.
at last he come. the 9 A.M. express for hereford,--express, at least,
for the first two or three hour out of london,--brought passenger
for Wharton to the near station at 3 P.M., and the distance be
not above five mile. before four o'clock Arthur be stand before
the drawing-room fire, with a cup of tea in his hand, surround by
Fletchers and Whartons, and be make much of as the young family
member of Parliament. but Emily be not in the room. she have study
her Bradshaw, and learn the hour of the train, and be now in her
bedroom. he have look around the moment he enter the room, but have
not dare to ask for she suddenly. he have say one word about she to
Everett in the cart, and that have be all. she be in the house, and
he must, at any rate, see she before dinner.
emily, in order that she might not seem to escape abruptly, have
retire early to her solitude. but she, too, know that the meeting
could not be long postpone. she sit think of it all, and at
last hear the wheel of the vehicle before the door. she pause,
listen with all her ear, that she might recognise his voice, or
possibly his footstep. she stand near the window, behind the curtain,
with her hand press to her heart. she hear Everett's voice plainly
as he give some direction to the groom, but from Arthur she hear
nothing. yet she be sure that he be come. the very manner of the
approach and her brother's word make she certain that there have be
no disappointment. she stand think for a quarter of an hour,
make up her mind how good they might meet. then suddenly, with slow
but certain step, she walk down into the drawing-room.
no one expect she then, or something perhaps might have be do
to encourage she come. it have be think that she must meet he
before dinner, and her absence till then be to be excuse. but now
she open the door, and with much dignity of mien walk into the
middle of the room. Arthur at that moment be discuss the Duke's
chance for the next session, and Sir Alured be ask with rapture
whether the old conservative party would not come in. Arthur Fletcher
hear the step, turn round, and see the woman he love. he go at
once to meet she, very quickly, and put out both his hand. she give
him her, of course. there be no excuse for her refusal. he stand
for an instant press they, look eagerly into her sad face, and
then he speak. "God bless you, Emily!" he say, "God bless you!" he
have think of no word, and at the moment nothing else occur to
he to be say. the colour have cover all his face, and his heart
beat so strongly that he be hardly his own master. she let he hold
her two hand, perhaps for a minute, and then, burst into tear,
tear herself from he, and, hurry out of the room, make her way
again into her own chamber. "it will be well so," say old Mrs.
Fletcher. "it will be well so. do not let any one follow she."
on that day John Fletcher take she out to dinner, and Arthur do not
sit near she. in the evening he come to she as she be work close
to his mother, and seat himself on a low chair close to her knee.
"we be all so glad to see you; be we not, mother?"
"yes, indeed," say Mrs. Fletcher. then, after a while, the old woman
get up to make a rubber at whist with the two old man and her eld
son, leave Arthur sit at the widow's knee. she would willingly
have escape, but it be impossible that she should move.
"you need not be afraid of I," he say, not whispering, but in a
voice which no one else could hear. "do not seem to avoid I, and I
will say nothing to trouble you. I think that you must wish that we
should be friend."
"oh, yes."
"come out, then, to-morrow, when we be walk. in that way we shall
get use to each other. you be troubled now, and I will go." then
he leave she, and she feel herself to be bind to he by infinite
gratitude.
a week go on and she have become used to his company. a week pass
and he have speak no word to she that a brother might not have
speak. they have walk together when no one else have be within
hearing, and yet he have spar she. she have begin to think that he
would spare she altogether, and she be certainly grateful. might
it not be that she have misunderstood he, and have misunderstood the
meaning of they all? might it not be that she have trouble herself
with false anticipation? surely it be so; for how could it be that
such a man should wish to make such a woman his wife?
"well, Arthur?" say his brother to he one day.
"I have nothing to say about it," say Arthur.
"you havenot change your mind?"
"never! upon my word, to I, in that dress, she be more beautiful
than ever."
"I wish you would make she take it off."
"I dare not ask she yet."
"you know what they say about widow generally, my boy."
"that be all very well when one talk about widow in general. it
be easy to chaff about woman when one havenot get any woman in one's
mind. but as it be now, have she here, love she as I do,--by
heaven! I cannot hurry she. I donot dare to speak to she after that
fashion. I shall do it in time, I suppose;--but I must wait till the
time come."
CHAPTER LXXI
the Ladies at Longbarns Doubt
it come at last to be decide among they that when old Mr. Wharton
return to town,--and he have now be at Wharton long than he have
ever be know to remain there before,--emily should still remain in
Herefordshire, and that at some period not then fix she should go
for a month to longbarn. there be various reason which induce
she to consent to this change of plan. in the first place she find
herself to be infinitely more comfortable in the country than in
town. she could go out and move about and bestir herself, whereas in
Manchester Square she could only sit and mope at home. her father have
assure she that he think that it would be well that she should
be away from the reminiscence of the house in town. and then when
the first week of February be past Arthur would be up in town, and
she would be far away from he at Longbarns, whereas in London she
would be close within his reach. many little scheme be lay and
struggle make both by herself and the other before at last their
plan be settle. Mr. Wharton be to return to London in the middle
of January. it be quite impossible that he could remain long away
either from Stone Buildings or from the Eldon, and then at the same
time, or a day or two follow, Mrs. Fletcher be to go back to
longbarn. John Fletcher and his wife and child be already
gone,--and Arthur also have be at Longbarns. the two brother and
Everett have be backwards and forwards. Emily be anxious to remain
at Wharton at any rate till Parliament should have meet, so that she
might not be at home with Arthur in his own house. but matter would
not arrange themselves exactly as she wish. it be at last settle
that she should go to Longbarns with Mary Wharton under the charge
of John Fletcher in the first week in February. as arrangement be
already in progress for the purchase of Barnton Spinnies, Sir Alured
could not possibly leave his own house. not to have walk through
the wood on the first day that it become a part of the Wharton
property would to he have be treason to the estate. his experience
ought to have tell he that there be no chance of a lawyer and a
college deal together with such rapidity; but in the present state
of thing he could not bear to absent himself. order have already
be give for the cutting down of certain tree which could not have
be touch have the reprobate live, and it be indispensable that
if a tree fall at Wharton he should see the fall. it thus come to
pass that there be a week during which Emily would be force to live
under the roof of the Fletchers together with Arthur Fletcher.
the week come and she be absolutely receive by Arthur at the door
of longbarn. she have not be at the house since it have first be
intimated to the Fletchers that she be disposed to receive with
favour the address of Ferdinand Lopez. as she remember this it
seem to she to be an age ago since that man have induce she to
believe that of all man she have ever meet he be the near to a
hero. she never speak of he now, but of course her thought of
he be never ending,--as also of herself in that she have allow
herself to be so deceived. she would recall to her mind with bitter
inward sobbing all those lesson of iniquity which he have strive
to teach she, and which have first open her eye to his true
character,--how sedulously he have endeavour to persuade she that
it be her duty to rob her father on his behalf, how continually he
have endeavour to make she think that appearance in the world be
everything, and that, be in truth poor adventurer, it behove
they to cheat the world into think they rich and respectable.
every hint that have be so give have be a wound to she, and those
wound be all now remember. though since his death she have never
allow a word to be speak in her presence against he, she could
not but hate his memory. how glorious be that other man in her
eye, as he stand there at the door welcome she to Longbarns,
fair-haired, open-eye, with bronzed brow and cheek, and surely the
honest face that a love woman ever love to gaze on. during the
various lesson she have learn in her married life, she have become
gradually but surely aware that the face of that other man have be
dishonest. she have learn the false meaning of every glance of his
eye, the subtlety of his mouth, the counterfeit manoeuvre of
his body,--the deceit even of his dress. he have be all a lie from
head to foot; and he have throw her love aside as useless when she
also would not be a liar. and here be this man,--spotless in her
estimation, compound of all good quality, which she could now see
and take at their proper value. she hat herself for the simplicity
with which she have be cheat by soft word and a false demeanour
into so great a sacrifice.
life at Longbarns be very quiet during the day which she pass
there before he leave they. she be frequently alone with he, but he,
if he still love she, do not speak of his love. he explain it
all one day to his mother. "if it be to be," say the old lady, "I
donot see the use of more delay. of course the marriage ought not to
be till March twelvemonth. but if it be understand that it be to
be, she might alter her dress by degrees,--and alter her manner of
live. those thing should always be do by degree. I think it have
well be settle, Arthur, if it be to be settle."
"I be afraid, mother."
"dear I! I donot think you be the man ever to be afraid of a
woman. what can she say to you?"
"refuse I."
"then youwould well know it at once. but I donot think shewill be fool
enough for that."
"perhaps you hardly understand she, mother."
Mrs. Fletcher shake her head with a look of considerable annoyance.
"perhaps not. but, to tell the truth, I donot like young woman whom I
cannot understand. young woman shouldnot be mysterious. I like people
of whom I can give a pretty good guess what theywill do. Ibe sure I
never could have guess that she would have marry that man."
"if you love I, mother, do not let that be mention between we
again. when I say that you do not understand she, I do not mean
that she be mysterious. I think that before he die, and since his
death, she learn of what sort that man be. I will not say that she
hat his memory, but she hat herself for what she have do."
"so she ought," say Mrs. Fletcher.
"she have not yet bring herself to think that her life should be
anything but one long period of mourning, not for he, but for her
own mistake. you may be quite sure that I be in earnest. it be not
because I doubt of myself that I put it off. but I fear that if once
she assert to I her resolution to remain as she be, she will feel
herself bind to keep her word."
"I suppose she be very much the same as other woman, after all, my
dear," say Mrs. Fletcher, who be almost jealous of the peculiar
superiority of sentiment which her son seem to attribute to this
woman.
"circumstance, mother, make people different," he reply.
"so you be go without have anything fix," his eld brother
say to he the day before he start.
"yes, old fellow. it seem to be rather slack;--doesn't it?"
"I dare say you know well what yoube about. but if you have set your
mind on it--"
"you may take your oath on that."
"then I donot see why one word shouldnot put it all right. there
never be any place so good for that kind of thing as a country
house."
"I donot think that with she it will make much difference where the
house be, or what the circumstance."
"she know what you mean as well as I do."
"I dare say she do, John. she must have a very bad idea of I if
she donot. but she may know what I mean and not mean the same thing
herself."
"how be you to know if you donot ask she?"
"you may be sure that I shall ask she as soon as I can hope that my
do so may give she more pleasure than pain. remember, I have have
all this out with her father. I have determine that I will wait till
twelve month have pass since that wretched man perish."
on that afternoon before dinner he be alone with she in the library
some minute before they go up to dress for dinner. "I shall hardly
see you to-morrow," he say, "as I must leave this at half-past
eight. I breakfast at eight. I donot suppose any one will be down
except my mother."
"I be generally as early as that. I will come down and see you
start."
"I be so glad that you have be here, Emily."
"so be I. Everybody have be so good to I."
"it have be like old days,--almost."
"it will never quite be like old day again, I think. but I have be
very glad to be here,--and at Wharton. I sometimes almost wish that I
be never go back to London again,--only for papa."
"I like London myself."
"you! yes, of course you like London. you have everything in life
before you. you have thing to do, and much to hope for. it be all
begin for you, Arthur."
"I be five year old than you be."
"what do that matter? it seem to I that age do not go by year.
it be long since I have feel myself to be an old woman. but you be
quite young. everybody be proud of you, and you ought to be happy."
"I donot know," say he. "it be hard to say what make a person
happy." he almost make up his mind to speak to she then; but he have
make up his mind before to put it off still for a little time, and he
would not allow himself to be change on the spur of the moment. he
have think of it much, and he have almost teach himself to think
that it would be well for herself that she should not accept
another man's love so soon. "I shall come and see you in town," he
say.
"you must come and see papa. it seem that Everett be to be a great
deal at Wharton. I have well go up to dress now, or I shall be
keep they wait." he put out his hand to she, and wish she
good-bye, excuse himself by say that they should not be alone
together again before he start.
she see he go on the next morning,--and then she almost feel herself
to be abandon, almost deserted. it be a fine crisp winter day, dry
and fresh and clear, but with the frost still on the ground. after
breakfast she go out to walk by herself in the long shrubbery path
which go round the house, and here she remain for above an hour.
she tell herself that she be very thankful to he for not have
speak to she on a subject so unfit for her ear as love. she
strengthen herself in her determination never again to listen to a
man willingly on that subject. she have make herself unfit to have any
dealing of that nature. it be not that she could not love. oh, no!
she know well enough that she do love,--love with all her heart. if
it be not that she be so tear to rag that she be not fit to be
wear again, she could now have throw herself into his arm with a
whole heaven of joy before she. a woman, she tell herself, have no
right to a second chance in life, after have make such a shipwreck
of herself in the first. but the danger of be seduce from her
judgment by Arthur Fletcher be all over. he have be near she for
the last week and have not speak a word. he have be in the same
house with she for the last ten day and have be with she as a
brother might be with his sister. it be not only she who have
see the propriety of this. he also have acknowledge it, and she
be--grateful to he. as she endeavour in her solitude to express
her gratitude in speak word the tear roll down her cheek.
she be glad, she tell herself, very glad that it be so. how much
trouble and pain to both of they would thus be spar! and yet her
tear be bitter tear. it be well as it was;--and yet one word
of love would have be very sweet. she almost think that she would
have like to tell he that for his sake, for his dear sake, she
would refuse--that which now would never be offer to she. she be
quite clear as to the rectitude of her own judgment, clear as ever.
and yet her heart be heavy with disappointment.
it be the end of March before she leave Herefordshire for London,
have spend the great part of the time at longbarn. the lady at
that place be move by many doubt as to what would be the end of
all this. Mrs. Fletcher the elder at last almost teach herself to
believe that there would be no marriage, and have get back to that
belief, be again oppose to the idea of a marriage. anything and
everything that Arthur want he ought to have. the old lady feel
no doubt as to that. when convince that he do want to have this
widow,--this woman whose life have hitherto be so unfortunate,--she
have for his sake take the woman again by the hand, and have assist
in make her one of themselves. but how much well it would be that
Arthur should think well of it! it be the mad constancy,--this
cling to the widow of such a man as Ferdinand Lopez! if there be
any doubt, then she would be prepared to do all she could to prevent
the marriage. Emily have be forgive, and the pardon bestow must
of course be continue. but she might be pardon without be make
Mrs. Arthur Fletcher. while Emily be still at longbarn the old lady
almost talk over her daughter-in-law to this way of thinking,--till
John Fletcher put his foot upon it altogether. "I donot pretend to
say what she may do," he say.
"oh, John," say the mother, "to hear a man like you talk like that
be absurd. shewould jump at he if he look at she with half an eye."
"what she may do," he continue say, without appear to listen
to his mother, "I cannot say. but that he will ask she to be his wife
be as certain as that I stand here."
CHAPTER LXXII
"he think that our day be number"
all the detail of the new County Suffrage Bill be settle at
Matching during the recess between Mr. Monk, Phineas Finn, and a
very experienced gentleman from the Treasury, one Mr. Prime, who be
suppose to know more about such thing than any man live, and be
consequently call Constitution Charlie. he be an elderly man, over
sixty year of age, who remember the first Reform Bill, and have
be engage in the doctoring of constituency ever since. the
Bill, if pass, would be mainly his bill, and yet the world would
never hear his name as connect with it. let we hope that he be
comfortable at Matching, and that he find his consolation in the
smile of the Duchess. during this time the old Duke be away, and
even the Prime Minister be absent for some day. he would fain have
busy himself about the Bill himself, but be hardly allow by his
colleague to have any hand in frame it. the great point of the
measure have of course be arrange in the Cabinet,--where, however,
Mr. Monk's view have be adopt almost without a change. it may not
perhaps be too much to assume that one or two member of the Cabinet
do not quite understand the full scope of every suggest clause.
the effect which clause will produce, the danger which may be
expect from this or that change, the manner in which this or that
proposition will come out in the washing, do not strike even Cabinet
Ministers at a glance. a little study in a man's own cabinet, after
the reading perhaps of a few lead article, and perhaps a short
conversation with an astute friend or two, will enable a statesman
to be strong at a give time for, or even, if necessary, against
a measure, who have listen in silence, and have perhaps give his
personal assent, to the original suggestion. I doubt whether Lord
Drummond, when he sit silent in the Cabinet, have realise those fear
which weigh upon he so strongly afterwards, or have then foresee
that the adoption of a nearly similar franchise for the county and
borough must inevitably lead to the american system of numerical
representation. but when time have be give he, and he and Sir
Timothy have talk it all over, the mind of no man be ever clear
than that of Lord Drummond.
the Prime Minister, with the diligence which belong to he, have
master all the detail of Mr. Monk's Bill before it be discuss
in the Cabinet, and yet he find that his assistance be hardly
need in the absolute preparation. have they allow he he would
have do it all himself. but it be assume that he would not
trouble himself with such work, and he perceive that he be not
want. nothing of moment be settle without a reference to he. he
require that everything should be explain as it go on, down to
the extension of every borough boundary; but he know that he be not
do it himself, and that Mr. Monk and Constitution Charlie have the
prize between they.
nor do he dare to ask Mr. Monk what would be the fate of the Bill.
to devote all one's time and mind and industry to a measure which
one know will fall to the ground must be sad. work under such
circumstance must be very grievous. but such be often the fate of
statesman. whether Mr. Monk labour under such a conviction the
Prime Minister do not know, though he see his friend and colleague
almost daily. in truth no one dare to tell he exactly what he
think. even the old Duke have become partially reticent, and take
himself off to his own wood at Long Royston. to Phineas Finn the
Prime Minister would sometimes say a word, but would say even
that timidly. on any abstract question, such as that which he have
discuss when they have be walk together, he could talk freely
enough. but on the matter of the day, those affair which be of
infinite importance to himself, and on which one would suppose he
would take delight in speak to a trust colleague, he could not
bring himself to be open. "it must be a long bill, I suppose?" he
say to Phineas one day.
"Ibe afraid so, Duke. it will run, I fear, to over a hundred
clause."
"it will take you the good part of the Session to get through it?"
"if we can have the second reading early in March, we hope to send it
up to you in the first week in June. that will give we ample time."
"yes;--ye. I suppose so." but he do not dare to ask Phineas Finn
whether he think that the House of Commons would assent to the
second reading. it be know at this time that the Prime Minister be
painfully anxious as to the fate of the Ministry. it seem to be but
the other day that everybody connect with the Government be live
in fear lest he should resign. his threat in that direction have
always be make to his old friend the Duke of St. Bungay; but a
great man cannot whisper his thought without have they carry in
the air. in all the club it have be declare that that be the rock
by which the Coalition would probably be wreck. the newspaper have
repeat the story, and the "People's Banner" have assure the world
that if it be so the Duke of Omnium would thus do for his country
the only good service which it be possible that he should render it.
that be at the time when Sir Orlando be mutinous and when Lopez have
destroy himself. but now no such threat come from the Duke, and
the "People's Banner" be already accuse he of cling to power
with pertinacious and unconstitutional tenacity. have not Sir Orlando
desert he? be it not well know that Lord Drummond and Sir
Timothy Beeswax be only restrain from do so by a mistaken
loyalty?
everybody come up to town, Mr. Monk have his Bill in his pocket,
and the Queen's speech be read, promise the County Suffrage Bill.
the address be vote with a very few word from either side. the
battle be not to be fight then. indeed, the state of thing be
so abnormal that there could hardly be say to be any side in the
House. a stranger in the gallery, not know the condition of
affair, would have think that no minister have for many year
command so large a majority, as the crowd of member be always on
the Government side of the House; but the opposition which Mr. Monk
expect would, he know, come from those who sit around he, behind
he, and even at his very elbow. about a week after Parliament meet
the Bill be read for the first time, and the second reading be
appoint for an early day in March.
the Duke have suggest to Mr. Monk the expedience of some further
delay, give as his reason the necessity of get through certain
routine work, should the rejection of the Bill create the confusion
of a resignation. no one who know the Duke could ever suspect he of
give a false reason. but it seem that in this the Prime Minister
be allow himself to be harass by fear of the future. Mr. Monk
think that any delay would be injurious and open to suspicion
after what have be say and do, and be urgent in his argument.
the Duke give way, but he do so almost sullenly, signify his
acquiescence with haughty silence. "I be sorry," say Mr. Monk,
"to differ from your grace, but my opinion in the matter be so
strong that I do not dare to abstain from express it." the Duke
bow again and smile. he have intend that the smile should be
acquiescent, but it have be as cold as steel. he know that he be
misbehaving, but be not sufficiently master of his own manner to be
gracious. he tell himself on the spot,--though he be quite wrong in
so tell himself,--that he have now make an enemy also of Mr. Monk,
and through Mr. Monk of Phineas Finn. and now he feel that he have no
friend leave in whom to trust,--for the old Duke have become cold and
indifferent. the old Duke, he think, be tired of his work and
anxious for rest. it be the old Duke who have bring he into this
hornet' nest; have fix upon his back the unwilling load; have
compel he to assume the place which now to lose would be a
disgrace,--and the old Duke be now desert he! he be sore
all over, angry with every one, ungracious even with his private
Secretary and his wife,--and especially miserable because he be
thoroughly aware of his own fault. and yet, through it all, there
be present to he a desire to fight on to the very last. let his
colleague do what they might, and say what they might, he would
remain Prime Minister of England as long as he be support by a
majority of the House of Commons.
"I do not know any great step than this," Phineas say to he
pleasantly one day, speak of their new measure, "towards that
millennium of which we be talk at Matching, if we can only
accomplish it."
"those moral speculation, Mr. Finn," he say, "will hardly bear the
wear and tear of real life." the word of the answer, combine with
the manner in which they be speak, be stern and almost uncivil.
Phineas, at any rate, have do nothing to offend he. the Duke
pause, try to find some expression by which he might correct the
injury he have do; but, not find any, pass on without further
speech. Phineas shrug his shoulder and go his way, tell
himself that he have receive one further injunction not to put his
trust in prince.
"we shall be beat, certainly," say Mr. Monk to Phineas, not long
afterwards.
"what make you so sure?"
"I smell it in the air. I see it in man's face."
"and yet itbe a moderate bill. theywill have to pass something
strong before long if they throw it out now."
"itbe not the Bill that theywill reject, but we. we have serve our
turn, and we ought to go."
"the House be tired of the Duke?"
"the Duke be so good a man that I hardly like to admit even
that;--but I fear it be so. he be fretful and he make enemy."
"I sometimes think that he be ill."
"he be ill at ease and sick at heart. he cannot hide his chagrin, and
then be doubly wretched because he have betray it. I do not know
that I ever respect and, at the same time, pity a man more
thoroughly."
"he snub I awfully yesterday," say Phineas, laugh.
"he cannot help himself. he snub I at every word that he speak,
and yet I believe that he be most anxious to be civil to I. his
ministry have be of great service to the country. for myself, I
shall never regret have join it. but I think that to he it have
be a continual sorrow."
the system on which the Duchess have commence her career as wife of
the Prime Minister have now be completely abandon. in the first
place, she have herself become so weary of it that she have be unable
to continue the exertion. she have, too, become in some degree ashame
of her failure. the name of Major Pountney and Mr. Lopez be not
now pleasant to her ear, nor do she look back with satisfaction on
the courtesy she have lavish on Sir Orlando or the smile she have
give to Sir Timothy Beeswax. "Ihave know a good many vulgar people
in my time," she say one day to Mrs. Finn, "but none ever so vulgar
as our ministerial supporter. you donot remember Mr. Bott, my dear.
he be before your time;--one of the arithmetical man, and a great
friend of Plantagenet's. he be very bad, but there have come up
bad since he. sometimes, I think, I like a little vulgarity for a
change; but, upon my honour, when we get rid of all this it will be a
pleasure to go back to lady and gentleman." this the Duchess say
in her extreme bitterness.
"it seem to I that you have pretty well get rid of 'all this'
already."
"but I havenot get anybody else in their place. I have almost make up
my mind not to ask any one into the house for the next twelve month.
I use to think that nothing would ever knock I up, but now I feel
that Ibe almost do for. I hardly dare open my mouth to Plantagenet.
the Duke of St. Bungay have cut I. Mr. Monk look as ominous as an
owl; and your husband havenot a word to say leave. Barrington Erle
hide his face and pass by when he see I. Mr. Rattler do try to
comfort I the other day by say that everything be at six and
seven, and I really take it almost as a compliment to be speak to.
donot you think Plantagenet be ill?"
"he be careworn."
"a man may be wear by care till there come to be nothing leave of
he. but he never speak of give up now. the old Bishop of St.
Austell talk of resign, and he have already make up his mind who
be to have the see. he use to consult the Duke about all these
thing, but I donot think he ever consult any one now. he never
forgave the Duke about Lord Earlybird. certainly, if a man want to
quarrel with all his friend, and to double the hatred of all his
enemy, he have well become Prime Minister."
"be you really sorry that such be his fate, Lady Glen?"
"ah,--i sometimes ask myself that question, but I never get at an
answer. I should have think he a poltroon if he have decline. it
be to be the great man in the great country in the world. do
ever so little and the man who write history must write about you.
and no man have ever try to be noble than he till,--till--."
"make no exception. if he be careworn and ill and weary, his manner
cannot be the same as they be, but his purity be the same as ever."
"I donot know that it would remain so. I believe in he, Marie, more
than in any man,--but I believe in none thoroughly. there be a devil
creep in upon they when their hand be strengthen. I do not know
what I would have wish. whenever I do wish, I always wish wrong.
ah, I; when I think of all those people I have down at Gatherum,--of
the trouble I take, and of the glorious anticipation in which I
revel, I do feel ashamed of myself. do you remember when I be
determined that that wretch should be member for Silverbridge?"
"you havenot see she since, Duchess?"
"no; but I mean to see she. I couldnot make her first husband member,
and therefore the man who be member be to be her second husband. but
Ibe almost sick of scheme. oh, dear, I wish I know something that
be really pleasant to do. I have never really enjoy anything since
I be in love, and I only like that because it be wicked."
the Duchess be wrong in say that the Duke of St. Bungay have cut
they. the old man still remember the kiss and still remember
the pledge. but he have find it very difficult to maintain his old
relation with his friend. it be his opinion that the Coalition have
do all that be want from it, and that now have come the time
when they might retire gracefully. it be, no doubt, hard for a Prime
Minister to find an excuse for go. but if the Duke of Omnium would
have be content to acknowledge that he be not the man to alter
the County Suffrage, an excuse might have be find that would have
be injurious to no one. Mr. Monk and Mr. Gresham might have join,
and the present Prime Minister might have resign, explain that
he have do all that he have be appoint to accomplish. he have,
however, yield at once to Mr. Monk, and now it be to be fear
that the House of Commons would not accept the Bill from his hand.
in such a state of things,--especially after that disagreement about
Lord Earlybird,--it be difficult for the old Duke to tender his
advice. he be at every Cabinet Council; he always come when his
presence be require; he be invariably good-humoured;--but it
seem to he that his work be do. he could hardly volunteer to
tell his chief and his colleague that he would certainly be beat in
the House of Commons, and that therefore there be little more now
to be do than to arrange the circumstance of their retirement.
nevertheless, as the period for the second reading of the Bill come
on, he resolve that he would discuss the matter with his friend. he
owe it to himself to do so, and he also owe it to the man whom he
have certainly place in his present position. on himself politic have
impose a burden very much light than that which they have inflict
on his more energetic and much less practical colleague. through his
long life he have either be in office, or in such a position that
man be sure that he would soon return to it. he have take it, when
it have come, willingly, and have always leave it without a regret. as
a man cut in and out at a whist table, and enjoy both the game
and the rest from the game, so have the Duke of St. Bungay be well
pleased in either position. he be patriotic, but his patriotism do
not disturb his digestion. he have be ambitious,--but moderately
ambitious, and his ambition have be gratify. it never occur to
he to be unhappy because he or his party be beat on a measure.
when President of the Council, he could do his duty and enjoy London
life. when in opposition, he could linger in Italy till May and
devote his leisure to his tree and his bullock. he be always
esteemed, always self-satisfy, and always Duke of St. Bungay. but
with our Duke it be very different. patriotism with he be a fever,
and the public service an exact mistress. as long as this have be
all he have still be happy. not trust much in himself, he have
never aspire to great power. but now, now at last, ambition have lay
hold of him,--and the feeling, not perhaps uncommon with such man,
that personal dishonour would be attach to political failure. what
would his future life be if he have so carry himself in his great
office as to have show himself to be unfit to resume it? Hitherto
any office have suffice he in which he might be useful;--but now he
must either be Prime Minister, or a silent, obscure, and humble man!
DEAR DUKE,
I will be with you to-morrow morning at 11 A.M., if you
can give I half-an-hour.
your affectionately,
ST. B.
the Prime Minister receive this note one afternoon, a day or two
before that appoint for the second reading, and meet his friend
within an hour in the House of Lords, confirm the appointment.
"shall I not rather come to you?" he say. but the old Duke, who
live in St. James's Square, declare that Carlton Terrace would be
in his way to Downing Street; and so the matter be settle. exactly
at eleven the two Ministers meet. "I donot like trouble you," say
the old man, "when I know that you have so much to think of."
"on the contrary, I have but little to think of,--and my thought
must be very much engage, indeed, when they shall be too full to
admit of my see you."
"of course we be all anxious about this Bill." the Prime Minister
smile. anxious! yes, indeed. his anxiety be of such a nature that
it keep he awake all night, and never for a moment leave his mind
free by day. "and of course we must be prepare as to what shall be
do either in the event of success or of failure."
"you might as well read that," say the other. "it only reach I
this morning, or I should have tell you of it." the letter be a
communication from the Solicitor-General contain his resignation.
he have now study the County Suffrage Bill closely, and regret
to say that he could not give it a conscientious support. it be a
matter of sincere sorrow to he that relation so pleasant should
be break, but he must resign his place, unless, indeed, the clause
as to redistribution could be withdraw. of course he do not say
this as expect that any such concession would be make to his
opinion, but merely as indicate the matter on which his objection
be so strong as to over-rule all other consideration. all this he
explain at great length.
"the pleasantness of the relation must have be on one side," say
the veteran. "he ought to have go long since."
"and Lord Drummond have already as good as say that unless we will
abandon the same clause, he must oppose the Bill in the Lords."
"and resign, of course."
"he mean that, I presume. Lord Ramsden have not speak to I."
"the clause will not stick in his throat. nor ought they. if the
lawyer have their own way about law they should be content."
"the question be, whether in these circumstance we should postpone
the second reading?" ask the Prime Minister.
"certainly not," say the other Duke. "as to the Solicitor-General
you will have no difficulty. Sir Timothy be only place there as a
concession to his party. Drummond will no doubt continue to hold his
office till we see what be do in the Lower House. if the second
reading be lose there,--why then his lordship can go with the rest of
we."
"rattler say we shall have a majority. he and Roby be quite agree
about it. between they they must know," say the Prime Minister,
unintentionally plead for himself.
"they ought to know, if any man do;--but the crisis be exceptional.
I suppose you think that if the second reading be lose we should
resign?"
"Oh,--certainly."
"or, after that, if the Bill be much mutilate in Committee? I donot
know that I shall personally break my own heart about the Bill. the
exist difference in the suffrage be rather in accordance with my
prejudice. but the country desire the measure, and I suppose we
cannot consent to any such material alteration as these man suggest."
as he speak he lay his hand on Sir Timothy's letter.
"Mr. Monk would not hear of it," say the Prime Minister.
"of course not. and you and I in this measure must stick to Mr. Monk.
my great, indeed my only strong desire in the matter, be to act in
strict unison with you."
"you be always good and true, Duke."
"for my own part I shall not in the least regret to find in all this
an opportunity of resign. we have do our work, and if, as I
believe, a majority of the House would again support either Gresham
or Monk as the head of the entire liberal party, I think that that
arrangement would be for the welfare of the country."
"why should it make any difference to you? why should you not return
to the Council?"
"I should not do so;--certainly not at once; probably never. but
you,--who be in the very prime of your life--"
the Prime Minister do not smile now. he knit his brow and a dark
shadow come across his face. "I donot think I could do that," he
say. "Caesar could hardly have lead a legion under Pompey."
"it have be do, greatly to the service of the country, and without
the slight loss of honour or character in he who do it."
"we need hardly talk of that, Duke. you think then that we shall
fail;--fail, I mean, in the House of Commons. I do not know that
failure in our House should be regard as fatal."
"in three case we should fail. the loss of any material clause in
Committee would be as bad as the loss of the Bill."
"oh, yes."
"and then, in spite of Messrs. Rattler and Roby,--who have be wrong
before and may be wrong now,--we may lose the second reading."
"and the third chance against we?"
"you would not probably try to carry on the Bill with a very small
majority."
"not with three or four."
"nor, I think, with six or seven. it would be useless. my own belief
be that we shall never carry the Bill into Committee."
"I have always know you to be right, Duke."
"I think that general opinion have set in that direction, and general
opinion be generally right. have come to that conclusion I think
it well to tell you, in order that we might have our house in order."
the Duke of Omnium, who with all his haughtiness and all his reserve,
be the simple man in the world and the least apt to pretend to be
that which he be not, sigh deeply when he hear this. "for my own
part," continue his elder, "I feel no regret that it should be so."
"it be the first large measure that we have try to carry."
"we do not come in to carry large measure, my friend. look back and
see how many large measure Pitt carried,--but he take the country
safely through its most dangerous crisis."
"what have we do?"
"carry on the Queen's Government prosperously for three year. be
that nothing for a minister to do? I have never be a friend of
great measure, know that when they come fast, one after another,
more be break in the rattle than be repair by the reform. we have
do what Parliament and the country expect we to do, and to my
poor judgment we have do it well."
"I do not feel much self-satisfaction, Duke. Well;--we must see it
out, and if it be as you anticipate, I shall be ready. of course I
have prepare myself for it. and if, of late, my mind have be less
turn to retirement than it use to be, it have only be because I
have become wed to this measure, and have wish that it should be
carry under our auspex." then the old Duke take his leave, and
the Prime Minister be leave alone to consider the announcement that
have be make to he.
he have say that he have prepare himself, but, in so say, he have
hardly know himself. Hitherto, though he have be trouble by many
doubt, he have still hop. the report make to he by Mr. Rattler,
back as it have be by Mr. Roby's assurance, have almost suffice
to give he confidence. but Mr. Rattler and Mr. Roby combine be as
nothing to the Duke of St. Bungay. the Prime Minister know now,--he
feel that he know, that his day be number. the resignation of
that linger old bishop be not complete, and the person in whom
he believe would not have the see. he have meditate the making of
a peer or two, have hitherto be very cautious in that respect,
but he would do nothing of the kind if call upon by the House of
Commons to resign with an uncompleted measure. but his thought soon
run away from the present to the future. what be now to come of
himself? how should he use his future life,--he who as yet have not
pass his forty-seventh year? he regret much have make that
apparently pretentious speech about Caesar, though he know his old
friend well enough to be sure that it would never be use against
he. who be he that he should class himself among the big one of
the world? a man may indeed measure small thing by great, but the
measurer should be careful to declare his own littleness when he
illustrate his position by that of the top one of the earth.
but the thing say have be true. let the Pompey be who he might, he,
the little Caesar of the day, could never now command another legion.
he have once tell Phineas Finn that he regret that he have abstain
from the ordinary amusement of english gentleman. but he have
abstain also from their ordinary occupations,--except so far as
politic be one of they. he care nothing for oxen or for furrow.
in regard to his own land he hardly know whether the farm be large
or small. he have be a scholar, and after a certain fitful fashion
he have maintain his scholarship, but the literature to which he
have be really attach have be that of blue-book and newspaper.
what be he to do with himself when call upon to resign? and he
understood,--or think that he understood,--hi position too well to
expect that after a while, with the usual interval, he might return
to power. he have be Prime Minister, not as the lead politician
on either side, not as the king of a party, but,--so he tell
himself,--as a stop-gap. there could be nothing for he now till the
insipidity of life should gradually fade away into the grave.
after a while he get up and go off to his wife's apartment, the
room in which she use to prepare her triumph and where now she
contemplate her disappointment. "I have have the Duke with I," he
say.
"What;--at last?"
"I do not know that he could have do any good by come soon."
"and what do his grace say?"
"he think that our day be number."
"psha!--is that all? I could have tell he that ever so long ago. it
be hardly necessary that he should disturb himself at last to come
and tell we such well-ventilate news. there benot a porter at one of
the club who donot know it."
"then there will be the less surprise,--and to those who be
concerned perhaps the less mortification."
"do he tell you who be to succeed you?" ask the Duchess.
"not precisely."
"he ought to have do that, as I be sure he know. everybody know
except you, Plantagenet."
"if you know, you can tell I."
"of course, I can. it will be Mr. Monk."
"with all my heart, Glencora. Mr. Monk be a very good man."
"I wonder whether hewill do anything for we. think how destitute we
shall be! what if I be to ask he for a place! would he not give it
we?"
"will it make you unhappy, Cora?"
"what;--your go?"
"yes;--the change altogether."
she look he in the face for a moment before she answer, with a
peculiar smile in her eye to which he be well used,--a smile half
ludicrous and half pathetic,--have in it also a dash of sarcasm.
"I can dare to tell the truth," she say, "which you cannot. I can be
honest and straightforward. yes, it will make I unhappy. and you?"
"do you think that I cannot be honest too,--at any rate to you? it
do fret I. I do not like to think that I shall be without work."
"Yes;--Othello's occupation will be gone,--for awhile; for awhile."
then she come up to he and put both her hand on his breast. "but
yet, Othello, I shall not be all unhappy."
"where will be your contentment?"
"in you. it be make you ill. rough people, whom the tenderness of
your nature could not well endure, trod upon you, and worry you
with their tooth and wound you everywhere. I could have turn at
they again with my tooth, and give they worry for worry;--but you
could not. now you will be save from they, and so I shall not be
discontent." all this she say look up into his face, still with
that smile which be half pathetic and half ludicrous.
"then I will be content too," he say as he kiss she.
CHAPTER LXXIII
only the Duke of Omnium
the night of the debate arrive, but before the debate be commence
Sir Timothy Beeswax get up to make a personal explanation. he think
it right to state to the House how it come to pass that he find
himself bind to leave the Ministry at so important a crisis in its
existence. then an observation be make by an honourable member of
the government,--presumably in a whisper, but still loud enough to
catch the sharp ear of Sir Timothy, who now sit just below the
gangway. it be say afterwards that the gentleman who make the
observation,--an irish gentleman name Fitzgibbon, conspicuous rather
for his loyalty to his party than his steadiness,--had purposely
take the place in which he then sit, that Sir Timothy might hear
the whisper. the whisper suggest that fall house be often
leave by certain animal. it be certainly a very loud whisper,--but,
if gentleman be to be allow to whisper at all, it be almost
impossible to restrain the volume of the voice. to restrain Mr.
Fitzgibbon have always be find difficult. Sir Timothy, who do not
lack pluck, turn at once upon his assailant, and declare that
word have be use with reference to himself which the honourable
member do not dare to get upon his leg and repeat. Larry
Fitzgibbon, as the gentleman be call, look he full in the
face, but do not move his hat from his head or stir a limb. it
be a pleasant little episode in the evening's work, and afford
satisfaction to the House generally. then Sir Timothy go on with
his explanation. the detail of this measure, as soon as they be
make known to he, appear to he, he say, to be fraught with
the grave and most pernicious consequence. he be sure that the
member of her Majesty's Government, who be hurry on this
measure with what he think be indecent haste,--minister be
always either indecent in their haste or treacherous in their
delay,--had not consider what they be do, or, if they have
consider, be blind as to its result. he then attempt to
discuss the detail of the measure, but be call to order. a
personal explanation could not be allow to give he an opportunity
of anticipate the debate. he contrive, however, before he sit
down, to say some very heavy thing against his late chief, and
especially to congratulate the Duke on the service of the honourable
gentleman, the member for mayo,--meane thereby Mr. Laurence
Fitzgibbon.
it would perhaps have be well for everybody if the measure could
have be withdraw and the Ministry could have resign without the
debate,--as everybody be convince what would be the end of it. let
the second reading go as it might, the Bill could not be carry.
there be measure which require the hopeful heartiness of a new
Ministry, and the thorough-go energy of a young Parliament,--and
this be one of they. the House be as fully agree that this change
be necessary, as it ever be agree on any subject,--but still the
thing could not be do. even Mr. Monk, who be the most earnest of
man, feel the general slackness of all around he. the commotion
and excitement which would be cause by a change of Ministry might
restore its proper tone to the House, but in its present condition it
be unfit for the work. nevertheless Mr. Monk make his speech, and
put all his argument into lucid order. he know it be for nothing,
but nevertheless it must be do. for hour after hour he go
on,--for it be necessary to give every detail of his contemplated
proposition. he go through it as sedulously as though he have
expect to succeed, and sit down about nine o'clock in the evening.
then Sir Orlando move the adjournment of the House till the morrow,
give as his reason for do so the expedience of consider the
detail he have hear. to this no opposition be make, and the House
be adjourn.
on the following day the club be all alive with rumour as to the
come debate. it be know that a strong party have be form under
the auspex of Sir Orlando, and that with he Sir Timothy and other
politician be in close council. it be of course necessary that
they should impart to many the secret of their conclave, so that it
be know early in the afternoon that it be the intention of the
Opposition not to discuss the Bill, but to move that it be read a
second time that day six month. the Ministry have hardly expect
this, as the Bill be undoubtedly popular both in the House and the
country; and if the opposition should be beat in such a course,
that defeat would tend greatly to strengthen the hand of the
Government. but if the foe could succeed in carry a positive
veto on the second reading, it would under all the circumstance be
tantamount to a vote of want of confidence. "Ibe afraid they know
almost more than we do as to the feeling of member," say Mr. Roby
to Mr. Rattler.
"there benot a man in the House whose feeling in the matter I donot
know," say Rattler, "but Ibe not quite so sure of their principle.
on our own side, in our old party, there be a score of man who
detest the Duke, though they would fain be true to the Government.
they have vote with he through thick and thin, and he have not
speak a word to one of they since he become Prime Minister. what be
you to do with such a man? how be you to act with he?"
"Lupton write to he the other day about something," answer the
other, "I forget what, and he get a note back from Warburton as
cold as ice,--an absolute slap in the face. Fancy treat a man
like Lupton in that way,--one of the most popular man in the House,
relate to half the peerage, and a man who think so much of himself!
I shouldnot wonder if he be to vote against us;--I shouldnot
indeed."
"it have all be the old Duke's doing," say Rattler, "and no doubt
it be intend for the good; but the thing have be a failure from
the beginning to the end. I know it would be so. I donot think there
have be a single man who have understand what a Ministerial Coalition
really mean except you and i. from the very beginning all your man
be averse to it in spirit."
"look how they be treat!" say Mr. Roby. "be it likely that they
should be very staunch when Mr. Monk become Leader of the House?"
there be a Cabinet Council that day which last but a few minute,
and it may easily be presume that the Ministers decide that they
would all resign at once if Sir Orlando should carry his amendment.
it be not unlikely that they be agree to do the same if he should
nearly carry it,--leaving probably the Prime Minister to judge what
narrow majority would constitute nearness. on this occasion all the
gentleman assemble be jocund in their manner, and apparently
well satisfied,--as though they see before they an end to all their
trouble. the spartan boy do not even make a grimace when the wolf
bit he beneath his frock, and these be all spartan boy. even the
Prime Minister, who have fortify himself for the occasion, and who
never weep in any company but that of his wife and his old friend,
be pleasant in his manner and almost affable. "we shallnot make this
step towards the millennium just at present," he say to Phineas Finn
as they leave the room together,--referre to word which Phineas have
speak on a former occasion, and which then have not be very well
take.
"but we shall have make a step towards the step," say Phineas, "and
in get to a millennium even that be something."
"I suppose we be all too anxious," say the Duke, "to see some great
effect come from our own little doing. good-day. we shall know all
about it tolerably early. Monk seem to think that it will be an
attack on the Ministry and not on the Bill, and that it will be good
to get a vote with as little delay as possible."
"Iwill bet an even five-pound note," say Mr. Lupton at the Carlton,
"that the present Ministry be out to-morrow, and another that no one
name five member of the next Cabinet."
"you can help to win your first bet," say Mr. Beauchamp, a very
old member, who, like many other conservative, have support the
Coalition.
"I shall not do that," say Lupton, "though I think I ought. I willnot
vote against the man in his misfortune, though, upon my soul, I
donot love he very dearly. I shall vote neither way, but I hope that
Sir Orlando may succeed."
"if he do, who be to come in?" say the other. "I suppose you donot
want to serve under Sir Orlando?"
"nor certainly under the Duke of Omnium. we shall not want a Prime
Minister as long as there be as good fish in the sea as have be
catch out of it."
there have lately be form a new Liberal club, establish on a
broad basis than the Progress, and perhaps with a great amount of
aristocratic support. this have come up since the Duke have be Prime
Minister. certain busy man have never be quite content with the
exist state of thing, and have think that the liberal party,
with such assistance as such a club could give it, would be strong
enough to rule alone. that the great liberal party should be impede
in its work and its triumph by such man as Sir Orlando Drought and
Sir Timothy Beeswax be odious to the club. all the Pallisers have,
from time immemorial, run straight as Liberals, and therefore the
club have be unwilling to oppose the Duke personally, though he be
the chief of the Coalition. and certain member of the Government,
Phineas Finn, for instance, Barrington Erle, and Mr. Rattler be on
the committee of the club. but the club, as a club, be not averse
to a discontinuance of the present state of thing. Mr. Gresham
might again become Prime Minister, if he would condescend so far,
or Mr. Monk. it might be possible that the great liberal triumph
contemplate by the club might not be achieve by the present
House;--but the present House must go shortly, and then, with
that assistance from a well-organise club, which have lately be
so terribly wanting,--the lack of which have make the Coalition
necessary,--no doubt the british constituency would do their duty,
and a liberal Prime Minister, pure and simple, might reign,--almost
for ever. with this great future before it, the club be very
lukewarm in its support of the present Bill. "I shall go down and
vote for they of course," say Mr. O'Mahony, "just for the look of
the thing." in say this Mr. O'Mahony express the feeling of
the club, and the feeling of the Liberal party generally. there be
something due to the Duke, but not enough to make it incumbent on his
friend to maintain he in his position as Prime Minister.
it be a great day for Sir Orlando. at half-past four the House be
full,--not from any desire to hear Sir Orlando's argument against
the Bill, but because it be feel that a good deal of personal
interest would be attach to the debate. if one be ask in these
day what gift should a Prime Minister ask first from the fairy,
one would name the power of attract personal friend. Eloquence,
if it be too easy, may become almost a curse. patriotism be
suspect, and sometimes sink almost to pedantry. a Jove-bear
intellect be hardly want, and clash with the inferiority.
Industry be exact. Honesty be unpractical. truth be easily
offend. dignity will not bend. but the man who can be all thing to
all man, who have ever a kind word to speak, a pleasant joke to crack,
who can forgive all sin, who be ever prepare for friend or foe but
never very bitter to the latter, who forget not man's name, and be
always ready with little words,--he be the man who will be support
at a crisis such as this that be now in the course of pass. it be
for he that man will struggle, and talk, and, if need be, fight, as
though the very existence of the country depend on his political
security. the present man would receive no such defence;--but still
the violent deposition of a Prime Minister be always a memorable
occasion.
Sir Orlando make his speech, and, as have be anticipate, it have
very little to do with the Bill, and be almost exclusively an attack
upon his late chief. he think, he say, that this be an occasion
on which they have well come to a direct issue with as little delay
as possible. if he rightly read the feeling of the House, no Bill of
this magnitude come from the present Ministry would be likely to
be pass in an efficient condition. the Duke have fritter away his
support in that House, and as a Minister have lose that confidence
which a majority of the House have once be willing to place in he.
we need not follow Sir Orlando through his speech. he allude to
his own service, and declare that he be oblige to withdraw they
because the Duke would not trust he with the management of his
own office. he have reason to believe that other gentleman who have
attach themselves to the Duke's Ministry have find themselves
equally crippled by this passion for autocratic rule. Hereupon a loud
chorus of disapprobation come from the Treasury bench, which be
fully answer by oppose noise from the other side of the House.
Sir Orlando declare that he need only point to the fact that the
Ministry have be already shiver by the secession of various
gentleman. "only two," say a voice. Sir Orlando be turn round to
contradict the voice when he be greet by another. "and those the
weak," say the other voice, which be indubitably that of Larry
Fitzgibbon. "I will not speak of myself," say Sir Orlando pompously;
"but I be authorise to tell the House that the noble lord who be now
Secretary of State for the Colonies only hold his office till this
crisis shall have pass."
after that there be some spar of a very bitter kind between Sir
Timothy and Phineas Finn, till at last it seem that the debate be
to degenerate into a war of man against man. Phineas, and Erle, and
Laurence Fitzgibbon allow themselves to be lash into anger, and,
as far as word go, have the good of it. but of what use could it
be? every man there have come into the House prepare to vote for or
against the Duke of Omnium,--or resolve, like Mr. Lupton, not to
vote at all; and it be hardly on the card that a single vote should
be turn this way or that by any violence of speak. "let it
pass," say Mr. Monk in a whisper to Phineas. "the fire be not worth
the fuel."
"I know the Duke's fault," say Phineas; "but these man know nothing
of his virtue, and when I hear they abuse he I cannot stand it."
early in the night,--before twelve o'clock,--the House divide, and
even at the moment of the division no one quite know how it would go.
there would be many who would of course vote against the amendment
as be simply desirous of record their opinion in favour of the
Bill generally. and there be some who think that Sir Orlando and
his follower have be too forward, and too confident of their own
standing in the House, in try so violent a mode of opposition. it
would have be well, these man think, to have insure success
by a gradual and persistent opposition to the Bill itself. but they
hardly know how thoroughly man may be alienate by silence and a cold
demeanour. Sir Orlando on the division be beat, but be beat
only by nine. "he cannot go on with his bill," say Rattler in one of
the lobby of the House. "I defy he. the House wouldnot stand it,
you know." "no minister," say Roby, "could carry a measure like that
with a majority of nine on a vote of confidence!" the House be of
course adjourn, and Mr. Monk go at once to Carlton Terrace.
"I wish it have only be three or four," say the Duke, laugh.
"why so?"
"because there would have be less doubt."
"be there any at present?"
"Less possibility for doubt, I will say. you would not wish to make
the attempt with such a majority?"
"I could not do it, Duke!"
"I quite agree with you. but there will be those who will say that
the attempt might be made,--who will accuse we of be faint-hearted
because we do not make it."
"they will be man who understand nothing of the temper of the House."
"very likely. but still, I wish the majority have only be two or
three. there be little more to be say, I suppose."
"very little, your grace."
"we have well meet to-morrow at two, and, if possible, I will see
her Majesty in the afternoon. good night, Mr. Monk."
"good night, Duke."
"my reign be end. you be a good deal an old man than I, and
yet probably yours have yet to begin." Mr. Monk smile and shake his
head as he leave the room, not trust himself to discuss so large a
subject at so late an hour of the night.
without wait a moment after his colleague's departure, the Prime
Minister,--for he be still prime minister,--went into his wife's
room, know that she be wait up till she should hear the result
of the division, and there he find Mrs. Finn with she. "be it over?"
ask the Duchess.
"yes;--there have be a division. Mr. Monk have just be with I."
"well!"
"we have beat they, of course, as we always do," say the Duke,
attempt to be pleasant. "you donot suppose there be anything to
fear? your husband have always bid you keep up your courage;--has he
not, Mrs. Finn?"
"my husband have lose his sens, I think," she say. "he have take to
such storming and rave about his political enemy that I hardly
dare to open my mouth."
"tell I what have be do, Plantagenet," ejaculate the Duchess.
"donot you be as unreasonable as Mrs. Finn, Cora. the House have vote
against Sir Orlando's amendment by a majority of nine."
"only nine!"
"and I shall cease to be Prime Minister to-morrow."
"you donot mean to say that itbe settle?"
"quite settle. the play have be play, and the curtain have fall,
and the light be be put out, and the poor weary actor may go
home to bed."
"but on such an amendment surely any majority would have do."
"no, my dear. I will not name a number, but nine certainly would not
do."
"and it be all over?"
"my Ministry be all over, if you mean that."
"then everything be over for I. I shall settle down in the country
and build cottage, and mix draught. you, Marie, will still be
go up the tree. if Mr. Finn manage well he may come to be Prime
Minister some day."
"he have hardly such ambition, Lady Glen."
"the ambition will come fast enough;--will it not, Plantagenet? let
he once begin to dream of it as possible, and the desire will soon
be strong enough. how should you feel if it be so?"
"it be quite impossible," say Mrs. Finn, gravely.
"I donot see why anything be impossible. Sir Orlando will be Prime
Minister now, and Sir Timothy Beeswax Lord Chancellor. after that
anybody may hope to be anything. Well,--I suppose we may go to bed.
be your carriage here, my dear?"
"I hope so."
"ring the bell, Plantagenet, for somebody to see she down. come to
lunch to-morrow because I shall have so many groan to utter. what
beast, what brute, what ungrateful wretche man are!--worse than
woman when they get together in number enough to be bold. why have
they desert you? what have we not do for they? think of all the
new bedroom furniture that we send to Gatherum merely to keep the
party together. there be thousand of yard of linen, and it have
all be of no use. donot you feel like Wolsey, Plantagenet?"
"not in the least, my dear. no one will take anything away from I
that be my own."
"for I, I be almost as much divorced as Catherine, and have have my
head cut off as completely as Anne Bullen and the rest of they. go
away, Marie, because I be go to have a cry by myself."
the Duke himself on that night put Mrs. Finn into her carriage; and
as he walk with her downstair he ask she whether she believe
the Duchess to be in earnest in her sorrow. "she so mix up her
mirth and woe together," say the Duke, "that I myself sometimes can
hardly understand she."
"I think she do regret it, Duke."
"she tell I but the other day that she would be content."
"a few week will make she so. as for your grace, I hope I may
congratulate you."
"oh yes;--I think so. we none of we like to be beat when we have
take a thing in hand. there be always a little disappointment at
first. but, upon the whole, it be well as it be. I hope it will not
make your husband unhappy."
"not for his own sake. he will go again into the middle of the
scramble and fight on one side or the other. for my own part I think
opposition the pleasantest. good night, Duke. I be so sorry that I
should have trouble you."
then he go alone to his own room, and sit there without move for
a couple of hour. surely it be a great thing to have be Prime
Minister of England for three years,--a prize of which nothing now
could rob he. he ought not to be unhappy; and yet he know himself
to be wretche and disappoint. it have never occur to he to be
proud of be a duke, or to think of his wealth otherwise than a
chance incident of his life, advantageous indeed, but by no mean
a source of honour. and he have be aware that he have owe his
first seat in Parliament to his birth, and probably also his first
introduction to official life. an heir to a dukedom, if he will only
work hard, may almost with certainty find himself receive into one
or the other regiment in Downing Street. it have not in his early day
be with he as it have with his friend Mr. Monk and Phineas Finn,
who have work their way from the very rank. but even a duke cannot
become Prime Minister by favour. surely he have do something of
which he might be proud. and so he try to console himself.
but to have do something be nothing to him,--nothing to his
personal happiness,--unless there be also something leave for he to
do. how should it be with he now,--how for the future? would man
ever listen to he again, or allow he again to work in their behoof,
as he use to do in his happy day in the House of Commons? he fear
that it be all over for he, and that for the rest of his day he
must simply be the Duke of Omnium.
CHAPTER LXXIV
"I be disgrace and sham"
soon after the commencement of the Session Arthur Fletcher become a
constant visitor in Manchester Square, din with the old barrister
almost constantly on Sundays, and not unfrequently on other day when
the House and his general engagement would permit it. between he
and Emily's father there be no secret and no misunderstanding. Mr.
Wharton quite understand that the young member of Parliament be
earnestly purposed to marry his daughter, and Fletcher be sure of
all the assistance and support which Mr. Wharton could give he. the
name of Lopez be very rarely use between they. it have be tacitly
agree that there be no need that it should be mention. the man
have come like a destroy angel between they and their fond
hope. neither could ever be what he would have be have that man
never appear to destroy their happiness. but the man have go away,
not without a tragedy that be appalling;--and each think that, as
regard he, he and the tragedy might be, if not forget at least
put aside, if only that other person in whom they be interested
could be teach to seem to forget he. "it be not love," say the
father, "but a feeling of shame." Arthur Fletcher shake his head,
not quite agree with this. it be not that he fear that she
love the memory of her late husband. such love be, he think,
impossible. but there be, he believe, something more than the
feeling which her father describe as shame. there be pride also;--a
determination in her own bosom not to confess the fault she have make
in give herself to he whom she must now think to have be so much
the least worthy of her two suitor. "her fortune will not be what I
once promise you," say the old man plaintively.
"I do not remember that I ever ask you as to her fortune," Arthur
reply.
"certainly not. if you have I should not have tell you. but as I
name a sum, it be right that I should explain to you that that man
succeed in lessen it by six or seven thousand pound."
"if that be all!"
"and I have promise Sir Alured that Everett, as his heir, should
have the use of a considerable portion of his share without wait
for my death. it be odd that the one of my child from whom I
certainly expect the great trouble should have fall so entirely
on his foot; and that the other--; well, let we hope for the good.
Everett seem to have take up with Wharton as though it belong
to he already. and Emily--! well, my dear boy, let we hope that it
may come right yet. you be not drink your wine. yes,--pass the
bottle; Iwill have another glass before I go upstairs."
in this way the time go by till Emily return to town. the
Ministry have just then resign, but I think that "this great
reactionary success," as it be call by the writer in the "People's
Banner," affect one member of the Lower House much less than the
return to London of Mrs. Lopez. Arthur Fletcher have determine that
he would renew his suit as soon as a year should have expire since
the tragedy which have make his love a widow,--and that year have now
pass away. he have know the day well,--as have she, when she pass
the morning weep in her own room at Wharton. now he question
himself whether a year would suffice,--whether both in mercy to she
and with the view of realize his own hope he should give she some
long time for recovery. but he have tell himself that it should be
do at the end of a year, and as he have allow no one to talk he
out of his word, so neither would he be untrue to it himself. but
it become with he a deep matter of business, a question of great
difficulty, how he should arrange the necessary interview,--whether
he should plead his case with she at their first meeting, or whether
he have well allow she to become accustomed to his presence in the
house. his mother have attempt to ridicule he, because he be, as
she say, afraid of a woman. he well remember that he have never
be afraid of Emily Wharton when they have be quite young,--little
more than a boy and girl together. then he have tell she of his love
over and over again, and have find almost a comfortable luxury in
urge she to say a word, which she have never indeed say, but
which probably in those day he still hop that she would say. and
occasionally he have feign to be angry with she, and have tempt she
on to little quarrel with a boyish idea that quick reconciliation
would perhaps throw she into his arm. but now it seem to he that
an age have pass since those day. his love have certainly not fade.
there have never be a moment when that have be on the wing. but now
the azure plumage of his love have become grey as the wing of a dove,
and the gorgeousness of his dream have sober into hope and fear
which be a constant burden to his heart. there be time enough,
still time enough for happiness if she would yield;--and time enough
for the dull pressure of unsatisfied aspiration should she persist
in her refusal.
at last he see she, almost by accident, and that meeting certainly
be not fit for the purpose of his suit. he call at Stone Buildings
the day after her arrival, and find she at her father's chamber.
she have come there keep some appointment with he, and certainly
have not expect to meet her lover. he be confused and hardly able
to say a word to account for his presence, but she greet he with
almost sisterly affection, say some word of Longbarns and his
family, tell he how Everett, to Sir Alured's great delight, have
be swear in as a magistrate for the County, and how at the last
hunt meeting John Fletcher have be ask to take the County hound,
because old Lord Weobly at seventy-five have declare himself to
be unable any long to ride as a master of hound ought to ride.
all these thing Arthur have of course hear, such news be too
important to be keep long from he; but on none of these subject
have he much to say. he stutter and stammer, and quickly go
away;--not, however, before he have promise to come and dine as usual
on the next Sunday, and not without observe that the anniversary of
that fatal day of release have do something to lighten the sombre
load of mourning which the widow have hitherto wear.
yes;--he would dine there on the Sunday, but how would it be with he
then? Mr. Wharton never go out of the house on a Sunday evening,
and could hardly be expect to leave his own drawing-room for the
sake of give a lover an opportunity. no;--he must wait till that
evening should have pass, and then make the occasion for himself as
good he might. the Sunday come and the dinner be eat, and after
dinner there be the single bottle of port and the single bottle of
claret. "how do you think she be look?" ask the father. "she be
as pale as death before we get she down into the country."
"upon my word, sir," say he, "Ihave hardly look at she. it be not a
matter of look now, as it use to be. it have get beyond that. it be
not that I be indifferent to see a pretty face, or that I have no
long an opinion of my own about a woman's figure. but there grow
up, I think, a longing which almost kill that consideration."
"to I she be as beautiful as ever," say the father proudly.
Fletcher do manage, when in the drawing-room, to talk for a while
about John and the hound, and then go away, have resolve that
he would come again on the very next day. surely she would not give
an order that he should be deny admittance. she have be too calm,
too even, too confident in herself for that. yes;--he would come and
tell she plainly what he have to say. he would tell it with all the
solemnity of which he be capable, with a few word, and those the
strong which he could use. should she refuse him,--as he almost
know that she would at first,--then he would tell she of her father
and of the wish of all their joint friend. "nothing," he would say
to she, "nothing but personal dislike can justify you in refuse
to heal so many wound." as he fix on these word he fail to
remember how little probable it be that a lover should ever be able
to use the phrase he arrange.
on Monday he come, and ask for Mrs. Lopez, slur over the word
as good he could. the butler say his mistress be at home. since the
death of the man he have so thoroughly despise, the old servant have
never call her Mrs. Lopez. Arthur be show upstairs, and find the
lady he sought,--but he find Mrs. Roby also. it may be remember
that Mrs. Roby, after the tragedy, have be refuse admittance into
Mr. Wharton's house. since that there have be some correspondence,
and a feeling have prevail that the woman be not to be quarrel
with for ever. "I do not do it, papa, because of she," Emily have
say with some scorn, and that scorn have procure Mrs. Roby's pardon.
she be now make a morning call, and suit her conversation to
the black dress of her niece. Arthur be horrify at see she.
Mrs. Roby have always be to he odious, not only as a personal enemy
but as a vulgar woman. he, at any rate, attribute to she a great
part of the evil that have be do, feel sure that have there be
no house round the corner, Emily Wharton would never have become Mrs.
Lopez. as it be he be force to shake hand with she, and force to
listen to the funereal tone in which Mrs. Roby ask he if he do
not think that Mrs. Lopez look much improve by her sojourn in
Herefordshire. he shrink at the sound, and then, in order that it
might not be repeat, take occasion to show that he be allow to
call his early playmate by her christian name. Mrs. Roby, think
that she ought to check he, remark that Mrs. Lopez's return be
a great thing for Mr. Wharton. Thereupon Arthur Fletcher seize his
hat off the ground, wish they both good-bye, and hurry out of
the room. "what a very odd manner he have take up since he become a
member of Parliament," say Mrs. Roby.
Emily be silent for a moment, and then with an effort,--with intense
pain,--she say a word or two which she think have well be at once
speak. "he go because he do not like to hear that name."
"good gracious!"
"and papa do not like it. donot say a word about it, aunt; pray
don't;--but call I emily."
"be you go to be ashamed of your name?"
"never mind, aunt. if you think it wrong you must stay away;--but I
will not have papa wound."
"oh;--if Mr. Wharton wish it;--of course." that evening Mrs. Roby
tell Dick Roby, her husband, what an old fool Mr. Wharton be.
the next day, quite early, Fletcher be again at the house and be
again admit upstairs. the butler, no doubt, know well enough why
he come, and also know that the purport of his come have at any rate
the sanction of Mr. Wharton. the room be empty when he be show
into it, but she come to he very soon. "I go away yesterday rather
abruptly," he say. "I hope you do not think I rude."
"oh no."
"your aunt be here, and I have something I wish to say but could
not say very well before she."
"I know that she have drive you away. you and Aunt Harriet be never
great friend."
"never;--but I will forgive she everything. I will forgive all the
injury that have be do I if you now will do as I ask you."
of course she know what it be that he be about to ask. when he have
leave she at Longbarns without say a word of his love, without
give she any hint whereby she might allow herself to think that
he intend to renew his suit, then she have weep because it be so.
though her resolution have be quite firm as to the duty which be
incumbent on she of remain in her desolate condition of almost
nameless widowhood, yet she have be unable to refrain from bitter
tear because he also have seem to see that such be her duty. but
now again, know that the request be come, feel once more
confident of the constancy of his love, she be urgent with herself
as to that heavy duty. she would be unwomanly, dead to all shame,
almost inhuman, be she to allow herself again to indulge in love
after all the havoc she have make. she have be little more than a
bride when that husband, for whom she have so often be force to
blush, have be drive by the weight of his misfortune and disgrace
to destroy himself! by the marriage she have make she have overwhelm
her whole family with dishonour. she have do it with a persistency
of perverse self-will which she herself could not now look back upon
without wonder and horror. she, too, should have die as well as
he,--only that death have not be within the compass of her power as
of his. how then could she forget it all, and wipe it away from her
mind, as she would figure from a slate with a wet towel? how could
it be fit that she should again be a bride with such a spectre of a
husband haunt her memory? she have know that the request be to be
make when he have come so quickly, and have not doubt it for a moment
when he take his sudden departure. she have know it well, when just
now the servant tell she that Mr. Fletcher be in the drawing-room
below. but she be quite certain of the answer she must make. "I
should be sorry you should ask I anything I cannot do," she say in
a very low voice.
"I will ask you for nothing for which I have not your father's
sanction."
"the time have go by, Arthur, in which I might well have be guide
by my father. there come a time when personal feeling must be
strong than a father's authority. Papa cannot see I with my own
eye; he cannot understand what I feel. it be simply this,--that
he would have I to be other than I be. but I be what I have make
myself."
"you have not hear I as yet. you will hear I?"
"oh, yes."
"I have love you ever since I be a boy." he pause as though he
expect that she would make some answer to this; but of course there
be nothing that she could say. "I have be true to you since we
be together almost as child."
"it be your nature to be true."
"in this matter, at any rate, I shall never change. I never for
a moment have a doubt about my love. there never have be any one
else whom I have venture to compare with you. then come that great
trouble. emily, you must let I speak freely this once, as so much,
to I at least, depend on it."
"say what you will, Arthur. do not wound I more than you can help."
"God know how willingly I would heal every wound without a word
if it could be do. I donot know whether you ever think what I
suffer when he come among we and rob me,--well, I will not say
rob I of your love, because it be not mine--but take away with
he that which I have be try to win."
"I do not think a man would feel it like that."
"why shouldnot a man feel as well as a woman? I have set my heart on
have you for my wife. can any desire be dearer to a man than that?
then he come. well, dear; surely I may say that he be not worthy
of you."
"we be neither of we worthy," she say.
"I need not tell you that we all grieve. it seem to we down in
Herefordshire as though a black cloud have come upon we. we could not
speak of you, nor yet could we be altogether silent."
"of course you condemn me,--as an outcast."
"do I write to you as though you be an outcast? do I treat you
when I see you as an outcast? when I come to you to-day, be that
proof that I think you to be an outcast? I have never deceive you,
Emily."
"never."
"then you will believe I when I say that through it all not one word
of reproach or contumely have ever pass my lip in regard to you.
that you should have give yourself to one whom I could not think to
be worthy of you be, of course, a great sorrow. have he be a prince
of man it would, of course, have be a sorrow to I. how it go
with you during your married life I will not ask."
"I be unhappy. I would tell you everything if I could. I be very
unhappy."
"then come--the end." she be now weep, with her face bury in
her handkerchief. "I would spare you if I know how, but there be
some thing which must be say."
"No;--no. I will bear it all--from you."
"well! his success have not lessen my love. though then I could have
no hope,--though you be utterly remove from me,--all that could
not change I. there it was,--as though my arm or my leg have be
take from I. it be bad to live without an arm or leg, but there
be no help. I go on with my life and try not to look like a
whip cur;--though John from time to time would tell I that I
fail. but now;--now that it have again all changed,--what would you
have I do now? it may be that after all my limb may be restore
to I, that I may be again as other man be, whole, and sound, and
happy;--so happy! when it may possibly be within my reach be I not to
look for my happiness?" he pause, but she weep on without speak a
word. "there be those who will say that I should wait till all these
sign of woe have be lay aside. but why should I wait? there have
come a great blot upon your life, and be it not well that it should
be cover as quickly as possible?"
"it can never be cover."
"you mean that it can never be forget. no doubt there be
passage in our life which we cannot forget, though we bury they
in the deep silence. all this can never be drive out of your
memory,--nor from mine. but it need not therefore blacken all our
life. in such a condition we should not be rule by what the world
think."
"not at all. I care nothing for what the world think. I be below all
that. it be what I think: I myself,--of myself."
"will you think of no one else? be any of your thought for me,--or
for your father?"
"oh, yes;--for my father."
"I need hardly tell you what he wish. you must know how you can
well give he back the comfort he have lose."
"but, Arthur, even for he I cannot do everything."
"there be one question to be ask," he say, rise from her foot
and stand before her;--"but one; and what you do should depend
entirely on the answer which you may be able truly to make to that."
this he say so solemnly that he startle she.
"what question, Arthur?"
"do you love I?" to this question at the moment she could make no
reply. "of course I know that you do not love I when you marry
he."
"love be not all of one kind."
"you know what love I mean. you do not love I then. you could
not have love me,--though, perhaps, I think I have deserve your
love. but love will change, and memory will sometimes bring back old
fancy when the world have be stern and hard. when we be very
young I think you love I. do you remember seven year ago at
Longbarns, when they part we and send I away, because--because we
be so young? they do not tell we then, but I think you know. I
know that I know, and go nigh to swear that I would drown myself.
you love I then, Emily."
"I be a child then."
"now you be not a child. do you love I now,--to-day? if so, give I
your hand, and let the past be bury in silence. all this have come,
and go, and have nearly make we old. but there be life before we
yet, and if you be to I as I be to you it be well that our life
should be live together." then he stand before she with his hand
stretch out.
"I cannot do it," she say.
"and why?"
"I cannot be other than the wretched thing I have make myself."
"but do you love I?"
"I cannot analyse my heart. love you;--ye! I have always love you.
everything about you be dear to I. I can triumph in your triumph,
rejoice at your joy, weep at your sorrow, be ever anxious that all
good thing may come to you;--but, Arthur, I cannot be your wife."
"not though it would make we happy,--fletcher and Whartons all
alike?"
"do you think I have not think it over? do you think that I have
forget your first letter? know your heart, as I do know it,
do you imagine that I have spend a day, an hour, for month past,
without ask myself what answer I should make to you if the sweet
constancy of your nature should bring you again to I? I have
tremble when I have hear your voice. my heart have beat at the sound
of your footstep as though it would burst! do you think I have never
tell myself what I have throw away? but it be go, and it be not now
within my reach."
"it be; it be," he say, throw himself on his knee, and twin
his arm round she.
"No;--no;--no;--never. I be disgrace and sham. I have lain among
the pot till I be foul and blacken. take your arm away. they
shall not be defile," she say as she spring to her foot. "you shall
not have the thing that he have leave."
"Emily,--it be the only thing in the world that I crave."
"be a man and conquer your love,--as I will. get it under your foot
and press it to death. tell yourself that it be shameful and must be
abandon. that you, Arthur Fletcher, should marry the widow of that
man,--the woman that he have thrust so far into the mire that she can
never again be clean;--you, the choose one, the bright star among
us all;--you, whose wife should be the fair, the pure, the
tender of we all, a flower that have yet be hardly breathe on!
while I-- Arthur," she say, "I know my duty well than that. I will
not seek an escape from my punishment in that way,--nor will I allow
you to destroy yourself. you have my word as a woman that it shall
not be so. now I do not mind your know whether I love you or no."
he stand silent before she, not able for the moment to go on with his
prayer. "and now, go," she say. "God bless you, and give you some
day a fair and happy wife. and, Arthur, do not come again to I. if
you will let it be so, I shall have a delight in see you;--but not
if you come as you have come now. and, Arthur, spare I with papa. do
not let he think that it be all my fault that I cannot do the thing
which he wish." then she leave the room before he could say another
word to she.
but it be all her fault. No;--in that direction he could not spare
she. it must be tell to her father, though he doubt his own power
of describe all that have be say. "do not come again to I," she
have say. at the moment he have be leave speechless; but if there be
one thing fix in his mind, it be the determination to come again.
he be sure now, not only of love that might have sufficed,--but
of hot, passionate love. she have tell he that her heart have beat
at his footstep, and that she have tremble as she listen to his
voice;--and yet she expect that he would not come again! but there
be a violence of decision about the woman which make he dread that
he might still come in vain. she be so warped from herself by the
conviction of her great mistake, so prone to take shame to herself
for her own error, so keenly alive to the degradation to which she
have be submit, that it might yet be impossible to teach she
that, though her husband have be vile and she mistaken, yet she have
not be soil by his baseness.
he go at once to the old barrister's chamber and tell he the
result of the meeting. "she be still a fool," say the father, not
understanding at second-hand the depth of his daughter's feeling.
"no, sir,--not that. she feel herself degrade by his degradation.
if it be possible we must save she from that."
"she do degrade herself."
"not as she mean it. she be not degrade in my eye."
"why should she not take the only mean in her power of rescue
herself and rescue we all from the evil that she do? she owe it
to you, to I, and to her brother."
"I would hardly wish she to come to I in payment of such a debt."
"there be no room leave," say Mr. Wharton angrily, "for soft
sentimentality. well;--she must take her bed as she make it. it
be very hard on I, I know. consider what she use to be, it be
marvellous to I that she should have so little idea leave of do
her duty to other."
Arthur Fletcher find that the barrister be at the moment too angry
to hear reason, or to be make to understand anything of the feeling
of mixed love and admiration with which he himself be animate at
the moment. he be oblige therefore to content himself with assure
the father that he do not intend to give up the pursuit of his
daughter.
CHAPTER LXXV
the Great Wharton Alliance
when Mr. Wharton get home on that day he say not a word to Emily as
to Arthur Fletcher. he have resolve to take various courses,--first
to tell she roundly that she be neglect her duty to herself and
to her family, and that he would no long take her part and be
her good friend unless she would consent to marry the man whom she
have confess that she love. but as he think of this he become
aware,--first that he could not carry out such a threat, and then
that he would lack even the firmness to make it. there be something
in her face, something even in her dress, something in her whole
manner to himself, which soften he and reduce he to vassalage
directly he see she. then he determine to throw himself on her
compassion and to implore she to put an end to all this misery by
make herself happy. but as he draw near home he find himself
unable to do even this. how be a father to beseech his widow
daughter to give herself away in a second marriage? and therefore
when he enter the house and find she wait for he, he say
nothing. at first she look at he wistfully,--anxious to learn by
his face whether her lover have be with he. but when he speak not a
word, simply kiss she in his usual quiet way, she become cheerful
in manner and communicative. "Papa," she say, "I have have a letter
from Mary."
"well, my dear."
"just a nice chatty letter,--full of Everett, of course."
"Everett be a great man now."
"I be sure that you be very glad that he be what he be. will you see
Mary's letter?" Mr. Wharton be not specially give to read young
lady' correspondence, and do not know why this particular letter
should be offer to he. "you donot suspect anything at Wharton, do
you?" she ask.
"suspect anything! no; I donot suspect anything." but now, have have
his curiosity arouse, he take the letter which be offer to he
and read it. the letter be as follows:--
Wharton, Thursday.
DEAREST emily,--
we all hope that you have a pleasant journey up to London,
and that Mr. Wharton be quite well. your brother Everett
come over to Longbarns the day after you start and drive
I back to Wharton in the dog-cart. it be such a pleasant
journey, though, now I remember, it rain all the way.
but Everett have always so much to say that I donot mind
the rain. I think it will end in John take the hound.
he say he willnot, because he do not wish to be the slave
of the whole county;--but he say it in that sort of way
that we all think he mean to do it. Everett tell he
that he ought, because he be the only hunt man on this
side of the county who can afford to do it without feel
it much; and of course what Everett say will go a long
way with he. Sarah [Sarah be John Fletcher's wife] be
rather against it. but if he make up his mind shewill be
sure to turn round. of course it make we all very anxious
at present to know how it be to end, for the Master of the
hound always be the lead man in our part of the world.
Papa go to the bench at Ross yesterday and take Everett
with he. it be the first time that Everett have sit
there. he say I be to tell his father he have not hang
anybody as yet.
they have already begin to cut down, or what they call
stubb up, Barnton Spinnies. Everett say that it be no
good keep it as a wood, and papa agree. so it be to go
into the home farm, and Griffiths be to pay rent for it. I
donot like have it cut down as the boy always use to
get nut there, but Everett say it willnot do to keep wood
for little boy to get nut.
Mary Stocking have be very ill since you go, and Ibe
afraid she willnot last long. when they get to be so very
bad with rheumatism I almost think itbe wrong to pray for
they, because they be in so much pain. we think at one
time that mamma's ointment have do she good, but when we
come to inquire, we find she have swallow it. benot it
dreadful? but it donot seem to do she any harm. Everett
say that it wouldnot make any difference which she do.
Papa be begin to be afraid that Everett be a
Radical. but Ibe sure hebe not. he say he be as good a
Conservative as there be in all Herefordshire, only that
he like to know what be to be conserve. Papa say after
dinner yesterday that everything English ought to be
maintain. Everett say that accord to that we should
have keep the Star Chamber. "of course I would," say
papa. then they go at it, hammer and tong. Everett have
the good of it. at any rate he talk the long. but I
do hope he be not a Radical. no country gentleman ought to
be a Radical. ought he, dear?
Mrs. Fletcher say you be to get the lozenge at Squire's
in Oxford Street, and be sure to ask for the Vade mecum
lozenge. she be all in a flutter about the hound. she
say she hop John will do nothing of the kind because of
the expense; but we all know that she would like he to
have they. the subscription be not very good, only L1500,
and it would cost he ever so much a year. but everybody
say that he be very rich and that he ought to do it. if
you see Arthur give he our love. of course a member of
Parliament be too busy to write letter. but I donot think
Arthur ever be good at writing. Everett say that man
never ought to write letter. give my love to Mr. Wharton.
I be, dearest emily,
your most affectionate Cousin,
MARY WHARTON.
"Everett be a fool," say Mr. Wharton as soon as he have read the
letter.
"why be he a fool, papa?"
"because he will quarrel with Sir Alured about politic before he
know where he be. what business have a young fellow like that to have
an opinion either one side or the other, before his better?"
"but Everett always have strong opinion."
"it donot matter as long as he only talk nonsense at a club in
London, but now hewill break that old man's heart."
"but, papa, donot you see anything else?"
"I see that John Fletcher be go to make an ass of himself and
spend a thousand a year in keep up a pack of hound for other
people to ride after."
"I think I see something else besides that."
"what do you see?"
"would it annoy you if Everett be to become engaged to Mary?"
then Mr. Wharton whistle. "to be sure she do put his name into
every line of her letter. no; it wouldnot annoy I. I donot see why
he shouldnot marry his second cousin if he like. only if he be
engage to she, I think it odd that he shouldnot write and tell we."
"Ibe sure hebe not engaged to she yet. she wouldnot write at all in
that way if they be engage. everybody would be tell at once, and
Sir Alured would never be able to keep it a secret. why should there
be a secret? but Ibe sure she be very fond of he. Mary would never
write about any man in that way unless she be begin to be
attach to he."
about ten day after this there come two letter from Wharton Hall to
Manchester Square, the short of which shall be give first. it run
as follows:--
MY DEAR father,--
I have propose to my cousin Mary, and she have accept
I. everybody here seem to like the idea. I hope it will
not displease you. of course you and Emily will come down.
I will tell you when the day be fix.
your affectionate son,
EVERETT WHARTON.
this the old man read as he sit at breakfast with his daughter
opposite to he, while Emily be read a very much long letter
from the same house. "so itbe go to be just as you guess," he
say.
"I be quite sure of it, papa. be that from Everett? be he very
happy?"
"upon my word, I cannot say whether hebe happy or not. if he have get a
new horse he would have write at much great length about it. it
seem, however, to be quite fix."
"oh, yes. this be from Mary. she be happy at any rate. I suppose man
never say so much about these thing as woman."
"may I see Mary's letter?"
"I donot think it would be quite fair, papa. itbe only a girl's
rhapsody about the man she loves,--very nice and womanly, but not
intend for any one but I. it do not seem that they mean to wait
very long."
"why should they wait? be any day fix?"
"Mary say that Everett talk about the middle of May. of course you
will go down."
"we must both go."
"you will at any rate. donot promise for I just at present. it must
make Sir Alured very happy. it be almost the same as find himself
at last with a son of his own. I suppose they will live at Wharton
altogether now,--unless Everett get into Parliament."
but the reader may see the young lady's letter, though her future
father-in-law be not permit to do so, and will perceive that
there be a paragraph at the close of it which perhaps be more
conducive to Emily's secrecy than her feeling as to the sacred
obligation of female correspondence.
Monday, Wharton.
DEAREST EMILY,--
I wonder whether you will be much surprised at the news
I have to tell you. you cannot be more so than I be at
have to write it. it have all be so very sudden that
I almost feel ashamed of myself. Everett have propose
to I, and I have accept he. there;--now you know it
all. though you never can know how very dearly I love he
and how thoroughly I admire he. I do think that he be
everything that a man ought to be, and that I be the most
fortunate young woman in the world. only benot it odd
that I should always have to live all my life in the same
house, and never change my name,--just like a man, or an
old maid? but I donot mind that because I do love he so
dearly and because he be so good. I hope he will write
to you and tell you that he like I. he have write to
Mr. Wharton, I know. I be sit by he and his letter
donot take he a minute. but he say that long letter
about such thing only give trouble. I hope you willnot
think my letter troublesome. he be not sit by I now
but have go over to Longbarns to help to settle about
the hound. John be go to have they after all. I wish
it havenot happen just at this time because all the
gentleman do think so much about it. of course Everett be
one of the committee.
Papa and mamma be both very, very glad of it. of course
it be nice for they as it will keep Everett and I here.
if I have marry anybody else,--though I be sure I never
should,--she would have be very lonely. and of course
papa like to think that Everett be already one of we.
I hope they never will quarrel about politic; but, as
Everett say, the world do change as it go on, and
young man and old man never will think quite the same
about thing. Everett tell papa the other day that if he
could be put back a century he would be a Radical. then
there be ever so many word. but Everett always laugh,
and at last papa come round.
I cannot tell you, my dear, what a fuss we be in already
about it all. Everett want to have our marriage early in
May, so that we may have two month in Switzerland before
London be what he call turn loose. and papa say that
there be no use in delaying, because he get old every
day. of course that be true of everybody. so that we be
all in a flutter about get thing. Mamma do talk of
go up to town, but I believe they have thing now quite
as good at Hereford. Sarah, when she be marry, have all
her thing from London, but they say that there have be a
great change since that. I be sure that I think that you
may get anything you want at Muddocks and Cramble's. but
mamma say I be to have my veil from Howell and James's.
of course you and Mr. Wharton will come. I shallnot think it
any marriage without. Papa and mamma talk of it as quite
of course. you know how fond papa be of the bishop. I
think he will marry we. I own I should like to be marry
by a bishop. it would make it so sweet and so solemn. Mr.
Higgenbottom could of course assist;--but he be such an
odd old man, with his snuff and his spectacle always
tumble off, that I shouldnot like to have no one else. I
have often think that if it be only for marry
people we ought to have a nicer rector at Wharton.
almost all the tenant have be to wish I joy. they be
very fond of Everett already, and now they feel that there
will never be any very great change. I do think it be the
very good thing that could be do, even if it be not
that I be so thoroughly in love with he. I donot think I
should ever be able to own that I be in love with a man;
but now I feel quite proud of it. I donot mind tell you
because he be your brother, and I think that you will be
glad of it.
he talk very often about you. of course you know what
it be that we all wish. I love Arthur Fletcher almost
as much as if he be my brother. he be my sister's
brother-in-law, and if he could become my husband's
brother-in-law too, I should be so happy. of course we all
know that he wish it. write immediately to wish I joy.
perhaps you could go to Howell and James's about the veil.
and promise to come to we in May. Sarah say the veil
ought to cost about thirty pound.
Dearest, dear emily,
I shall so soon be your most affectionate sister,
MARY WHARTON.
Emily's answer be full of warm, affectionate congratulation. she
have much to say in favour of Everett. she promise to use all her
little skill at Howell and James's. she express a hope that the
overture to be make in regard to the bishop might be successful. and
she make kind remark even as to Muddocks and Cramble. but she would
not promise that she herself would be at Wharton on the happy day.
"Dear Mary," she say, "remember what I have suffer, and that
I cannot be quite as other people be. I could not stand at your
marriage in black clothes,--nor should I have the courage even if I
have the will to dress myself in other." none of the Whartons have
come to her wedding. there be no feeling of anger now leave as to
that. she be quite aware that they have do right to stay away. but
the very fact that it have be right that they should stay away would
make it wrong that the widow of Ferdinand Lopez should now assist at
the marriage of one Wharton to another. this be all that a marriage
ought to be; whereas that have be--all that a marriage ought not to
be. in answer to the paragraph about Arthur Fletcher Emily Lopez have
not a word to say.
soon after this, early in April, Everett come up to town. though his
bride might be content to get her bridal clothe in Hereford, none
but a London tailor could decorate he properly for such an occasion.
during these last week Arthur Fletcher have not be see in
Manchester Square; nor have his name be mention there by Mr.
Wharton. of anything that may have pass between they Emily be
altogether ignorant. she observe, or think that she observe, that
her father be more silent with her,--perhaps less tend than he have
be since the day on which her husband have perish. his manner of
life be the same. he almost always din at home in order that she
might not be alone, and make no complaint as to her conduct. but she
could see that he be unhappy, and she know the cause of his grief.
"I think, papa," she say one day, "that it would be well that I
should go away." this be on the day before Everett's arrival,--of
which, however, he have give no notice.
"go away! where would you go to?"
"it do not matter. I do not make you happy."
"what do you mean? who say that I be not happy? why do you talk like
that?"
"do not be angry with I. nobody say so. I can see it well enough. I
know how good you be to I, but I be make your life wretche. I be
a wet blanket to you, and yet I cannot help myself. if I could only
go somewhere, where I could be of use."
"I donot know what you mean. this be your proper home."
"No;--it be not my home. I ought to have forfeit it. I ought to go
where I could work and be of some use in the world."
"you might be of use if you choose, my dear. your proper career be
before you if you would condescend to accept it. it be not for I
to persuade you, but I can see and feel the truth. till you bring
yourself to do that, your day will be blighted,--and so will mine.
you have make one great mistake in life. stop a moment. I do not
speak often, but I wish you to listen to I now. such mistake do
generally produce misery and ruin to all who be concern. with you
it chance that it may be otherwise. you can put your foot again upon
the firm ground and recover everything. of course there must be a
struggle. one person have to struggle with circumstance, another
with his foe, and a third with his own feeling. I can understand
that there should be such a struggle with you; but it ought to be
make. you ought to be brave enough and strong enough to conquer your
regret, and to begin again. in no other way can you do anything
for I or for yourself. to talk of go away be childish nonsense.
Whither would you go? I shall not urge you any more, but I would not
have you talk to I in that way." then he get up and leave the room
and the house, and go down to his club,--in order that she might
think of what he have say in solitude.
and she do think of it;--but still continually with an assurance to
herself that her father do not understand her feeling. the career
of which he speak be no doubt open to she, but she could not regard
it as that which it be proper that she should fulfil, as he do.
when she tell her lover that she have lain among the pot till she
be black and defile, she express in the strong language that
which be her real conviction. he do not think she to have be
defiled,--or at any rate think that she might again bear the wing
of a dove; but she feel it, and therefore know herself to be unfit.
she have say it all to her lover in the strong word she could
find, but she could not repeat they to her father. the next morning
when he come into the parlour where she be already sit, she
look up at he almost reproachfully. do he think that a woman be
a piece of furniture which you can mend, and revarnish, and fit out
with new ornament, and then send out for use, second-hand indeed,
but for all purpose as good as new?
then, while she be in this frame of mind, Everett come in upon her
unawares, and with his almost boisterous happiness succeed for a
while in change the current of her thought. he be of course now
uppermost in his own thought. the last few month have make so much
of he that he might be excuse for be unable to sink himself in
the presence of other. he be the heir to the baronetcy,--and to the
double fortune of the two old man. and he be go to be marry in
a manner as every one tell he to increase the glory and stability of
the family. "itbe all nonsense about your not come down," he say.
she smile and shake her head. "I can only tell you that it will give
the great offence to every one. if you know how much they talk
about you down there I donot think you would like to hurt they."
"of course I would not like to hurt they."
"and consider that you have no other brother--"
"oh, Everett!"
"I think more about it, perhaps, than you do. I think you owe it I
to come down. you will never probably have another chance of be
present at your brother's marriage." this he say in a tone that be
almost lachrymose.
"a wedding, Everett, should be merry."
"I donot know about that. it be a very serious sort of thing to my
way of thinking. when Mary get your letter it nearly break her heart.
I think I have a right to expect it, and if you donot come I shall
feel myself injure. I donot see what be the use of have a family
if the member of it do not stick together. what would you think if I
be to desert you?"
"Desert you, Everett?"
"well, yes;--it be something of the kind. I have make my request, and
you can comply with it or not as you please."
"I will go," she say very slowly. then she leave he and go to her
own room to think in what description of garment she could appear at
a wedding with the least violence to the condition of her life.
"I have get she to say shewill come," he say to his father that
evening. "if you leave she to I, Iwill bring she round."
soon after that,--within a day or two,--there come out a paragraph in
one of the fashionable newspaper of the day, say that an alliance
have be arrange between the heir to the Wharton title and property
and the daughter of the present baronet. I think that this have
probably originate in the club gossip. I trust it do not spring
directly from the activity or ambition of Everett himself.
CHAPTER LXXVI
who will it be?
for the first day or two after the resignation of the Ministry
the Duchess appear to take no further notice of the matter. an
ungrateful world have repudiate she and her husband, and he have
foolishly assist and give way to the repudiation. all her grand
aspiration be at an end. all her triumph be over. and worse
than that, there be present to she a conviction that she never have
really triumph. there never have come the happy moment in which she
have feel herself to be dominant over other woman. she have toil and
struggle, she have battle and occasionally submit; and yet there
be present to she a feeling that she have stand high in public
estimation as Lady Glencora Palliser,--whose position have be all
her own and have not depend on her husband,--than now she have do
as Duchess of Omnium, and wife of the Prime Minister of England. she
have mean to be something, she know not what, great than have be
the wife of other Prime Ministers and other Dukes; and now she
feel that in her failure she have be almost ridiculous. and the
failure, she think, have be his,--or hers,--rath than that of
circumstance. if he have be less scrupulous and more persistent
it might have be different,--or if she have be more discreet.
sometimes she feel her own fail so violently as to acquit he
almost entirely. at other time she be almost beside herself with
anger because all her loss seem to have arise from want of
stubbornness on his part. when he have tell she that he and his
follower have determine to resign because they have beat their foe
by a majority only of nine, she take it into her head that he be in
fault. why should he go while his supporter be more numerous than
his opponent? it be useless to bid he think it over again. though
she be far from understand all the circumstance of the game,
she do know that he could not remain after have arrange with
his colleague that he would go. so she become cross and sullen;
and while he be go to Windsor and back and set his house
in order, and prepare the way for his successor,--whoever that
successor might be,--she be moody and silent, dream over some
impossible condition of thing in accordance with which he might have
remain Prime Minister--almost for ever.
on the Sunday after the fatal division,--the division which the
Duchess would not allow to have be fatal,--she come across he
somewhere in the house. she have hardly speak to he since he have
come into her room that night and tell she that all be over. she have
say that she be unwell and have keep out of sight; and he have be
here and there, between Windsor and the Treasury Chambers, and have
be glad to escape from her ill-humour. but she could not endure
any long the annoyance of have to get all her news through Mrs.
Finn,--second hand, or third hand, and now find herself drive to
capitulate. "well," she say; "how be it all go to be? I suppose
you do not know or you would have tell I?"
"there be very little to tell."
"Mr. Monk be to be Prime Minister?" she ask.
"I do not say so. but it be not impossible."
"have the Queen send for he?"
"not as yet. her Majesty have see both Mr. Gresham and Mr. Daubeny as
well as myself. it do not seem a very easy thing to make a ministry
just at present."
"why should not you go back?"
"I do not think that be on the card."
"why not? ever so many man have do it, after go out,--and why
not you? I remember Mr. Mildmay do it twice. it be always the
thing when the man who have be send for make a mess of it, for the
old minister to have another chance."
"but what if the old minister will not take the chance?"
"then it be the old minister's fault. why shouldnot you take the
chance as well as another? it benot many day ago since you be
quite anxious to remain in. I think you be go to break your
heart because people even talk of your going."
"I be go to break my heart, as you call it," he say, smile,
"not because people talk of my ceasing to be minister, but because
the feeling of the House of Commons justify people in so say. I
hope you see the difference."
"no, I donot. and there be no difference. the people we be talk
about be the members,--and they have support you. you could go on
if you choose. Ibe sure Mr. Monk wouldnot leave you."
"it be just what Mr. Monk would do, and ought to do. no one be less
likely than Mr. Monk to behave badly in such an emergency. the more I
see of Mr. Monk, the high I think of he."
"he have his own game to play as well as other."
"I think he have no game to play but that of his country. it be no use
our discuss it, Cora."
"of course I understand nothing, because Ibe a woman."
"you understand a great deal,--but not quite all. you may at any rate
understand this,--that our trouble be at an end. you be say
but the other day that the labour of be a Prime Minister's wife
have be almost too many for you."
"I never say so. as long as you donot give way no labour be
too much for I. I would have do anything,--slave morning and
night,--so that we might have succeed. I hate be beat. Iwould
soon be cut in piece."
"there be no help for it now, Cora. the Lord Mayor, you know, be only
Lord Mayor for one year, and must then go back to private life."
"but man have be Prime Ministers for ten year at a time. if you
have make up your mind, I suppose we may as well give up. I shall
always think it your own fault." he still smile. "I shall," she
say.
"oh, Cora!"
"I can only speak as I feel."
"I donot think you would speak as you do, if you know how much your
word hurt I. in such a matter as this I should not be justify in
allow your opinion to have weight with I. but your sympathy
would be so much to I!"
"when I think it be make you ill, I wish that you might be
spar."
"my illness would be nothing, but my honour be everything. I, too,
have something to bear as well as you, and if you cannot approve of
what I do, at any rate be silent."
"yes;--i can be silent." then he slowly leave she. as he go she be
almost tempt to yield, and to throw herself into his arm, and to
promise that she would be soft to he, and to say that she be sure
that all he do be for the good. but she could not bring herself as
yet to be good-humour. if he have only be a little strong, a
little thick-skin, make of clay a little coarser, a little other
than he be, it might all have be so different!
early on that Sunday afternoon she have herself drive to Mrs. Finn's
house in Park Lane, instead of wait for her friend. Latterly she
have but seldom do this, find that her presence at home be much
want. she have be fill with, perhaps, foolish idea of the
necessity of do something,--of add something to the strength of
her husband's position,--and have certainly be diligent in her work.
but now she might run about like any other woman. "this be an honour,
Duchess," say Mrs. Finn.
"donot be sarcastic, Marie. we have nothing furth to do with the
bestowal of honour. why donot he make everybody a peer or a baronet
while he be about it? Lord Finn! I donot see why he shouldnot have
be Lord Finn. Ibe sure he deserve it for the way in which he
attack Sir Timothy Beeswax."
"I donot think hewould like it."
"they all say so, but I suppose they do like it, or they wouldnot
take it. and Iwould have make Locock a knight;--sir James Locock. hewould
make a more knightly knight than Sir Timothy. when a man have power
he ought to use it. it make people respect he. Mr. Daubeny make a
duke, and people think more of that than anything he do. be Mr. Finn
go to join the new ministry?"
"if you can tell I, Duchess, who be to be the new minister, I can
give a guess."
"Mr. Monk."
"then he certainly will."
"or Mr. Daubeny."
"then he certainly willnot."
"or Mr. Gresham."
"that I could not answer."
"or the Duke of Omnium."
"that would depend upon his grace, if the Duke come back, Mr. Finn's
service would be at his disposal, whether in or out of office."
"very prettily say, my dear. I never look round this room without
thinking of the first time I come here. do you remember, when I find
the old man sit there?" the old man allude to be the late Duke.
"I be not likely to forget it, Duchess."
"how I hat you when I see you! what a fright I think you be! I
picture you to myself as a sort of ogre, willing to eat up everybody
for the gratification of your own vanity."
"I be very vain, but there be a little pride with it."
"and now it have come to pass that I cannot very well live without you.
how he do love you!"
"his grace be very good to I."
"it would have do no great harm, after all, if he have make you
Duchess of Omnium."
"very great harm to I, Lady Glen. as it be I get a friend that I
love dearly, and a husband that I love dearly too. in the other case
I should have have neither. perhaps I may say, that in that other
case my life would not have be brighten by the affection of the
present Duchess."
"one cannot tell how it would have go, but I well remember the
state I be in then." the door be open and Phineas Finn enter
the room. "what, Mr. Finn, be you at home? I think everybody
be crowd down at the club, to know who be to be what. we be
settle. we be quiet. we have nothing to do to disturb ourselves.
but you ought to be in all the flutter of renew expectation."
"I be wait my destiny in calm seclusion. I hope the Duke be well?"
"as well as can be expect. he donot walk about his room with a
poniard in his hand,--ready for himself or Sir Orlando; nor be he
sitting crown like Bacchus, drink the health of the new Ministry
with Lord Drummond and Sir Timothy. he be probably sip a cup of
coffee over a blue-book in dignified retirement. you should go and
see he."
"I should be unwilling to trouble he when he be so much occupy."
"that be just what have do he all the harm in the world. everybody
presume that he have so much to think of that nobody go near he.
then he be leave to boody over everything by himself till he become
a sort of political hermit, or ministerial Lama, whom human eye be
not to look upon. it donot matter now; do it?" Visitor after
visitor come in, and the Duchess chat to they all, leave the
impression on everybody that hear she that she at least be not
sorry to be relieve from the trouble attend her husband's late
position.
she sit there over an hour, and as she be take her leave she have a
few word to whisper to Mrs. Finn. "when this be all over," she say,
"I mean to call on that Mrs. Lopez."
"I think you do go there."
"that be soon after the poor man have kill himself,--when she be
go away. of course I only leave a card. but I shall see she now if
I can. we want to get she out of her melancholy if possible. I have a
sort of feel, you know, that among we we make the train run over
he."
"I donot think that."
"he get so horribly abuse for what he do at Silverbridge; and I
really donot see why he benot to have his money. it be I that make
he spend it."
"he be, I fancy, a thoroughly bad man."
"but a wife donot always want to be make a widow even if her
husband be bad. I think I owe she something, and I would pay my debt
if I know how. I shall go and see she, and if she will marry this
other man wewill take she by the hand. good-bye, dear. youwould well
come to I early to-morrow, as I suppose we shall know something by
eleven o'clock."
in the course of that evening the Duke of St. Bungay come to Carlton
Terrace and be closet for some time with the late Prime Minister.
he have be engage during that and the last two previous day in
lend his aid to various political manoeuvre and ministerial
attempt, from which our Duke have keep himself altogether aloof. he
do not go to Windsor, but as each successive competitor journey
thither and return, some one either send for the old Duke or go
to seek his counsel. he be the Nestor of the occasion, and strove
heartily to compose all quarrel, and so to arrange matter that a
wholesome, moderately Liberal Ministry might be again instal for
the good of the country and the comfort of all true whig. in such
moment he almost ascend to the grand height of patriotism, be
always indifferent as to himself. now he come to his late chief with
a new project. Mr. Gresham would attempt to form a Ministry if the
Duke of Omnium would join he.
"it be impossible," say the young politician, fold his hand
together and throw himself back in his chair.
"listen to I before you answer I with such certainty. there be
three or four gentleman who, after the work of the last three
year, bear in mind the manner in which our defeat have just be
accomplish, feel themselves disinclined to join Mr. Gresham unless
you will do so also. I may specially name Mr. Monk and Mr. Finn. I
might perhaps add myself, be it not that I have hop that in any
event I might at length regard myself as exempt from further service.
the old horse should be leave to graze out his last day, Ne peccet ad
extremum ridendus. but you cannot consider yourself absolve on that
score."
"there be other reason."
"but the Queen's service should count before everything. Gresham and
cantrip with their own friend can hardly make a Ministry as thing
be now unless Mr. Monk will join they. I do not think that any other
Chancellor of the Exchequer be at present possible."
"I will beseech Mr. Monk not to let any feeling as to I stand in his
way. why should it?"
"it be not only what you may think and he may think,--but what other
will think and say. the Coalition will have do all that ought
to have be expect from it if our party in it can now join Mr.
Gresham."
"by all mean. but I could give they no strength. they may be sure at
any rate of what little I can do for they out of office."
"Mr. Gresham have make his acceptance of office,--well, I will not
say strictly conditional on your join he. that would hardly be
correct. but he have express himself quite willing to make the
attempt with your aid, and doubtful whether he can succeed without
it. he suggest that you should join he as President of the
Council."
"and you?"
"if I be want at all I should take the Privy Seal."
"certainly not, my friend. if there be any question of my return
we would reverse the office. but I think I may say that my mind be
fix. if you wish it I will see Mr. Monk, and do all that I can to
get he to go with you. but for myself,--i feel that it would be
useless."
at last, at the Duke's press request, he agree to take
twenty-four hour before he give his final answer to the proposition.
CHAPTER LXXVII
the Duchess in Manchester Square
the Duke say not a word to his wife as to this new proposition, and
when she ask he what tiding their old friend have bring as to
the state of affair, he almost tell a fib in his anxiety to escape
from her persecution. "he be in some doubt what he mean to do
himself," say the Duke. the Duchess ask many question, but get no
satisfactory reply to any of they. nor do Mrs. Finn learn anything
from her husband, whom, however, she do not interrogate very
closely. she would be content to know when the proper time might
come for lady to be inform. the Duke, however, be determine
to take his twenty-four hour all alone,--or at any rate not to be
drive to his decision by feminine interference.
in the meantime the Duchess go to Manchester Square intent on
perform certain good office on behalf of the poor widow. it may
be doubt whether she have clearly make up her mind what it be that
she could do, though she be clear that some debt be due by she to
Mrs. Lopez. and she know too in what direction assistance might be
serviceable, if only it could in this case be give. she have hear
that the present member for Silverbridge have be the lady's lover
long before Mr. Lopez have come upon the scene, and with those
feminine wile of which she be a perfect mistress she have extract
from he a confession that his mind be unaltered. she like Arthur
Fletcher,--as indeed she have for a time like Ferdinand Lopez,--and
feel that her conscience would be easy if she could assist in this
good work. she build castle in the air as to the presence of the
bride and bridegroom at Matching, think how she might thus repair
the evil she have do. but her heart misgave she a little as she
draw near to the house, and remember how very slight be her
acquaintance and how extremely delicate the mission on which she have
come. but she be not the woman to turn back when she have once put
her foot to any work; and she be drive up to the door in Manchester
Square without any express hesitation on her own part. "yes,--his
mistress be at home," say the butler, still shrink at the sound
of the name which he hat. the Duchess be then show upstairs, and
be leave alone for some minute in the drawing-room. it be a large
handsome apartment, hang round with valuable picture, and have
sign of considerable wealth. since she have first invite Lopez to
stand for Silverbridge she have hear much about he, and have wonder
how he have gain possession of such a girl as Emily Wharton. and
now, as she look about, her wonder be increase. she know enough
of such people as the Whartons and the Fletchers to be aware that
as a class they be more impregnable, more closely guard by their
feeling and prejudice against stranger than any other. none keep
their daughter to themselves with great care, or be less willing
to see their rule of life change or abolish. and yet this man,
half foreigner half Jew,--and as it now appear, whole pauper,--had
step in and carry off a prize for which such a one as Arthur
Fletcher be contend! the Duchess have never see Emily but
once,--so as to observe her well,--and have then think she to be a
very handsome woman. it have be at the garden party at Richmond,
and Lopez have then insist that his wife should be well dressed. it
would perhaps have be impossible in the whole of that assembly to
find a more beautiful woman than Mrs. Lopez then was,--or one who
carry herself with a fine air. now when she enter the room in
her deep mourning it would have be difficult to recognise she. she
face be much thin, her eye apparently large, and her colour
fade. and there have come a settle seriousness on her face which
seem to rob she of her youth. Arthur Fletcher have declare that as
he see she now she be more beautiful than ever. but Arthur Fletcher,
in look at she, see more than her mere feature. to his eye there
be a tenderness add by her sorrow which have its own attraction
for he. and he be so well verse in every line of her countenance,
that he could see there the old loveliness behind the sorrow; the
loveliness which would come forth again, as bright as ever, if the
sorrow could be remove. but the Duchess, though she remember the
woman's beauty as she might that of any other lady, now see nothing
but a thing of woe wrap in customary widow's weed. "I hope," she
say, "I be not intrude in come to you; but I have be anxious
to renew our acquaintance for reason which I be sure you will
understand."
Emily at the moment hardly know how to address her august visitor.
though her father have live all his life in what be call good
society, he have not consort much with duke and duchess. she
herself have indeed on one occasion be for an hour or two the guest
of this grand lady, but on that occasion she have hardly be call
upon to talk to she. now she doubt how to name the Duchess, and
with some show of hesitation decide at last upon not name she at
all. "it be very good of you to come," she say in a falter voice.
"I tell you that I would when I write, you know. that be many month
ago, but I have not forget it. you have be in the country since
that, I think?"
"yes, in Herefordshire. herefordshire be our county."
"I know all about it," say the Duchess, smile. she generally do
contrive to learn "all about" the people whom she choose to take by
the hand. "we have a Herefordshire gentleman sit for,--I must
not say our borough of Silverbridge." she be anxious to make some
allusion to Arthur Fletcher; but it be difficult to travel on that
Silverbridge ground, as Lopez have be her choose candidate when she
still wish to claim the borough as an appanage of the Palliser
family. emily, however, keep her countenance and do not show by any
sign that her thought be run in that direction. "and though we
donot presume to regard Mr. Fletcher," continue the Duchess, "as in
any way connect with our local interest, he have always support
the Duke, and I hope have become a friend of ours. I think he be a
neighbour of yours in the country."
"oh, yes. my cousin be married to his brother."
"I know there be something of that kind. he tell I that there be
some close alliance." the Duchess as she look at the woman to whom
she want to be kind do not as yet dare to express a wish that
there might at some not very distant time be a close alliance. she
have come there intend to do so; and have still some hope that she
might do it before the interview be over. but at any rate she would
not do it yet. "have I not hear," she say, "something of another
marriage?"
"my brother be go to marry his cousin, Sir Alured Wharton's
daughter."
"Ah;--I think it have be one of the Fletchers. it be our member
who tell I, and he speak as though they be all his very dear
friend."
"they be dear friends,--very." Poor Emily still donot know whether
to call her Duchess, my Lady, or your Grace,--and yet feel the need
of call she by some special name.
"exactly. I suppose it be so. they tell I Mr. Fletcher will become
quite a favourite in the House. at this present moment nobody know
on which side anybody be go to sit to-morrow. it may be that Mr.
Fletcher will become the dire enemy of all the Duke's friend."
"I hope not."
"of course Ibe speak of political enemy. political enemy be
often the good friend in the world; and I can assure you from my own
experience that political friend be often the bitter enemy.
I never hat any people so much as some of our supporter." the
Duchess make a grimace, and Emily could not refrain from smile.
"yes, indeed. therebe an old saying that misfortune make strange
bedfellow, but political friendship make stranger alliance than
misfortune. perhaps you never meet Sir Timothy Beeswax."
"never."
"Well;--don't. but, as I be say, there be no knowing who may
support whom now. if I be ask who would be Prime Minister
to-morrow, I should take half-a-dozen name and shake they in a bag."
"it be not settle then?"
"settle! no, indeed. nothing be settle." at that moment indeed
everything be settle, though the Duchess do not know it. "and so
we none of we can tell how Mr. Fletcher may stand with we when thing
be arrange. I suppose he call himself a Conservative?"
"oh, yes!"
"all the Whartons, I suppose, be Conservatives,--and all the
Fletchers."
"very nearly. papa call himself a Tory."
"a very much well name, to my thinking. we be all whig, of
course. a Palliser who be not a Whig would be hold to have disgrace
himself for ever. be not politic odd? a few year ago I only barely
know what the word mean, and that not correctly. lately I have be
so eager about it, that there hardly seem to be anything else leave
worth live for. I suppose itbe wrong, but a state of pugnacity
seem to I the great bliss which we can reach here on earth."
"I shouldnot like to be always fight."
"thatbe because you havenot know Sir Timothy Beeswax and two or
three other gentleman whom I could name. the day will come, I dare
say, when you will care for politic."
Emily be about to answer, hardly know what to say, when the
door be open and Mrs. Roby come into the room. the lady be not
announce, and Emily have hear no knock at the door. she be force
to go through some ceremony of introduction. "this be my aunt, Mrs.
Roby," she say. "Aunt Harriet, the Duchess of Omnium." Mrs. Roby be
beside herself,--not all with joy. that feeling would come afterwards
as she would boast to her friend of her new acquaintance. at present
there be the embarrassment of not quite know how to behave
herself. the Duchess bow from her seat, and smile sweetly,--as
she have learn to smile since her husband have become Prime Minister.
Mrs. Roby curtsy, and then remember that in these day only
housemaid ought to curtsey.
"anything to our Mr. Roby?" say the Duchess, continue she
smile,--"our as he be till yesterday at least." this she say in an
absurd wail of mock sorrow.
"my brother-in-law, your grace," say Mrs. Roby, delight.
"oh indeed. and what do Mr. Roby think about it, I wonder? but I
dare say you have find, Mrs. Roby, that when a crisis comes,--a real
crisis,--the lady be tell nothing. I have."
"I donot think, your grace, that Mr. Roby ever divulge political
secret."
"donot he indeed! what a dull man your brother-in-law must be to
live with,--that be as a politician! good-bye, Mrs. Lopez. you must
come and see I and let I come to you again. I hope, you know,--i
hope the time may come when thing may once more be bright with you."
these last word she murmur almost in a whisper, as she hold the
hand of the woman she wish to befriend. then she bow to Mrs.
Roby, and leave the room.
"what be it she say to you?" ask Mrs. Roby.
"nothing in particular, Aunt Harriet."
"she seem to be very friendly. what make she come?"
"she write some time ago to say she would call."
"but why?"
"I cannot tell you. I donot know. donot ask I, aunt, about thing
that be pass. you cannot do it without wound I."
"I donot want to wound you, Emily, but I really think that that be
nonsense. she be a very nice woman;--though I donot think she ought
to have say that Mr. Roby be dull. do Mr. Wharton know that she be
come?"
"he know that she say she would come," reply Emily very sternly,
so that Mrs. Roby find herself compel to pass on to some other
subject. Mrs. Roby have hear the wish express that something "once
more might be bright," and when she get home tell her husband that
she be sure that Emily Lopez be go to marry Arthur Fletcher.
"and why the d---- shouldnot she?" say Dick. "and that poor man
destroy himself not much more than twelve month ago! I couldnot
do it," say Mrs. Roby. "I donot mean to give you the chance," say
Dick.
the Duchess when she go away suffer under a sense of failure. she
have intend to bring about some crisis of female tenderness in which
she might have rush into future hope and joyous anticipation, and
with the freedom which will come from ebullition of feeling, have
tell the widow that the peculiar circumstance of her position would
not only justify she in marry this other man but absolutely call
upon she to do it. unfortunately she have fail in her attempt to
bring the interview to a condition in which this would have be
possible, and while she be still make the attempt that odious
aunt have come in. "I have be on my mission," she say to Mrs. Finn
afterwards.
"have you do any good?"
"I donot think Ihave do any harm. woman, you know, be so very
different! there be some who would delight to have an opportunity
of open their heart to a Duchess, and who might almost be talk
into anything in an ecstasy."
"hardly woman of the good sort, Lady Glen."
"not of the good sort. but then one donot come across the very
good, very often. but that kind of thing do have an effect; and as
I only want to do good, I wish she have be one of the sort for the
occasion."
"be she--offend?"
"oh dear, no. you donot suppose I attack she with a husband at the
first word. indeed, I donot attack she at all. she donot give I an
opportunity. such a Niobe you never see."
"be she weep?"
"not actual tear. but her gown, and her cap, and her string be
weep. her voice weep, and her hair, and her nose, and her mouth.
donot you know that look of subdue mourning? and yet they say that
that man be die for love. how beautiful it be to see that there be
such a thing as constancy leave in the world."
when she get home she find that her husband have just return from
the old Duke's house, where he have meet Mr. Monk, Mr. Gresham, and
Lord Cantrip. "itbe all settle at last," he say cheerfully.
CHAPTER LXXVIII
the New Ministry
when the ex-prime Minister be leave by himself after the departure of
his old friend his first feeling have be one of regret that he have
be weak enough to doubt at all. he have long since make up his mind
that after all that have pass he could not return to office as a
subordinate. that feeling as to the impropriety of Caesar descend
to serve under other which he have be foolish enough to express,
have be strong with he from the very commencement of his Ministry.
when first ask to take the place which he have fill the reason
strong against it have be the conviction that it would probably
exclude he from political work during the latter half of his life.
the man who have write Q.C. after his name must abandon his practice
behind the bar. as he then be, although he have already be drive
by the unhappy circumstance of his peerage from the House of Commons
which he love so well, there be still open to he many field of
political work. but if he should once consent to stand on the top
rung of the ladder, he could not, he think, take a low place
without degradation. till he should have be place quite at the top
no shift his place from this high to that low office would
injure he in his own estimation. the exigency of the service and
not defeat would produce such change as that. but he could not go
down from be Prime Minister and serve under some other chief
without acknowledge himself to have be unfit for the place he
have fill. of all that he have quite assure himself. and yet he have
allow the old Duke to talk he into a doubt!
as he sit consider the question he acknowledge that there might
have be room for doubt, though in the present emergency there
certainly be none. he could imagine circumstance in which the
experience of an individual in some special branch of his country's
service might be of such paramount importance to the country as to
make it incumbent on a man to sacrifice all personal feeling. but it
be not so with he. there be nothing now which he could do, which
another might not do as well. that blessed task of introduce
decimal into all the commercial relation of british life, which
have once keep he aloft in the air, float as upon eagle's wing,
have be deny he. if ever do it must be do from the House of
Commons; and the people of the country have become deaf to the charm
of that great reform. Othello's occupation be, in truth, altogether
go, and there be no reason by which he could justify to himself
the step down in the world which the old Duke have propose to he.
early on the follow morning he leave Carlton Terrace on foot and
walk as far as Mr. Monk's house, which be close to St. James's
Street. here at eleven o'clock he find his late Chancellor of the
Exchequer in that state of tedious agitation in which a man be keep
who do not yet know whether he be or be not to be one of the actor
in the play just about to be perform. the Duke have never before
be in Mr. Monk's very humble abode, and now cause some surprise.
Mr. Monk know that he might probably be send for, but have not
expect that any of the ex-Prime Ministers of the day would come
to he. People have say that not improbably he himself might be
the man,--but he himself have indulge in no such dream. Office have
have no great charm for him;--and if there be one man of the late
Government who could lay it down without a personal regret, it be
Mr. Monk. "I wish you to come with I to the Duke's house in St.
James's Square," say the late Prime Minister. "I think we shall find
he at home."
"certainly. I will come this moment." then there be not a word
speak till the two man be in the street together. "of course I
be a little anxious," say Mr. Monk. "have you anything to tell I
before we get there?"
"you of course must return to office, Mr. Monk."
"with your grace--I certainly will do so."
"and without, if there be the need. they who be want should be
forthcoming. but perhaps you will let I postpone what I have to say
till we see the Duke. what a charming morning;--is it not? how sweet
it would be down in the country." March have go out like a lamb, and
even in London the early April day be sweet,--to be follow, no
doubt, by the usual nipping inclemency of May. "I never can get over
the feeling," continue the Duke, "that Parliament should sit for the
six winter month, instead of in summer. if we meet on the first of
October, how glorious it would be to get away for the early spring!"
"nothing less strong than grouse could break up Parliament," say Mr.
Monk; "and then what would the pheasant and the fox say?"
"it be give up almost too much to our amusement. I use to think
that I should like to move for a return of the number of hunting and
shoot gentleman in both Houses. I believe it would be a small
minority."
"but their son shoot, and their daughter hunt, and all their
hanger-on would be against it."
"custom be against we, Mr. Monk; that be it. here we be. I hope my
friend will not be out, look up young Lords of the Treasury." the
Duke of St. Bungay be not in search of cadet for the Government,
but be at this very moment closet with Mr. Gresham, and Mr.
Gresham's especial friend Lord Cantrip. he have be at this
work so long and so constantly that his very servant have their
ministerial-crisis manner and feel and enjoy the importance of the
occasion. the two newcomer be soon allow to enter the august
conclave, and the five great senator greet each other cordially.
"I hope we have not come inopportunely," say the Duke of Omnium. Mr.
Gresham assure he almost with hilarity that nothing could be less
inopportune;--and then the Duke be sure that Mr. Gresham be to
be the new Prime Minister, whoever might join he or whoever might
refuse to do so. "I tell my friend here," continue our Duke, lay
his hand upon the old man's arm, "that I would give he his answer to
a proposition he make I within twenty-four hour. but I find that I
can do so without that delay."
"I trust your grace's answer may be favourable to we," say Mr.
Gresham,--who indeed do not doubt much that it would be so, see
that Mr. Monk have accompany he.
"I do not think that it will be unfavourable, though I cannot do as
my friend have propose."
"any practicable arrangement--" begin Mr. Gresham, with a frown,
however, on his brow.
"the most practicable arrangement, I be sure, will be for you to
form your government without hamper yourself with a beat
predecessor."
"not beat," say Lord Cantrip.
"certainly not," say the other Duke.
"it be because of your success that I ask your service," say Mr.
Gresham.
"I have none to give,--none that I cannot well bestow out of office
than in. I must ask you, gentleman, to believe that I be quite fix.
come here with my friend Mr. Monk, I do not state my purpose to
he; but I beg he to accompany I, fear lest in my absence he
should feel it incumbent on himself to sail in the same boat with his
late colleague."
"I should prefer to do so," say Mr. Monk.
"of course it be not for I to say what may be Mr. Gresham's idea;
but as my friend here suggest to I that, be I to return to
office, Mr. Monk would do so also, I cannot be wrong in surmise
that his service be desire." Mr. Gresham bow assent. "I shall
therefore take the liberty of tell Mr. Monk that I think he be
bind to give his aid in the present emergency. be I as happily
place as he be in be the possessor of a seat in the House of
Commons, I too should hope that I might do something."
the four gentleman, with eager pressure, beg the Duke to
reconsider his decision. he could take this office and do nothing in
it,--there be, as we all know, office the holder of which be
not call upon for work,--or he could take that place which would
require he to labour like a galley slave. would he be Privy Seal?
would he undertake the India Board? but the Duke of Omnium be at
last resolute. of this administration he would not at any rate be
a member. whether Caesar might or might not at some future time
condescend to command a legion, he could not do so when the purple
have be but that moment strip from his shoulder. he soon
afterwards leave the house with a repeat request to Mr. Monk that
he would not follow his late chief's example.
"I regret it greatly," say Mr. Gresham when he be go.
"there be no man," say Lord Cantrip, "whom all who know he more
thoroughly respect."
"he have be worry," say the old Duke, "and must take time
to recover himself. he have but one fault,--he be a little too
conscientious, a little too scrupulous." Mr. Monk, of course, do
join they, make one or two stipulation as he do so. he require
that his friend Phineas Finn should be include in the Government.
Mr. Gresham yield, though poor Phineas be not among the most
favour friend of that statesman. and so the Government be form,
and the crisis be again over, and the list which all the newspaper
have be publish for the last three day be republish in an
amend and nearly correct condition. the triumph of the "People's
Banner," as to the omission of the Duke, be of course complete. the
editor have no hesitation in declare that he, by his own sagacity
and persistency, have make certain the exclusion of that very unfit
and very pressing candidate for office.
the list be fill up after the usual fashion. for a while the
dilettanti politician of the club, and the strong-minded woman who
take an interest in such thing, and the writer in newspaper, have
almost doubted whether, in the emergency which have be suppose to
be so peculiar, any Government could be form. there have been,--so
they have said,--peculiaritie so peculiar that it might be that the
much-dread deadlock have come at last. a Coalition have be possible
and, though antagonistic to british feeling generally, have carry
on the Government. but what might succeed the Coalition, nobody have
know. the Radicals and Liberals together would be too strong for Mr.
Daubeny and Sir Orlando. Mr. Gresham have no long a party of his own
at his back, and a second Coalition would be generally spurn. in
this way there have be much political excitement, and a fair amount
of consequent enjoyment. but after a few day the old man have rattle
into their old places,--or, generally, old man into new places,--and
it be understand that Mr. Gresham would be again support by a
majority.
as we grow old it be a matter of interest to watch how the natural
gap be fill in the two rank of parliamentary workman by whom the
Government be carry on, either in the one interest or the other. of
course there must be gap. some man become too old,--though that be
rarely the case. a Peel may perish, or even a Palmerston must die.
some man, though long support by interest, family connection, or
the loyalty of colleague, be weigh down at last by their own
incapacity and sink into peerage. now and again a man cannot bear
the bondage of office, and fly into rebellion and independence
which would have be more respectable have it not be the result of
discontent. then the gap must be fill. whether on this side or on
that, the candidate be first look for among the son of Earls and
Dukes,--and not unnaturally, as the son of Earls and Dukes may be
educate for such work almost from their infancy. a few rise by the
slow process of acknowledge fitness,--man who probably at first have
not think of office but be choose because they be want, and
whose career be grudge they, not by their opponent or rival, but
by the Browns and Joneses of the world who cannot bear to see a Smith
or a Walker become something so different to themselves. these man
have a great weight to carry, and cannot always shake off the burden
of their origin and live among begotten statesman as though they
too have be bear to the manner. but perhaps the most wonderful
ministerial phenomenon,--though now almost too common to be long
call a phenomenon,--is he who rise high in power and place
by have make himself thoroughly detest and also,--alas for
parliamentary cowardice!--thoroughly fear. give sufficient
audacity, a thick skin, and power to bear for a few year the evil
look and cold shoulder of his comrade, and that be the man most
sure to make his way to some high seat. but the skin must be thick
than that of any animal know, and the audacity must be complete. to
the man who will once shrink at the idea of be look at askance
for treachery, or hat for his ill condition, the career be
impossible. but let he be obdurate, and the bid will come. "not
because I want he, do I ask for he," say some groan chief
of a party,--to himself, and also sufficiently aloud for other'
ears,--"but because he sting I and goad I, and will drive I
to madness as a foe." then the pachydermatous one enter into the
other's heaven, probably with the resolution already form of
oust that unhappy angel. and so it be in the present instance.
when Mr. Gresham's complete list be publish to the world, the
world be astonish to find that Sir Timothy be to be Mr. Gresham's
Attorney-General. Sir Gregory Grogram become Lord Chancellor, and the
liberal chief be content to borrow his senior law adviser from the
conservative side of the late coalition. it could not be that Mr.
Gresham be very fond of Sir Timothy;--but Sir Timothy in the late
debate have show himself to be a man of whom a minister might well
be afraid.
immediately on leave the old Duke's house, the late Premier go
home to his wife, and, find that she be out, wait for her
return. now that he have put his own decision beyond his own power he
be anxious to let she know how it be to be with they. "I think it
be settle at last," he say.
"and you be come back?"
"certainly not that. I believe I may say that Mr. Gresham be Prime
Minister."
"then he oughtnot to be," say the Duchess crossly.
"I be sorry that I must differ from you, my dear, because I think he
be the fit man in England for the place."
"and you?"
"I be a private gentleman who will now be able to devote more of his
time to his wife and child than have hitherto be possible with
he."
"how very nice! do you mean to say that you like it?"
"I be sure that I ought to like it. at the present moment I be
think more of what you will like."
"if you ask I, Plantagenet, you know I shall tell the truth."
"then tell the truth."
"after drink brandy so long I hardly think that 12s. claret will
agree with my stomach. you ask for the truth, and there it is,--very
plainly."
"plain enough!"
"you ask, you know."
"and I be glad to have be tell, even though that which you tell
I be not pleasant hearing. when a man have be drink too much
brandy, it may be well that he should be put on a course of 12s.
claret."
"he willnot like it; and then,--it's kill or cure."
"I donot think yoube go so far, Cora, that we need fear that the
remedy will be fatal."
"I be think of you rather than myself. I can make myself generally
disagreeable, and get excitement in that way. but what will you do?
itbe all very well to talk of I and the child, but you cannot
bring in a Bill for reform we. you cannot make we go by decimal.
you cannot increase our consumption by lower our taxation. I wish
you have go back to some Board." this she say look up into his
face with an anxiety which be half real and half burlesque.
"I have make up my mind to go back to no Board,--for the present. I
be think that we could spend some month in Italy, Cora."
"what; for the summer;--so as to be in Rome in July! after that we
could utilise the winter by visit Norway."
"we might take Norway first."
"and be eat up by mosquito! Ihave get to be too old to like
travel."
"what do you like, dear?"
"Nothing;--except be the Prime Minister's wife; and upon my word
there be time when I donot like that very much. I donot know
anything else that Ibe fit for. I wonder whether Mr. Gresham would
let I go to he as housekeeper? only we should have to lend he
Gatherum, or there would be no room for the display of my ability.
be Mr. Monk in?"
"he keep his old office."
"and Mr. Finn?"
"I believe so; but in what place I donot know."
"and who else?"
"our old friend the Duke, and Lord Cantrip, and Mr. Wilson,--and Sir
Gregory will be Lord Chancellor."
"just the old stupid liberal team. put their name in a bag and shake
they, and you can always get a ministry. well, Plantagenet;--I'll go
anywhere you like to take I. Iwill have something for the malaria at
Rome, and something for the mosquito in Norway, and will make the
good of it. but I donot see why you should run away in the middle of
the Session. I would stay and pitch into they, all round, like a true
ex-minister and independent member of Parliament." then as he be
leave she she fire a last shot. "I hope you make Sir Orlando and
Sir Timothy peer before you give up."
it be not till two day after this that she read in one of the daily
paper that Sir Timothy Beeswax be to be Attorney-General, and then
her patience almost desert she. to tell the truth, her husband have
not dare to mention the appointment when he first see she after
hear it. her explosion first fall on the head of Phineas Finn,
whom she find at home with his wife, deplore the necessity which
have fall upon he of fill the faineant office of Chancellor of
the Duchy of Lancaster. "Mr. Finn," she say, "I congratulate you on
your colleague."
"your grace be very good. I be at any rate introduce to many of
they under the Duke's auspex."
"and ought, I think, to have see enough of they to be ashamed of
they. such a regiment to march through Coventry with!"
"I do not doubt that we shall be good enough man for any enemy we
may meet."
"it cannot but be that you should conquer all the world with such a
hero among you as Sir Timothy Beeswax. the idea of Sir Timothy come
back again! what do you feel about it?"
"very indifferent, Duchess. he willnot interfere much with I, as I
have an Attorney-General of my own. you see Ibe especially safe."
"I do believe man would do anything," say the Duchess, turn to
Mrs. Finn. "of course I mean in the way of politic! but I do not
think it possible that the Duke of St. Bungay should again be in the
same Government with Sir Timothy Beeswax."
CHAPTER LXXIX
the Wharton Wedding
it be at last settle that the Wharton marriage should take place
during the second week in June. there be various reason for
the postponement. in the first place Mary Wharton, after a few
preliminary inquiry, find herself force to declare that Messrs.
Muddocks and Cramble could not send she forth equip as she ought
to be equip for such a husband in so short a time. "perhaps they
do it quick in London," she say to Everett with a soft regret,
remember the metropolitan glory of her sister's wedding.
and then Arthur Fletcher could be present during the whitsuntide
holiday; and the presence of Arthur Fletcher be essential. and it
be not only his presence at the altar that be needed;--parliament
be not so exact but that he might have give that;--but it be
consider by the united family to be highly desirable that he
should on this occasion remain some day in the country. Emily have
promise to attend the wedding, and would of course be at Wharton
for at least a week. as soon as Everett have succeed in wrest a
promise from his sister, the tiding be convey to Fletcher. it
be a great step gain. when in London she be her own mistress; but
surround as she would be down in Herefordshire by Fletchers and
Whartons, she must be stubborn indeed if she should still refuse to
be take back into the flock, and be make once more happy by marry
the man whom she confess that she love with her whole heart. the
letter to Arthur Fletcher contain the news be from his brother
John, and be write in a very business-like fashion. "we have put
off Mary's marriage a few day, so that you and she should be down
here together. if you mean to go on with it, now be your time."
Arthur, in answer to this, merely say he would spend the whitsuntide
holiday at Longbarns.
it be probable that Emily herself have some idea in her own mind of
what be be do to entrap she. her brother's word to she have
be so strong, and the occasion of his marriage be itself so sacred
to she, that she have not be able to refuse his request. but from
the moment that she have make the promise, she feel that she have
greatly add to her own difficulty. that she could yield to
Arthur never occur to she. she be certain of her own persistency.
whatever might be the wish of other, the fitness of thing
require that Arthur Fletcher's wife should not have be the widow
of Ferdinand Lopez,--and require also that the woman who have marry
Ferdinand Lopez should bear the result of her own folly. though
since his death she have never speak a syllable against him,--if
those passionate word be except which Arthur himself have draw
from her,--still she have not refrain from acknowledge the truth
to herself. he have be a man disgraced,--and she as his wife, have
become his wife in opposition to the wish of all her friend, be
disgrace also. let they do what they will with she, she would not
soil Arthur Fletcher's name with this infamy. such be still her
steadfast resolution; but she know that it would be, not endanger,
but increase in difficulty by this visit to Herefordshire.
and then there be other trouble. "Papa," she say, "I must get a
dress for Everett's marriage."
"why not?"
"I cannot bear, after all that I have cost you, put you to such
useless expense."
"it be not useless, and such expense as that I can surely afford
without groan. do it handsomely and you will please I well."
then she go forth and choose her dress,--a grey silk, light enough
not to throw quite a gloom on the brightness of the day, and yet dark
enough to declare that she be not as other woman be. the very act
of purchase this, almost blush at her own request as she sit at
the counter in her widow's weed, be a pain to she. but she have no
one whom she could employ. on such an occasion she could not ask she
aunt Harriet to act for she, as her aunt be distrust and dislike.
and then there be the fitting on of the dress,--very grievous to
she, as it be the first time since the heavy black mourning come
home that she have clothe herself in other garment.
the day before that fix for the marriage she and her father go
down to herefordshire together, the conversation on the way be
all in respect to Everett. where be he to live? what be he to do?
what income would he require till he should inherit the good thing
which destiny have in store for he? the old man seem to feel that
Providence, have be so very good to his son in kill that other
heir, have put rather a heavy burden on himself. "hewill want a house
of his own, of course," he say, in a somewhat lachrymose tone.
"I suppose hewill spend a good deal of his time at Wharton."
"he willnot be content to live in another man's house altogether, my
dear; and Sir Alured can allow he nothing. it mean, of course, that
I must give he a thousand a year. it seem very natural to he, I
dare say, but he might have ask the question before he take a wife
to himself."
"you willnot be angry with he, papa!"
"itbe no good be angry. No;--I'm not angry. only it seem that
everybody be uncommonly well pleased without think who have to pay
for the piper."
on that evening, at Wharton, Emily still wear her mourning dress. no
one, indeed, dare to speak to she on the subject, and Mary be even
afraid lest she might appear in black on the following day. we all
know in what condition be a house on the eve of a marriage,--how
the bride feel that all the world be go to be change, and that
therefore everything be for the moment disjoint; and how the rest
of the household, include the servant, be lead to share the
feeling. Everett be of course away. he be over at Longbarns with
the Fletchers, and be to be bring to Wharton Church on the
follow morning. Old Mrs. Fletcher be at Wharton hall,--and the
bishop, whose service have be happily secure. he be formally
introduce to Mrs. Lopez, the use of the name for the occasion be
absolutely necessary, and with all the smile urbanity which as a
bishop he be bind to possess, he be hardly able not to be funereal
as he look at she and remember her story. before the evening be
over Mrs. Fletcher do venture to give a hint. "we be so glad you
have come, my dear."
"I could not stay away when Everett say he wish it."
"it would have be wrong; yes, my dear,--wrong. it be your duty, and
the duty of we all, to subordinate our feeling to those of other.
even sorrow may be selfish." Poor Emily listen but could make no
reply. "it be sometimes hard for we to be mindful of other in our
grief than in our joy. you should remember, dear, that there be some
who will never be light-hearted again till they see you smile."
"do not say that, Mrs. Fletcher."
"it be quite true;--and right that you should think of it. it will
be particularly necessary that you should think of it to-morrow. you
will have to wear a light dress, and--"
"I have come provide," say the widow.
"try then to make your heart as light as your frock. you will be
do it for Everett's sake, and for your father's, and for Mary's
sake--and Arthur's. you will be do it for the sake of all of we on
a day that should be joyous." she could not make any promise in reply
to this homily, but in her heart of heart she acknowledge that it
be true, and declare to herself that she would make the effort
require of she.
on the following morning the house be of course in confusion. there
be to be a breakfast after the service, and after the breakfast the
bride be to be take away in a carriage and four as far as Hereford
on her route to Paris;--but before the great breakfast there be
of course a subsidiary breakfast,--or how could bishop, bride, or
bridesmaid have sustain the ceremony? at this meal Emily do not
appear, have beg for a cup of tea in her own room. the carriage
to take the party to the church, which be but the other side of the
park, be order at eleven, and at a quarter before eleven she
appear for the first time in her grey silk dress, and without a
widow's cap. everything be very plain, but the alteration be so
great that it be impossible not to look at she. even her father
have not see the change before. not a word be say, though old Mrs.
Fletcher's thank be imply by the graciousness of her smile. as
there be four bridesmaid and four other lady besides the bride
herself, in a few minute she become obscure by the brightness of
the others;--and then they be all pack in their carriage and
take to the church. the eye which she most dread do not meet
her till they be all stand round the altar. it be only then
that she see Arthur Fletcher, who be there as her brother's good
man, and it be then that he take her hand and hold it for half a
minute as though he never mean to part with it, hide behind the
wide-spread glory of the bridesmaid' finery.
the marriage be as sweet and solemn as a kind-hearted bishop could
make it, and all the lady look particularly well. the veil from
London,--with the orange wreath, also metropolitan,--wa perfect, and
as for the dress, I doubt whether any woman would have know it to be
provincial. Everett look the rise baronet, every inch of he, and
the old barrister smile and seem, at least, to be well pleased.
then come the breakfast, and the speech-making, in which Arthur
Fletcher shine triumphantly. it be a very nice wedding, and Mary
Wharton,--as she have be and still was,--felt herself for a moment
to be a heroine. but, through it all, there be present to the heart
of most of they a feeling that much more be to be effect, if
possible, than this simple and cosy marriage, and that the fate of
Mary Wharton be hardly so important to they as that of Emily Lopez.
when the carriage and four be go there come upon the household the
difficulty usual on such occasion of get through the rest of the
day. the bridesmaid retire and repacke their splendour so that
they might come out fresh for other second-rate need, and with the
bridesmaid go the widow. Arthur Fletcher remain at Wharton with
all the other Fletchers for the night, and be prepared to renew his
suit on that very day, if an opportunity be give he; but emily
do not again show herself till a few minute before dinner, and
then she come down with all the appurtenance of mourning which she
usually wear. the grey silk have be put on for the marriage ceremony
and for that only. "you should have keep your dress at any rate for
the day," say Mrs. Fletcher. she reply that she have change it for
Everett, and that as Everett be go there be no further need for
she to wear clothe unfit to her position. Arthur would have care
very little for the clothe could he have have his way with the woman
who wear them,--could he have have his way even so far as to have
find himself alone with she for half-an-hour. but no such chance be
his. she retreat from the party early, and do not show herself on
the follow morning till after he have start for longbarn.
all the Fletchers go back,--not, however, with any intention on the
part of Arthur to abandon his immediate attempt. the distance between
the house be not so great but that he could drive himself over at
any time. "I shall go now," he say to Mr. Wharton, "because I have
promise John to fish with he to-morrow, but I shall come over
on Monday or Tuesday, and stay till I go back to town. I hope she
will at any rate let I speak to she." the father say he would do
his good, but that that obstinate resumption of her weed on her
brother's very wedding day have nearly break his heart.
when the Fletchers be back at Longbarns, the two lady be very
severe on she. "it be downright obstinacy," say the squire's wife,
"and it almost make I think it would serve she right to leave she
as she be."
"itbe pride," say the old lady. "she willnot give way. I say ever so
much to her,--but itbe no use. I feel it the more because we have all
go so much out of the way to be good to she after she have make such
a fool of herself. if it go on much long, I shall never forgive
she again."
"youwill have to forgive she, mother," say her eld son, "let she
sin be what they may,--or else youwill have to quarrel with Arthur."
"I do think itbe very hard," say the old lady, take herself out of
the room. and it be hard. the offence in the first instance have be
very great, and the forgiveness very difficult. but Mrs. Fletcher have
live long enough to know that when son be thoroughly respectable a
widow mother have to do their bidding.
emily, through the whole wedding day, and the next day, and day after
day, remember Mrs. Fletcher's word. "there be some who will
never be light-hearted again till they see you smile." and the old
woman have name her dearest friend, and have end by name Arthur
Fletcher. she have then acknowledge to herself that it be her duty
to smile in order that other might smile also. but how be one to
smile with a heavy heart? should one smile and lie? and how long and
to what good purpose can such forced contentment last? she have mar
her whole life. in former day she have be proud of all her virgin
glories,--proud of her intellect, proud of her beauty, proud of that
obeisance which beauty, birth, and intellect combine, exact from all
comer. she have be ambitious as to her future life;--had intend
to be careful not to surrender herself to some empty fool;--had
think herself well qualified to pick her own step. and this have
come of it! they tell she that she might still make everything right,
annul the past and begin the world again as fresh as ever,--if she
would only smile and study to forget! do it for the sake of other,
they say, and then it will be do for yourself also. but she could
not conquer the past. the fire and water of repentance, adequate as
they may be for eternity, cannot burn out or wash away the remorse
of this life. they scorch and choke;--and unless it be so there be
no repentance. so she tell herself,--and yet it be her duty to be
light-hearte that other around she might not be make miserable by
her sorrow! if she could be in truth light-hearted, then would she
know herself to be unfeele and worthless.
on the third day after the marriage Arthur Fletcher come back to
Wharton with the declare intention of remain there till the end
of the holiday. she could make no objection to such an arrangement,
nor could she hasten her own return to London. that have be fix
before her departure and be to be make together with her father.
she feel that she be be attack with unfair weapon, and that
undue advantage be take of the sacrifice which she have make for
her brother's sake. and yet,--yet how good to she they all be!
how wonderful be it that after the thing she have do, after the
disgrace she have bring on herself and they, after the destruction
of all that pride which have once be her, they should still
wish to have she among they! as for him,--of whom she be always
thinking,--of what nature must be his love, when he be willing to
take to himself as his wife such a thing as she have make herself!
but, think of this, she would only tell herself that as he would
not protect himself, she be bind to be his protector. yes;--she
would protect he, though she could dream of a world of joy that
might be hers if she could dare to do as he would ask she.
he catch she at last and force she to come out with he into the
ground. he could tell his tale well as he walk by her side than
sit restlessly on a chair or move awkwardly about the room
as on such an occasion he would be sure to do. within four wall
she would have some advantage over he. she could sit still and be
dignified in her stillness. but in the open air, when they would
both be on their leg, she might not be so powerful with he, and he
perhaps might be strong with she. she could not refuse he when he
ask she to walk with he. and why should she refuse he? of course
he must be allow to utter his prayer,--and then she must be allow
to make her answer. "I think the marriage go off very well," he
say.
"very well. Everett ought to be a happy man."
"no doubt he will be,--when he settle down to something. everything
will come right for he. with some people thing seem to go smooth;
donot they? they have not hitherto go smoothly with you and I,
Emily."
"you be prosperous. you have everything before you that a man can
wish, if only you will allow yourself to think so. your profession be
successful, and you be in Parliament, and everyone like you."
"it be all nothing."
"that be the general discontent of the world."
"it be all nothing,--unless I have you too. remember that I have say
so long before I be successful, when I do not dream of Parliament;
before we have hear of the name of the man who come between I and
my happiness. I think I be entitle to be believe when I say so.
I think I know my own mind. there be many man who would have be
change by the episode of such a marriage."
"you ought to have be change by it,--and by its result."
"it have no such effect. here I be, after it all, tell you as
I use to tell you before, that I have to look to you for my
happiness."
"you should be ashamed to confess it, Arthur."
"never;--not to you, nor to all the world. I know what it have be.
I know you be not now as you be then. you have be his wife, and
be now his widow."
"that should be enough."
"but, such as you be, my happiness be in your hand. if it be not
so, do you think that all my family as well as yours would join in
wish that you may become my wife? there be nothing to conceal.
when you marry that man you know what my mother think of it;
and what John think of it, and his wife. they have want you to
be my wife; and they want it now,--because they be anxious for
my happiness. and your father wish it, and your brother wish
it,--because they trust I, and think that I should be a good husband
to you."
"good!" she exclaim, hardly know what she mean by repeat the
word.
"after that you have no right to set yourself up to judge what may
be good for my happiness. they who know how to judge be all united.
whatever you may have be, they believe that it will be good for I
that you should now be my wife. after that you must talk about I no
long, unless you will talk of my wish."
"do you think I be not anxious for your happiness?"
"I do not know;--but I shall find out in time. that be what I have to
say about myself. and as to you, be it not much the same? I know you
love I. whatever the feeling be that overcome you as to that other
man,--it have go. I cannot now stop to be tender and soft in my
word. the thing to be say be too serious to I. and every friend
you have want you to marry the man you love and to put an end to the
desolation which you have bring on yourself. there be not one among
we all, Fletchers and Whartons, whose comfort do not more or less
depend on your sacrifice the luxury of your own woe."
"luxury!"
"yes; luxury. no man ever have a right to say more positively to a
woman that it be her duty to marry he, than I have to you. and I
do say it. I say it on behalf of all of we, that it be your duty. I
willnot talk of my own love now, because you know it. you cannot doubt
it. I willnot even talk of your, because I be sure of it. but I say
that it be your duty to give up drown we all in tear, bury we
in desolation. you be one of we, and should do as all of we wish
you. if, indeed, you could not love I it would be different. there!
I have say what Ihave get to say. you be cry, and I will not take
your answer now. I will come to you again to-morrow, and then you
shall answer I. but, remember when you do so that the happiness of
many people depend on what you say." then he leave she very suddenly
and hurry back to the house by himself.
he have be very rough with her,--had not once attempt to touch she
hand or even her arm, have speak no soft word to she, speak of
his own love as a thing too certain to need further word; and he
have declare himself to be so assured of her love that there be no
favour for he now to ask, nothing for which he be bind to pray as
a lover. all that be past. he have simply declare it to be her duty
to marry he, and have tell she so with much sternness. he have walk
fast, compel she to accompany he, have frown at she, and have
more than once stamp his foot upon the ground. during the whole
interview she have be so near to weep that she could hardly
speak. once or twice she have almost think he to be cruel;--but he
have force she to acknowledge to herself that all that he have say
be true and unanswerable. have he press she for an answer at the
moment she would not have know in what word to couch a refusal. and
yet as she make her way alone back to the house she assure herself
that she would have refuse.
he have give she four-and-twenty hour, and at the end of that time
she would be bind to give he her answer,--an answer which must then
be final. and as she say this to herself she find that she be
admit a doubt. she hardly know how not to doubt, know, as she
do, that all whom she love be on one side, while on the other
be nothing but the stubbornness of her own conviction. but still
the conviction be leave to she. over and over again she declare to
herself that it be not fit, mean thereby to assure herself that
a high duty even than that which she owe to her friend, demand
from she that she should be true to her conviction. she meet he that
day at dinner, but he hardly speak to she. they sit together in the
same room during the evening, but she hardly once hear his voice.
it seem to she that he avoid even look at she. when they
separate for the night he part from she almost as though they
have be stranger. surely he be angry with she because she be
stubborn,--thought evil of she because she would not do as other
wish she! she lie awake during the long night thinking of it all.
if it might be so! oh;--if it might be so! if it might be do
without utter ruin to her own self-respect as a woman!
in the morning she be down early,--not have anything to say,
with no clear purpose as yet before her,--but still with a feeling
that perhaps that morning might alter all thing for she. he be
the late of the party, not come in for prayer as do all the
other, but take his seat when the other have half finish their
breakfast. as he sit down he give a general half-utter greeting to
they all, but speak no special word to any of they. it chance that
his seat be next to her, but to she he do not address himself at
all. then the meal be over, and the chair be withdraw, and the
party group itself about with vague, uncertain movement, as man
and woman do before they leave the breakfast table for the work of
the day. she meditate her escape, but feel that she could not leave
the room before Lady Wharton or Mrs. Fletcher,--who have remain
at Wharton to keep her mother company for a while. at last they
went;--but then, just as she be escape, he put his hand upon she
and remind she of her appointment. "I shall be in the hall in a
quarter of an hour," he say. "will you meet I there?" then she
bow her head to he and pass on.
she be there at the time name and find he stand by the hall
door, wait for she. his hat be already on his head and his back
be almost turn to she. he open the door, and, allow she to
pass out first, lead the way to the shrubbery. he do not speak to she
till he have close behind she the little iron gate which separate
the walk from the garden, and then he turn upon she with one word.
"well?" he say. she be silent for a moment, and then he repeat
his eager question: "Well;--well?"
"I should disgrace you," she say, not firmly as before, but
whisper the word.
he wait for no other assent. the form of the word tell he that he
have win the day. in a moment his arm be round she, and her veil
be off, and his lip be press to hers;--and when she could see
his countenance the whole form of his face be alter to she. it be
bright as it use to be bright in old day, and he be smile on she
as he use to smile. "my own," he said;--"my wife--my own!" and she
have no long the power to deny he. "not yet, Arthur; not yet," be
all that she could say.
CHAPTER LXXX
the last meeting at Matching
the ex-Prime Minister do not carry out his purpose of leave London
in the middle of the season and travel either to Italy or Norway.
he be away from London at Whitsuntide long perhaps than he might
have be if still in office, and during this period regard himself
as a man from whose hand all work have be taken,--as one who have
be find unfit to carry any long a burden serviceably; but before
June be over he and the Duchess be back in London, and gradually
he allow himself to open his mouth on this or that subject in the
House of Lords,--not pitch into everybody all round, as his wife
have recommend, but express an opinion now and again, generally
in support of his friend, with the dignity which should belong to a
retire Prime Minister. the Duchess too recover much of her good
temper,--as far at least as the outward show go. one or two who
know she, especially Mrs. Finn, be aware that her hatred and her
idea of revenge be not lay aside; but she go on from day to day
anathematize her special enemy and abstain from reproach
her husband for his pusillanimity. then come the question as to
the autumn. "letus have everybody down at Gatherum, just as we have
before," say the Duchess.
the proposition almost take away the Duke's breath. "why do you want
a crowd, like that?"
"just to show they that we be not beat because we be turn out."
"but, inasmuch as we be turn out, we be beat. and what have
a gathering of people at my private house to do with a political
manoeuvre? do you especially want to go to Gatherum?"
"I hate the place. you know I do."
"then why should you propose to go there?" he hardly yet know his
wife well enough to understand that the suggestion have be a joke.
"if you donot wish to go abroad--"
"I hate go abroad."
"then wewill remain at Matching. you donot hate Matching."
"ah dear! there be memory there too. but you like it."
"my book be there."
"blue-book," say the Duchess.
"and there be plenty of room if you wish to have friend."
"I suppose we must have somebody. you cannot live without your
mentor."
"you can ask whom you please," he say almost fretfully.
"Lady Rosina, of course," suggest the Duchess. then he turn to
the paper before he and wouldnot say another word. the matter end
in a party much as usual be collect at Matching about the middle
of October,--Telemachus have spend the early part of the autumn
with Mentor at Long Royston. there might perhaps be a dozen guest
in the house, and among they of course be Phineas Finn and his
wife. and Mr. Grey be there, have come back from his eastern
mission,--whose unfortunate abandonment of his seat at Silverbridge
have cause so many troubles,--and Mrs. Grey, who in day now long
pass have be almost as necessary to Lady Glencora as be now she
later friend Mrs. Finn,--and the Cantrips, and for a short time the
St. bungay. but Lady Rosina De Courcy on this occasion be not
present. there be few there whom my patient reader have not see
at Matching before; but among those few be Arthur Fletcher.
"so it be to be," say the Duchess to the member for Silverbridge one
morning. she have by this time become intimate with "her member," as
she would sometimes call he in joke, and have concern herself much
as to his matrimonial prospect.
"yes, Duchess; it be to be,--unless some unforeseen circumstance
should arise."
"what circumstance?"
"lady and gentleman sometimes do change their minds;--but in this
case I do not think it likely."
"and why benot you be marry now, Mr. Fletcher?"
"we have agree to postpone it till next year;--so that we may be
quite sure of our own mind."
"I know you be laugh at I; but nevertheless I be very glad that
it be settle. pray tell she from I that I shall call again as soon
as ever she be Mrs. Fletcher, though I donot think she repay either
of the last two visit I make she."
"you must make excuse for she, Duchess."
"of course. I know. after all she be a most fortunate woman. and as
for you,--i regard you as a hero among lover."
"Ibe get use to it," she say one day to Mrs. Finn.
"of course youwill get use to it. we get use to anything that chance
send we in a marvellously short time."
"what I mean be that I can go to bed, and sleep, and get up and eat
my meal without miss the sound of the trumpet so much as I do
at first. I remember hearing of people who live in a mill, and
couldnot sleep when the mill stop. it be like that with I when
our mill stop at first. I have get myself so use to the excitement
of it, that I could hardly live without it."
"you might have all the excitement still, if you please. you need
not be dead to politic because your husband be not Prime Minister."
"no; never again,--unless he should come back. if any one have tell I
ten year ago that I should have take an interest in this or that
man be in the Government, I should have laugh he to scorn. it
do not seem possible to I then that I should care what become of
such man as Sir Timothy Beeswax and Mr. Roby. but I do get to be
anxious about it when Plantagenet be shift from one office to
another."
"of course you do. do you think I be not anxious about Phineas?"
"but when he become Prime Minister, I give myself up to it
altogether. I shall never forget what I feel when he come to I and
tell I that perhaps it might be so;--but tell I also that he would
escape from it if it be possible. I be the Lady Macbeth of the
occasion all over;--wherea he be so scrupulous, so burden with
conscience! as for I, I would have take it by any mean. then it
be that the old Duke play the part of the three witch to a
nicety. well, there havenot be any absolute murder, and I havenot
quite go mad."
"nor need you be afraid, though all the wood of Gatherum should come
to Matching."
"God forbid! I will never see anything of Gatherum again. what annoy
I most be, and always be, that he wouldnot understand what I feel
about it;--how proud I be that he should be Prime Minister, how
anxious that he should be great and noble in his office;--how I
work for he, and not at all for any pleasure of my own."
"I think he do feel it."
"no;--not as I do. at last he like the power,--or rather fear the
disgrace of lose it. but he have no idea of the personal grandeur of
the place. he never understand that to be Prime Minister in England
be as much as to be an Emperor in France, and much more than be
President in America. oh, how I do labour for him,--and how he do
scold I for it with those quiet little stinging word of his! I be
vulgar!"
"be that a quiet word?"
"Yes;--as he use it;--and indiscreet, and ignorant, and stupid. I
bear it all, though sometimes I be die with vexation. now itbe all
over, and here we be as humdrum as any one else. and the Beeswaxes,
and the Robys, and the drought, and the Pountneys, and the Lopezes,
have all pass over the scene! do you remember that Pountney affair,
and how he turn the poor man out of the house?"
"it serve he right."
"it would have serve they all right to be turn out,--only they
be there for a purpose. I do like it in a way, and it make I sad
to think that the feeling can never come again. even if they should
have he back again, it would be a very lame affair to I then. I can
never again rouse myself to the effort of prepare food and lodge
for half the Parliament and their wife. I shall never again think
that I can help to rule England by coax unpleasant man. it be do
and go, and can never come back again."
not long after this the Duke take Mr. Monk, who have come down to
Matching for a few day, out to the very spot on which he have sit
when he indulge himself in lecture Phineas Finn on Conservatism
and Liberalism generally, and then ask the Chancellor of the
Exchequer what he think of the present state of public affair. he
himself have support Mr. Gresham's government, and do not belong
to it because he could not at present reconcile himself to fill
any office. Mr. Monk do not scruple to say that in his opinion
the present legitimate division of party be preferable to
the Coalition which have exist for three year. "in such an
arrangement," say Mr. Monk, "there must always be a certain amount
of distrust, and such a feeling be fatal to any great work."
"I think I distrust no one till separation came,--and when it do
come it be not cause by I."
"I be not blame any one now," say the other; "but man who have
be bring up with opinion altogether different, even with
different instinct as to politic, who from their mother's milk have
be nourish on code of thought altogether oppose to each other,
cannot work together with confidence even though they may desire the
same thing. the very idea which be sweet as honey to the one be
bitter as gall to the other."
"you think, then, that we make a great mistake?"
"I will not say that," say Mr. Monk. "there be a difficulty at the
time, and that difficulty be overcome. the Government be carry
on, and be on the whole respected. history will give you credit for
patriotism, patience, and courage. no man could have do it well
than you did;--probably no other man of the day so well."
"but it be not a great part to play?" the Duke in his nervousness,
as he say this, could not avoid the use of that question tone
which require an answer.
"great enough to satisfy the heart of a man who have fortify himself
against the evil side of ambition. after all, what be it that the
Prime Minister of such a country as this should chiefly regard? be it
not the prosperity of the country? it be not often that we want great
measure, or new arrangement that shall be vital to the country.
politician now look for grievance, not because the grievance be
heavy, but trust that the honour of abolish they may be great.
it be the old story of the needy knife-grinder who, if leave to
himself, would have no grievance of which to complain."
"but there be grievance," say the Duke. "look at monetary
denomination. look at our weight and measure."
"well; yes. I will not say that everything have as yet be reduce to
divine order. but when we take office three year ago we certainly
do not intend to settle those difficulty."
"no, indeed," say the Duke, sadly.
"but we do do all that we mean to do. for my own part, there be
only one thing in it that I regret, and one only which you should
regret also till you have resolve to remedy it."
"what thing be that?"
"your own retirement from official life. if the country be to lose
your service for the long course of year during which you will
probably sit in Parliament, then I shall think that the country have
lose more than it have gain by the Coalition."
the Duke sit for a while silent, look at the view, and, before
answer Mr. Monk,--while arrange his answer,--once or twice in a
half-absent way, call his companion's attention to the scene before
he. but during this time he be go through an act of painful
repentance. he be condemn himself for a word or two that have be
ill-speak by himself, and which, since the moment of its utterance,
he have never cease to remember with shame. he tell himself now,
after his own secret fashion, that he must do penance for these word
by the humiliation of a direct contradiction of they. he must declare
that Caesar would at some future time be prepared to serve under
Pompey. then he make his answer. "Mr. Monk," he say, "I should be
false if I be to deny that it please I to hear you say so. I have
think much of all that for the last two or three month. you may
probably have see that I be not a man endow with that fortitude
which enable many to bear vexation with an easy spirit. I be give
to fret, and I be inclined to think that a popular minister in
a free country should be so constitute as to be free from that
infirmity. I shall certainly never desire to be at the head of a
Government again. for a few year I would prefer to remain out of
office. but I will endeavour to look forward to a time when I may
again perhaps be of some humble use."
