CLARA VAUGHAN 
 BOOK I. 
 CHAPTER I. 
 I do not mean to describe myself . already I feel that the personal pronoun will appear too often in these page . know the fault of my character almost as well as my good friend know they , I shall attempt to hide they no more than would those beloved one . enough of this : the story I have to tell be strange , and short as my own its preamble . 
 the day when I be ten year old begin my serious life . it be the 30th of December , 1842 ; and proud be the kiss my love father give I for spelling , writing , and pronounce the date in English , French , and italian . no very wonderful feat , it be true , for a clever child well - teach ; but I be by no mean a clever child ; and no one except my father could teach I a single letter . when , after several year of wedlock , my parent find new joy in I , their bliss be soon overhang with care . they fear , but durst not own the fear , lest the wilful , passionate , love creature , on whom their heart be wholly set , should be tear from their love to a distance great than the void of death ; in a word , should prove insane . at length they could no long hide this terror from each other . one look tell it all ; and I vaguely remember my hazy wonder at the scene that follow . like a thief , I come from the corner behind the curtain - loop , and tremble at my father 's knee , for he to say something to I . then frighten at his silence - a thing unknown to I - I pull his hand from before his eye , and find hot tear upon they . I coax he then , and pet he , and feel his sorrow through I ; then make believe to scold he for be so naughty as to cry . but I could not get his trouble from he , and he seem to watch I through his kiss . 
 before I have cease to ponder dreamily over this great wonder , a vast event   for a child of seven   divert I . Father , mother , and tooty - for so I then be call - be draw a long way by horse with yellow man upon they : from enlarged experience I infer that we must have post to London . here , among many marvel , I remember especially a long and mysterious interview with a kind , white - haired old gentleman , who wear most remarkable shoe . he take I upon his lap , which seem to I rather a liberty ; then he smooth down my hair , and feel my head so much that I ask if he want to comb it , have make up my mind to kick if he dare to try such a thing . then he put all sort of baby question to I which I be disposed to resent , have long discard Cock Robin and little red - riding - hood . unconsciously too , I be move by Nature 's strong hate of examination . but my father come up , and with tear in his eye beg I to answer everything . meanwhile my mother sit in a dark corner , as if her good doll be die . with its innate pugnacity , my hazy intellect rise to the situation , and I narrowly heed every thing . 
 " now go , my dear , " the old gentleman say at last ; " you be a very good little girl indeed . " 
 " that be a great lie , " I cry ; for I have learn bad word from a flighty girl , take rashly as under - nurse . 
 the old gentleman seem surprised , and my mother be dreadfully shocked . my father laugh first , then look at I sadly ; and I do what he expect , I jump into his arm . at one word from he , I run to the great physician , and humbly beg his pardon , and offer he my very dear toy . he come up warmly , and shake my father 's hand , and smile from his heart at my mother . 
 " allow I , Mrs. Vaughan - allow I , my dear sir - to congratulate you cordially . the head be a noble and honest one . it be the growth of the brain that cause these little commotion ; but the congestion will not be permanent . the fit , that have so alarmed you , be at this age a good symptom ; in fact , they be Nature 's remedy . they may last for seven year , or even for ten ; of course they will not depart at once . but the attack will be milder , and the interval long , when she have turn fourteen . for the intellect you need have no fear whatever . only keep she quiet , and never force she to learn . she must only learn when it come as it be with the wind . she will never forget what she do learn . " 
 Hereupon , unless I be much mistaken , my father and mother fall to and kiss and hug one another , and I hear a sound like sobbing ; then they catch I up , and devour I , as if I be bear anew ; and star round with great childish eye , I could not catch the old gentleman 's glance at all . 
 henceforth I learn very little , the wind , perhaps , be unfavourable ; and all the little I do learn come from my father 's lip . his patience with I be wonderful ; we spend most of the day together , and when he be force to leave I , I take no food until he return . whenever his horse be order , Miss Clara 's little grey pony begin to neigh and to fidget , and Miss Clara be off in a moment to get her blue riding - skirt . even when father go shoot or fishing , Tooty be sure to go too , except in the depth of winter ; and then she be up at the top of the house , watch all round for the gun - smoke . 
 ah , why do I linger so over these happy time - be it the pleasure of think how fondly we love one another , or be it the pain of know that we can do so no more ? 
 now , the 30th of December be my parent ' wedding - day , for I have be bear six year exact after their affectionate union . and now that I be ten year old - a notable hinge on the door of life - how much they make , to be sure , of each other and of I ! at dinner I sit in glory between they , upset all ceremony , please my father , and tease my mother , by many a childish sally . so genial a man my father be that he would talk to the servant , even on state occasion , quite as if they be human being . yet none of they ever take the small liberty with he , unless it be one to love he . before dessert , I inter my queen doll , with much respect and some heartache , under a marble flag by the door , which have be prepare for the purpose . my father be chief - mourner , but do not cry to my liking , until I have pinch he well . after this typical good - bye to childhood , I ride he back to the dining - table , and help he and my mother to the last of the West 's St. Peter grape , give he all the fat one . then we all drink health and love to one another , and I fall to in earnest at a child 's delight . dear father keep supply I with thing much nice than be now to be get , while my mother in vain pretend to guard the frontier . it be the first time I taste Guava jelly ; and now , even at the name , that scene be bright before I . the long high room oak - panel , the light and shadow flicker as on a dark bay horse , the crimson velvet curtain where the window be go to bed , the great black chair with damask cushion , but hard and sharp at the edge , the mantel - piece all carve in stone which I be forbid to kick , the massive lamp that never would let I eat without loose cloud of hair dance all over my plate , and then the great fire , its rival , shudder in blue flame at the thought of the frost outside ; all these thing , and even the ticking of the timepiece , be more palpable to I now than the desk on which I write . my father sit in his easy chair , laugh and joking , full of life and comfort , with his glass of old port beside he , his wife in front , and I , his " claricrop , " at his knee . more happy than a hundred king , he wish for nothing well . at one time , perhaps , he have long for a son to keep the ancient name , but now he be quite ashamed of the wish , as mutiny against I . after many an interchange , a drink for father , a sip for tooty , he begin to tell wondrous story of the shot he have make that day ; especially how he have kill a woodcock through a magpie 's nest . my mother listen with playful admiration ; I with breathless interest , and most profound belief . 
 then we play at draught , and fox and goose , and pretend even to play at chess , until it be nine o'clock , and my hour of grace expire . three time Ann Maples come to fetch I , but I would not go . at last I go submissively at one kind word from my father . my mother obtain but a pouting kiss , for I want to wreak some vengeance ; but my father I never kiss with less than all my heart and soul . I fling both arm around his neck , lay my little cheek to his , and whisper in his ear that I love he more than all the world . tenderly he clasp and kiss I , and now I be sure that through his smile he look at I with sadness . turn round at the doorway , I stretch my hand towards he , and meet once more his love , laugh eye . once more and only once . next I see he in his coffin , white and stark with death . by - and - by I will tell what I know ; at present I can only feel . the emotion - away with long word - the passion which sweep my little heart , with equal power rend it now . long I lay dumb and stun at the horror I could not grasp . then with a scream , as in my fit , I fling upon his body . what to I be shroud and shell , the rigid look and the world of awe ? such thing let step - child fear . not I , when it be my father . 
 CHAPTER II . 
 how that deed be do , I learn at once , and will tell . by whom and why it be do , I have give my life to learn . the evidence lay before the coroner be a cloud and fog of mystery . for day and day my mother lie insensible . then , for week and week , she would leap from her bed in fit of terror , stare , and shriek and faint . as for the servant , they know very little , but imagine a great deal . the only other witness be a medical man , a shoemaker , and two London policeman . the servant say that , between one and two in the morning , a clear , wild shriek ring through the house . large as the building be , this shriek unrepeate awake nearly all but I . rush anyhow forth , they hurry and huddle together at the head of the great staircase , doubt what to do . some say the cry come one way , some another . meanwhile Ann Maples , who sleep with I in an inner room at the end of a little passage , in the courage of terror go straight to her master and mistress . there , by the light of a dim night - lamp , use to visit I , she see my mother upright in the bed , and point towards my father 's breast . my father lie quite still ; the bed - clothe be smooth upon he . my mother do not speak . Ann Maples take the lamp , and look in her master 's face . his eye be open , wide open as in amazement , but the surprise be death . one arm be stiff around his wife , the other lax upon the pillow . as she describe it in west - country phrase , " he look all frore . " the woman rush from the room , and scream along the passage . the servant run to she , flurry and haggard , each afraid to be leave behind . none except the butler dare to enter . whispering and tremble they peer in after he , all ready to run away . Thomas Kenwood love his master dearly , be his foster - brother . he at once remove the bedclothe , and find the fatal wound . so strongly and truly be it deal , that it pierce the centre of my dear father 's heart . one spot of blood and a small three - cornered hole be all that could be see . the surgeon , who come soon after , say that the weapon must have be a very keen and finely - temper dagger , probably of foreign make . the murderer must have be quite cool , and well acquaint with the human frame . death follow the blow on the instant , without a motion or a groan . in my mother 's left hand strongly clutched be a lock of long , black , shin hair . a curl very like it , but rather finer , lie on my father 's bosom . in the room be no sign of disorder , no mark of forcible entrance . 
 one of the maid , a timid young thing , declare that soon after the stable - clock strike twelve , she have hear the front baluster creak ; but as she be know to hear this every night , little importance be attach to it . the coroner pay more attention to the page   a sharp youth from London , who , be first in the main corridor , after the cry , see , or think he see , a move figure , where the faint starlight come in at the oriel window . he be the more believe , because he own that he durst not follow it . but no way of escape could be discover there , and the eastern window be strongly bar betwixt the mullion . no door , no window be anywhere find open . 
 outside the house , the only trace be at one remarkable spot . the time have be choose well . it be a hard black frost , without , as yet , any snow . the ground be like iron , and an Indian could have spy no trail . but at this one spot , twenty - five yard from the east end of the house , and on the verge of a dense shrubbery , a small spring , scarcely visible , ooze among the moss . around its very head , it clear , and keep , a narrow space quite free from green , and here its margin be a thin coat of black mineral mud , which never froze . this space , at the broad , be but two foot and ten inch across from gravel to turf , yet now it hold two distinct footprint , not of some one crossing and re - crossing , but of two successive step lead from the house into the shrubbery . these footprint be remarkable ; the one nearest the house be of the left foot , the other of the right . each be the impression of a long , light , and pointed boot , very hollow at the instep . but they differ in this - the left footprint be plain and smooth , without mark of nail , or cue , or any other roughness ; while the right one be clearly stamp in the centre of the sole with a small rectangular cross . this mark seem to have be make by a cruciform piece of metal , or some other hard substance , inlay into the sole . at least , so say a shoemaker , who be employ to examine it ; and he add that the boot be not those of the present fashion , what he call " duck 's bill " be then in vogue . this man be ask to account for the fact of the footprint be so close together , do so very easily , and with much simplicity . it be evident , he say , that a man of average stature , walk rapidly , would take nearly twice that distance in every stride ; but here the verge of the shrubbery , and the branch strike he in the face , have suddenly curtail the step . and to this , most likely , and not to any hurry or triumph , be to be ascribe the fact that one so wily and steadfast do not turn back and erase the dangerous token . most likely , he do not feel what be beneath his foot , while he be battle with the tangle above . 
 be that as it may , there the mark remain , like the blot - paper of his crime . cast of they be take at once , and carefully have they be store by I . 
 the shoemaker , a shrewd but talkative man , say unasked that he have never see such boot as have leave those mark , since the " Young Squire "   he mean Mr. Edgar Vaughan   go upon his travel . for this gratuitous statement , he be strongly rebuke by the coroner . 
 for the rest , all that could be find out , after close inquiry , be , that a stranger darkly clothe have be see by the gamekeeper , in a copse some half - mile from the house , while the man be beat for woodcock on the previous day . he do not seem to be follow my father , and they think he have wander out of the forest road . he glide quickly away , before they could see his feature , but they know that he be tall and swarthy . no footprint be find in that ride like those by the shrubbery spring . 
 I need not say what verdict the coroner 's jury find . 
 CHAPTER III . 
 thus far , I have write in sore haste , to tell , as plainly and as briefly as possible , that which have darken all my life . though it never leave my wake thought , to dwell upon it before other be agony to I . henceforth my tale will flow perhaps more easily , until I fall again into a grief almost as dark , and be strike by storm of passion which childhood 's stature do not reach . 
 when the shock of the household , and the wonder of the county , and the hope of constable   raise by a thousand pound ' reward   have subside gradually , my mother continue to live in the old mansion , perhaps because none of her friend come forward to remove she . under my father 's will she be the sole executrix ; but all the estate   include house and park   be leave to my father 's near relative , as trustee for myself , with a large annuity to my mother charge upon they . there be many other provision and power in the will , which be of no consequence to my story . the chief estate be large and rich , extend three or four mile from the house , which stand in a beautiful part of Gloucestershire . the entire rental be about 12,000 l.   a year . my father   whose name be Henry Valentine Vaughan , be a very active man in the prime of life , have employ no steward , but manage everything himself . the park , and two or three hundred acre round it , have always be keep in hand ; the rest be let to thriving tenant , who love   as they express it   " every hair on the head of a Vaughan . " there be also a small farm near the sea , in a lonely part of Devonshire ; but this be my mother 's , have be leave to she by her father , a clergyman in that neighbourhood . 
 my father 's near relative be his half - brother , Edgar Vaughan , who have be educate for the Bar , and at one time seem likely to become eminent ; then suddenly he give up his practice , and reside   or rather rove   abroad , during several year . Sinister rumour about he reach our neighbourhood , not long before my father 's death . to these , however , the latter pay no attention , but always treat his brother Edgar with much cordiality and affection . but all admit that Edgar Vaughan have far outrun his income as a young son , which amount to about 600 l.   a year . of course , therefore , my father have often help he . 
 on the third day after that night , my guardian come to Vaughan Park . he be say to have hurry from London , upon learn there what have happen . 
 the servant and other have vainly and foolishly try to keep from I the nature of my loss . soon I find out all they know , and when the first tit and horror leave I , I pass my whole time , light or dark , in rove from passage to passage , from room to room , from closet to closet , search every chink and cranny for the murderer of my father . though heretofore a timid child , while so engaged I know not such a thing as fear ; but peer , and grope , and listen , feel every inch of wall and wainscot , crawl lest I should alarm my prey , spy through the slit of every door , and shake every empty garment . certain board there be near the east window which sound hollow ; at these I scoop until I break my nail . in vain nurse maple lock I in her room , hold I at her side , or even bind I to the bed . my raving force she soon to yield , and I would not allow she , or any one else , to follow I . the Gloucester physician say that since the disease of my mind have take that shape , it would be more dangerous to thwart than to indulge it . 
 it be the evening of the third day , and weary with but never of my search , I be grope down the great oak - staircase in the dusk , hand after hand , and foot by foot , when suddenly the main door - bell rang . the snow be fall heavily , and have deaden the sound of wheel . at once I slide   as my father have teach I to do   down the broad balustrade , run across the entrance - hall , and with my whole strength draw back the bolt of the lock . there I stand in the porch , unfrightened , but with a new kind of excitement on I . a tall dark man come up the step , and shake the snow from his boot . the carriage - lamp shone in my face . I would not let he cross the threshold , but stand there and confront he . he pretend to take I for some servant 's child , and hand I a parcel cover with snow . I fling it down , and say , look he full in the face , " I be Clara Vaughan , and you be the man who kill my father . " " carry she in , John , " he say to the servant - " carry she in , or the poor little thing will die . what eye ! " and he use some foreign oath - " what wonderful eye she have ! " 
 that burst of passion be the last conscious act of the young and over - labour brain . for three month I wander outside the gate of sorrow . my guardian , as they tell I , be most attentive throughout the whole course of the fever , and even in the press of business visit I three time every day . meanwhile , my mother be slowly shake off the stupor which lie upon she , and the new fear of lose I come through that thick heaviness , like the wind through a fog . Doubtless it help to restore her sens , and awake she to the work of life . then , as time go on , her former beauty and gentleness come back , and her reason too , as regard other subject . but as to that which all so long to know , not a spark of evidence could be have from she . the faint allusion to that crime , the name of her love husband , the mere word " murder " utter in her presence - and the consciousness would leave her eye , like a loan withdraw . upright she sit and rigid as when she be find that night , with the line of her face as calm and cold as moonlight . only two mean there be by which her sens could be restore : one be low sweet music , the other profound sleep . she be never throw into this cataleptic state by her own thought or word , nor even by those of other when in strict sequence upon her own . but any attempt to lead she to that one subject , no matter how craftily veil , be sure to end in this . the skilful physician , who have know she many year , judge , after special study of this disease , in which he feel deep interest , that it be always present in her brain , but wait for external aid to master she . I need not say that she be now unfit for any stranger 's converse , and even her most careful friend must touch sometimes the motive string . 
 as I recover slowly from long illness , the loss of my good friend and the search for my bad enemy revive and reign within I . sometimes my guardian would deign to reason with I upon what he call " my monomania . " when he do so , I would fix my eye upon he , but never try to answer . now and then , those eye seem to cause he some uneasiness ; at other time he would laugh and compare they pleasantly to the blue fire - damp in a coal - mine . his dislike of their scrutiny be well known to I , and incite I the more to urge it . but in spite of all , he be ever kind and gentle to I , and even try some grimly playful overture to my love , which flee from he with loathing , albeit a slow conviction form that I have wrong he by suspicion . 
 Edgar Malins Vaughan , then about thirty - seven year old , be   I suppose   a very handsome man , and perhaps of a more striking presence than my dear father . his face , when he be pleased , remind I strongly of the glance and smile I have lose , but never could it convey that soft sweet look , which still come through the cloud to I , now and then in dream . the outline of my guardian 's face be keener too and strong , and his complexion far more swarthy . his eye be of a hard steel - blue , and never seem to change . a slight lameness , perceptible only at time , do not impair his activity , but serve he as a pretext for decline all field - sport , for which   unlike my father   he have no real taste . 
 his enjoyment , if he have any - and I suppose all man have some - seem to consist in the management of the estate   which he take entirely upon himself , in satiric literature and the news of the day , or in lonely ride and sail upon the lake . it be hint too , by Thomas Kenwood , who dislike and fear he strangely , that he drink spirit or foreign cordial in his own room , late at night . there be nothing to confirm this charge ; he be always up betime , his hand be never tremulous , nor do his colour change . 
 CHAPTER IV . 
 my life - childhood I can scarcely call it - go quietly for several year . the eastern wing of the house be leave unused , and rarely traverse by any but myself . foolish tale , of course , be tell about it ; but my frequent visit find nothing to confirm they . at night , whenever I could slip from the care of good but matter - of - fact Ann Maples , I use to wander down the long corridor , and squeeze through the iron gate now set there , half in hope and half in fear of meet my father 's spirit . for such an occasion all my question be prepare , and all the answer canvass . my infant mind be struggle ever to pierce the mystery which so vaguely lead its life . year only quicken my resolve to be the due avenger , and harden the set resolve into a fatalist 's conviction . my mother , always full of religious feeling , teach I daily in the scripture , and try to make I pray . but I could not take the mild teaching of the Gospel as a little child . to I the Psalms of David , and those book of the Old Testament which recount and seem to applaud revenge , be sweet than all the balm of Gilead ; they supply a terse and vigorous form to my perpetual yearning . with a child 's impiety , I claim for myself the mission of the Jews against the enemy of the Lord . the form of prayer , which my mother teach I , I mumble through , while look in her gentle face , with anything but a prayerful gaze . for my own bedside I keep a widely different form , which even now I shudder to repeat . and yet I love dear mother truly , and pity she sometimes with tear ; but the shadow - love be far the deep . 
 my father 's grave be in the churchyard of the little village which cluster and nestle beyond our lodge . it be a real grave . the thought of lie in a vault have always be loathsome to he , and he say that it strike he cold . so fond be he of air and light and freedom , the change of season and weather , and the shifting of the sun and star , that he use to pray that they still might pass over his bury head ; that he might lie , not in the dark locker of death , but in the open hand of time . his friend use to think it strange that a man of so light and festive nature should ever talk of death ; yet so he often do , not morbidly , but with good cheer . in pursuance , therefore , of his well - know wish , the vault wherein there lie five century of Vaughan dust be not open for he ; neither be his grave build over with a hideous ash - bin ; but lie narrow , fair , and humble , with a plain , low headstone of the white marble , bear his initial deeply carve in grey . through our warm love and pity , and that of all the village , and not in mere compliance with an old usage of the western county , his simple bed be ever green and white with the fairest of low flower . though otherwise too moody and reckless to be a gardener , I love to rear from seed his favourite plant , and keep they in my room until they blossom ; then I would set they carefully along his grave , and lie down beside it , and wonder whether his spirit take pleasure in they . 
 but more often , it must be own , I lay a dark tribute there . the gloomy channel into which my young mind have be force be overhung , as might be expect , by a sombre growth . the legend of midnight spirit , and the tale of black crime , shed their poison on I . from the dust of the library I exhume all record of the most famous atrocity , and devour they at my father 's grave . as yet I be too young to know what grief it would cause to he who sleep there , could he but learn what his only child be do . that knowledge would at once have check I , for his presence be ever with I , and his memory cast my thought , as moonlight shape the shadow . 
 the view from the churchyard be a lovely english scene . what high praise can I give than this ? long time a wanderer in foreign part , nothing have I see that come from nature to the heart like a true english landscape . 
 the little church stand back on a quiet hill , which bent its wing in a gentle curve to shelter it from the north and east . these bend wing be feather , soft as down , with , larch , hawthorn , and the lightly - pencil birch , between which , here and there , the bluff rock stand their ground . southward , and beyond the glen , how fair a spread of wave country we could see ! to the left , our pretty lake , all clear and calm , give back the survey of the tree , until a bold gnoll , fringe with alder , lead it out of sight . far away upon the right , the severn steal along its silver road , leave many a reach and bend , which catch towards eventide the notice of the travelled sun . upon the horizon might be see at time , the blue distance of the Brecon hill . 
 often when I sit here all alone , and the evening dusk come on , although I hold those volume on my lap , I could not but forget the murder and the revenge of man , the motif , form , and evidence of crime , and nurse a vague desire to dream my life away . 
 sometimes also my mother would come here , to read her favourite Gospel of St. John . then I would lay the dark record on the turf , and sit with my injury hot upon I , wonder at her peaceful face . while , for her sake , I rejoice to see the tear of comfort and contentment dawn in her eye , I never grieve that the soft chastenment be not shed on I . for she I love and admire it ; for myself I scorn it utterly . 
 the same clear sunshine be upon we both : we both be look on the same fair scene - the gold of ripen corn , the emerald of wood and pasture , the crystal of the lake and stream ; above we both the peaceful heaven be shed , and the late distress be but a night go by - wherefore have it leave to one the dew of life , to the other a thunderbolt ? I know not the reason then , but now I know it well . 
 although my favourite style of literature be not likely to improve the mind , or yield that honey melancholy which some young lady woo , to I it do but little harm . my will be so bent upon one object , and the whole substance and shape of my thought so stanch in their sole ductility thereto , that other thing go idly by I , if they show no power to promote my end . but upon palpable life , and the doing of nature I become observant beyond my age . thing in growth or motion round I impress themselves on my sens , as if a nerve be touch . the uncoiling of a fern - frond , the shrinking of a bind - weed blossom , the escape of a cap - pinch bud , the projection of a seed , or the spark from a fade tuberose , in short , the light print of Nature 's sandalled foot , be trace and count by I . not that I derive a maiden pleasure from they , as happy person do , but that it seem my business narrowly to heed they . 
 as for the proud phenomenon of imperial man , so far as they yet survive the crucible of convention - the line where cunning crouch , the smile that be but a brain - flash , the veil let down across the wide mouth of greed , the guilt they try to make volatile in charity , - all these I be not old and poor enough to learn . yet I mark unconsciously the trait of individual , the mannerism , the gesture , and the mode of speech , the complex motive , and the underflow of thought . so all I do , and all I dream , have one colour and one aim . 
 my education , it be just to say , be neglect by no one but myself . my father 's love of air and heaven have descend to I , and nothing but my mother 's prayer or my own dark quest could keep I in the house . abstract principle and skeleton dogma I could never grasp ; but whatever be vivid and shrewd and native , whatever have point and purpose , be seize by I and make my own . my faculty be not large , but steadfast now , and concentrate . 
 though several master try their good , and my governess do all she could , I choose to learn but little . drawing and music   to soothe my mother   be my principal study . of poetry I take no heed , except in the fierce old drama . 
 enough of this . I have say so much , not for my sake , but for my story . 
 CHAPTER V. 
 on the fifth anniversary of my father 's death , when I be fifteen year of age , I go to visit   as I always do upon that day   the fatal room . although this chamber have be so long unused , the furniture be allow to remain ; and I insist passionately that it should be my charge . what have seem the petulance of a child be now the strong will of a thoughtful girl . 
 I take the key from my bosom , where I always keep it , and turn it in the lock . no mortal have enter that door since I pass it in my last paroxysm , three week and a day before . I see a cobweb reach from the black finger - plate to the third mould of the beading . the weather have be damp , and the door stick fast to the jamb , then yield with a crack . though I be bold that day , and in a mood of triumph , some awe fall on I as I enter . there hang the heavy curtain , last draw by the murderer 's hand ; there lie the bed - clothe , raise for the blow , and replace on death ; and there be the pillow where sleep have be so prolonged . all these I see with a forced and fearful glance , and my breath stand still as the wind in a grave . 
 presently a light cloud float off the sun , and a white glare from the snow of the morning burst across the room . my sight be not so dim with tear as it generally be when I stand there , for I have just read the history of a long - hide crime detect , and my eye be full of fierce hope . but stricken soon to the wonted depth of sadness , with the throb of my heart fall like the avenger 's step , I go minutely through my death - inspection . I feel all round the dusty wainscot , open the wardrobe and cupboard , raise the lid of the deep - bay window - seat , peer shudder down the dark closet , where I believe the assassin have lurk , start and star at myself in the mirror , to see how lone and wan I look , and then approach the bed , to finish my search in the usual place , by lie and sob where my father die . I have glance beneath it and round the pillar , and clutch the curtain as if to squeeze out the truth , and be just about to throw myself on the coverlet and indulge the fit so bitterly hold at bay , when something on the hanging above the head - board stop I suddenly . there I see a narrow line of deep and glow red . it grow so vivid on the faded damask , and in the white glare of the level sun , that I think it be on fire . hastily set a chair by the pillar , for I would not tread on that bed , I leap up , and closely examine the crimson vein . 
 without think , I know what it be - the heart - blood of my father . there be three distinct and several mark , trace by the reeking dagger . the first on the left , which have catch my glance , be the broad and clear to read . two line , meet at a right angle , rudely form a Roman L. rudely I say , for the poniard have be too rich in red ink , which have clot where the two stroke meet . the second letter be a roman d , form also by two bold stroke , the upright very distinct , the curve less easily trace at the top , but the low part deep and clear . the third letter be not so plain . it look like c at first , but upon further examination I feel convinced that it be mean for an o , leave incomplete through the want of more writing fluid ; or be it then that my mother have seize the dark author by the hair , as he stoop to incline his pen that the last drop might trickle down ? 
 decipher thus with finger and eye , I trace these letter of blood , one by one , over and over again , till they dance in my gaze like the northern light . I stand upon tiptoe and kiss they ; I care not what I be do : it be my own father 's blood , and I think of the heart it come from , not of the hand which shed it . when I turn away , the surprise , for which till then I have find no time , break full upon I . how could these letter , in spite of all my vigilance , so long have remain unseen ? why do the murderer peril his life yet more by stay to write the record , and seal perhaps the conviction of his deed ? and what do these character mean ? of these three question , the first be readily solve . the other two remain to I as new shadow of wonder . several cause have conspire to defer so long this discovery . in the first place , the damask have be of rich lilac , shoot with a pile of carmine , which , in the wave play of light , glossed at once and obscure the crimson stain , until the fade hue of art leave in strong contrast nature 's abide paint . secondly , my rapid growth and the clearness of my eye that day lessen the distance and favour perception . again - and this be perhaps the paramount cause - the winter sun , with ray unabsorbe by the snow , throw his sheer dint upon that very spot , keen , level , and uncoloure - a thing which could happen on few day in the year , and for few minute each day , and which never have happen during my previous search . perhaps there be also some chemical action of the ray of light which evoke as well as show the colour ; but of this I do not know enough to speak . suffice it that the letter be there , at first a great shock and terror , but soon a strong encouragement to I . 
 my course be at once to perpetuate the mark and speculate upon they at leisure , for I know not how fleeting they might be . I hurry downstairs , and speak to no one procure some clear tissue paper . apply this to the damask , and hold a card behind , I carefully trace with a pencil so much of the letter as could be perceive through the medium , and complete the sketch by copy most carefully the rest ; it be , however , beyond my power to keep my hand from tremble . a shade flit over my drawing - oh , how my heart leap ! 
 when I have finish the pencil - sketch , and before it be ink over   for I could not bring myself to paint it red , I kneel where my father die and thank God for this guidance to I . by the time I have dry my eye the sun be pass and the line of blood be go , even though I know where to seek they , have leave a pin in the damask . by measure I find that the letter be just three foot and a quarter above the spot where my father 's head have be . the large of they , the L , be three inch long and an eighth of an inch in width ; the other be nearly as long , but nothing like so wide . 
 tremble now , for the rush of passion which still the body be past , and step silently on the long silent floor , I go to the deep dark - mullioned window and try to look forth . after all my lone tumult , perhaps I want to see the world . but my jade eye and brain show only the same three letter burn on the snow and sky . evening , a winter evening , be flutter down . the sun be spend and stop by a grey mist , and the landscape full of dreariness and cold . for mile , the earth lie white and wan , with nothing to part life from death . no step be on the snow , no wind among the tree ; fence , shrub , and hillock be as wrinkle in a winding - sheet , and every stark branch have like I its own cold load to carry . 
 but on the left , just in sight from the gable - window , be a spot , black as midnight , in the billowy snow . it be the spring which have store for I the footprint . perhaps I be superstitious then ; the omen be accept . suddenly a last gleam from the dauntless sun come through the ancient glass , and fling a crimson spot upon my breast . it be the red heart , centre of our shield , win with Coeur de Lion . 
 oh scutcheon , blazonment , and other gewgaw , by which man think to ennoble daylight murder , how long shall fool account it honour to be tattooed with you ? mercy , fellow - feeling , truth , humility , virtue that never flap their wing , but shrink lest they should know they stoop , what have these win ? gaze sinister , and their crest a pillory . 
 with that red pride upon my breast , and that black heart within , and my young form stately with revenge , I be a true descendant of Crusaders . 
 CHAPTER VI . 
 to no one , not even to Thomas Kenwood   in whom I confide most , do I impart the discovery just describe . again and again I go to examine those letter , jealous at once of my secret , and fearful lest they should vanish . but though they remain perhaps unaltered , they never appear so vivid as on that day . 
 with keener interest I begin once more to track , from page to page , from volume to volume , the chronicled step of limping but sure - footed justice . 
 not long after this I be provide with a companion . " Clara , " say my guardian one day at breakfast , " you live too much alone . have you any friend in the neighbourhood ? " 
 " none in the world , except my mother . " 
 " well , I must try to survive the exclusion . I have do my good . but your mother have succeed in find a colleague . there be a cousin of yours come here very soon . " 
 " mother dear , " I cry in some surprise , " you never tell I that you have any niece . " 
 " neither have I , my darling , " she reply , " nor any nephews either ; but your uncle have ; and I hope you will like your visitor . " 
 " now remember , Clara , " resume my guardian , " it be no wish of mine that you should do so . to I it be a matter of perfect indifference ; but your mother and myself agree that a little society would do you good . " 
 " when be she to come ? " I ask , in high displeasure that no one have consult I . 
 " he be likely to be here to - morrow . " 
 " oh , " I exclaim , " the plot be to humanize I through a young gentleman , be it ? and how long be he to stay in my house ? " 
 " in your house ! I suppose that will depend upon your mother 's wish . " 
 " more likely upon your , " I cry ; " but it matter little to I . " 
 he say nothing , but look displeased ; my mother do the same , I be silent , and the subject drop . but of course I see that he wish I to like his new importation , while he dissemble the wish from knowledge of my character . 
 two year after my father 's birth , his father have marry again . of the second wedlock the only offspring be my guardian , Edgar Vaughan . he be a posthumous son , and his mother in turn contract a second marriage . her new husband be one Stephen Daldy , a merchant of some wealth . by he she leave one son , name Lawrence , and several daughter . this Lawrence Daldy , my guardian 's half - brother , prove a spendthrift , and , while scatter the old merchant 's treasure marry a fashionable adventuress . as might be expect , no retrenchment ensue , and he die in poverty , leave an only child . 
 this boy , Clement Daldy , be of my own age , or thereabout , and , in pursuance of my guardian 's plan , be to live henceforth with we . 
 he arrive under the wing of his mother , and his character consist in the absence of any . if he have any quality at all by which one could know he from a doll , it be perhaps vanity ; and if his vanity be singular enough to have any foundation , it could be only in his good look . he be , I believe , as pretty a youth as ever talk without mind , or smile without meaning . need it be say that I despise he at once unfathomably ? 
 his mother be of a very different order . long - endure , astute , and plausible , with truth no more than the pith of a straw , she add thereto an imperious spirit , embody just now in an odious meekness . whatever she say or do , in her large contempt of the world , her lady - abbess walk , and the chastened droop of her brilliant eye , she convey through it all the impression of her humble superiority . though profoundly convinced that all be vanity , she be reluctant to force this conviction on mind of a narrow scope , and dissemble with conscious grace her knowledge of human nature . 
 to a blunt , outspoken child , what could be more disgusting ? but when upon this be assume an air of deep pity for my ignorance , and interest in my littleness , it become no long bearable . 
 this Christian Jezebel nearly succeed in estrange my mother from I . the latter feel all that kindness towards she which people of true religion , when over - charitable , conceive towards all who hoist and salute the holy flag . our sweet pirate know well how to make the most of this . 
 for myself , though I feel that a hypocrite be below the level of hate , I could not keep my composure when with affectionate blandness our visitor dare to " discharge her sacred duty of impress on I the guilt of harbouring thought of revenge . " of course , she do not attempt it in the presence of my mother ; but my guardian be there , and doubtless know her intention . 
 it be on a Sunday after the service , and she have stay for the sacrament . 
 " my sweet child , " she begin , " you will excuse what I be about to say , as I only speak for your good , and from a humble sense that it be the path of duty . it have please God , in his infinite wisdom , to afflict your dear mother with a melancholy so sensitive , that she can not bear any allusion to your deeply - lament father . you have therefore no female guidance upon a subject which justly occupy so much of your thought . your uncle Edgar , in his true affection for you , have think it right that you should associate more with person calculate to develop your mind . " 
 now I hate that word " develop ; " and I feel my passion rise , but let she go on : - 
 " under these circumstance , it grieve I deeply , my poor dear child , to find you still display a perversity , and a wilful neglect of the blessed mean of grace , which must   humanly speak   draw down a judgment upon you . now , open your heart to I , the whole of your little unregenerate heart , you mysterious but   I firmly believe   not ill - dispose lambkin . tell I all your thought , your brooding , your dream - in fact , your entire experience . Uncle Edgar will leave the room , if you wish it . " 
 " certainly not , " I say . 
 " quite right , my dear ; have no secret from one who have be your second father . now tell I all your little trouble . make I your mother - confessor . I take the deep interest in you . true , I be only a weak and sinful woman , but my chastisement have work together for my edification , and God have be graciously pleased to grant I peace of mind . " 
 " you do not   look as if you have much , " I cry . 
 her large eye flash a quick start from their depth , like the stir of a newly - fathomed sea . my guardian 's face gleam with a smile of sly amusement . recover at once her calm objective superiority , she proceed : 
 " I have be trouble and chasten severely , but now I perceive that it be all for the good . but perhaps it be not very graceful to remind I of that . yet , since all my trial have work together for my good , on that account I be , under Providence , well qualified to advise you , in your dark and perilous state . I have see much of what thoughtless people call ' life . ' but in help you , I wish to proceed on high principle than those of the world . you possess , beyond question , a strong and resolute will , but in your present benighted course it can lead only to misery . now , what be the principal aim of your life , my love ? " 
 " the death of my father 's murderer . " 
 " exactly so . my unhappy child , I know it too well . though a dark sin be your lead star , I feel too painfully my own shortcoming , and old unregenerate tendency , to refuse you my carnal sympathy . you know my feeling , Edgar . " 
 " indeed , Eleanor , " reply my guardian , with an impenetrable smile , " how should I ? you have always be such a model of every virtue . " 
 she give he a glance , and again address I . " now suppose , Clara Vaughan , that , after year of brood and lonely anguish , you obtain your revenge at last , who will be any the well for it ? " 
 " my father and I. " 
 " your father indeed ! how you wrong his sweet and most forgiving nature ! " 
 this be the first thing she have say that touch I ; and that because I have often think of it before . but I would not let she see it . 
 " though his nature be an angel 's , " I cry , " as I believe it be , never could he forgive that be who tear he from I and my mother . I know that he watch I now , and must be cold and a wanderer , until I have do my duty to he and myself . " 
 " you awful child . why , you will frighten we all . but you make it the more my duty . come with I now , and let I inculcate the doctrine of a high and holier style . " 
 " thank you , Mrs. Daldy , I want no teaching , except my mother 's . " 
 " you be too wilful and headstrong for she . come to I , my poor stray lamb . " 
 " I would soon go to a butcher , Mrs. Daldy . " 
 " be it possible ? be you so lose to all sense of right ? " 
 " yes , if you be right , " I reply ; and leave the room . 
 Thenceforth she pursue tactic of another kind . she try I with flattery and fictitious confidence , likely from a woman of her maturity to win a young girl , by inflate self - esteem : she even feign a warm interest in my search , and wish to partake in my reading and secret musing . indeed , I could seldom escape she . I be ready to own that , by her suggestion and quick apprehension , she gain some ascendancy over I , but not a tenth part of what she think she have win ; and I still continue to long for her departure . of this , however , no symptom appear : she make herself quite at home , and do she good to become indispensable to my mother . 
 Clement Daldy have full opportunity to commend himself to my favour . we be constantly throw together , in the presence of his mother , and the absence of mine . for a long time , I be too young , and too much engross by the object for which I live , to have any inkling of their scheme ; but suddenly a suspicion break upon I . my guardian and his sister - in - law have form , as I think , a deliberate plot for marry I , when old enough , to that tailor 's block . the one have be so long accustom to the lordship of the property , to some county influence , and great command of money , that it be not likely he would forego the whole without a struggle . but he know quite well that the moment I should be of age I would dispense with his wardship , and even with his residence there , and devote all I have to the pursuit of my " monomania . " all his endeavour to make I his thrall have fail , partly from my suspicion , partly from a repugnance which could not be conquer . of course , I intend to give he an ample return for his stewardship , which have be wise and unwearying . but this be not what he want . the motif of his accomplice require no explanation . if once this neat little scheme should succeed , I must remain in their hand , clement be nobody , until they should happen to quarrel for I . 
 to show what Clement Daldy be , a brief anecdote be enough . when we be about sixteen year old , we sit in the park one morning , at the corner of the lake ; Clement 's little curl spaniel , which he love as much as he could love anything , be gambol round we . as the boy lounge along , half asleep , on the rustic chair , with his silky face shade by a broad hat , and his bright curl glisten like daffodil play , I think what a pretty peep - show he make , and wonder whether he could anyhow be the owner of a soul . 
 " oh , Clara , " he lisp , as he chance to look up - " Couthin Clara , I wish you would not   look at I tho . " 
 " and do it look fierce at its dolly ? " I say ; for I be always good - natured to he . " dolly know I would not   hurt it , for it be house full of sugar - plum . " 
 " then do let I go to thleep ; you be such a howwid girl . " 
 so I hush he off with a cradle song . but before the long lash sink flat on his cheek , like the ermine tip on my muff , and while his red lip yet tremble like cherry in the wind , my attention be suddenly draw to the lake . there be a plashing , and barking , and hiss , and napping of snow - white wing - poor Juan engage in unequal combat with two fierce swan who have a nest on the island . the poor little dog , though he fight most gallantly , be soon drive into deep water , and the swan keep knock he under with rapid and powerful stroke . see he almost drown , I call Clement to save he at once . 
 " I can not , " say the brave youth ; " you go if you like . they will kill I , and I can not   bear it ; and the water ith tho cold . " 
 in a moment I push off the boat which be near , jump into it , and , seize an oar , contrive to beat back the swan , and lift the poor little dog on board , gasp , half - drown , and woefully beat . meanwhile my lord elect have leap on the seat for safety , and be wring his white little hand , and dancing and cry , " oh , Clara'll be throwne , and they will say it be I . oh , what thall I do ! what thall I do ! " 
 even when I bring he his little pet safe , he would not touch he , because he be wet ; so I lay he full on his lap . 
 CHAPTER VII . 
 the spring of the year 1849 be remarkable , throughout the western county , for long drought . I know not how it may be in the east of England , but I have observe that in the west long drought occur only in the spring and early summer . in the autumn we have sometimes as much as six week without rain , and in the summer a month at most , but all the real drought   so far as my experience go   commence in February or March ; these be , however , so rare , and April have win such poetic fame for shower , and July for heat and dryness , that what I state be at variance with the popular impression . 
 be that as it may , about Valentine's - day , 1849 , and after a length of very changeable weather , the wind fix its home in the east , and the sky for a week be grey and monotonous . brilliant weather ensue ; white frost at night , and strong sun by day . the frost become less biting as the year go on , and the sun more powerful ; there be two or three overcast day , and people hop for rain . but no rain fall , except one poor drizzle , more like dew than rain . 
 with habit now so ingrained as to become true pleasure , I mark the effect of the drought on all the scene around I . the meadow take the colour of russian leather , the cornland that of a knife - board . the young leaf of the wood hung pinch and crisp , unable to shake off their tunic , and more like catkin than leaf . the pool go low and dark and thick with a coppery scum   in autumn it would have be green , and little bubble come up and pop where the earth crack round the side . the tap - root plant look comely and brave in the morning , after their drink of dew , but flag and flop in the afternoon , as a club cabbage do . as for those which have only the surface to suck , they dry by the acre , and powder away like the base of a bonfire . 
 the ground be hard as horn , and fissure in star , and angle , and jagged gap crack , like a dissect map or a badly - plaster wall . it amuse I sometimes to see a beetle suddenly cut off from his home by that which to he be an earthquake . how he would run to and fro , look doubtfully into the dark abyss , then , rise to the occasion , bridge his road with a straw . the snail shrink close in their shell , and resign themselves to a spongy distance of slime . the bird might be see in the morning , hop over the hollow of the shrunken pond , pry for worm , which have shut themselves up like caddise deep in the thirsty ground . our lake , which be very deep at the low end , become a refuge for all the widgeon and coot and moorhen of the neighbourhood , and the quick - diving grebe , and even the summer snipe , with his wild and lonely " cheep . " the brink of the water be feather , and dabble with countless impression of foot of all sort - dibber , and wader , and wagtail , and weasel , and otter , and fox , and the bore of a thousand bill , and muscle lay high and dry . 
 for my own pet robin I use to fill pan with water along the edge of the grass , for I know their dislike of the mineral spring   which never go dry , and to these they would fly down and drink , and perk up their impudent head , and sluice their poor little dusty wing ; and then , as they could not sing now , they would give I a chirp of gratitude . 
 when the drought have last about three month , the east wind , which till then have be cold and creep , become suddenly parch hot . Arid and heavy , and choke , it pant along the glade , like a dog on a dusty road . it come down the water - meadow , where the crowsfoot grow , and wild celery , and it lick up the dreg of the stream , and powder the flood - gate , all skeleton now , with grey dust . it come through the copse , and the young leaf shrunk before it , like a child from the hiss of a snake . the blast push the door of our house , and its dry wrinkle hand be lay on the wall and the staircase and woodwork ; a hot grime track its step , and a taint fall on all that be fresh . as it fold its baleful wing , and lie down like a desert dragon , vegetation , so long a time sick , give way at last to despair , and flag off flabbed and dead . the clammy grey dust , like hot sand throw from rampart , eat to the core of everything , choke the shrivelled pore and stifle the languid breath . old gaffer be talk of murrain in cattle , and famine and plague among man , and farmer be too badly off to grumble . 
 but the change even now be at hand . the sky which have long present a hard and cloudless blue , but trail a light haze round its rim in the morning , be bedim more every day with a white scudding vapour across it . the sun grow large and pale , and lean more on the heaven , which soon become rib with white skeleton - cloud ; and these in their turn grow soft and deep , then furry and ravel and wispe . one night the hot east wind drop , and , next morning   though the vane have not change , the cloud drive heavily from the south - west . but these sign of rain grow for several day before a single drop fall ; as be always the case after discontinuance , it be hard to begin again . indeed , the sky be amass with black cloud , and the dust go swirl like a mat beat over the tree , and the air become cold , and the wind moan three day and three night , and yet no rain fall . as old Whitehead , the man at the lodge , well observe , it have " forget the way to rain . " then it suddenly clear one morning   the 28th of May , and the west be streak with red cloud , that come up to crow at the sun , and the wind for the time be lull , and the hill look close to my hand . so I go to my father 's grave without the little green watering - pot or a trowel to fill the chink , for I know it would rain that very day . 
 in the eastern shrubbery there be a pond , which my father have take much trouble to make and adorn ; it be not feed by the mineral spring , for that be think likely to injure the fish , but by a large and purer stream , call the " Witches ' brook , " which , however , be now quite dry . this pond have be plant around and through with silver - weed , thrumwort and sun - clew , water - lily , arrow - head , and the rare double frog - bit , and other aquatic plant , some of they bring from a long distance . at one end there be a grotto , case with fantastic porous stone , and inside it a small fountain play . but now the fountain be silent , and the pond shrink almost to its centre . the silver eel which once have abound here , find their element likely to fail , make a migration , one dewy night , overland to the lake below . the fish , in vain envy of that great enterprise , huddle together in the small wet space which remain , with their back - fin here and there above water . when any one come near , they dash away , as I have see grey mullet do in the shallow sea - side pool . several time I have water pour in for their benefit , but it be go again directly . the mud round the edge of the remnant puddle be bake and crack , and foul with an oozy green sludge , the relic of water - weed . 
 this little lake , once so clear and pretty , and full of bright dimple and crystal shadow , now look so forlorn and wasted and old , like a bright eye wear dim with year , and the tree stand round it so fade and wan , the poplar unkempt of its silver and green , the willow without wherewithal to weep , and the spray of the birch lay dead at its foot ; altogether it look so empty and sad and piteous , that I have be deeply grieve for the sake of he who have love it . 
 so , when the sky cloud up again , in the afternoon of that day , I hasten thither to mark the first effect of the rain . 
 as I reach the white shell - walk , which loosely girt the pond , the lead - colour sky take a greyer and woollier cast , and overhead become blurred and pulpy ; while round the horizon it lift in fray festoon . as I take my seat in the grotto , the big drop begin to patter among the dry leaf , and the globule roll in the dust , like parch pea . a long hiss sound ensue , and a cloud of powder go up , and the tree move their bough with a heavy dull sway . then break from the laurel the song of the long - silent thrush , and reptile , and insect , and all that could move , dart forth to rejoice in the freshness . the earth send forth that smell of sweet newness , the breath of young nature awake , which remind we of milk , and of clover , of balm , and the smile of a child . 
 but , most of all , it be in and around the pool that the sign of new life be stir . as the circle begin to jostle , and the bubble sail close together , the water , the slime , and the bank , dance , flickered , and darken , with a whirl of living creature . the surface be brush , as green corn be flaw by the wind , with the quivering dip of swallow ' wing ; and the ripple that race to the land splash over the foot of the wagtail . 
 here , as I mark all narrowly , and seem to rejoice in their gladness , a sudden new wonder befell I . I be watch a monster frog emerge from his penthouse of ooze , and lift with some pride his brown spot and his bright golden throat from the matted green cake of dry weed , when a quick gleam shoot through the fibre . with a listless curiosity , wonder whether the frog , like his cousin the toad , be a jeweller , I advance to the brim of the pool . the poor frog look timidly at I with his large start eye ; then , shoulder off the green coil , make one rapid spring , and be safe in the water . but his movement have far disclose some glitter object below . determine to know what it be , despite the rain , I place some large pebble for step , run lightly , and lift the weed . before I lay , as bright as if polish that day , with the jewel hilt towards I , a long narrow dagger . with a haste too rapid for thought to keep up , I snatch it , and rush to the grotto . 
 there , in the drought of my long revenge , with eye on fire , and tooth set hard and dry , and every root of my heart cleave and cry to heaven for blood , I pore on that weapon , whose last sheath have be - how well I know what . I do not lift it towards God , nor fall on my knee and make a theatrical vow ; for that there be no necessity . but for the moment my life and my soul seem to pass along that cold blade , just as my father 's have do . a treacherous , blue , three - cornered blade , with a point as keen as a viper 's fang , sublustrous like ice in the moonlight , sleuth as hate , and tenacious as death . to my curdled and fury - strike vision it seem to writhe in the gleam of the storm which play along it like a corpse - candle . I fancy how it have quiver and rung to find itself deep in that heart . 
 my passion at length overpower I , and I lay , how long I know not , utterly insensible . when I come to myself again , the storm have pass over , the calm pool cover my stepping stone , the shrub and tree weep joy in the moonlight , the nightingale sing in the elm , healing and beauty be in the air , peace and content walk abroad on the earth . the May moon sleep on the water before I , and stream through the grotto arch ; but there it fall cold and ghost - like upon the tool of murder . over this I hastily fling my scarf ; coward , perhaps I be , for I could not handle it then , but flee to the house and dream in my lonely bed . 
 when I examine the dagger next day , I find it to be of foreign fabric . " Ferrati , Bologna , " the name and abode of the maker , as I suppose , be damascene on the hilt . a cross , like that on the footprint , but small , and make of gold , be inlay on the blade , just above the handle . the hilt itself be wreathe with a snake of green enamel , have garnet eye . from the fine temper of the metal , or some annealing process , it show not a stain of rust , and the blood which remain after write the letter before describe have probably be wash off by the water . I lay it most carefully by , along with my other relic , in a box which I always keep lock . 
 so God , as I think , by his sun , and his season , and weather , and the mind he have so prepare , be hold the clue for I , and shake it clear from time to time , along my dark and many - wind path . 
 CHAPTER VIII . 
 soon after this , a ridiculous thing occur , the consequence of which be grave enough . the summer and autumn after that weary drought be rather wet and stormy . one night towards the end of October , it blow a heavy gale after torrent of rain . go to the churchyard next day , I find , as I have expect , that the flower so carefully keep through the summer be shatter and strew by the temp ; and so I return to the garden for other to plant in their stead . my cousin Clement   as he be tell to call himself   come saunter towards I among the bed . his usual look of shallow brightness and empty self - esteem have fail he for the moment , and he look like a fan - tail pigeon who have tumble down the horse - rack . he follow I to and fro , with a sort of stutter walk , as I choose the plant I like well ; but I take little notice of he , for such have be my course since I first discover their scheme . 
 at last , as I stoop to dig up a white verbena , he come behind I , and begin his errand with more than his usual lisp . this I shall not copy , as it be not worth the trouble . 
 " oh , Clara , " he say , " I want to tell you something , if you will only be good - natured ! " 
 " do not   you see I be busy now ? " I reply , without turn to look . " will not   it do when you have take your curl - paper off ? " 
 " now , Clara , you know that I never use curl - paper . my hair do not   want it . you know it be much pretty than your long wave black stuff , and it curl of its own accord , if mamma only brush it . but I want to tell you something particular . " 
 " well , then , be quick , for I be go away . " and with that I stand up and confront he . he be scarcely so tall as myself , and his light showy dress and pink rise of a face , which seem make to be wear in the hair , be throw into bright relief by my sombre apparel and earnest twilight look . some lurk sense of this contrast seem to add to his hesitation . at last he begin again : 
 " you know , Cousin Clara , you must not be angry with I , because it be not   my fault . " 
 " what be not your fault ? " 
 " why , that I should fall - what do they call it ? - fall in love , I suppose . " 
 " you fall in love , you dissolute doll ! how dare you fall in love , sir , without my leave ? " 
 " well , I be afraid to ask you , Clara . I could not   tell what you would say . " 
 " oh , that must depend , of course , on who Mrs. Doll be to be ! if it be a good little thing with blue satin arm , and a sash and a slip , and pretty blue eye that go with a string , perhaps I will forgive you , poor child , and set you up with a house , and a tea - set , and a mother - of - pearl perambulator . " 
 " now , do not   talk nonsense , " he answer . " before long I shall be a man , and then you will be afraid of I , and put up your hand , and shriek , and want I to kiss you . " 
 I have indulge he too much , and his tongue be take liberty . I soon stop he . 
 " how dare you bark at I , you wretche little white - woolled nursery dog ? " 
 I leave he , and go with my basket of flower along the path to the churchyard . for a while he stand there frighten , till his mother look forth from the drawing - room window . between the two fear he choose the less , and follow I to my father 's grave . I stand there and angrily wave he back , but he still persist , though tremble . 
 " Cousin Clara , " he say - and his lisp be quite go , and he try to be in a passion - " Cousin Clara , you shall hear what I have get to say . you have live with I now a long time , and I be sure we have agree very well , and I - I - no , I do not   see why we should not be marry . " 
 " do not   you indeed , sir ? " 
 " perhaps , " he continue , " you be afraid that I do not   care about you . really now , I often think that you would be very good - look , if you would only laugh now and then , and leave off those nasty black gown ; and then if you would only leave off be so grand , and mysterious , and stately , and get up so early , I would let you do as you like , and you might paint I and have a lock of my hair . " 
 " Clement Daldy , " I ask , " do you see that lake ? " 
 " yes , " he reply , turn pale , and incline to fly . 
 " there be water enough there now . if you ever dare again to say one word like this to I , or even to show by your look that you think it , I will take you and drown you there , as sure as my father lie here . " 
 he slunk away quickly without a word , and could eat no lunch that day . in the afternoon , as I sit in my favourite bow - window seat , Mrs. Daldy glide in . she have put on with care her cling smile , as she would an indian shawl . I think how much well her face would have look with its natural , bold , haughty gaze . 
 " my dear Clara , " begin this pious tidewaiter , " what have you do to vex so your poor cousin clement ? " 
 " only this , Mrs. Daldy : he be foolish or mad , and I give he advice in a truly christian spirit , entirely for his own good . " 
 " I hope , my dear , that some day it may be his duty as well as his privilege to advise you . but , of course , you need not take his advice . my Clara love her own way as much as any girl I ever know ; and with poor Clement she will be safe to have it . " 
 " no doubt of that , " I reply . 
 " and then , my pet , you will be in a far well position than you could attain as an unmarried girl to pursue the great aim of your life ; so far , I mean , as be not inconsistent with the spirit of christian forgiveness . your guardian have think of that , in effect this arrangement ; and I trust that I be not wrong in allow so fair a prospect , under Providence , of your ultimate peace of mind to influence I considerably when he seek my consent . " 
 " I be sure I be much oblige to you . " 
 " I can not conceal from you , so clear - sighted as you be - and if I could , I object to concealment of any kind , on principle - that there be also certain worldly advantage , which be not without weight , however the heart be wean by trial and chasten from transient thing . and your guardian have this arrangement so very much at heart . my own dear child , I have feel for you so long that I love you as a daughter . how thankful I ought to be to the Giver of all good thing to have you really my own dear child . " 
 " be thankful , madam , when you have get it . this be a good thing which under Providence you must learn to do without . " 
 it be coarse of I to hint at my rich . but what could I do with she ? 
 " why , Clara , " she ask , in great amazement , " you can not be so foolish and wilful as to throw away this chance of revenge ? if only for your dear mother 's sake , as well as your father 's , it be the path of duty . let I tell you , both she and yourself be very much more in your guardian 's power than you have any idea . and what would be your poor father 's wish , who have leave you so entirely to his brother 's care and discretion ? will you put off for ever the discovery of his murderer ? " 
 " my father , " I say , proudly , " would scorn I for do a thing below he and myself . the last of the Vaughans to be plot away to a grocer 's doll ! " 
 it have be a trial of temper ; and contempt be too much for hypocrisy . through the rouge of the world , and the pearl - powder of religion , nature flush forth on her cheek ; for she really love her son . she know where to wound I the deep . 
 " be it no condescension in we that my beautiful boy should stoop to the maniac - child of a man who be stab - stab in his midnight bed - to atone , no doubt , for some low act of his own ? " 
 I spring up , and ring the bell . Thomas Kenwood , who make a point of attend I , come at once . I say to he , calmly and slowly : 
 " allow this person one hour to pack her thing . get a fly from the Walnut Tree Inn , and see she beyond the Lodge . " 
 if I have tell he to drag she away by the hair , I believe that man would have do it . she shrink away from I ; for the moment her spirit be quell , and she tremble into a chair . 
 " I assure you , Clara , I do not mean what I say . you provoke I so . " 
 " not one word more . leave the room and the house . " 
 " Miss Vaughan , I will not leave this house until your guardian return . " 
 " Thomas , " I say , without look towards she , " if Mrs. Daldy be not go in an hour , you quit my service . " 
 how Thomas Kenwood manage it , I never ask . he be a resolute man , and all the servant obey he . she turn round once , as she cross the threshold , and give I a look which I shall never forget . be such the look that have glare on my father before the blow ? she lift the white arm of which she be proud , and throw back her head , like the Fecial hurl his dart . 
 " Clara Vaughan , you shall bitterly grieve for this . it shall throw you and your mother at the foot of your father 's murderer , and you shall crave meat bad than your enemy 's blood . " 
 until she have quit the house , I could not sit down ; but go to my father 's bedroom , where I often take refuge when strongly excited and unable to fly to his grave . the thought and the memory hover and sigh around that fatal chamber be enough to calm and allay the sensation of trivial wrong . 
 but now this be not the case . the outrage offer have be , not to I , but to he who seem present there . the suggestion , too , of an injury do by my father , though scorn at first , be work and ruffle within I , as child put bearded corn - ear in another 's sleeve , which by - and - by work their own way to the breast . till now , I have always believe that some worldly advantage or gain have impel my foe to the deed which leave I an orphan . but that woman 's dark word have start a new train of reasoning , whose very first motion be doubt of the man I worship . among all I have ever meet , there exist but one opinion as to what he have be - a true gentleman , who have injure not one of God 's creature , whose life have be guide mainly by the wish and welfare of other . moreover , I have my own clear recollection - his voice , his eye , and his smile , his manner and whole expression ; these , it be true , be but outward thing , yet a child 's intuition be strong and hard to refute . 
 again , during my remembrance , he have never be absent from we , except for a day or two , now and then , among his county neighbour ; and any ill will which he might have incur from they must , from his position , have become notorious . 
 and yet , in the tooth of this reasoning , and in spite of my own warm feeling , that horrible suspicion clave to my heart and chill it like the black spot of mildew . and what if the charge be true ? in that case , how be I well than he who have always be to my mind a fiend in special commission ? his be vengeance , and mine revenge ; he have suffer perhaps a wanton wrong , as deep to his honour as mine to my love . 
 while I be brood thus miserably , my eye fall upon the bed . there be the red streak , grain and fibre like the cross - cut of a fern - stalk ; frame and look down on I , the sampler of my life . draw near , I tremble with an unknown awe , to find myself in that lonely presence , not indeed think , but inkle such thing of my father , my own darling father , whose blood be look at I . in a storm of self - loathing and sorrow , I kneel there and sob my atonement ; but never thenceforth could I wholly bar out the idea . foul idea when once admit will ever return on their track , as the cholera walk in the trail of its former pall . 
 but instead of abate my dogged pursuit , I now have a new incentive - to dispel the aspersion cast on my father 's shadow . 
 CHAPTER IX . 
 at this particular time of my life , many thing begin to puzzle I , but nothing be a great puzzle than the character of my guardian . Morose or moody he be not , though a stranger might have think he so ; nor could I end with the conviction that his heart be cold . it rather seem to I as if he feel that it ought to be so , and try his good to settle down as the inmate of an icehouse . but any casual flush of love , any glow of native warmth from the heart around he , and take by surprise he waver for one traitor moment , and in his eye gleam some remembrance , like firelight upon frozen window . but let any one attempt to approach he then with softness , to stir kind interest and feel into benevolent expression , and Mr. Vaughan would promptly shut himself in again , with a bar of irony , or a bolt of sarcasm . only to my mother be his behaviour different ; towards she his manner be so gentle , and his tone so kind , that but for my conviction that remorse lie under it , I must have come to like he . true , they do not often meet , for dear mother confine herself   in spite of Mrs. Daldy   more and more closely to her own part of the house , and rarely have the spirit now to share in the meal of the family . therefore , I begin at once to take her place , and would not listen to Mrs. Daldy 's kind offer to relieve I . this have lead quite recently to a little outbreak . one day I have be rather late for dinner , and , enter the room with a proud apology , find to my amazement Mrs. Daldy at the head of the table . for I a seat be place , as for a good little girl , by the side of Master Clement . at first I have not the presence of mind to speak , but stand by my rival 's chair , wait for she to rise . she affect not to understand I , and begin , with her hand on the ladle , and look I full in the face : " I fear , darle Clara , the soup be cold ; but your uncle can give you a very nice slice of salmon . have you offer thank for these mercy ? " 
 " thank you , I will take soup . allow I to help myself . I be sorry to have trouble you . " 
 and I place my hand on the back of her chair , presume that she would get up ; but she never stir one inch , and actually call for a plate to help I . my guardian be look at both of we , with a dry smile of amusement , and Clement begin to simper and play with his fork . - now for it , or never , think I. " Mrs. Daldy , you quite mistake I , or pretend to do so . have the goodness to quit my chair . " 
 she have presume on my dread of an altercation before the servant , but only Thomas Henwood happen to be in the room . have there be a dozen present , I would still have assert my right . at last she rise in her stateliest manner , but with an awkward smile , and a still more awkward sneer . 
 " your use , my poor child , of the possessive pronoun be far more emphatic than your good breeding be . " 
 " who care for your opinion ? " not a hospitable inquiry ; but then she be not my visitor . 
 in grand style she march to the door , but soon think well of it , and come to her proper place with the sigh of a contrite spirit . 
 " poor creature ! it be a rebuke to I , for my want of true faith in the efficacy of prayer . " 
 and after all this , she make a most excellent dinner . 
 about that woman there be something of a slimy pride , no more like to upright prickly self - respect than macerate bird - lime be to the stiff bright holly . yet no one I ever know possess such wiry power of irritation . whenever my mother and my guardian meet , she take care to be in the way , and watch they both , and appeal to I with all her odious pantomime of sorrow , sympathy , wonder , love superiority , and spiritual yearning . and all the time her noisome smile , like the smell of a snake , come over we . she know , and rejoice in the knowledge , how hard set I be to endure it , and every quick flash of my eye only light up her unctuous glory . 
 for all I know , it be natural that my antipathy to that woman should , by reaction , thaw sometimes my coldness towards my uncle . though self - respect have at length compel he to abandon his overture to my friendship , now and then I detect he look at I with a pitying regard . in self - defence , I begin to pity he , and cease to make face or sneer when the maid - those romantic being - declare that he must have be cross in love . at this conclusion , long ago , all the servant ' hall have arrive ; and even little Tilly Jenkins , not admit as yet to that high conclave , remarkable only for live in dust - bin , and too dirty to cause uneasiness to the under - shoeboy 's mother - even that Tilly , I say , run up to I one morning   when I go to see my dear pony   and beat out her dust , and then whisper : 
 " oh , please , Miss Clara , to give my very good wish to Master . what a terrible blight to the heart be unrequited love ! " and Tilly sigh a great cloud of brick - dust . 
 " terrible , Tilly : I hope you have not fall in love with the weed boy ! " - a smart young lad , ten stair at least above she . 
 " I , miss ? do you think I would so demean myself ? " and Tilly catch up her dust - pan arrogantly . 
 this little anecdote prove a fact which I never could explain , viz . that none of the servant be ever afraid of I . 
 to return to the straight line of history . my guardian come home rather late that evening , and some hour after the hasty exit of Mrs. and Master Daldy . while I be wait in some uneasiness , it strike I that he have keep out of the way on purpose , lest he should seem too anxious about the plot . Mrs. Daldy , as I find afterwards , have write to he from the inn , describe my " frenzied violence , and foam satanic fury " - perhaps I turn pale , no more - and announce her intention to remain at Malvern , until she should be apprise whether uncle or niece be the master . in the latter case she demand - not that she care for mammon , but as a humble mean for the advancement of the Kingdom - the sum of 300 l. ; that be the low salary conscience allow she to specify for tread the furnace of affliction , to save the lost sheep of the house of Israel . I forget to say that , before she leave the house , she have try to obtain an interview with my mother , hop , no doubt , to leave she in the cataleptic state . but this have be sternly prevent by Thomas Kenwood , who perform quite a labour of love in minister the expulsion . all the servant hat she as a canting sneak and a spy . 
 that night when I receive Mr. Edgar Vaughan 's short missive - " Clara , I wish to see you immediately in my study , " my heart begin to flutter provokingly , and the long speech I have prepare fly away in shred of rhetoric . not that I mean for an instant to bate one tittle of what I have do and would do : but I have never assert my right as yet in direct opposition to he , nor take upon my own shoulder the guardianship of myself . but the dreary year of dark preparation and silent welding of character have brace a sensitive , nervous nature with some little self - reliance . 
 with all the indifference I could muster , I enter the gloomy room , and find he lean upon the high desk where he keep the account of his stewardship . the position be choose well . it serve at once to remind I of his official relation , and to appeal to the feeling as betoken an onerous wardship . of late his health have be fail he , and after every long absence from home , he return more jaded and melancholy . now a few silver hair - no more than a wife would have quickly pull out - be glisten among his black lock ; but though he be weary and lonesome , he seem to want none to love he , and his face wear the wonte sarcastic and travelled look . 
 as our glance meet , we both see that the issue be join which should settle for life the mastery . he begin in a light and jocund manner , as if I be quite a small thing . 
 " well do , Miss Clara , you be assert yourself . why , you have dismiss our visitor with very scant ceremony . " 
 " to be sure I have ; and will again , if they dare to come back . " 
 " and do not   you think that you might have consult your mother or I ? ' 
 " most likely I should have do so , in an ordinary case . " 
 " then your guardian be mean for small matter ! but what be the wonder to - day ? " 
 " no wonder at all . Mrs. Daldy insult my father , and I send she out of his house . " 
 " what make her insult my brother ? " 
 " my refusal to marry her puppet and puppy . " 
 " clement daldy ! do she propose such a thing ? she must think very highly of you ! ' 
 " then I think very lowly . " 
 " and you decline , do you , Clara ? " 
 " no . I refuse . " 
 " very good . no one shall force you ; there be plenty of time to consider the subject . " 
 " one moment be too much . " 
 " Clara , I have long notice in you a rude , disrespectful , and I will say   in spite of your birth   a low and vulgar manner towards I , your uncle and guardian . once for all , I will not permit it , child . " 
 " child you call I , do you ? Me , who be just seventeen , and have live seven such year as I have , and no one else ! " 
 he answer quite calmly , and look coldly at I : 
 " I never argue with woman . much less with girl . Mrs. Daldy come back to - morrow . you will beg her pardon , as become a young lady who have forget herself . the other question may wait . " 
 " I think , sir , that you have travel far , and in many country . " 
 the abrupt inquiry startle he , and his thought seem to follow the memory . 
 " what if I have ? " he ask , at length , and with a painful effort . 
 " have you always find woman do just what you choose ? " 
 he seem not to listen to I ; as if he be out of hearing : then laugh because I be look at he . 
 " Clara , " he say , " you be an odd girl , and a Vaughan all over . I would rather be your friend than your enemy . if you can not like I , at least forget your dislike of I , and remember that I be your uncle , and have try to make you love I . " 
 " and what if I do not ? " 
 " then I must keep you awhile from the management of this property . my dear brother would have wish it , until you recover your sens ; and not an acre of it be legally your . " 
 this he say so slowly , and distinctly , and entirely without menace , that , know his manner , I see it be the truth , at least in his opinion . strange as it may seem , I begin at once to revolve , not the result of dispossession and poverty on myself , or even on my mother , but the influence which the knowledge of this new fact must have on my old suspicion , surmise , and belief . 
 " will the property pass to you ? " I ask . 
 " yes , if I choose : or at any rate the bulk of it . " 
 " what part will be yours ? do you mean to say the house ? - " 
 " never mind now . I would rather leave thing as they be , if you will only be more sensible . " 
 " I will not disguise my opinion for a hundred Vaughan Parks , or a thousand Vaughan Palaces ; no , nor even to be near my father 's bone . " 
 " very well , " he say , " just as you like . but for your mother 's sake , I give you till Christmas to consider . " 
 " if you bring back Mrs. Daldy , I shall leave the door as she enter it . " 
 " I have no wish to hurry you , " he reply , " and therefore she shall not return at present . now take these paper with you . you may lay they before any lawyer you please . they be only copy , but may be compare with the original , which I have . they will quickly prove how totally you be at my discretion . " 
 " the money and the land may be so , but not i. before I go , answer I one question . do you know of these thing , whatever they may be , before my father 's death ? " 
 he look at I clearly and calmly , with no withdrawal , or conscious depth in his eye , and answer : 
 " no . as a gentleman , I do not . " 
 I feel myself more at a loss than ever , and for the moment could not think . 
 CHAPTER X. 
 thus be I , and , what matter much more , my mother , reduce quite suddenly from a position of rank and luxury , and a prospective income of L15,000 a - year   so much have the land increase in value   to a revenue of nothing , and no home . even to I it be a heavy blow , but what could my poor mother do ? 
 we be assure by counsel that a legal struggle could end in expense alone , and advise by the family lawyer to throw ourselves on the good feeling and appeal to the honour of Mr. Edgar Vaughan . Mr. Vaughan he must henceforth be call . I can not well understand , still less can I explain , small and threadbare technicality   mote , which too often be the beam of Justice , but the circumstance which rob I of my father 's home be somewhat as follow : - 
 by the will of my father 's grandfather , Hubert Vaughan , who die in the year 1782 , the whole of the family property be devise to his son , Vaughan Powis Vaughan , for life , and after his decease , to his son successively in tail male , fail these to his right heir in general . this will be say to have be prepare in haste : it be , in fact , draw by a country attorney , when the testator be rapidly sink . it be very brief , and by no mean accurately word ; neither do it contain those power to meet family exigency , which I be tell a proper practitioner would have insert . 
 there be no reason to suppose that the testator have contemplate anything more than a strict settlement of the usual kind , i.e. a common estate entail , expectant upon a life - interest ; and under which I should have succeed my father , as his heiress , in the ordinary course . but it be the chief fault of smatterer in the law   and country attorney at that time be no well   that they will attempt to be too definite . the country lawyer in this case , grossly ignorant of his profession , and catch by the jangle of the word tail male , have insert they at hazard , possibly not without some idea that they would insure a strict succession than a common entail would do . 
 when my father become of age , measure be take for bar the entail create by the will of Hubert Vaughan ; and at the time it be believe that these be quite effectual , and therefore that my father be now entitle in fee - simple , and could dispose of the property . 
 upon his marriage with my mother , she , with worthy pride , refuse most firmly to accept a jointure charge on his estate , allege that as she bring no fortune into the family , she would not incumber the family property , which have but recently be relieve of incumbrance . More than this - she have even insist upon expressly abandon , by her marriage settlement , all claim to dower . this unusual course she have adopt , because of some discontent express by relative of my father at his marriage with a portionless bride , whereby her self - respect have be deeply wound . so nothing be settle upon she , except her own little estate in Devonshire , which be secure to her separate use . 
 my father have never permit this excess of generosity on her part , but that he be by nature careless upon such subject , and hop to provide amply for her interest by his will : moreover he be hot to remove all obstacle to their marriage . but it be now discover that he have no power to charge the real estate for her benefit , in the manner his will import ; that he have never be more than a tenant in tail , and that entail such that I could not inherit . neither , of course , could I take under his will , as he possess no power of disposition . one quarter of all that have be write upon the subject I never could understand ; and even as to the simple point , sometimes I seem to apprehend they clearly , and then I feel that I do not . my account of the matter be compress from what I remember of the legal opinion . 
 the lead fact , at any rate , and the key to all the mischief , be , that the entail have never be bar at all : the legal process   call a " recovery "   which be to have have that effect , be null and void through some absurd informality . they tell I something about a tenant to a precipice , but they must have make a mistake , for there be no precipice on the estate , unless some cliff near the church could be call so , and they be never let . 
 be that as it may , my father 's will be declare to be waste paper , except as regard what they call the personalty , or , in good English , the money he have to bequeath . and of this there be very little , for , shortly before his death , he have spend large sum in drainage , farm - building , and other improvement . furthermore , he have always maintain a profuse hospitality , and his charity be most lavish . the lawyer tell we that , under the circumstance   a favourite expression of theirs when they mean some big robbery , a court of equity would perhaps consider our application to be " recuppe , " as they call it , out of the estate , for the money lay out in improvement under a false impression . but we have be cup enough already . grossly plunder by legal jargon , rob by statute , and scourge by scrivener ' tradition , we fling away in disgust the lint the bandit offer , and leave they " all estate , right , title , interest , and claim , whether at law or in equity , in to or out of " the licking of our blood . 
 but now my long suspicion , and never - discard conviction of my guardian 's guilt , be , by summary process , not only revive , but redouble . this arise partly from the discovery of the stake he have on my father 's life , and partly , perhaps , from a feeling of hatred towards our supplanter . that he know not till now the flaw in our title , and his own superior claim , be more than I could believe . I feel sure that he have gain this knowledge while in needy circumstance and sharp legal practice , bring , as he then most probably be , into frequent contact with the London agent who have the custody of the document . 
 to be in the same room with he , be now more than I could bear , and it become impossible that we should live any long in the same house . he , indeed , wish , or feign to wish , that we should remain there , and even show some reluctance to urge his unrighteous right . but neither my mother   who bear the shock with strange resignation   nor myself would hear of any compromise , or take a farthing at his hand , and he be too proud and stern to press upon we his compunction . 
 statement of our case have be prepare and submit to three most eminent conveyancer , and the three opinion have be find to agree , except upon some trivial point . More than two month have be thus consume , and it be now once more the anniversary of my father 's death . I have spend the time in narrowly watch my ex - guardian 's conduct , though keep aloof , as much as possible , from any intercourse with he . 
 one night , I steal into the room which he call his study , and where   with a child 's simplicity   I believe he to keep his private document . through Thomas Kenwood , to whom I now confide almost everything , and whose suspicion be even strong than mine , I obtain clandestine possession of the key of the large bureau . as I stand before that massive repository in the dead of night , the struggle within I be intense and long . what letter , what journal , document , or momentous relic of a thousand kind , might be lurk here , wait only for a daughter 's hand to turn the lock , and cast the light she bear on the death - warrant of her father ! how easy then to snatch away the proof , clutch it , though it should burn the hand or bosom , to wave it , with a triumph wilfully prolong , before the eye of justice 's dull - visioned minister ; and then to see , without a shudder or a thrill of joy , but with the whole soul gaze , the slow , struggle , ghastly expiation . as this thought come crawl through my heart , light up its depth as would a snake of fire , the buhl before I grow streak of blood , and the heavy crossbar a gallow . I lift my hand to open the outer lock . already the old cruciform key be tremble in the silver scutcheon . I raise the lamp in my left hand to show the lunette guard which curve above the hole , when a heavy mass all cold and dark fall across my eye . I start , and think for the moment , in my strong excitement , that it be my father 's hand . one instant more , and , through the trembling of my sens , I see that it be only a thick fold of my long black hair , shake down on the face by my bending and quiver posture . but the check be enough . a Vaughan , and that the last one of so proud and frank a race , to be prowl meanly , with a steal tool , to violate confidence , and pry through letter ! no suspicion , however strong , nothing short of certainty   if even that   could warrant it . drive away by shame combine with superstition , I glide from the cold silent room , and restore the key to my faithful friend , whom I have leave in the passage , order he at once to replace they , and never touch they again . 
 " well , miss , " he whisper , with a smile , " I know you could not   do it , because I seem , somehow , it be not   like a Vaughan . " 
 we be already prepare to quit the house , no long ours , when our dismissal become abrupt , through another act of mine . what drive I to such a wild deed I can scarcely tell . Shame , perhaps , for the furtive nature of my last attempt hurry I into the other extreme ; and now I be so shake by conflict impulse , that nothing be too mad for I . 
 on the seventh anniversary of my father 's death , and the last which I be likely ever to spend beneath that roof , I pass the whole day in alternate sadness and passion , in the bedroom where he die . all the relic I possess , both of his love and of his death , I bring thither ; and spread they out , and weep upon the one , and pray upon the other . I also bring my choice history of murder and revenge , and pore over they by the wan daylight and the dull lamp , and so on through the night , until my mind become the soul 's jetsam . 
 then I procure four very large wax candle , and light they at the head of the bed , two on each side , and spread a long white cloth between , as if my father be lie in state ; and hang a row of short light above , to illuminate the letter of blood . then I take a small alarum clock , give I by dear father , that I might rise for early walk with he , and set it upon a chest by the door , and fix it so as to ring five minute before the hour at which the murder befell . a cold presentiment crawl through I that , at the fatal time , I should see the assassin . after all these arrangement I take my volume again , and sit in the shade of the curtain , with a strong light on the page . I be deep in some horrible record , and creep with terror and hope , when the clear bell ring a long and startling peal . I leap up , like one shot through the heart , and what I do be without design or purpose . my glance fall on the dagger ; I catch it up , and snatch the lamp , and hurry down corridor and staircase , straight to my guardian 's private room . 
 he be sit at the table , for he never pass that night in bed . at the sound of the lock he leap up , and point a pistol , then hide it . straight up to he I go , as swiftly and quietly as a spirit , and speak : 
 " seven year ago , at this very moment , my father be kill . do you know this dagger ? " he start back , as if I have stab he with it , then cover his eye with both hand . 
 " you know it , then ? " I say , with a triumph chill all over I . " it be your hand that use it . " 
 another moment , and I should have strike he with it . I lift it in my frenzy ; when he look at I by some wonderful effort , calmly , steadily , even coldly . " yes , " he say , " I have see that weapon before . alas my poor dear brother ! " 
 whether it be true feeling that make his voice so low and deep , or only fierce self - control , I know not then , nor try to think . 
 " you know who own it ? " I ask , with my life upon his answer . 
 " yes . I know who own it once ; but many year ago . and I know not in the least what be become of he now . " 
 the baffled fury and prostrate hope - for at the moment I fully believe he - be too much for my reel brain and fast body . for one minute 's command of my faculty , I would have sell they for ever ; but I feel they ebb from I , as the life do from a wound . the hemisphere of my brain be part one from the other , and a grey void spread between they . I try to think , but could not . I strove to say anything , but fail . fainter and fainter grow the room , the lamp , the ceiling , the face at which I try to look . thing go to and fro with a quick quiver , like flame in the wind , then , round and round like whirling water ; my mouth grow stiff , and the tongue between my tooth feel like a glove ; and with a rush of sound in my brain and throat , and a scream pen up , yet burst , I fall , as I think , through the earth . I be only on the floor , in a fit . 
 when I come to myself , I be in my own bed , and my own dear mother bend over I , pale , and haggard , and full of tear . the broad daylight be around we , and the faint sunshine on her face . she have be with I ever since . in my weakness , I look up at she with a pang of self - reproach , to think how little I have value her love ; and I vow to myself to make up for it by future care and devotion . 
 that violent convulsion , and the illness after it , change I not a little both in mind and body . 
 CHAPTER XI . 
 it be indeed high time for I to cherish my mother . her pain at leave the place where she have know she little all of happiness - for her childhood have be overcast with trouble - her pain be so acute and overpower that all my deep impassione feeling sink reprove before it . 
 my guardian now seem much embitter against I , and anxious for our departure . he come once or twice , in my illness , to ask for and to see I ; and he bring back , unperceive by any one , the weapon for which I rave . but ere I be quite recover , he write , request to see I on business in his study . I could not speak yet without pain , have bite my tongue severely . 
 " your mother shall have a home here , " he say , " as long as ever she want one ; but as for you , malignant or mad , I will try no more to soften you . when first I see you in your early childhood , you fly at I as a murderer . soon after you ransack my cupboard and steal my boot , to compare they with some impression or cast you keep . yes , you look astonish . I never tell you of it , but I know it for all that . of those absurdity I think little , for I regard they as the folly of a mad child , and I pity you deeply , and even like you for your filial devotion . but now I find that you have grow up in the same belief , and you dare even now to avow it . you know that I have no fear of you . " 
 " then why have you get that pistol ? " 
 I see that he be vex and surprise at my having perceive it . 
 " in a house like this , where such deed have be do , I think it right to be arm . do you think if I have fear you , or your evidence , I would have restore that dagger ? " 
 " whose be it ? " 
 " I tell you the other night that I once see a weapon like it , for which at first I mistook it , but close examination convince I of the difference . " 
 " how do it differ ? " 
 " in this . there be no snake on the handle of the other , though there be the cross on the blade . " 
 " and where do you see the other ? " 
 " some day I will tell you . it be not right to do so now . " 
 " not convenient to you , I suppose you mean . " 
 " I have also show you that the lock of hair find in your poor mother 's hand be much fine and more silky than mine ; and you know that I can not draw on my foot a boot so small as the one whose impression you have . but I be ashamed of myself for have stoop to such proof as these . dare you to look at I and suppose that I with my own hand could have stab my brother , a brother so kind and good to I , and for whose sake alone I have bear so long with you ? " 
 he try to look I down . I have meet but one whose gaze could master mine ; and he be not that one . 
 " so , you doubt I still ? be your thing pack ? ' 
 " yes , and my mother 's . " 
 " then if your mother be well enough , and will not let you leave she , you have well go next week . " 
 " no , " I reply , " we will go to - morrow . " 
 " wilful to the last . so be it . take this ; you can not refuse it in duty to your mother . " 
 he put in my hand an order for a large sum of money . I throw it into the fire . 
 " there have be criminal , " I exclaim , " who have suffer from a life - long fear , lest the widow and orphan , starve through their crime , should compass their die bed . though we starve in a garret , we touch no bread of your . " 
 " Bravo , Miss Melodrame . you need never starve in the present state of the stage . " 
 " that I do not   understand ; but this I do . it be perhaps the last time I shall ever see you live . whether you do that deed or not be know to God , and you , and possibly one other . but whether you do it or not , I know it be on your soul . your day be wretche , your night be troubled . you shall die as your brother die , but not so prepared for death . " 
 " good bye , Clara . my lunch be come up . " 
 God have much to forgive I , but nothing bad than the dark thought of that speech . in my fury at weakness in such a cause , I have dare sometimes to imagine that my mother know he to be the murderer , but conceal it for the sake of the family honour ! 
 CHAPTER XII . 
 no need to recount my bitter farewell to all the scene and object I have love so long , to all which possess a dark yet tender interest , and most of all to my father 's grave . that some attention might still be pay to this , I entrust it to the care of an old housekeeper of our , who be live in the village . my last visit be in the moonlight , and dear mother be there . I carry rather than lead she away . slight as my knowledge have be of lightsome and happy love , I be sure that a sombre affection be far the strong and sweeter . 
 as we begin our journey , a crowd of the villager meet we beyond the lodge , and line the Gloucester road as far as the old oak - tree . while our hire conveyance pass between they , the man stand mute with their hat in their hand , the woman sob and curtsey , and bless we , and hold up their child to look at we . 
 our refuge be the small estate or farm in Devonshire , which I have mention as my mother 's property . this , which produce L45 a - year , be all that now remain to we , except a sum of L1,000 leave to I by a godfather , and of which I could not touch the principal . the residue of the personalty , and the balance at the banker 's , we have refuse to take , be assure that legally we be responsible to Mr. Vaughan , even for the back rent of the Gloucestershire estate . of course we have plenty of jewellery , some of it rather valuable , but the part most precious be heirloom , and that we have leave behind . Most of our own have be my father 's gift , and therefore we could not bear to sell it . 
 as regard myself , this comparative poverty be not of very great moment , except as impair my mean of search ; but for my mother 's sake I be cut to the heart , and lose in perplexity . she have so long be accustom to much attention and many luxury , which her weak health have make indispensable to she . Thomas Henwood and poor Ann maple insist on follow our fortune , at one third of their previous wage . my mother think it beyond our mean to keep they even so ; but for her sake I resolve to try . I need not say that I carry all my relic , difficult as it be to hide they from my mother . 
 when we reach our new home , late in the evening of the second day , a full sense of our privation for the first time break upon we . it be mid - winter , and in the gloom of a foggy night , and after the weariness of a long journey , our impression be truly dismal . jolt endlessly up and down by rut a foot deep and slaty stone the size of coal - scuttle , entomb alive betwixt grisly hedge which meet above we like the wing of night , then oblige to walk up treadmill hill while the rickety fly crawl up behind ; then again plunge and lurch down some corkscrew steep to the perpetual wood and rush stream at the bottom ; at length and at last along a lane so narrow that it scrap we on both side as we pass , a lane which zig - zagge every thirty yard with a tree - bole jutting at every corner , at length and at last we come to the farmyard gate . it be not far from the lonely village of Trentisoe , which lie some six mile to the west of Lynmouth . this part be little know to London tourist , though it possess scenery of a rare kind than Lynmouth itself can show . 
 pass through an outer court , with a saw - pit on one side and what they call a " linhay " on the other , and where a slop of straw and " muck " quelche under the wheel , we come next to the farmyard proper , and so   as the flyman express it   " home to ouze . " the " ouze " be a low straggle cottage , jag - thatch , and heavy - eaved , and remind I strongly of ragged wet horse - cloth on a rack . the farmer be not come home from Ilfracombe market , but his wife , Mrs. Honor Huxtable , soon appear in the porch , with a bucket in one hand and a candle stick in a turnip in the other . in the cross - light , we see a stout short woman , brisk and comely , with an amazing cap , and cheek like the apple which they call in Devonshire " hoary morning . " 
 " a massy on we , Zuke , " she call into the house , " if here bain't   the genelvolk coom , and we be arl of a muck ! Hum , cheel , hum for thee laife to the calf ' ouze , and toorn out both the peg , and take the pick to the strah , and gie un a veed o ' wet . " 
 have thus provide for our horse , she advance to we . 
 " so , ye be coom at last ! I be crule glad to zee e , zure enough . baint e starve amost ! an unkid place it be for the laike of you . " 
 so say , she hurry we into the house , and set we before a wood - fire all glow upon the ground , beneath an enormous chimney pod with great pot and crock hang on thing like saw . these pot , like Devonshire hospitality , be always boil and chirping . the kitchen be low , and floor with lime and sand , which be wear into pit such as boy use for marble ; but the great feature be the ceiling . this be divide by deep rafter into four compartment lengthwise . across some of these , batten of wood be nail , form a series of rack , wherein repose at least a stye - ful of bacon . herb and store of many kind , and rope of onion dangle between . 
 Mrs. Huxtable go to the dresser , and get a large dish , and then turn round to have a good look at we . 
 " poor leddy , " she say gently , " I sim she 's turble weist and low . but look e zee , there be a plenty of bakken yanner , and us'll cut a peg 's drort to - morrow , and Varmer Badcock will zend we a ship , by rason ourn be all a'lambe . " then she turn to I . 
 " Whai , Miss , you look crule unkid tu . do e love zider ? " 
 " no , Mrs. Huxtable . not very much . I would rather have water . " 
 " oh drat that wash , e shall not   have none of thiccy . we have get a brown gearge of beer , and more nor a dizzen pan of mulk and crame . " 
 her chatter warmth soon put we at our ease ; and as soon as the parlour fire burn up , she show we with many apology , and " hop no offence " the room which be thenceforth to be ours . 
 after tea , I put my dear mother to bed as soon as possible , and sit by the die fire to muse upon our prospect . not the strangeness of the place , the new idea around I , not even my weariness after railroad , coach , and chaise , could keep my mind from its one subject . in fact , its colour have now become its form . 
 to other indeed , all hope of ever detect and bring to justice the man , for whose death I live , might seem to grow fainter and fainter . expel from that place , and banish from those recollection , where , and by which alone , I could well expect ever to wind up my clue , rob of all mean of move indifferent person and retain strong one ; and , more than this , engross   as I must henceforth be   in keep debt at bay , and shield my mother from care - what prospect be there , nay what possibility , that I a weak unaided girl , lead only by set will and fatalism , should ever overtake and grasp a man of craft , and power , and desperation ? 
 it matter not : let other thing be doubtful , unlikely , or impossible ; let the hand of man be clench against I , and the ear of heaven be stop ; let the earth be spread with thick darkness , as the water be spread with earth , and the murderer set Sahara between we , or turn hermit on the Andes ; happen what would , so God be still above we , and the world beneath our foot - I be as sure that I should send that man from the one to the throne of the other , as he be sure to be drag away thence , to fire , and chain , and gnashing of tooth . 
 CHAPTER XIII . 
 so impulsive , kind - hearte , and honest be Mrs. Huxtable , that we could always tell what be the next thing she be go to say or do . even at her meal she contrive to be in a bustle , except on Sundays ; but she get through a great deal of work . on Sundays she put on , with her good gown , an air of calm dignity which make she unhappy until it be off , which it be directly after the evening service . she seem a very sensible woman , and whatever the merit of the case she side always with the weak . the next morning we ask how it be she appear not to expect we , as I have write and post the letter myself on the previous Saturday . 
 " for sure now , " she reply , " and the papper scrawl coom'd on Monday ; but we bain't   girt scholard , and Varmer say most like ' twa the Queen 's taxis , for there be her head upon it ; so we put un in the big mortar till Beany Dawe should come over , or we should go to church next Zunday , and passon would discoorse it for we . but " - and off she run - " but she belong to you now , Miss Clerer , see as how you have   coom after un . " 
 so they have only a general idea that we be come , and know not when it would be . the following day , Thomas Henwood arrive , bring our box in a vehicle call a " butt , " which be a short and rudely make cart , use chiefly for carry lime . 
 after unpack our few embellishment , we set up a clumsy but comfortable sofa for my mother , and try to divert her sadness a little by many a shift and device to garnish our narrow realm . we remove the horrible print of " Death and the Lady , " which be hang above the chimneypiece , and sundry daub of our Lord and the apostle , and a woman of Samaria with a french parasol , and Eli fall from a turnpike gate over the great western steamer . but these alteration be not make without some wistful glance from poor Mrs. Huxtable . at last , when I begin to nail up a simple sketch of the church at Vaughan St. Mary instead of a noble representation of the Prodigal Son , wear a white hat with a pipe stick under the riband , and weep into a handkerchief with some horse upon it , the good dame could no long repress her feeling . 
 " Whai , Miss Clerer , Miss , dear art alaive , cheel , what be 'bout ? they be the smart picter anywhere this saide of Coorn . Varmer gi a pan of hog ' pudden for they , and a Chainey taypot and a Zunday pair of corderahoy . why them'll shaine with the zun on ' um , laike a vield of poppy and charlock . but thic smarl pokey papper of yourn ha'ant no more colour nor the track of a marly scrarly . a massy on we if I could not   walk a well picter than thic , with my patten on in the zider squash . " 
 to argue with such a connoisseur would have be bad than useless ; so I pacify she by hang the reject gem in her own little summer room by the dairy . our parlour begin before long to look neat and even comfortable . of course the furniture be rough , but I care not much for upholstery , and be quite rude of french polish . my only fear be lest the damp from the lime - ash floor should strike to my dear mother 's foot , through the scanty drugget which cover it . the fire - place be bright and quaint , line with old dutch tile , and the grey - wash wall be less offensive to the eye than would have be a paper choose by good Mrs. Huxtable . the pretty lattice window , bud even now with woodbine , and impudent to the wind with myrtle , would have make amend for the mean room in England . before it lie a simple garden with sparry walk and bright - thatched hive , and down a dingle rich with tree and a crystal stream , it catch a glimpse of the Bristol Channel . 
 CHAPTER XIV . 
 when our thing be nearly settle , and I be sit by myself , with dirty hand and cover with dust , there come a little timid tap at the door , follow by a shuffle outside , as if some one contemplated flight , yet fear to fly . open the door , I be surprised to find the child whom I expect a massive figure , some six foot and a quarter high , and I know not how many foot in width , but wide enough to fill the entire passage . he make a doubtful step in advance , till his great open - hearted face hang sheepishly above my head . 
 " have I the pleasure of see Mr. Huxtable ? " I ask . 
 " Ees ' um , " he stammer , blush like a beet - root , " leastway Miss , I ort to zay , no plasure ' um to the laike of thee , but a honour to ai . Varmer Uxtable they karl I round about these ' ere part , and some on them Varmer Jan , and Beany Dawe , he karl I ' Varmer Brak - plew - harnish , as toss arl they garnish , ' and a dale he think of his potry as it please God to give ' un : but Maister , may be , be the riglar thing , leastway you know well , Miss. " " dange if I can coom to discourse with girt folk nohow , no more nor a sto - un . " this be an " aside , " but audible a long way off , as they always be on the stage . 
 " but I be a very small folk , Mr. Huxtable , compare at least with you . " 
 " I humbly ax your parding , Miss , but ai do not   goo for to be zuch a beg , nockety , sprarle zort of a chap . I do not   goo for to do it nohow . Reckon ' twar my moother 's valt , she be always drain of hayrick . " this also be an " aside . " 
 " come in , " I say , " I be very glad to see you , and so will my mother be . " 
 " Noo ! be e now ? be e though undade , my dear ? " he ask with the true and fine smile I ever see : and I feel ashamed in front of the strong simplicity which take my conventional word for heart 's truth . 
 " they be the good word , " he continue " as ai ' ve   ' eere this many a dai ; for ai'll be dange if ever a loi could coom from unner such eye as yourn . " 
 and thereupon he take my puny weak hand in his rough iron palm , like an almond in the nut - cracker , and examine it with pity wonder . 
 " wull , wull ! some hand be make for mulke coo , and some be make of the crame itself . now there could not   be such a purty thing as this ere , unless it wor to snow war'rm . but she bain't   no kaind of gude for rarstle ? and ai be aveare thee'll have to rarstle a rare bout wi the world , my dearie : one down , tother coom on , that be the wai of ' un . " 
 " oh , I be not afraid , Mr. Huxtable . " 
 he take some time to meditate upon this , and shake his head when he have finish . 
 " Noo , thee bain't   aveard yet I will warr'ne . gude art alaive , if e bain't   a spurrity maid . but if ere a chap zays the black word on e - and thiccy 's the taime when a maid can not   help herzell , then ony you karl Jan Uxtable that be arl my dear , and if so be it be in the dead hoor of the naight , and thee beest to tother zaide of Hexymoor , ai'll be by the zaide of thee zooner nor ai could thraw a vorehip . " 
 before I could thank he for his honest championship my mother enter the room , and all his bashfulness   lose for the moment in the pride of strength   come over he again like an extinguisher . although he do not tremble - his nerve be too firm for that - he stand fumble with his hat , and redden , and look vaguely about , at a loss where to put his eye or anything else . 
 my mother , quite wear out with her morning 's walk , surprised at her uncouth visitor , and frighten perhaps at his bulk , sink on our new - fangle sofa , in a stupor of weakness . then it be strange and fine to see the strong man 's sense of her feeble state . all his embarrassment vanish at once ; he see there be something to do ; and a look of deep interest quicken his great blue eye . poise his heavy frame with the lightness of a bird , he step to her side as if the floor have be holy , and , scarcely touch she , contrive to arrange the rude cushion , and to lay her delicate head in an easy position , as a nurse compose a child . all the while , his look and manner express so much feeling and gentleness , that he must have know what it be to lose a daughter or mother . 
 " poor dear leddy , " he whisper to I , " she be use to zummut more plum nor thiccy , I reckon . her zimth crule weist and low laike . hath she be long in that there wai ? " 
 " yes , she have long be weak and poorly ; but I fear that her health have be grow bad for the last few month . " I could not   help cry a little ; and I could not   help his see it . 
 " dang thee , Jan Uxtable , for a doilish girt zinny . now doon e tak on so , Miss ; doon e , that be a dear . Avore she be be here a wake , her'll be as peart as a gladdy . there bain't   in arl they furren part no place the laike of this ere to make a body ston upraight . the braze coom off o hexymoor as frash as a young coolt , and up from the zay as swate as the breath of a coo on the clover , and he will zit on your chake the zame as a dove on her nestie ; and ye'll be so hearty the both on ye , that ye'll karl for tatie and heggs and crame and inyon avore e be hout of bed . Ee 's fai ye wull . " with this homely comfort he depart , after a cheer glance at my mother . 
 before I proceed , the homeric epithet " break - plough - harness , " apply by the poet to Mr. Huxtable , need some explanation . it appear that the farmer , in some convivial hour   for at other time he detest vaunt , have lay a wager that he and Timothy Badcock , his farm - labourer , would plough half an acre of land , " wiout no beastessy in the falde . " now , it happen that the Parracombe blacksmith have lately be at Barnstaple , and there have see a man who have hear of plough by steam . so when the farmer 's undertaking get noise abroad and magnify , all Exmoor assemble to witness the exploit , wonder , trembling , and wrathful . bench and table be set in the " high Barton , " a nice piece of mealy land , just at the back of the house , while Suke and Mrs. Huxtable ply the cider - barrel for the yeoman of the neighbourhood . the farmer himself be not visible - no plough or ploughing tackle of any description appear , and a rumour begin to spread that the whole affair be a hoax , and the contriver afraid to show himself . but as people begin to talk of ' send for the constable "   who , of course be there all the time , and as cart - whip and knob - stick begin to vibrate ominously , Mrs. Huxtable make a signal to Mr. Dawe , who lead off the grumbling throng to the further end of the field , where an old rick - cloth lie along against the hedge . while the tilting be move aside , the bold son of Exmoor shrunk back , expect some horrible monster , whose smoke be already puff . all they see be a one - horse plough with the farmer , in full harness , sit upon it and smoke his pipe , and Timothy Badcock patiently stand at the plough - tail . amid a loud hurrah from his friend , Mr. Huxtable leap to the fore , and cast his pipe over the hedge ; then settle the breast - band across the wrestling - pad on his chest , and draw tight both the chain - trace . " Gee wugg now , if e wull , " cry stout Tim Badcock cheerily , and off sail the good ship of husbandly , cleave a deep bright furrow . but when they reach the corner , the farmer turn too sharply , and snap the off - side trace . that accident impress the multitude with a deep sense of his prowess than even the striking success which attend his primitive method of speed the plough . 
 to return to my mother . as spring come on , and the beautiful country around we freshen and take green life from the balmy air , I even venture to hope that the good yeoman 's word would be true . he have become , by this time , a great friend of ours , do his utmost that we might not feel the loss of our faithful Thomas Henwood . 
 Poor Thomas have be very loth to depart ; but I find , as we get settle , that my mother cease to want he , and it would have be wrong as well as foolish to keep he any long . he invest his saving in a public - house at Gloucester , which he call the " Vaughan Arms , " and soon afterwards marry Jane Hiatt , a daughter of our head game - keeper ; or I ought to say , Mr. Vaughan 's . 
 Ann Maples remain with we still . we live , as may be suppose , in the most retired manner . my time be chiefly occupy in attendance upon dear mother , and in attempt to create for she some of those countless comfort , whose value we know not until they be lose . after breakfast , my mother would read for an hour her favourite part of Scripture , and vainly endeavour to lead I into the path of peace . her soul discard more and more the travel garb and wayfare trouble of this low existence , as , day by day , it win a near view of the golden gate , and the glory beyond ; with which I have see her eye suffuse , like the lucid heaven with sunrise . it have be say , and I believe , that there be nothing , in all our material world , so lovely as a fair woman look on high for the angel she know to be wait for she . 
 even I , though look in an opposite direction , and for an opposite being , could not but admire that gentle meekness , whose absence form the main fault of my character . not that I be hard - hearted , or cross ,   unless self - love deceive I , but restless yearning and hatred be ever at work within I ; and these repel thing of a milder nature , as a bullet cry tush to the zephyr . 
 CHAPTER XV . 
 one cold day in March , when winter have come to say " good - bye " with a roar , after wheel the sofa with my mother upon it towards the parlour fire , I go out to refresh my spirit in the kitchen with Mrs. Huxtable , and to " yat myself "   for the sofa take all the parlour fire   by the fragrant hearth of wood and furze . the farmer 's wife be " larn " I some strange word of her native dialect , which I be now desirous to " discoorse , " and which she declare to be " the only vitty talk . arl the lave of thiccy stoof , zame as the Carnishers and the Zummersets and the lunnoner tull up , arl thiccy be no more nor a passel of gibbersh , Miss Clerer , and not vitty atarl ; noo , nor english nother . instead of zaye ' ai ' laike a Kirsten , zome on em zays ' oi , ' and zome on em ' i. ' " in the middle of her lecture , and just as I have learn that to " quilty " be the proper English for to ' swallow , " and that the passage down which we quilty be , correctly speak , not the throat , but the " ezelpipe , " a strange - look individual darken the " draxtool "   corruptly call the threshold   and cross the " planch , " or floor , to the fireplace where we sit . 
 turn round , I behold a man about fifty year old , of moderate stature , gauntly bodied , and loosely build , and utterly reckless of his attire . his face be long and thin , the profile keenly aquiline ; and the angle make yet sharp , by a continual twitching and tension of the muscle . the skin of his cheek be draw , from his solemn brow to his lipless and down - curve mouth , tight and hollow , like the bladder on a jam - pot . his eye , of a very pale blue , seem always to stand on tip - toe , and never to know what he be go to say . a long , straight , melancholy chin , grisly with patch of hair , be mean by nature to keep his mouth shut , and come back sullenly when it fail . over his shoulder be fling a patch potato - sack , fasten in front with a wooden skewer , and his nether clothe be as rag as poetry . in his air and manner , self - satisfaction strove hard with solemn reserve . upon the whole he remind I of an owl who have lose his heart to a bantam hen . I can not express he justly ; but those who have see may recognise Beany Dawe , the sawyer , acknowledge the bard of the north of Devon . 
 Mr. Ebenezer Dawe , without any hesitation or salute , take a three - legged stool , and set it between our chair , then look from Mrs. Huxtable to I , and introduce himself . 
 " wull , here be we three , 
 and I hopp we shall agree . " 
 
 " Agray indeed , " cry Mrs. Huxtable , " doon ' e zee the quarlity be here , ye aul vule ? " then turn to I . " doon'e be skeare , Miss Clerer , it be oney that there aul mazed ramscallion , Beany Dawe . her makth what girt scholard , laike you , karl potry , or zum such stoof . her casn ' oppen the drort of he nohow , but what she must spake potry . pote     indeed ! no tino , I would pote un out of ouze if I be the waife of un . ' Zee zaw , Beany Dawe ! ' that be arl the name he hath airne vor his rhaiming and rubbish , and too good for ' un too ! rhaime , rhaime , drash , drash , like two girt gawk in a barn ! oh fai , oh fai ; and a maight have aim two zhilling a dai and his zider ! " 
     " pote . " danmonic for to " kick . " 
 the subject of these elegant stricture regard she all the time , with that pleased pity which none but a great poet so place can feel . then swing slowly on his tripod , and address the back of the chimney , he respond : 
 " poor vule ! her dunno what a saight ' tis haigher 
 to be a pout , nor a hunderzawyer ! " 
 
 perhaps his lofty couplet charm her savage ear ; at any rate she make a peaceful overture . 
 " Coom now , Mr. Dawe , wull e have a few broth ? " 
 he assent with an alacrity much below his dignity ; 
 " tatie , and zider , maat , and broth a few , 
 " Wull , zin you ax ai , ai'll not answer noo . " 
 
 " E shall not   have no cider , " reply his hostess , " without e'll spake , for wance , laike a Kirsten , maind that , without no moor of thiccy jingle jangle , the very zame for arl the world as e be use to droon in the zawpit , ' Zee , zaw , Margery Daw , ' with the arm of e a gwayn up and doon , up and doon , and your oyes and maouth most chokke with pilm     and the vace of e a hurne laike a taypot , and never a drop of out to aise the crickle of your barck . that be the steet you pot be in , and zawyer . " 
     Pilm , Londinice , " dust . " 
 as she deliver this comment , she swing to and fro on her chair , in weak imitation of the impressive roll , with which he enforce his rhyme . this plagiarism annoy he much more than her word : but he vindicate his cause , like a true son of song . 
 " and if zo hap , I be a pout grand , 
 Thee need not   jah , 'cos thee doon't   understand . 
 a pout , laike a ' ooman , or a bell , 
 must have his clack out , and can not   help hiszell . " 
 
 a mighty " ha ha " from the door , like a jocund earthquake , prove that this last hit have find an echo in some ample bosom . 
 " thee shall have as much vittel as ever thee can let down , " say the farmer , as he enter , " dange if thee bain't   a wunnerful foine chap , zure enough . Ai'd as lieve a'most to be a pote , plase God , as I wud to be a ooman : zimth to ai , there bain't   much differ atwixt them . but they vaind out a saight of thing we tak no heed on . I reckon now , Beany , thee cas'n drink beer ? " 
 this be a home thrust , for Mr. Dawe be a notorious drinker . he reply with a heavy sigh and profoundly solemn look : 
 " Ah noo ! a noo ! unless when I be vorce , 
 by rason , Dactor zaith , my stommirk ba'in exhaust . " 
 
 " and what be it the doctor say to you , Mr. Dawe ? " I ask , perceive that he court inquiry . he fix his eye upon I , with a search look ; eager , as it seem , yet fear to believe that he have find at last a generous sympathy . 
 " ' twas more nor dree month zince ai titche a drap , 
 when ai be compel to consult the Dactor chap ; 
 he zaith , zaith he , " tain't   no good now this here , 
 oh , Ebenezer Dawe , you must tak beer . ' " 
 
 these word he repeat with impressive earnestness , shake his head and sighing , as if in deprecation of so sad a remedy . yet the subject possess perhaps a melancholy charm , and his voice relent to a pensive unctuousness , as he conclude . 
 " ' tak beer ! ' I zays , ' Lor , I dunnow the way ! ' 
 ' then you must larn , ' zays he , ' this blessed day : 
 You'm get , ' he zays , ' a daungerous zinking here , 
 your constitooshun do requaire beer . ' " 
 
 " Thee wasn ' long avore thee try it , I will warr'n , " say the farmer , " tache the calf the wai to the coo ! " 
 scorn this vile insinuation , Mr. Dawe continue thus : 
 " Wull , after that , mayhap a month or zo , 
 I be gooin home , the zame as maight be noo : 
 I have zawe a hellum up for Varmer Yeo , 
 and a velt my stommick gooin turble low , 
 she cry and skoone , like a chield leave in the dark , 
 and a maze laike in my head , and a maunder in my barck . 
 Zo whun ai coom to the voot of Breakneck hill , 
 I zeed the public keep by Pewter Will : 
 the virelight show the glass in the bar , 
 and ' um dance and twinkle like the avening star . " 
 
 here he pause , overcome by his own description . 
 " wull , " say the farmer , brighten with fellow - feeling , for he like his glass , " wull , thee toorne in and have a drap , laike a man , and not be sham of it nother . and how do she tast ? a must have be nation good , after so long a drouth ! " 
 " Coom'd down my drort , like the Quane and Princess Royal , 
 the very sa - be as a drap of oi - al ! " 
 
 " the very sa - am , the very sa - am , " he repeat with an extrametrical smack of his lip , which he wipe with the back of his hand , and cast a meaning glance towards the cellar . the farmer rise , and take from the dresser a heavy quart cup make of pewter . with this he go to the cellar , whence issue presently a trickling and froth sound , which thrill to the sensitive heart of Mr. Dawe . the tankard of ale , with a crown of white foam , be present to the thirsty bard by his host , who do not , however , relinquish his grasp upon the vessel ; but impose   like Pluto to Orpheus   a stern condition . " now , Beany Dawe , thee shall not   have none , unless thee can zay zummut without no poetry in it . " 
 at this barbarous restriction , poor Ebenezer roll his eye in a most tragic manner ; he thrust his tongue into his cheek , and swing himself , not to and fro as usual , but sideways , and clutch one hand on the tatter of his sack , while he cling with the other to the handle of the cup . then with a great effort , and very slowly , he speak - 
 " if my poor vasse only mak you frown , 
 I will try , ee fai I wull , to keep them - 
 
 a rhyme come over he , the twitching of his face show the violence of the struggle ; he attempt to say " in , " but nature triumph , and he utter the fatal " down . " in a moment the farmer compress his mighty finger , and crush the thick metal like silver paper . the forfeit liquor fly over the poet 's knee , and hiss at his foot in the ash . foresee a storm of verse from he , and of prose from Mrs. Huxtable at the fate of the pride of her dresser , I make a hasty retreat . 
 Thenceforth I take a kind interest in our conceited but harmless bard . his neighbour seem not to know , how long it be since he have first yield to his unfortunate ailment ; which probably owe its birth to the sound of the saw . during our first interview , his rhythm and rhyme have be unusually fluent and finish , from pride perhaps at have find a new audience , or from some casual inspiration . Candour compel I to admit that his subsequent work be little , if at all , well than those of his more famous contemporary ; and I be not so proud , as he expect I to be , of his connexion with my sad history . 
 CHAPTER XVI . 
 about half a mile from Tossil 's Barton   the farmhouse where we live   there be a valley , or rather a vast ravine , of a very uncommon formation . a narrow winding rocky combe , where slab , and tor , and boulder stone , seem pasture on the velvet grass , or look into the bright trout - stream , which leap down a flight of step without a tree to shade its flash and foam ; this narrow , but glad dingle , as it near the sea , burst suddenly back into a desert gorge , cleave the height that front the Bristol Channel . the mountain side from right and left , straight as if strike by rule , steeply converge , like a high - pitch roof turn upside down ; so steep indeed that none can climb they . along the deep bottom gleam a silver chord , where the cramp stream chafe its way , bedded and bank in stone , without a blade of green . from top to bottom of this huge ravine there be no growth , no rock , no cliff , no place to stay the foot , but all a barren , hard , grey stretch of shingle , slate , and gliddery stone : as if the ballast of ten million fleet have be shoot in two enormous pile , and be always on the slip . look at it we forget that there be such a thing as life : the desolation be not painful , because it be so grand . the brief noon glare of the sun on these titanic dry wall , where even a lichen die ; the gaunt desert shade steal back to its lair in the early afternoon ; the solemn step of evening stoop to her cloak below - I know not which of these be the most impressive and mournful . no stir of any sort , no voice of man or beast , no flow of tide , ever come to visit here ; the little river , after a course of battle , win no peaceful union with the sea , but pond against a shingle bar , and gurgle away in slow whirlpool . only a fitful moaning wind draw up and down the melancholy chasm . the famous " Valley of Rocks , " some four mile to the east , seem to I common - place and tame compare to this grand defile . yet how many man I know who would smoke their pipe throughout it ! 
 think so much of this place , I long wish my mother to see it ; and find she rather strong one lovely April morning , I persuade she forth , embark on Mrs. Huxtable 's donkey . we go , down a small tributary glen , towards the head of the great defile . the little glen be bright , and green , and laugh into bud , and banter a swift brook , which could hardly stop to answer , but leave the ousel as it pass to talk at leisure about their nest , and the trout to make those musical leap that sound so crisp through the alder . another stream meet it among the bush below , and now they be entitle to the dignity of a bridge whereon grow the maidenhair fern , and which , with its rude and pointed arch , look like an old pack - saddle upon the stream . 
 from this point we follow a lane , lead obliquely up the ascent , before the impassable steep begin . have tether our quiet donkey to a broken gate , I take my mother along a narrow path through the thicket to the view of the great ravine . stand at the end of this path , she be astonish at the scene before she . we have gain a height of about two hundred foot , the hill - top stretch a thousand foot above we . we stand on the very limit of vegetation , a straight line pass clown the hill where the quarry - like steep begin . 
 my dear mother be tired , and I have call she to come home , lest the view should make she giddy ; when suddenly she step forward to gather a harebell straggling among the stone . the shingle beneath her foot give way , then below she , and around , and above her head , begin in a great mass to glide . bury to the knee and fall sideways , she be sink slowly at first , then quickly and quick yet , with a hoarse roar of move ton of stone , gather and whelm upon she , down the rugged abyss . scream , I leap into the avalanche after she , never think that I could only do harm . strong , and swifter , and louder , and surging , and berge with shoulder stone the solid cascade rush on . I see dear mother below I try to clasp her hand in prayer , and to give I her last word . with a desperate effort drag my shawl from the gulfing crash , I throw it towards she , but she do not try to grasp it . a heavy stone leap over I , and strike she on the head ; her head drop back , she lie senseless , and nearly bury . we be dash more headlong and headlong , in the rush of the mountain side , to the precipice over the river , and my sens have all but fail , and revenge be prone before judgment , when I hear through the din a shout . on the brink of firm ground stand a man , and sign I to throw my shawl . with all my remain strength I do so , but not as he mean , for I cast it entirely to he , and point to my mother below . one instant the avalanche pause , he leap about twenty foot down , through the heather and gorse , and stay his descent by clutch a stout ash sapling . to this in a moment he fasten my shawl ,   a long and strong plaid , and just as my mother be be sweep by , he plunge with the other end into the shingle tide . I see he leap and struggle towards she , and lift she out of the gliding tomb , glide himself the while , and sway himself and his burden , by mean of the shawl , not back   for that be impossible , but obliquely downwards ; I see the strong sapling bow to the strain like a fishing - rod , while hope and terror fight hard within I ; I see he , by a desperate effort , which bent the ash - tree to the ground , leap from the whirling havoc , and lie my mother on the dead fern and heath . of the rest , I know nothing , have become quite unconscious , before he save I , in the same manner . 
 we must have be take home in Farmer Huxtable 's butt , for I remember well that , amidst the stir and fright of our return , and while my mother be still insensible , Mrs. Huxtable fall savagely upon poor Suke , for have despatch that elegant vehicle without clean it from the lime dust ; whereby , as she declare , our dress   so rent and tattere by the jagged stone   be " muxe up to shord . " Poor Suke would have be likely to fare much bad , if , at such a time , she have stop to dust the cart . 
 when the farmer come home , his countenance , rich in capacity for express astonishment , far outdo his word . " wull , wull , for sure ! wuther ye do or no ? " be all the vent he could find for his idea during the rest of the day ; though it be plain to all who know he that he be think profoundly upon the subject , and wholly occupy with it . in the course of the follow week he advise I very impressively never to do it again ; and nothing could ever persuade he but that I jump in , and my mother come to rescue I . 
 but his wife very soon have all her wit about she . she send to " Coom " for the doctor   I beg that it might not be Mr. Dawe 's physician , she put dear mother to bed , and dress her wound with simple worth ten druggist ' shop , and bath her temple with rosemary , and run down the glen for " fathery ham "   Valerian , which she declare " would kill nine sort of infermation ; " then she hush the entire household , permit no tongue to move except her own , and beat her eld boy   a fine young huxtable   for crying , whereupon he roar ; she even conquer her strong desire to know much more than all could tell ; and show my mother such true kindness and pity that I love she for it at once , and ever since . 
 breathing slowly and heavily , my poor mother lie in the bed which have long be the pride of Tossil 's Barton . the bedstead be make of carved oak , as many of they be in North Devon , and would have be handsome and striking , if some ancestral Huxtable have not adorn it with whitewash . but the quilt be what they be proud of . it be form of patch of diamond shape and most incongruous colour , with a death 's head in the centre and crossbone underneath . 
 when first I behold it , I toss it down the stair , but my mother would have it bring back and use , because she know how the family glory in it , and she could not bear to hurt their feeling . 
 one taper white hand lie on it now , with the tender skin bruise and discolour by blow . she have close the finger which bear her wedding ring , and it still remain curved and rigid . in an agony of tear , I kneel by the side of the bed , watch she placid and deathlike face . till then I have never know how strongly and deeply I love she . 
 I firmly believe that she be revive in some degree by the glare of the patched quilt upon her eye . the antagonism of nature be rouse , and bring home her wander power . feebly glance away , she come suddenly to herself , and exclaim : 
 " be she safe ? be she safe ? ' 
 " yes , mother ; here I be , with my own dear mother . " 
 she open her arm , and hold I in a nervous cold embrace , and thank God , and weep . 
 CHAPTER XVII . 
 when the surgeon come , he pronounce that none of her limb be break , but that the shock to the brain , and the whole system , have be so severe , that the only chance of recovery consist in perfect quiet . she herself say that the question be , whether Providence want she still to watch over her child . 
 after some day she come down stair , not without my support , and be prop once more upon her poor sofa . Calm she appear , and content , and happy in such sort as of old ; but whenever she turn her glance from I , she observe with start eye every little thing that move . especially she would lie and gaze through the open window , at a certain large spider , who work very hard among the woodbine blossom . one day , in make too bold a cast , he fall ; some chord of remembrance be touch , and she swoon away on the couch . 
 in spite of these symptom I fondly hop that she be recover strength . she even walk out with I twice , in the sunny afternoon . but this only last a very short time ; it soon become manifest , even to I , that ere long she would be with my father . 
 unable to fight any more with this dark perception , I embrace it with a sort of savage despair , an utter sinking of the heart , which defy God as it sink . this she soon discover , and I fear that it sadden her end . 
 she be much disappointed , too , that we could not find or thank he who have perille his life for we . none could tell who he be , or what have become of he ; though the farmer , at our entreaty , search all the village round . we be tell , indeed , by the landlady of the " red - deer Inn "   a lonely public - house near the scene of the accident   that a stranger have come to she in very great haste , and , have learn who we be , for she have see we pass half an hour before , have send her boy to the farm for some kind of conveyance , while he return at full speed to attend those whom he have rescue . it far appear that this stranger have help to place we in the cart , and show the kind anxiety to lessen the roughness of its motion , himself even lead old " Smiler , " to thwart his propensity to the deep and hard rut . by the time our slow vehicle reach the farm , Mrs. Huxtable be return from the Lower Cleve orchard , where she have be smoke the fernwebs , in ignorance of our mishap ; and our conductor , see we safe in her hand , depart without a word , while she be too flurried and frighten to take much notice of he . 
 neither could the woman of the inn describe he ; she be so " mazed , " when she hear of the " vail arl down the girt goyal , " as she call our slide of about fifty foot ; and for this she quote the stranger as her authority , " they be the very word as he use ; " though , just before this , she have state that he be a foreigner and could not speak English . know that in Devonshire any stranger be call a foreigner , and English mean the brogue of the countryside , I do not attach much weight to this declaration . the only remain witness , the lad who have come with the butt , be too stupid to describe anything , except three round O 's , with his mouth and eye . 
 but it matter little about description ; I have see that stranger under such circumstance , that I could not fail to know he again . 
 on the morrow , and once in the follow week , some kind inquiry be make as to our condition , by mean of slip of paper convey by country lad . no name be attach to these , and no information give about the inquirer . the bearer of the first missive come from Lynmouth , and of the second from Ilfracombe . neither lad know anything   though submit by Mrs. Huxtable to keen cross - examination , except that he be pay for his errand , but would like some cider , and that the answer be to be write upon the paper he bring . 
 whether any motive for concealment exist , beside an excess of delicacy , or whether there even be any intentional secresy , or merely indifference to our gratitude , be more than we could pretend to say . I be not at all inquisitive - not more so , I mean , than other woman - but I need not confess that my curiosity   to say nothing of well feeling   be pique a little by this uncommon reserve . 
 so now , beside the engrossing search for my deadly enemy , I have to seek out another , my brave and noble friend . 
 CHAPTER XVIII . 
 but for the present , curiosity , gratitude , hate , all feeling indeed and passion , except from the bleed vein of love , and the heart - root fibre of sorrow , be to be crush within I . evening after evening , my dear mother 's presence seem more and more dreamy and shadowy ; and night after night she go feebler and feebler to bed . in the morning indeed she have gather some fragile strength , such strength as so waste a form could exert , and the breeze and the fresh May sun make believe of health on her cheek . but no more be I tempt to lay my arm round her waist , and rally she on its delicate girlish span , nor could I now look gaily into her eye , and tell she how much she excel her child . those little liberty , which with less than a matron 's dignity , and more than a mother 's fondness she have so long allow I , become as she still expect , and I could not bear to take they , so many great distress . even at night , when I twin in its simple mode her soft brown hair , as I think how few the time my old task would be need again , it cost I many a shift to prevent her descry my tear in the glass , or suspect they in my voice . for herself , she know well what be come ; she have learn how soon she must be my sweet angel instead of my mother , and her last trouble be that she could not bring I to think the difference small . so calmly she speak of her end , not look at I the while for fear we both should weep , so gently and sweetly she talk of the time when I should hearken no more , as if she be go to visit a garden and hand I the flower outside . then , if I break forth in an anguish of sob , she would beg my forgiveness , as if she could have do wrong , and mourn for my loneliness after she , as though she could help forsake I . 
 look back , even now , on that time , how I condemn and yet pardon myself , reflect how little I try to dissemble my child - like woe . 
 when all thing rejoice in their young summer strength , and scarcely the breeze turn the leaf for the song of the bird , and the pure white hawthorn be calm as the death of the good , and the soul of gladness be sad , we talk for the last time together , mother and child , look forth on the farewell of sunset . the room under the thatch smell musty in summer , and I have make up a bed on the sofa downstairs . the waste low fever be past , and the wearisome cough exhaust , and the flush have ebb from her cheek   as the world from her heart , and of all human passion , and wish , and care , not one leave a trace in her bosom , except a mother 's love . this and only this retard her flight to heaven , as the sight of his nest delay the rise of the lark . 
 " my child , " she begin , and her voice be low , but very distinct , " my only and darling child , who have mind I so long , and lay her youth , and beauty , and high courageous spirit , at the foot of her weak mother ; my child , who foster in wealth and love , will be to - morrow an orphan , cast upon the wide world " - here she fairly break down , in spite of religion , and heaven , and turn her head to the pillow , a true daughter and mother of earth . I would fain have give that fortune , whose loss to I she lament , for leave to cry freely with she , without add to her distress . 
 in a minute or two , she be able to proceed ; with her thin hand she part the hair shake purposely over my eye . 
 " I be sure that my pet will listen , with kindness and patience , while I try to say what have lie so long at my heart . you know how painfully I have always be move by any allusion to the death of your dear father . it have be a weakness no doubt on my part , but one which I vainly strove against ; and for which I trust to be pardon where all be pardon and peace . " 
 her voice begin to tremble , and her eye become fix , and I fear a return of the old disorder ; but she shake it off , and speak again distinctly , though with great labour : 
 " this be a bitter subject , and I never could bring myself to it , till now , when it seem too late . but , my poor love , I be so anxious about it . for the rest - that Providence which have never forsake we , repine as I would , I can trust that Providence still to protect my darling child . there be one thing , and only one , by promise which you will make my departure quite happy . then I shall go to rejoin your father , and carry such tiding of you , as will enable we both to wait , in the fulness of time , your come . " 
 " oh , that the fulness of time be come ! " I cry in my selfish loneliness ; " for I it be empty enough . " 
 " my precious , my own darling Clara , you sob so , you make I most wretched . " 
 " Mother , I will not cry any more ; " neither do I , while she could see I . 
 " I need not tell you , " she say , " what be that promise which I crave for your own dear sake . " 
 " no , ma'am , " I reply , " I know quite well what it be . " 
 I see that I have grieve she . how could I call she then anything else than " mother " ? 
 " my mother dear , you wish I to promise this - that I will forego my revenge upon he who slay my father . " 
 she bow her head , with a look I can not describe . in the harsh way I have put it , it seem as if she be injure both my father and I . 
 " have you ask I anything else , although it be sin against God and man   if you could ask such a thing   - I would have pledge myself to it , as gladly as I would die - die , at least , if my task be do . but this , this one thing only - to abandon what I live for , what I be bear to do , to be a traitor to my own father and you - I implore you , mother , by he whose glory be on you now , do not ask I this . " 
 her face in its sadness and purity make I bury my eye and forget thing . 
 " then I must die , and leave my only child possess with a murderer 's spirit ! " 
 the depth of her last agony , and which I believe would cling to she even in heaven , be more than I could bear . I kneel on the floor and put my hand to her side . she wear out heart be throb again , with the pang of her disappointment . 
 " Mother , " I cry , " I will promise you this . when I have discover , as I must do , that man who have make you a widow and I an orphan , if I find any plea whatever to lessen his crime , or penitence to atone for it , as I hope to see my father and mother in heaven , I will try to spare and forgive he . can you wish I to rest in ignorance , and forget that deed ? " 
 " Clara , " she answer weakly , and she speak more slowly and feebly every time , " you have promise I all I can hope for . how you love your father ! I too you have love I can not say how much . for my sake , you have bear poverty , trouble , and illness , without a complain word . by day , and by night , through my countless want , and long fretfulness . " 
 I put my finger upon her pale lip . how could she tell such a story then ? her tear come now and then , and would not be stop , as she lay her weak hand on my head . 
 " may the God of the fatherless and the poor , who know and comfort the widow 's grief , the God who be take I now to his bosom , bless with all blessing of earth and heaven , and restore to I this my child . " 
 a sudden happiness fall upon she , as if she have see her prayer 's acceptance . she let her arm fall round I , and lay my cheek by the side of her bright flow smile . it be the last conscious stir of the mind ; all the rest seem the flush of the soul . in the window the night - scented heath be bloom ; outside it , the jessamine cross in a milky way of white star , and the lush honeysuckle have fling down her lap in cluster . the fragrance of flower lie heavy upon we , and we be sore weary with the burden of sorrow and joy . so tranquil and kind be the face of death , that sleep , his half - brother , still hold his hand . 
 the voice of the thrush , from the corner laurel , break the holy stillness . like dream of home that break our slumber , his melody be its own excuse . my mother awake , and say faintly , with no gleam in her eye : 
 " raise I upon the pillow , my love , that I may hear he once more . he sing like one your father and I use to listen to every evening , in the day when we watch your cradle . " 
 I lift she gently . the voice of nature make way for her pass spirit . 
 " now kiss I , my child ; once more , my own love child , my heart be with you for ever . light of my eye , you be grow dim . " 
 she clasp her hand in prayer , with one of mine between they . my other be round her neck . 
 then she speak slowly , and with a wan voice ; but firmly , as if it have be her marriage - response . 
 " thou art my guide , and my staff . I have no fear , neither shadow of trembling . make no long tarrying , oh my God ! " 
 the bird go home to his nest , and she to that refuge where all be home . though the hand that hold mine grow cold as ice , and her lip reply to no kiss , and the smile on her face sleep off into stillness , and a grey shade creep on her feature ; - I could not believe that all this be death . 
 CLARA VAUGHAN 
 BOOK II . 
 CHAPTER I. 
 " long - shadow death , " some poet say . how well I know and feel it ! the gloom before he deepen as he come , and the world of darkness stretch many year behind . 
 I once dare to believe that no earthly blow could ever subdue , or even bend my resolute will . I now find my mistake , and care not even to think about it . 
 on the morning after my mother 's death I wander about , and could not tell where to go . the passionate clinging which would not allow I , during that blank and sleepless night , to quit what remain of her presence , and the jealous despair which feel it a wrong that any one else should approach , have now settle down to a languid heaviness , and all that I care for be to be let alone . all the place where we have be together I visit now , without know why , perhaps it be to see if she be there . then vaguely disappointed , I think there must be some mistake , and wearily go the dreary round again . 
 I can not clearly call to mind , but think it must have be that day , when I be in the corner of the room , look at the place whence they have take dear mother . Ann Maples and Mrs. Huxtable come in , follow by the farmer , who have leave his shoe at the door . they do not see I , so I suppose it must have be in the evening . they be come to remove the sofa . I have not the heart to follow their brogue . 
 " yes to be sure , " say Mrs. Huxtable , look at it with a short sigh . it be odd that it should strike I then , but all she do be short . 
 " get it out of her sight , poor dear , " say Ann Maples . 
 " to see she sit and look at it ! " exclaim the farmer 's wife . 
 " with her eye so dry and stupid like ! " return the other . " poor child , she must have cry herself out . I have know she sit by the hour , and stare at the bed where her father be kill , but it be a different sort of look to this . " 
 " ah well , she have lose a good mother , " say Dame Huxtable . " God grant my poor little chick may never be leave like she . " 
 " what be your child to talk of along with Miss Clara ? " ask my nurse . 
 Mrs. Huxtable be about to answer sharply , but check herself , and only say : 
 " all child be much of a muchness to their mother . " 
 " do not   tell I , " cry Ann Maples , who have never have any . 
 the farmer come between they , walk on tip - toe . 
 " for good , now , do not   ye fall out at such a time as this here . what be our affair to speak of now ? " 
 " what be any folk , " ask Mrs. Huxtable , " that have the breath of life ? " 
 " and go forth in the morning , and be cast into the oven , ma'am , " continue her antagonist . 
 " ah , bless thee , yes ! " the farmer reply , " I will take my gospel oath of it . it be not much good I be at parsone , and maybe I like a drop of drink when the weather be fitty ; but that young chestnut filly that be just come home from break , I would sell she to a gipsey , and trust he for the money , if so be ' twould make the young lady turn her face to the Lord . can not   ye speak to she now about it , either of you woman ? Doo'e now , doo'e . " 
 " how could I possible ? " his wife exclaim ; " why , farmer , you must be maze . a high young lady like that , and the tear still hot in her eye ! " 
 " the very reason , wife , the very time and reason . but likely Mrs. Maples would be the proper person . " 
 " thank you , sir , " my nurse reply , " Mrs. Maples know good manner a little . thank you , sir ; Mrs. Maples be not   bear in Devonshire . " 
 " I ask your pardon , ma'am , " say the farmer , much abash , " I humbly ask your pardon ; I be not   teach no well . I can only go by what I have see , and what seem to come inside of I . and I know , in our way of business , when a calf be wean from the mother , the poor beastess hath a call for some one else to feed it . maybe it be no harm to let she have the refusal . " Therewith he open my mother 's Bible , and place it reverently on the window - seat . " Waife , do'e mind the time as poor Aunt Betsy die , over there to Rowley Mires ? " 
 " for sure I do , but what have she get to do with it ? we must not   talk of she , I reckon , any more than of the chiller , though we be so unlucky as to be bear in Devonshire . Fie , fie , thee ought to know well than to talk of poor Aunt Betsy along of a lady , and before our better . " here she curtsy to Ann Maples , with a flash of light in her eye , and rub they hard with her apron . 
 " well , well , " reply the farmer , sadly , " mayhap so I do . and who be I to gainsay ? mayhap so I do ; " he drop his voice , but add , after some reflection , " it be hard to tell the right of it ; but sure she be a woman . " 
 " who say she be a man , thee zany ? " Mrs. Huxtable be disappoint that the case would not be argue . the farmer discreetly change the subject . 
 " now , if it be I , " he continue , " I would not   think of take this here settle - bed away from the poor thing . " 
 " why not , farmer ? " ask Mrs. Huxtable , sharply . " give I a reason for leave it , and I will give you ten for take it . " 
 " I can not   give no reason . but maybe it comfort she a little . " 
 " Comfort indeed ! " say his wife ; " break her heart with , cry , more likely . come , lend a hand , old heavy - strap ; what can a great dromedary like thee know about young wench ? " 
 at any rate he know more than she do . the moment they touch it I burst forth from my corner , and fling myself upon it , roll as if I would bury myself in the ecstasy of anguish . what they do I can not tell ; they might say what they like , I have not cry till then . 
 the next day I be sit stupifie and heavy , try once more to meet the necessity of think about my mother 's funeral ; but again and again , the weakness of sorrow fall away from the subject . the people of the house keep from I . Mrs. Huxtable have do she good , but they know I would rather be alone . 
 the door be open quietly , and some one enter in a stealthy manner . regard it as an intrusion , I would not look that way . 
 " Miss Clara dear , " begin the farmer , stand behind I , and whispering , " I humbly ask your pardon , Miss , for call you that same . but we have have a wonderful fine season , sure enough . " 
 I make he no answer , be angry at his ill - timed common - place . 
 " if you please , Miss , such a many lamb be never know afore , and turnip fine last winter , and corn , and hay , and every kind of stock , a fetching of such price . the farmer about here have make their fortune mainly . " 
 " I be glad to hear that you be so prosperous , Mr. Huxtable , " I answer , very coldly . 
 " yes fie , good time , Miss , wonderful good time , we do not   know what to do with our money a'rnost . " 
 " buy education and good taste , " I say , " instead of thrust your happiness upon such as I. " 
 how little I know he ! shall I ever forgive myself that speech ? 
 " ah , I wish I could , " he answer , sadly , " I wish with all my heart I could . but we must be bear to the like of that , I be afeare , Miss Vaughan . " 
 poor fellow ! he know nothing of irony , as we do , who be bear to good taste , otherwise I might have suspect he of it then . 
 he suddenly wish I " good evening , " although it be middle - day , and then he make off for the door , but come back again with a desperate resolve , and speak , for he , very quickly , look all the time at his foot . 
 " there , I can not   make head or tail of it , Miss Clara , but wife say I be to do it so . take the dange money , that be a dear , and for good now do not   be offend , for I cas'n help it . " 
 he open his great hand , which be actually shake , and hurriedly place on the sofa a small packet tie in the leaf of a copy book ; then suddenly put in mind of something , he make a dive , and snatch it up , fling it upon a Windsor chair . it fall with a chink , the string slip off , and out roll at least forty sovereign and guineas , and a number of crown - piece . 
 Peremptorily I call he back , for he be run out of the door . 
 " Mr. Huxtable , what be the meaning of this ? " 
 " mean , Miss ! Lord bless you , Miss Clara , there bain't   no meaning of it ; only it corn into my head last night , as I be lay awake , humbly ask your pardon , Miss , for that same , that if so be you should desire , that the dear good lady herself might like , if I may make so bold , mean that it be not   fitly like , that she should lay nowhere else , but alongside of her own husband , till death do they part , Mr. Henry Valentine Vaughan , Esquire , Vaughan Park , in the county of Gloucestershire . there I be as bad as Beany Dawe . " 
 he repeat his rhyme , with some relief , hop to change the subject . I catch he by both hand , and burst into tear . 
 " do not   ye now , " he say , with a thickness in his voice , " do not   ye now , my dearie , leastway unless it do you good . " 
 " it do I good , indeed , " I sob , " to find still in the world so kind a heart as your . " 
 though I long to look he in the face , I know that I must not do so . oh why be man so ashamed of manly tear ? perceive that I could not speak , he begin to talk for both of we , make a hundred blunder apology , try to hide his knowledge of my poverty , and to prove that he be only pay a debt which extend over many year of tenancy . he be not at all an imaginative man , but delicacy supply he with invention . so deep a sense pervade all class in this english country , that want of money be an indictment , which none but the culprit may sign . poor or rich , I should not be worth despise , if I have show the paltry pride of decline such a loan . 
 the tear come anew to my eye when I find that what have be bring so freely be the saving of year of honest toil , a truth which the owner have try to conceal by polish the old coin . but not be skilled , dear soul , in plate - cleaning , they have leave some rotten - stone adhering to the George and Dragons . 
 CHAPTER II . 
 although I find a sad pleasure in linger over these time , with such a history still impend , I can not afford the indulgence . 
 dear mother 's simple funeral take I once more to my native place . even without Mr. Huxtable 's generous and noble assistance , I should have lay she to rest by the side of the husband she love so well . but difficulty , sore to encounter at such a time , would have meet I on every side . moreover the kind act cheer and lead I through despondency , like the hand and face of God . 
 care little what people might say or think , I could not stay at a distance . nature tell I that it be my duty to go , and duty or not , I could not stay away . 
 and now for the last time I look on the face and form of my mother . that which I have play , and talk , and laugh with , though lately not much of laughter , that which have feed and care for I , till it need my care in turn ; that which I have toddle beside , or proudly run in front of ; whose arm have be round I whenever I weep , and whose bosom the haven of childhood 's storm ; first to greet I with smile in the morning , and last to bless I with tear at night ; ever love , and never complain - in one word for a thousand , my mother . so far away now , so hopelessly far away ! there it lie indeed , I can touch it , kiss it , and embrace it ; but oh how small a part of mother ! and even that part be not mine . so holy and calm it lie , such love kindness still upon its feature , so near I , but in mystery so hopelessly far away ! I can see it , but it never will know I again ; I may die beside it , and it can not weep . the last last look of all on earth - they must have carry I away . 
 I remember totter down the hill , support by a stalwart arm . the approach to the house prevent - or something . two child run before I , stop now and then to wonder , and straggle to pick hedge - flower . one of they bring I a bunch , then star , and be afraid to offer they . " Nancy , I will be the death of thee , " whisper a woman 's voice . the little girl shrink to I for shelter , with timid tear in her great blue eye . so I take her hand , and lead she on , and somehow it do I good . 
 at interval , the funeral hymn , which they sing on the road to the grave , fall solemnly on our ear . some one from time to time give out the word of a verse and then it be sing to a simple impressive tune . that ancient hymn , which have drown so many sob , I do not hear , but feel it . 
 we arrive at Vaughan St. Mary late in the afternoon of the second day . the whole of the journey be to I a long and tearful dream . Mr. Huxtable come with we . he have never before be far from home than Exeter ; and his single visit to that city have form the landmark of his life . he never try to comfort I as the other do . the ignorant man know well . 
 alone I sit by my father 's grave , with my mother 's ready before my foot . they have cast the mould on the other side , so as not to move my father 's coverlet . the poor old pensioner have be true to her promise , and man 's last garden be bloom like his first flower - bed . 
 my mind   if any I have   seem to have undergo some change . defiance , and pride , and savage delight in misery , be entirely go ; and depression have take the place of dejection . death now seem to I the usual and proper condition of thing , and I feel it an impertinence that I should still be alive . so I wait , with heavy composure , till she should be bring , who so often have walk there with I . at length she be come for good and all , and a space be leave for I . but I must not repose there yet ; I have still my task before I . 
 the bell be toll fast , and the shadow grow long , and the child who have be play at hide - and - seek , where soon themselves shall be seek in vain , have flit away from sight , perhaps scar at my presence , perhaps go home to tea , to enjoy the funeral afterwards . the evening wind have cease from trouble the yew , and the short - live song of the bird be do . the place be as sad as I could wish . the smell of new earth inspire , as it always do , some unsearchable everlaste sympathy between the material and the creature . 
 the sun be set behind I : suddenly a shadow eclipse my own upon the red loam across the open grave . without a start , and dreamily   as I do all thing now , I turn to see whence it come . within a yard of I stand Mr. Edgar Vaughan . in a moment the old feeling be at my heart , and my wit be all awake . 
 I observe that he be pale than when I have see he last , and the rigid look be waver on his face , like steel reflect by water . he lift his hat to I . I neither rise nor speak , but turn and watch he . 
 " Clara , " he say in a low , earnest voice , " I see you be still the same . will no depth of grief , no length of time , no visitation from he who be over we all , ever bend your adamant and implacable will ? " 
 I hear , with some surprise , his allusion to the Great Being , whom he be not will not to recognise ; but I make he no reply . 
 " very well , " he resume , with the ancient chill harden over his feature ; ' so then let it be . I be not come to offer you condolence , which you would despise ; nor do I mean to be present when you would account the sight of I an insult . and yet I love your mother , Clara ; I love she very truly . " 
 this he say with such emotion , that a new thought break upon I . 
 Quick as the thought , he ask , " would you know who kill your father ? " 
 " and my mother , too , " I answer , " whose coffin I see come . " 
 the funeral turn the corner of the lane , and the dust rise from the bearer ' foot . he take his hat off , and the perspiration stand upon his forehead . betwixt suspense and terror , and the wildness of grief , I be oblige to lean on the headstone for support , and a giddiness come over I . when I raise my eye again , there be no one near I . in vain I wipe they hurriedly and look again . Mr. Vaughan be go ; but on the grass at my foot lie a fold letter . I seize it quickly , and break the seal . that moment a white figure appear between the yew - tree by the porch . it be the aged minister lead my mother the last path of all . the book be in his hand , and his form be tall and stately , and his step so slow , that the white hair fall unruffled , while the grand word on his lip call majesty into his gaze . thrust aside the letter , I follow into the Church , and stand behind the old font where I have be baptize ; a dark and gloomy nook , fit for such an entrance . she who have carry I there be carry past it now , and the pall wave in the damp cold air , and all the world seem stone and mould . 
 but afterwards , on the fair hill - side , while the faint moon gather power from the deepening sky , and glance on that hoary brow seal the immortal promise and smooth the edge of the grave , around which bent the uncovered head of many who have mourn before , and after a few bound of mirth should bend again in mourning , until in earth 's fair turn and turn , other should bend and they lie down - behold this , and feel something high than " dust to dust , " I grow content to bide my time with the other child of man , and remember that no wave can break until it reach the shore . 
 CHAPTER III . 
 when a long and heavy sleep   my first sleep since dear mother 's death   have bring I down to the dull plain of life , I read for the first time the letter so strangely deliver . even then it seem unkind to my mother that I should think about it . Mr. Vaughan have place it in a new envelope , which he have seal with his own ring , the original cover   if any there be   have be remove . the few word , of which it consist , be write in a clear round hand , upon a sheet of thin tough paper , such as we use for foreign postage , and fold in a peculiar manner . there be nothing remarkable in the writing , except this , that the word as well as the letter be join . it be as follow : 
 " the one who slay your brother be at 19 Grove Street London . you will come in danger of it why you know . " 
 no date , no signature , no stop , except as show above . in short , it be so dark and vague , that I return to Devonshire , with a resolution to disregard it wholly . when we reach the foot of the hill , at the corner of the narrow lane which lead to Tossil 's Barton , and where the white gate stand of which the neighbourhood be so proud , a sudden scream be hear , and a rush make upon we from behind the furze - bush . the farmer receive the full brunt of a most vigorous onset , and the number and courage of the enemy make up for their want of size , his strong bastion be almost carry by storm . to the cry of " daddy ! daddy 's come home ! " half a dozen urchin and more , without distinction of sex , jump and tug and fling and clung around he , with no respect whatever for his Sunday coat , or brass - button gaiter . take advantage of his laughing , they pull his leg this way and that , as if he be skate for the first time , and little Sally   his favourite   swarm up , make a base foot - rope of the great ancestral silver watch - chain whose mysterious awe sometimes suffice to keep her eye half open in church . Betwixt delight and shame , the poor father be so dreadfully take aback , that he could not tell what to do , till fatherly love suggest the only escape . he lift they one by one to his lip , and after some hearty smack send all   except the baby   slide down his back . 
 while all this be go forward , the good dame , with a clean apron on , keep herself in the background , curtsey and try to look sad at I , but too much carry away to succeed . her plump cheek leave but little room for tear , yet I think one try to find a road from either eye . when the burst be nearly do , she feel   like a true woman   for I so lonely in all this love , though I could not help enjoy it ; and so she try to laugh at it . 
 for a long time after this , the farmer be admire and consult by all the neighbour parish , as a man who have see the world . his labourer , also , one man and a boy , for a fortnight call he " Sir , " a great discomfort to he ; more than this , some letter be bring for he to interpret , and Beany Dawe become unduly jealous . but in this , as in most other matter , thing come to their level , and when it be slowly discover that the farmer be just the same , his neighbour show much disappointment , and even some contempt . 
 it be not long before the thought of that letter , which have be lay by so scornfully , begin to work within I . again and again , as time wear on , and the deep barb of sorrow darkly rust away , it come home to I as a sin , that I be neglect a special guidance . moreover , my reason for stay in Devonshire be go , and as my spirit recover its tone , it could not put up with inaction . 
 three month after our return , one breezy afternoon in August , when the heath have long succeed the gorse and broom upon the cleve , and the child be search for " wut " and half - kernele nut , I sit on a fallen tree , where a break in the copse make a frame for one of our favourite view . of late I have be try to take some sketch in water - colour of what my mother and I have so often admire together , and this have be keep for the last . wild as the scheme may appear to all who know the world and its high contempt for woman 's skill , I have some hope of earn money in London by the pencil , and be do my utmost to advance in art . also , I wish to take away with I some memorial of a time comparatively happy . 
 little Sally Huxtable , a dear little child , now my chief companion , have stray into the wood to string more strawberry bead on her spike of grass , for the wood strawberry here last almost to the equinox ; and I have just rough in my outline , and be correct the bold stroke , by nature 's soft gradation ; when suddenly through a cobnut bush , and down the steep bank at my side , come , in a slide canter , a magnificent red deer . he pass so close before I , with antler , like a varnished crabstick , russet in the sun , that I could have touch his brown flank with my pencil . be in no hurry or fright whatever , he regard I from his large deep eye with a look of courteous interest , a dignified curiosity too well breed for word ; and then , as if with an evening of pleasant business before he , trot away through the pod wild broom on the left . 
 before I have time to call he back , which , with a childish impulse , I be about to do , the nutbush where he have enter move again , and , laugh at his own predicament on the steep descent , a young man leap and land in the bramble at my foot . before I stand the one whom we have so often long to thank . but at sight of I , his countenance change entirely . the face , so playful just before , suddenly grow dark and sad , and , with a distant salutation , he be hurry away , when I spring forward and catch he by the hand . every nerve in my body thrill , as I feel the grasp that have save my mother and I . 
 " excuse I , " he say coldly , " I will lose my prey . " 
 but I would not let he go so curtly . what I say I can not tell , only that it be very foolish , and clumsy , and cold by the side of what I feel . whom but God and he have I to thank for my mother 's peaceful end , and all her treasured word , each worth a dozen life of mine ? he answer not at all , nor look at I ; but listen with a cold constraint , and , as I think , contemptuous pity , at which my pride begin to take alarm . 
 " Sir , " I exclaim , when still he answer not , " Sir , I will detain you no long from murder that poor stag . " 
 he answer very haughtily , " I be not of the Devonshire hunter , who toil to exterminate this noble race . " 
 as he speak he point down the valley , where the red deer , my late friend , be cross , for his evening browse , to a gnoll of juicy grass . then why be he pursue he , and why do he call he his prey ? the latter , probably a pretext to escape I , but the former question I could not answer , and do not choose to ask . he go his way , and I feel discharge of half my obligation . 
 CHAPTER IV . 
 the farmer , his wife , and little Sally be now all I have to love . poor Ann maple , though thoroughly honest and faithful , be of a nature so dry and precise that I respect rather than love she . I be bear to love and hate with all my heart and soul , although a certain pride prevent I from exhibit the well passion , except when strongly move . that other feeling , sow by Satan , he never allow I to disguise . 
 to leave the only three I love be a bitter grief , to tell they of my intention , a sore puzzle . but , after search long for a good way to manage it , the only way I find be to tell they bluntly , and not to cry if it could be help . so when Mrs. Huxtable come in full glory to try upon I a pair of stocking of the bright blue ever see , which she have long be knit on the sly , for winter wear , I thank she warmly , and say : 
 " dear I , Mrs. Huxtable , how they will admire these in London . " 
 " in Lonnon , cheel ! " she always call I her child , since I have lose my mother - " they will never see the like of they in Lonnon , without they git one of they there long glaskie , same as preventive chap have , and then I reckon there will be Hexymoor between , and Dartmoor too , for out I know , and ever so many church - tower and milestone . " 
 " oh yes , they will . I shall be there in a week . " 
 " in Lonnon in a wake ! dear heart alaive , cheel , dont'e tell on so ! " 
 she think my wit be wander , as she have often fancy of late , and set off for the larder , which be the usual course of her prescription . but I stop she so calmly that she could not doubt my sanity . 
 " yes , dear Mrs. Huxtable , I must leave my quiet home , where all of you have be so good and kind to I ; and I have already write to take lodging in London . " 
 " oh , Miss Clerer , dear , I can not   belave it nohow ! come and discoorse with farmer about it . he know a power more than I do , though I say it as should not . but if so be he hearken to the like of that , I will comb he with the toasting iron . " 
 give I no time to answer , she lead I to the kitchen . the farmer , who have finish his morning 's work , be stamp about outside the threshold , wipe his boot most carefully with a pitchfork and a rope of twisted straw . this process , to his great discomfort , Mrs. Huxtable have at length enforce by many scolding ; but now she snatch the pitchfork from he , and send it fly into the court . 
 " Wun't   thee never larn , thee girt drummedary , not to ston there an hour , muck arl the place ? " 
 " wull , wull , " say the farmer , look at the pitchfork first , and then at I , " Reckon the old mare 's dead at last . " 
 " Cas'n thee drame of nothing but boss and ass , thee girt mule ? here be Miss Clerer , as be like a cheel of my own , and now she'm gooin awai , and us'll niver zee she no more . " 
 " what dost thee mane , ' ooman ? " ask the farmer , sternly , " hast thee darr'd to goo a jahing of she , zame as thee do Zuke ? " 
 " oh , no , farmer ! " I answer , quickly , " Mrs. Huxtable never give I an unkind word in her life . but I must leave you all , and go to live in London . " 
 the farmer look as if he have lose something , and begin feel for it in all his pocket . then , without a word , he go to the fire , and unhung the crock which be boil for the family dinner . this do , he rake out the ember on the hearthstone , and sit down heavily on the settle with his back towards we . presently we hear he say to himself , " if any cheel of mine ate ever a bit of bakkon to - day , I will bile he in that there pot . and to zee the copy our Sally write this very morning ! " 
 " wonnerful ! wonnerful ! " cry Mrs. Huxtable , " and now her'll not know a p from a pothook . and little Jack can spell zider , zame as them do in Lonnon town ! " 
 " Dang Lonnon town , " say the farmer , savagely , " and arl as live there , lave out the Duke of Wellington . it be where the devil live , and them catch his braath in lantern . my faather tould I that , and her niver spak a loi . but it hain't   for the larning I be vex to lose my dearie . " 
 that last word he dwelt upon so tenderly and sadly , that I could stop no long , but run up to he bravely with the tear upon my face . as I sit low before he , on little Sally 's stool , he lay his great hand on my head , with his face turn toward the settle , and ask if I have any one to see I right in the world but he . 
 I tell he , " none whatever ; " and the answer seem at once to please and frighten he . 
 " then do not   e be a - gooin ' , my dear heart , do not   e think no more of gooin . if it be for the bit and drap thee ate and drink , do not   thee know by this time , our own flash and blood bain't   no more welcome to it ! and we have a plenty here , and more nor a plenty . and if we have not , Jan Huxtable hisself , and Honor Huxtable his waife , wud live on pegmale   well nor they desarve   and gie it arl to thee , and bless thee for ate of it . " 
 " ay , that we wud , ee fai , " answer Mrs. Huxtable , come forward . 
 " and if it be for channge , and plaisure , and zeee of the warld , I have   zeen a dale in my time , ax your pardon , Miss , for convarse so to you . and what hath it be even at Coom market , with the varmer I have   a - knowed from little chiller up ? no well nor a harrow dill for a little coolt to zuck . I would liefer know thee be a - gooin ' to Trentisoe churchyard , where little Jane and Winny be , than let thee goo to Lonnon town , zame as this here be . and what wud thy poor moother zay , if so be she could hear tell of it ? " 
 at this moment , when I could say nothing , be thoroughly convict of ingratitude , and ashamed before nature far well than my own , dear little Sally , who have be roll on the dairy floor , recover from the burst of childish grief enough to ask whether it have any cause . up to I she run , with great pearl tear on the veining of her cheek , and peep through the lash of her violet - blue eye , she give I one long reproachful look , as if she begin to understand the world , and to find it disappointment ; then she bury her flaxen head in the homespun apron I have lately take to wear , and sob as if she have spoil a dozen copy . what happen afterwards I can not tell . cry I hate , but there be time when nothing else be any good . I only know that , as the farmer leave the house to get , as he say , " a little braze , " these ominous word come back from the court : 
 " ' Twud be a bad job for Tom Grundy , if she coom'd acrass I now . " 
 CHAPTER V. 
 that same evening , as I be sit in my lonely room , yet not quite alone , - for little Sally , who always do as I bade she , be scratch and blot her good copy - book , under my auspex , - in burst Mrs. Huxtable , without stop to knock as usual . 
 " oh Miss Clerer , what have e be and do ? Varmer 's in crule trouble . Us'll arl have to goo to gaol to - morrow , chiller and arl . " 
 she be greatly flurry and out of breath , and yet seem proud of what she have to tell . she do not require much asking , nor beat about the bush , as many woman do ; but tell I the story shortly , and then ask I to come and hear all particular from Tim Badcock the farm - labourer , who have see the whole . 
 Tim sit by the kitchen fire with a pint of cider by he on the little round table ; strong evidence that his tiding , after all , be not so very unwelcome . 
 " Wull , you zee , Miss , " say Tim , after get up , and pull his rough forelock , " you zee , Miss , the Maister coom out this arternoon , in a weist zort of a wai , as if she have not   have no dinner . " here he give a sly look at " the Missus , " who have the credit of stop the supply , when the farmer have be too much on the cruise . 
 " what odd to thee , Tim , " she reply , " what odd to thee , what thee better have for dinner ? " 
 " Noo fai , " say Tim , " zo long as ai git maine , and my missus arlway have un raddy . Zo I ze to Bill , zays I , ' well maind what thee be at boy , there be a starm a coomin , zure as my name 's Timothy Badcock . ' Howsomever she do not   tak on atarl wi we , but kitche up a shivel , and work awai without niver a ward . ' twur the tap of the clave , ' langside of the beg fuzz , where the braidle road coomth along ' twixt that and the double hadge ; and we be arl a stubbing up the bush as plaisant as could be , to plough thiccy plat for clover , coom some rain , plase God . " 
 " Git on , Tim , wull e , " cry his impatient mistress , " we know arl about that . Cas'n thee tull it no quick ? " 
 " Wull , Miss , " continue Tim , in no hurry whatever , " prasently us zee a girt beg chap on a zort of a brown cob , a coomin in our diraction " - Tim be proud of this word , and afraid that we should fail to appreciate it - " they be a coomin , as you might zay , in our diraction this beg chap , and anither chap langside on he . Wull , when ' um coom'd within spake room of we , beg chap a ' horsebarck holler out , ' can ' e tell , my man , where Jan Uxtable live ? ' Avore I have taime to spake , Maister lift hissell up , and zaith , ' what doo ' e want to know for , my faine feller ? ' every bit the zame as ai be a tullin of it to you . ' what be the odd to thee , ' zays tother chap , ' thee d'st well kape a zivil tongue in thee head . I be Tom Gundry from Carnwall . ' and with that he stand up in his starrup , as beg a feller as iver you zee , Miss. Wull , Maister know all about Tom Gundry and what a be a coom for , and zo do I , and the boy , and arl the country round ; for Maister have get a turble name for rarstle ; maybe , Miss , you have   a heer'd on he in Lunnon town ? " 
 " I have never be in London , Tim , since I be a child ; and I know nothing at all about wrestling . " 
 " Wull , Miss , that be nayther here nor there . but there have be a dale of brag after Maister have throw arl they carnisher to barnstable vair , last year , about vetche this here Tom Gundry , who wor the good man in Cornwall , to throw our Maister . Howsomever , it be time for ai to crack on a bit . ' ah , ' zays the man avoot , who zimth have coom to back un , ' ah , ' twor arl mighty faine for uxtable to play skittle with our zecond rate man . Chappell or Ellicombe cud have do as much as that . Rackon Jan Uxtable wud vind a different game with Tom Gundry here . ' ' Rackon he wud , ' zaith Gundry , ' a have well jine a burial club , if her've   get ere a waife and vamily . ' " 
 " Noo . do a zay that though ? " inquire Mrs. Huxtable , much excited . 
 " ' Coom now , ' my maister zaith , try to look smarl behaind the fuzz , ' thee must throw I , my lad , avore thee can throw Jan Uxtable . he be a well man mainly nor ai be this dai . but ai baint in no oomer for playin ' much jist now , and rackon ai should hoort any man ai kitche on . ' ' she that be a good un , Zam , baint it now ? ' zaith Gundry to little chap , the very zame as ai be a tullin it now , ' doth the fule s'pose ai be ratten ? Ai've   half a maind to kick un over this hadge ; jist thee hold the nag ! ' ' Sober now , ' zaith varmer , and ai zeed a be gettin ' rad in the chake , ' God know ai do not   feel no carl to hoort ' e. Ai'll gie thee wan chance more , Tom Gundry , as thee'st a coom arl this wai fram Carnwall . can ' e trod a path in thiccy country , zame as this here be ? ' and wi ' that , a walk into the beg fuzz , twaice so haigh as this here room , and the stock begger round nor my body , and hard nor wrought hiern . a jist stratche his two hon , raight and leave , and twitch un up , wan by wan , vor ten gude lanyard , as asily as ai wud pull spring inyon . ' now , wull e let I lone ? ' zaith he , zo zoon as a coom barck , wi his brath a little quick by rason of the exarcise , ' wull ' e let I lone ? ' ' Ee 's fai , wull I , ' zaith the man avoot . ' hor , ' zaith Tom Gundry , who have be a     shopping zumwhere , ' thee cans't do a gude dai 's work , my man , tak that vor thee 's wage . ' and wi ' that a let fly at Maister 's vace wi ' a light hash stick a carr'd , man to raide off avore Maister cud coom to 's brath again . in a crack Jan Uxtable zet both his hon under the stommick of the nag , one avore the starrup and one behaind , zame as I maight to this here little tabble , and have un , harse and man , clane over hadge into Muster Yeo 's turmot falde . then with wan heft , a kitche up tother chap , and zent un sprarling after un , zame as if ' twor this here stule after the tabble . " 
     i.e. deal commercially where the staple be liquid . 
 I think poor Tim , in the excitement of his story , would have throw table and stool over the settle to illustrate it ; and if he have , Mrs. Huxtable would have forgive he . 
 " ' Thar , ' zaith our Maister , as plaisant as cud be , and ai think us shud have die of laffing , ' thar now , if zo be the owner of thiccy falde zummon e for traspash , you zay Jan Uxtable zent e on a little arrand , to vaind a carnisher as can do the laike to he . ' and wi ' that , a waipe his hon with a slip of vern , and tuk a little drap of zider , and full to 's wark again . " 
 " wull , but Tim , " ask the farmer 's wife , to lose no part of the effect , " what zort of a hadge wor it now ? twor a little hadge maybe , no haigher nor the zettle barck . " 
 " Wor it though ? " say Tim , " thee know well nor that , Missus . it be the begg hadge on arl the varm , wi ' a double row of saplin hash atap . her mak the boundary betwixt the two parish , and be not   be trim these vaive year , ai can swear . " 
 " and how be the both on them now , Tim ? a must have go haigh enough to channge the mune . 
 " Wull , Miss , " say Tim , address I , for he have tell his mistress all the story twice , " Tom Gundry brak his collar boun , and zarve ' un raight , for a brak Phil Dascombe 's a puppose whun a get ' un in a trap , that taime down to Bodmin thar ; and harse gat a rick of his taial ; but the little chap , he vell upon his hat , and that zave he kindly . but I heer'd down to Pewter Will 's , whur I gooe for a drap of zumthin for my waife 's stommick , ai heer'd zay there , as how Constable be a coomin to Maister this very naight , if Carnishers cud have perswadde un . but Constable zaith , zaith he , ' twor all along o you garnish chap , fust battery be mad , and fust blow gien , and wi'out you can zhow I Squaire Drake 's warrant , I wunt have nout to do wi ' it , not ai ; and that be law and gospel in Davonsheer and in Cornwall . ' " 
 " Tim , " say Mrs. Huxtable , " i'se warrant thee 's niver tould so long a spin up in thee 's laife avore . and thee 's tould it wonnerful well too ; hathn't   un Miss Clerer ? Zuke , here be the kay of zellar , gie Tim a half a paint more zider ; and thee mai'st have a drap theesell , gall . waipe thee mouth fust . " 
 " ah , " say Tim , favour I with a wink , in the excess of his glory , " rackon they Carnishers will know the wai off Tossil 's Barton varm next taime , wi'out no saign postesse . "   
     every word of Tim 's story be true , except as regard the name . 
 CHAPTER VI . 
 two or three day after this , I be keep school in the dairy , the parlour be too small for that purpose , and the kitchen and " wash - up "   as they call the back - kitchen   too open to inroad from Suke and Tim . my class consist of ten , or rather be eight strong , the two weames   big baby and little baby , only attend for the sake of example , and because they would have roar , if part from the other child . so those two be allow to spraddle on the floor , where sometimes they make little roller of themselves , with much indecorum , and between while sit gravely suck their fat red finger , and then point they in a glistening state at I or my audience , and giggle with a large contempt . the eight , who make believe to learn something , be the six eld Huxtables , and two of Tim Badcock 's " young un . " I marshal they , four on each side , against the low lime - whitened wall , which bear the pan of cream and milk . Little Sally , my head scholar , be very proud of measure her height , by the horizontal line on the milk - pan where the glazing end ; which Tabitha Badcock , even on tiptoe , could not reach . they be all well " clane , " and have white pinny on , and their ruddy cheek rub up to the high possible polish , with yellow soap and the jack - towel behind the wash - up door . hence , I never could relieve they from the idea that Sunday now come every day in the week . 
 I maintain strict discipline , and allow no nonsense ; but two sad drawback constantly perplex I . in the first place , their way be so ridiculous , and they labour so much hard to make I laugh , than they do to learn , that I could not always keep my countenance , and when the spelling - book go up before my face , they know , as well as possible , what be go on behind it , and peep round or below , and burst out all together . the second drawback be , that Mrs. Huxtable , in spite of all my protest , would be always rush in , upon errand purely fictitious ; and the farmer himself always find some special business in the yard , close to the wired and unglazed window , whence every now and then his loud haw - haw , and too audible soliloquy , " Dang I ! wull do , zally , that wor a good un ; zay un again , cheel ! zay un again , wull ' e ? " utterly overthrow my most solemn institution . 
 " Coom now , smarl chiller " - I address they in my unclassical Devonshire dialect , for it keep their attention alive to criticise I when I ' spak unvitty " - " coom now , e've   a be spulle lang enough : ston round I now , and tull I what I ax you . " 
 already , I have make one great mistake , by say " round " instead of " raound , " and Billy , the genius of the family , be upon the giggle . 
 " now thun , wutt be a quadripade ? " 
 " ai knoo ! " say Sally , with her hand hold out . 
 " Zo do ai , " say Jack , thrust forth his stomach . 
 " who wur ax of you ? " I inquire in a stately manner . " you bain't   the smarl chiller , be ' e ? Bill know , " I continue , but wax doubtful from the expression of Bill 's face . 
 " Ees fai , " cry Bill , suddenly clear up , " she be wutt moother zit on vor to mulk the coo . bain't   she now ? " 
 " Thee bee'st ony wan leg out , Bill . now Tabby Badcock ? " 
 while Tabby be splash in her memory   for I tell they all last week , the farmer much excite , and have no idea what the answer should be , but hop that one of his own child may discover it first , boldly show his face at the wire window , but be quite resolve to allow fair play . not so Mrs. Huxtable , who , in full possession of the case , suddenly appear behind I , and shake her fist at poor puzzle Tabby . " thee'dst good pretend to know more than thy better . " she try to make Tabby hear , without my catch her word . but the farmer hotly shout , " Lat un alo - un , waife . tak thee hon from thee mouth , I tull ' e. Spak up now , little wanch . " 
 thus encourage , Tabby make reply , look cross - wise at Mrs. Huxtable . 
 " Plase , Miss , it be a beastie wi vour taial . " 
 " raight , " cry the farmer , with admiration conquer his disappointment ; " raight this taime , ai'll tak my oath on it . I zeed wan to Barnstaple vair last year , and her wor karle , ' Phanominy Quadripade , ' her Kirsten name and her zurname , now ai coom to racollack . " 
 Tabby look elated , and Mrs. Huxtable chagrin . before I can redress the situation , a sound of heavy blow , deliver on some leathery substance , cause a new stir . all recognise the arrival of her Majesty 's mail , a boy from Martinhoe , who come upon a donkey twice a week , if there happen to be any letter for the village below . 
 out rush Mrs. Huxtable and Suke   who once receive an epistle , and the child long to go , but know well . the boy , however , have only a letter for I , which be from Mrs. Shelfer   a cousin of Ann Maples , to whom I write a few day since , ask whether she have any room to let . Mrs. Shelfer reply that ' she have apartment , and they be splendid , and the rent quite trifle ; " so the mail be bribe with a pint of cider , while I write to secure a new home . 
 my departure be now fix and inevitable , the woman naturally begin to remonstrate more than over . it have be settle that Ann Maples should go with I , not to continue as my servant , but to find a place for herself in London . 
 my few arrangement , which cost I far more pain than trouble , be not long in make ; and after say good - bye to all the dear little child and weanie , and kiss their pretty face in their little bed , amid an agony of tear from Sally , I be surprised , on enter the kitchen , to find there Mr. Beany Dawe . there be little time for talk , and much less for poetry . we be to start at three in the morning , the farmer have promise to drive we to meet the coach in Barnstaple , whence there would be more than thirty mile of hilly road to Tiverton , the near railway station . the journey to London could thus be make in a day , though no one in the parish could be bring to believe it . 
 the poet have be suborn , no doubt , by Mrs. Huxtable , and now detain I to listen to an elegy upon the metropolis of England . I can not stop to repeat it , neither do it deserve the trouble ; but it begin thus : - 
 " Fayther be wance to Lonnon town , 
 and a zed , ze he , whan a coom down , 
 ' do not   e niver goo there , Ebenezer my son , 
 for they mulk a coo , when she be not   gat none . 
 they kape up sich a hollerin , naight and day , 
 and a Devonsheer man dunno the impudence they zay . 
 their head and their hat wag regular , like the 
 scratcher of a harrow , 
 and they bile their tatie peel , and ate they 
 in a barrow . 
 they raid on a waggon top with their wife squaze 
 up inside she , 
 and they drink black dose and yesty pop in the 
 place of wholesome zider . 
 they want take back anything they have   zelle , 
 and the bed can bite , and the cat can speak : 
 and a well - dress'd man be a most compel 
 to channge his shirt in the middle of the week ! ' " 
 
 " Lor , " cry Mrs. Huxtable , " however could they do their washing ? Thee vayther must a be as big a liar as thee , Beany . they gift always run in the family . " 
 when , with remarkable patience , I have hear out his elegant effusion , the author , who have conceive much good will towards I , because I listen to his lay and call he Mr. Dawe , the author dive with a deep - draw sigh into a hole in his sack , and produce in a mysterious manner something wrap in greasy silver paper , and well tie up . he beg I to accept , and carry it about I most carefully and secretly , as long as I should live . to no other person in the world would he have give this , but I have earn it , as a true lover of poetry , and require it as a castaway among the peril of London . in vain I decline the present ; refusal only confirm his resolution . as the matter be of so little importance , I soon yield upon condition that I should first examine the gift . he give I leave with much reluctance , and I be surprised at the beauty and novelty of the thing . it be about the size of a Geneva watch , but rather thick , jet black and shin , and of the exact shape of a human heart . around the edge run a moulding line or cord of brilliant red , of the same material as the rest . in the centre be a white spot like a siphuncle . what it be I could not guess , but it look like some mineral substance . where the two lobe meet , a small hole have be drill to receive a narrow riband . after put I through many guess , Mr. Dawe inform I that it be a pixie 's heart , a charm of unequalled power against witchcraft and assassination , and to enthral the affection of a love one . he only smile , and rub his nose , on hear that I should never want it in the last capacity . be greatly pleased with it , I ask he many question , which he be very loth to answer . nevertheless I extort from he nearly all he know . 
 as he be saw into board a very large oak - tree , something fall from the very heart of it almost into his mouth , for poor Ebenezer be only an undersawyer . as he could not stop the saw without his partner concurrence , and do not wish to share his prize , he kick some sawdust over it until he could stoop to pick it up unobserved . in all his long experience of the wood , he have see but two of these rare and beautiful thing , and now assure I that any sawyer be consider lucky who find only one in the course of his career . the legend on the subject be rather quaint and graceful , and deserve a well garb than he or I can furnish . 
 " all in the olden time , there live 
 a little Pixie king , 
 so lovely and so light of foot 
 that when he dance the ring , 
 the moonlight always shift , to gaze upon his face , 
 and the cowslip - bell uplifted , rang time with every pace . 
 
 there come a dozen maiden , 
 almost as tall as bluebell ; 
 the cowslip hush their cadence , 
 and bow before the true belle : 
 the maiden shyly glance , betwixt the cummer dart , 
 espy the monarch dancing , and lose a dozen heart . 
 
 he be fit up so neatly , 
 with dewdrop for his crown , 
 and he foot it so featly 
 he never shake they down . 
 the maid begin advance , along a lily stem , 
 not to stop the monarch 's dancing , but to make he look at they . 
 
 the king could not afford they 
 the proper time to gaze , 
 but sweetly bow toward they , 
 at the turn of every maze : 
 till full of pretty face , and his sandal get wear , 
 he be puzzle in his pace , and fall upon a thorn . 
 
 the maiden break the magic ring , 
 and leap the cummer dart ; 
 ' alas , our little Pixie king , 
 the thorn be in his heart ! ' 
 they lay he in a molehill , and piteously they cry : 
 yet this be not the whole ill , for all the maiden die . 
 
 each take a spindled acorn , find 
 below a squirrel 's nest , 
 and set the butt against the ground , 
 the barb beneath her breast : 
 so truly she address the stroke unto her love part , 
 that when the acorn grow an oak , it hold her little heart . ' 
 
 by no mean a " little heart , " it seem to I , for a fairy to have own , but as large as it be love . I assure Mr. Dawe that he be quite untaught in fairy lore , or he never would have confound fairy with pixy , a different class of society . but he treat my learning with utter contempt , and reasonably enough declare that he who spend all his time in the wood must know more than any book could tell . 
 he also inform I , that the proper name for the lignify fairy heart , be a " gordit : " but he do not choose to tell I what have become of the other , which be not so large or handsome as this , yet it have save he a month 's sawing , and earn he " a rare time , " which mean , I fear , that the proceed have be spend in a very long cruise . 
 after refuse all compensation , Mr. Dawe make his farewell in several couplet of uncouth but hearty blessing , beg I only to shake hand with he once , and venture as a poet to prophesy that we should meet again . the " gordit " be probably nothing more than a rare accretion , or ganglion , in the centre of an aged oak . however , it be very pretty ; and of course I observe the condition upon which I have receive it , value it moreover as a token of true friend . 
 but how can I think of such trifle , while sit for the last time in the room where my mother die ? to - morrow all the form and colour of my life shall change ; even now I feel once more my step on the dark track of justice , which be to I revenge . how long have I be saunter on the dreary moor of listlessness and hollow weariness , which spread , for so many dead league , below the precipice of grief ? how long have I be saunter , not care to ask where , and conscious of existence only through the nerve and fibre of the memory . the thing I have be do , the duty I have discharge , the vague unlinked idea , startle I by their buffoonery to grief - might not these have all pass through I , every whit as well , if I have be set against a wall , and wound up for three month , and fit with the mind express in the chuckle of a clock ? Nay , bad than all - have I not allow soft thought to steal throughout my heart , the love of child , the warmth of kindness , the pleasure of do good in however small a way ? much more of this , and I shall learn forgiveness of my wrong ! 
 but now I see a clear road before I . return health renew my gall . death recede , and lift his train from the sword that fall before he . once more my pulse beat high with hatred , with scorn of meanness , treachery , and lie , with admiration of truth and manhood , not after the fashion of fool . 
 but dare I mount the Judge 's throne ? shall the stir of one frail heart , however fresh from its maker 's hand , be take for his voice pronounce right and wrong ? 
 these thought give I pause , and I dwell again with my mother . but in all the strength of youth and stern will , I tread they down ; and be once more that Clara Vaughan whose life shall right her father 's death . 
 CHAPTER VII . 
 at last we get through our parting with the good of people   far worthy than myself to interest any reader , and after it the dark ride over the moor , and the farmer 's vain attempt at talk to relieve both himself and we . the honest eye be bright with tear , tear of pity for my weakness , which now he scarcely care to hide , but would not show by wipe away ; and how many time he beg for frequent tiding of we , which Sally could now interpret , if write in large round hand . how many time he consult , command , and threaten the coachman , and promise he a goose at Michaelmas , if he take good care of we and our luggage ! these great kindness , and all the trifling care which strew the gap of long farewell , be more to think of than to tell . but I ought to mention , that much against the farmer 's will , I insist on pay he half the sum , which he have lend I in a manner never to be forget . moreover , with the same presentiment which he have always feel , he make I promise once more to send for he , if I fall into any dreadful strait . 
 it be late at night when our cabman , the most polite , and   if his word may be trust   the most honourable of mankind , ring the bell of Mrs. Shelfer 's house . the house be in a by - street near a large unfinished square , in the northern part of London . Mrs. Shelfer come out at once , sharp and quick and short , and wonderfully queer . at first she take no notice at all of either of as , but begin pull with all her strength at the strap of the heavy box , which , by mean know to herself alone , she contrive to drag through the narrow passage , and down three low step into the little kitchen . then she hurry back , talk all the time to herself , re - open the door of the fly , jump in , and feel under both the seat , and round the lining . find nothing there , she climb upon the driver 's box , and thoroughly examine both that and the roof . be satisfied now that none of our chattel be leave in the vehicle , she shake her little fist at two or three boy , who stand at the corner near the mew , and set both hand to the farmer 's great hamper or " maun "   as he call it , she drag it inside the front door , and turn point blanc upon I . 
 " pray , my good friend , how many be there ? " 
 " I be sure I do not   know , Mrs. Shelfer , your cousin know well . " 
 " ah , they be terrible fellow they cabby , terrible ! " the cabman stand by all the time , beat his hand together . " ' twas only last time I go to Barbican , one of them come up to I , ' Mrs. Shelfer , ' say he , ' Mrs. Shelfer ! ' say I , ' pray my good friend , how do you know my name ? ' ' ho , I know Charley well enough , ' say he , ' and there be not   a well fellow living . ' ' a deal too good for you , ' say I , ' and now pray what be your business with I ? ' ' why , old lady , ' he say , as impudent as the man with the wooden leg , ' you have   be and leave your second good umbrella under the seat of the Botany Bay Bus . ' ' catch I ! ' say I. ' it be Bible truth , ' say he , ' and my old woman 's get it now . ' ' if you never get drunk , ' say I , ' till that umbrella run in your shoe , your old woman need not   steal her light , ' and with that I run between the leg of a sheep , hang up with my tuscan bonnet on trim with white - nothing like it , my good friend , the same as I have   have these two and twenty year . " 
 " what for , Mrs. Shelfer ? " I ask in great surprise . 
 " why , for the butcher to see I , to be sure , Miss. you see he want to get I down the mew , and murder I with my little wash - leather bag , as I be go to pay the interest on Shelfer 's double - barrel gun . ah yes , " with a short sigh , " and there will be four and ninepence again , next Tuesday . " 
 talk at this rate , and stop for no reply , she lead we into her kitchen , say that she would not light a fire upstairs , it be so bootiful , the trimming of the grate , because she be not   certain that we would come , but she have get supper for we , excuse I , my good friend , in her own snug little room , and bootiful they be sure enough , the wind last week have make they so fat . 
 she point in triumph to a large dish on the table pile up with blue shell . 
 " why , Mrs. Shelfer , they be muscle , " I exclaim with some disgust . 
 " ah I see you know them , that they be , Miss , and as bootiful as ever you ate . Charley and I sit down to a peck of they . but the man as come round with the catsmeat 's brother the man with the truck and his eye cross , he tell I there be such a demand for they in Grosvenor Square , and they be so cunning this weather when they get fat , he have not   more than half a peck left , but they be the good of the lot . now I will have they all bootiful hot , bootiful , boil my good friend , if you will just run upstairs , and a teaspoon and a half of salt , and Cousin Ann know the way , and the apartment be splendid , splendid , Miss Vaughan ! " 
 she draw herself up , at the end of the sentence , with an air of the great dignity ; then suddenly drop it again , and begin bustle in and out . now for the first time , I have leisure to examine she , for while she speak , the short jump of her idea unsettle my observation . 
 she be a little body , rather thin , with a face not strongly peculiar , but odd enough to second the oddity of her mind . no doubt she have once be pretty , and her expression be pleasant now , especially when a glimpse be afford of her quick grey eye , which generally avoid the gaze , and drop beneath a fringe of close - set lash . but the loss of the front tooth , and the sharpening and wrinkling of the face , with the straggling neglect of the thick black hair fray out from the black cap , and the habit she have of shut her mouth with a snap , all these interfere with her credit for pristine good look . like Mrs. Huxtable , she be generally in a bustle , but a bustle of word more often than of deed . she have no deception about she , yet she never know the difference between the truth and a lie , and could not understand that any one else should do so . therefore she suspect everything and everybody , till one of her vein of opinion be touch , and then she would swallow anything . 
 tire out with the long day 's travel , the dazing of railway speed , and the many scene and face which have flash across I , I could not appreciate the beauty of Mrs. Shelfer 's furniture ; but leave Ann maple to eat the muscle , if she could , and to gossip with her cousin , I be not slow to revisit the old farmhouse , and even the home of my childhood , in the wing cradle of sleep . 
 CHAPTER VIII . 
 Ann Maples have do she good to persuade I to call on my godmother , Lady Cranberry , but I be quite resolve to do nothing of the sort . in the first place , Lady Cranberry be a person of great wealth , live in a very large house , and keep up such state as gay widow love , who have forget old affection and be look out for new . in I , therefore , to whose fix estimate fidelity seem the very pith of honour , there could be no love towards such a changeling . and even if I have like she , my circumstance would not admit of our visit upon equal term , and it be not likely that I would endure to be patronize by any one . in the second place , the same most amiable lady have write letter of beautiful condolence , and take a tender interest in our change of fortune , so long as there be any novelty in it ; but soon flag off , and have not even reply to my announcement of dearest mother 's death . finally , I hat she without any compromise , from what I have see of she , and what she have do to I at Vaughan Park . 
 so my good Ann set off all alone , for she hop to obtain some recommendation there , and I be leave to receive Mrs. Shelfer 's morning visit . 
 her queer episodical conversation , and strange biography of every table , chair , and cushion - her ' stick , " as she delight to call they - I shall not try to repeat , for my history be not a comic one ; neither will she appear , unless the connexion require it . one vein of sympathy between we be open at once , by she come into the room with a lame blackbird on her finger ; and I be quite surprised at the number of her pet . as for the ' splendid apartment , " they be two little room on the first floor , adjoin one another , and form , together with the landing outside and a coal - closet , the entirety of that storey . the room above be occupy by a young dress - maker . Mr. and Mrs. Shelfer , who have no child keep the ground - floor   consist of a parlour and kitchen   and the two attic , one of which be always full of onion and carrot seed . upon the whole , though the ' stick " be very old , and not over clean , until I scour they , and the drawing - room   as my landlady love to call it   be low and small , and look through the rail of a narrow balcony upon a cheese - monger 's shop across the road   instead of a woode dingle , I be very well satisfied with they ; and above all the rent be within my mean . 
 in the afternoon , when thing be grow tidy , a carriage drive up rapidly , and a violent ringing of the bell ensue . it be Lady Cranberry , who , under the pretext of bring Ann Maples home , be come to gratify her own sweet curiosity . she run upstairs in her most charming manner , catch I by both hand , and would have kiss I desperately , if I have show any tendency that way . then she stop to admire I . 
 " oh , you lovely creature ! how you be grow to be sure ! I should never have know you . how delicious all this be ! " 
 of course I be pleased with her admiration ; but only for a moment , because I dislike she . 
 " I be glad you find it delicious , " I reply quite coldly ; " perhaps I shall by - and - by . " 
 " what would I give to be enter life under such sweetly romantic circumstance ? dear I ! I must introduce you . what a sensation you will cause ! with such a face and figure and such a delightful story , we shall all rave about you . and how well you be dress from that outlandish place ! what a piece of luck ! it be the great marvel on earth that you find I in London now . " 
 " excuse I , " I say , " I neither find , nor mean to find you . " 
 " oh , of course you be cross with I . I forget about that . but who make your dress , in the name of all woodland grace ? " 
 " I always make my own dress . " 
 " then you shall make mine . say no more about it . you shall live with I , and make my dress by day ; and by night you shall go with I everywhere , and I will not   be jealous . I will introduce you everywhere . ' this be my ward , Miss Vaughan , whose father - ah , I see , you know that romantic occurrence in Gloucestershire . ' do you think it will be a your - and the Great Exhibition season - before you be mistress of a property ten time the size of Vaughan Park ? if you doubt it , look in the glass . ah I ! you know nothing of the world , I forget , I be so warm - hearted . but you may take my word for it . will you cry a bargain ? " 
 she hold out her hand , as she have see the fast man do , whose society she affect . I notice it not , but lead she on ; my fury have long be gather . I almost choke when she speak in that way of my father , utterly as I despise she . but I make it a trial of self - control , which might be demand against more worthy object . 
 " be you sure that I shall be useful ? sure that I shall earn my board ? " 
 " oh , you Vaughans be always so conscientious . I want an eider - down petticoat quilt at once for the winter , and I dare not trust it to Biggs , I know she will pucker it so . that shall be the first little job for my Clara . " 
 her cup be full . she have use dearest mother 's fond appellative , and , as I think , in mockery . I do not lower myself by any sarcastic language . she would not have understand it . I merely open the door , and say calmly to my landlady , who be there , of course " promiscuously ; " " Mrs. Shelfer , show out the Countess of Cranberry . " 
 poor godmother , she be so frightened that I be sorry for she . they help she into the carriage , and she have just strength to draw down the blind . 
 Mrs. Shelfer have be in rapture at have so grand a vehicle and two great footman at her door . lest the street should lose the effect , she have run in and out a dozen time , and bang the door , and get into talk with the coachman , and send for beer to the Inn , though she have it in the house . she now come again to my door , in what she call a " terrible quandary . " I could not attend to she , but lock myself in , and wrestle with my passionate nature , at one time indulge , then spurn and freeze it . yet I could not master it , as I fancy I have do . 
 CHAPTER IX . 
 soon afterwards , Ann Maples go to the place which she have obtain in Lady Cranberry 's household ; and I determine to begin my search . 
 " Mrs. Shelfer , do you know London well ? " 
 my landlady be feed her bird , and I have make up for her disappointment about Lady Cranberry , by fit the lame blackbird with a wooden leg , cut from a skewer , and tip with a button : it be pretty to see how kindly and cleverly he take to it , and how proudly he contemplate it , when he think there be no one watch . his mistress now stop her work , and make ready for a long speech , with the usual snap of her lip . 
 " Know London , Miss Vaughan ! I be bear in Red Cross Street , and I have   never be far out of town than Chalk Farm fair , or Hampstead Waterworks , and , please God , I never will . bless I , what an awful place the country be , awful ! what with the tree , and the ditch , and the sting - nettle , and the black wainscot with skewer on the top - " 
 " too bad of you , Mrs. Shelfer , to be frighten at paling - and your husband a gardener , too ! but tell I whereabouts be Grove Street ? " 
 " what Grove Street , my good friend ? " 
 " Grove Street , London , to be sure . " 
 " why , dear I , Miss , I think you know everything ; you can doctor Jack , and the Bully , and tell I all about Sandy the squirrel 's tail and the hair come off and when it be go to rain ! do not   you know there be a dozen Grove Streets in London , for all I know . leastway I know four . " 
 " and where be those four , Mrs. Shelfer ? " 
 " now please , my good friend , give I just a minute to think . it be dreadful work to be hurry , ever since I fall downstairs , when I be six year old . let I see now . Charley know . can not   you wait , Miss , till Charley come home , and he be come quite early this evening , and two friend of his to supper . " 
 " no , Mrs. Shelfer , I can not wait . if you can not   tell I , I must go and get a book . " 
 " oh they book be no good . why they be not   get Charley in , and he with the lease one time of the garden in Hollyhock Square , and a dahlia name after he at the Royal Heretical Society ! and they do say the Queen would have hand he the spade she like his look so much , only his nail be not   clean . very likely you hear , Miss - and how he be cheat out of it . " 
 " do you expect I to wait all day ? " 
 " no no , my good friend , to be sure not . you never will wait a minute , partikler when I spill the coal , and when I want to baste the meat . and how can the gravy run , and a pinch of salt in the dripping - pan - " 
 " yesterday , Mrs. Shelfer , you baste my pound and a half of mutton with three pound of coal . now do not   go off into a treatise . answer I , where be Grove Street ? " 
 " bless my heart , Miss Vaughan . you never give one a chance . and we think a young lady from the country as have be bring up with tag , and lace , and bobbin , and pig , and hay - " 
 " could be cheat anyhow . no , I do not   mean that : I beg your pardon , dear Patty . I often speak very hastily . what I mean be that you think I should know nothing at all . and I do not   know much , but one thing I do know , that you would never cheat I much . " 
 to my surprise she be not at all sensitive on this subject . in fact she have deal with so many lodger , that she expect to be suspect . but I believe she never cheat I more than she could help . she answer I quite calmly , after some meditation : 
 " to be sure , Miss , to be sure , I only do my dooty . a little dripping may be , or a drop of milk for old Tom , and a piece of soap you leave in the water , Miss , I keep it for Charley to shave with . " 
 " now , Mrs. Shelfer , no more of that . come back to Grove Street ; surely , I have give you time enough now . " 
 " well , Miss , there be one I know close by here . you keep down the Willa Road , and by the fishmonger 's shop , and then you turn on the right over against the licensed pursuant to Act of George the Fourth . I know George the Fourth act badly , but I never think it be that way . Sam the Sweep live with he , and the young man with a hook for his hand that let out the ' time ' for a penny , and keep all his brother and sister . " 
 " and where be the other three that you know ? " 
 " there be one in Hackney , and one in Bethnal Green , and there be one in Mile - end Road . bless I , to be sure ! I have   be there with dear Miss Minto after a cat she lose , a tabby with a silver collar on , and a notch in his left ear . it would make you cry , Miss - " 
 " thank you , Mrs. Shelfer ; that will do for the present . I will go up to the ' drawing - room ' now . " 
 in a few minute I go forth with my dark plaid shawl around I , which have save my mother 's life , and be thenceforth sacred . it be the first time I walk all alone in London , and though we live quite in the suburb it seem very odd to I . for a while I feel rather nervous , but no one molest I then or at any other time ; although I have hear some plain young lady declare that they could not walk in London without attract unpleasant attention . perhaps because they know not the way either to walk or to dress . 
 without any trouble , I find no . 19 , Grove Street , then ring the bell and look round I . it be a clean unpretentious street , not to be know by its architecture from a thousand other in London . the bell be answer by a neat little girl , and I ask for the Master of the house . clever tactic truly for commence a task like mine . 
 be tell that the Master be from home , I beg to see the Mistress . the little maid hesitate awhile , with the chain of the door in her hand , and then invite I into the parlour , a small room , but neat and pretty . 
 " please , Miss , what name shall I say ? " 
 " Miss Vaughan , if you please . " then I say to myself , " what good be I ? be this my detective adroitness ? " 
 presently a nice old lady , with snow - white hair , come in . 
 " Miss Vaughan , " she ask with a pleasant smile , " do you wish to see I ? " 
 " yes , if you please . just to ask a few question as to the inmate of this house . " 
 despite her kindness and good breeding , the lady star a little . 
 " may I inquire your motif ? do you know I at all ? I have not the pleasure of know you . " 
 " my motif I must not tell you . but , as a lady , I assure you , that curiosity be not one . neither be they improper . " 
 she look at I in great surprise , examine I closely , and then reply : 
 " young lady , I believe what you say . it be impossible not to do so . but my answering you must depend on the nature of your inquiry . you have do , excuse my say it , you have do a very odd thing . " 
 " I will not ask many question . how many people live here ? " 
 " I will answer you curtly as you ask , unless you ask what I do not choose to answer . four people live here , namely , my husband , myself , our only daughter - but for whom I might have be ruder to you - and the child who let you in . also a woman come every day to work . " 
 " be there no more ? forgive my impertinence . no stranger to the family ? " 
 " no lodger whatever . my son be employ in the City , and sleep there . my only daughter be in very weak health , and though we do not want all the house , we be not oblige to take lodger . a thing I never would do , because they always expect to be cheat . " 
 " and be your husband an Englishman ? " 
 " yes , and an english writer , not altogether unknown . " 
 she mention a name of good repute in the world of letter , as even I be aware . 
 " you have quite satisfied I . I thank you most heartily . very few would have be so polite and kind . I fear you must think I a very singular being . but I have powerful motive , and be quite a stranger in London . " 
 " my dear , I know that at once . no Londoner would have learn from I the family history I have tell you . I should have show they out at the very first question . thank you , oh thank you , my child . but I be sure you have hurt yourself . oh , the shell have run into your forehead . " 
 as she look so intently at I , on her way to the door of the room , her foot have be catch by the claw of the what - not , and I barely save she from fall . 
 " no , Mrs. Elton , I be not hurt at all . how stupid of I , to be sure . and all my fault that you fall . I hope the shell be not break . ah , I bring very bad luck to all who treat I kindly . " 
 " the shell be not worth sixpence . the fault be all my own . if you have not be wonderfully quick , I must have fall heavily . pray sit down , and recover yourself , Miss Vaughan . look , you have drop a letter . dear I , I know that writing ! excuse I ; it be I that be now impertinent . " 
 " if you know that writing , pray tell I how and where . " 
 the letter she have see be the anonymous one which bring I from Devonshire to London . I have put it into my pocket , think that it might be want . it fall out as I leap forward , and it lie on the floor wide open . 
 " may I look at the writing more closely ? perhaps I be deceive . " 
 for a while I hesitate . but it seem so great a point to know who the writer be , that I hush my hesitation . however , I show the letter so that she could not gather its import . 
 " yes , " say Mrs. Elton , " I be quite certain now . that be the writing of a polish lady , whom at one time I know well . my husband have write a work upon Poland , which bring he into contact with some of the refugee . among they be a gentleman of some scientific attainment , who have a pretty lively warm - hearted wife , very fond of dancing , and very fond of dog . she and I have have many a laugh at one another and ourselves ; for , though my hair be grey , I be fond of lively people . " 
 " and where be that lady now ? " 
 " my child , I can not tell you . her name I will tell you , if you like , when I have consult my husband . but it will help you very little towards find she ; for they change their name almost every time they move . even in London they forget that they be not hear every time they sneeze . the furtive habit bear of oppression cle about they still . " 
 " and where do they live at the time you know they ? " 
 wring by suspense and anxiety , I have forget good manner . but Mrs. Elton have good feeling which know when to dispense with they . nevertheless I blush with shame at my own effrontery . 
 " not very far from here , in a part that be call ' Agar Town . ' but they have now leave London , and England too , I believe . I must tell you no more , because they have reason for wish to be unknown . " 
 " only tell I one thing . be they cruel or violent people ? " 
 " the very opposite . most humane and warm - hearted they would injure no one , and hat all kind of cruelty . how pale you be , my child ! you must have a glass of wine . it be useless to say no . " 
 as this clue , which seem so promising , lead to nothing at all , I may as well wind it up at once , and not tangle my story with it . Mr. Elton permit his wife to tell I all she know about the polish exile , for they be go to America , and nothing do here could harm they . but at the same time he make I promise not to mention to the police , if my case should ever come before they , the particular which he give I ; and I be sure he would not wish I to make free with the gentleman 's name . a gentleman he be , as both my kind friend assure I , and not likely to conceal any atrocious secret , unless he have learn it in a way which lay it upon his honour . Mr. Elton have never be intimate with he , and know not who his friend be , but Mrs. Elton have like the lady who be very kind and passionate . also she be very apt to make mistake in english name , and to become confused at moment of excitement . therefore Mrs. Elton think that she have confound the Eltons ' address with that of some other person ; for it seem a most unlikely thing that she should know the resident at two Nos . 19 Grove Street . however so it prove - but of that in its place . it be now six month since they have quit London , perhaps on account of the climate , for the gentleman have be ill some time , and quite confine to the house . it would be altogether vain to think of trace they in America . while live in London they own a most magnificent dog , a truly noble fellow but afflict with a tumour . this dog suddenly disappear , and they would not tell what have become of he , but the lady cry most violently one day when he be speak of . directly after this they leave the country , with a very brief farewell . 
 all this I learn from Mr. and Mrs. Elton during my second visit , for Mrs. Elton be too good a wife to dispense with her husband 's judgment . also I see their daughter , a pleasing delicate girl ; they learn of course some part of my story , and be most kind and affectionate to I ; and I be proud to have preserve their friendship to the present time . but as they take no prominent share in the drama of my life , henceforth they will not be present upon its stage . 
 as I return up the Villa Road , think of all I have hear , and feel down at heart , something cold be gently place in my ungloved hand . turn in surprise and fright I see an enormous dog , wag his tail , and look at I with magnificent brown eye . those great brown eye be beg clearly for the honour of my acquaintance , and that huge muzzle be deposit as a gage of love . as I stoop to ascertain his sentiment , he gravely raise one mighty paw and offer it to I delicately , with a little sigh of self - approval . upon my accept it frankly and beg to congratulate he upon his noble appearance and evident moral excellence , he put out his tongue , a brilliant red one , and give I a serious kiss . then he shrug his shoulder and look with patient contempt at a nicely - dress young lady , who be exert her lung at a silver whistle some fifty yard down the road . " go , good dog , " I say with a smile , " run , that be a good dog , your mistress want you immediately . " " let she wait , " he say with his eye , " I be not in a hurry this morning , and she do not   know what to do with her time . however , if you think it would be rude of I - " and with that he resume a long bone , lay aside while he chat to I , tuck it lengthwise in his mouth , like a tobacco - pipe , and after shake hand again , and say " now do not   forget I , " the great dog trot away sedately , flourish his tail on high , like a plume of Pampas grass . at the corner of the railing he overtake his young Mistress , whose feature I could not descry ; though from her air and walk I know that she must be a pretty girl . a good - temper one too she seem to be , for she only shake her little whip lightly at the dog , who make an excursion across the road and sniff at a heap of dust . 
 CHAPTER X. 
 although Ann Maples be not so very talkative , it would be romantic to suppose that Mrs. Shelfer have fail to learn my entire history , so far at least as her cousin know it . 
 have now dispose of one Grove Street , I be about to try the same rude tactic with another , viz . that in Hackney ; when my landlady give a little nervous knock , and hurry into the room . " oh , Miss Vaughan , be it about they willain you be wander about and take on so , and frightening all of we nearly to death ? " 
 " Mrs. Shelfer , I shall feel oblige by your leave I to manage my own affair . " 
 " bless you , Miss , so I will . I would not   have they on my mind for the Bank of England , and Guildhall , pave with Lombard Street , and so I tell Charley last night . right , my good friend , quite right , you may depend upon it . " here she tap her forehead , and look mysterious . 
 " that be so , Mrs. Shelfer , I need say nothing more ; " and with that I be go away . 
 " no , no , to be sure not . only listen to I , Miss , one minute ; and I know more about willain , a deal more than you do of course , Miss. why , ever since that rogue who come to Miss Minto 's with brandyball and rabbitskin on a stick . " 
 " once more , Mrs. Shelfer , I have no time to spare for gossip - " 
 " Gossip ! no , no , Miss Vaughan ; if you ever hear any one say Patty Shelfer be a ' gossip , ' I will thank you for their name . Gossip ! a mercy on I with all I have to do , and the day draw in so , and how they do charge for the gas , and the director hold a meeting first Tuesday in every month , and fill up the pipe with spittle , that be the reason it sputter so , Charley tell I . " 
 " good bye , Mrs. Shelfer . " 
 " no , no . one minute , Miss Vaughan ; you be always in such a hurry . what Charley and I be talk about last night be this . my Uncle John , a very high class man , first - rate , first - rate , Miss Vaughan , have be for ever so long in the detective police . there be nothing he do not   know of what go on in London , from the rat as come up the drain pipe to the Queen get up on her throne . a wonderful man he be . I say t'other day - " 
 " be he like you , Mrs. Shelfer ? " 
 " like I , my good friend ! no , no . and I would not   be like he for something . with all they state secret upon he . why he dare not   sneeze out of his hat . but if you will only put off go again till to - morrow , he will be here this very night about the plate they steal in the Square . and I be sure you can not   do well than hear what he think about you . he will be sure to know all that be do at the time . bless you , he have get to make all the return ; what that be , I do not   know . it be a kind of tobacco Charley say , that they smoke in the Queen 's pipe . but I think it be the convict as return from Botany Bay . " 
 " well , Mrs. Shelfer , I will think of what you say , and I be much oblige to you for the suggestion ; but I can not   bear the idea of come before the Police again , with a matter in which they fail so signally . " 
 " but you know , my good friend , it need not be put on the book at all . he will tell we what he think of it , private like , and for the love of the thing . " 
 " if I see he at all , I must beg to see he alone . " 
 " to be sure , my good friend . quite right , Miss Vaughan , quite right . I be sure I would rather have the plumber 's ladle put to my ear , than one of they horrible secret . " 
 " Mrs. Shelfer , have I tell you any ? now remember , if you ever again allude to this subject before I , I leave your house that day . you ought to know well , Mrs. Shelfer . " 
 " you be quite right , Miss Vaughan ; I ask your pardon , you be quite right . the very word as Charley say to I the other night . ' you ought to have know well , Patty , that you do . ' " 
 away she go , smooth her apron , pat the fray of her hair - for she never wear side - combs - and mumble down the stair . " quite right , my good friend , quite right , I ought to have know well , poor thing . " 
 she bring up my dinner and tea , without a single word , but with many sly glance at I from her quick grey eye . once or twice she be at the point of speak , and the dry smile she always speak with flutter upon her face ; but she close her lip firmly and even bit they to keep herself in . I could scarcely help laugh , for I like the odd little thing ; but she be so free with her tongue , that the lesson be sadly want . 
 late in the evening , she come to say that Inspector Cutting be there , and would come up if I wish it . upon my request he come , and one look be enough to show that his niece have not misdescribe he . an elderly man , but active looking and wiry , with nothing remarkable in his feature , except the clear cast of his forehead and the firm set of his mouth . but the quick intelligence that shoot from his eye make it seem waste of time to finish tell he anything . for this reason , polite though he be , it become unpleasant to talk to he . it be something like shoot at diver - as my father use to describe it - for whom the flash of the gun be enough . 
 yet he never once stop or hurry I , until my tale be do , and all my thought lay bare . then he ask to see all my relic and vestige of the deed ; even my gordit do not escape he . 
 " L.D.O. " he say shortly , " do you speak italian ? ' 
 " I can read it , but not speak it . " 
 " be it commoner for italian surname to begin with an o , or with a c ? " 
 " there be plenty begin with both ; but more I should think with a C. " 
 when all my particular have be tell , and all my evidence show , I ask with breathless interest - for my confidence in he grow fast - what his opinion be . 
 " allow I , young lady , to put a few question to you , on matter you have not mention . forgive I , if they pain you . I believe you feel that they will not be impertinent . " 
 I promise to answer without reserve . 
 " what be your mother 's personal appearance ? " 
 " most win and delicate . " 
 " how old be she at the time of her marriage ? " 
 " twenty - one , I believe . " 
 " how old be your father then ? " 
 " twenty - five . " 
 " how many year be they marry ? " 
 " Sixteen , exactly . " 
 " when do your guardian first leave England ? " 
 " in the course of a year or two after the marriage . " 
 " have there be any misunderstanding between he and your father ? " 
 " none , that I ever hear of . " 
 " do your father , at any time , travel on the continent ? " 
 " only in Switzerland , and part of Italy , during his wedding tour . " 
 " your guardian return , I believe , at interval to England ? " I have never tell he this . 
 " yes . at least I suppose so , or he would not have be in London . " 
 " do he visit then at Vaughan Park ? " 
 " not once within my memory . " 
 " thank you . I will ask no more . it be a strange story ; but I have know several much more strange . of one thing be assure . I shall catch the criminal . I need not tell you that I hear much of this case at the time . " 
 " be you send down to Gloucestershire ? " 
 " no . if I have be - well , I will not say . but I be not then in my present position . have I be so , it would have become my special department . " 
 " pray keep I no more in suspense . tell I what you think . " 
 " that I must not do , or you should know it at once , for my opinion be form . it would be a breach of duty for I to tell you now . " 
 " oh , " I cry in my disappointment , " I wish I have never see you . " 
 " young lady , you have do your duty in place the matter before I , and some day you will rejoice that you do so . one piece of advice I will give you : change your name immediately , before even the tradesman about here know it . " 
 " change my name , Inspector Cutting ! do you think I be ashamed of my name ? " 
 " certainly not . you have show great intelligence when a mere child ; exert but a little now , and you will see the good sense , or rather the necessity , of my recommendation . when you have gain your object , you may resume your name with pride . you have give your information , Miss Vaughan , as clearly as ever I know a female give it . " 
 if I det anything , in the way of small thing , it be to be call a " female . " so I say coldly ; " Inspector Cutting , I thank you for the compliment . it would be strange indeed if I could not tell with precision , what I have think of all my life . " 
 " excuse I , Miss , it would not be strange at all , in a female . and now I will wish you ' good night . ' you shall hear from I when needful . meanwhile , I will take charge of these article . " 
 he begin , in the cool manner , to pack up my sacred relic , dagger , cast , and all . 
 " indeed you will not , " I cry , " you shall not have one of they . what be you think of ? " 
 he go on with his packing . I see he be resolute ; so be I. I spring to the door , lock it , and put the key in my pocket . he say nothing , but smile . 
 " now , " I exclaim in triumph , " you can not take those away , unless you dare to outrage a young lady . " 
 I be wholly mistaken . he pass by , without touch I , draw some instrument from his waistcoat pocket , and the door stand open before he . all my treasure be in his left hand . I fly at , and snatch they , and then let go with a scream . a gush of blood pour from my hand . he have take the dagger fold in paper only , and I be cut to the bone . I sink on a chair and faint . 
 when I come to myself , Mrs. Shelfer be kneel before I , with her foot in a basin of water , while two other basin , and numberless towel , be round . Mrs. Shelfer be rub my other hand , and cry and talk desperately about her bad luck that day , and a man with eye cross whom she have meet in the morning . in the background stand Mr. Shelfer himself , whom I have hitherto fail to see , though I believe he have see I often . he have a pipe in his mouth about a yard long , and seem wholly undisturbed . " all right , old ' ooman , " he say deliberately through his nose , as he see that I perceive he , ' she will do now , if you do not   make too much rumpus . " and with that he disappear , and I have time to pity myself . the hand the poor farmer use so to admire , and which I be proud of no doubt , in my way , lie in a dishcloth cover and ooze with blood . but my relic be on the table , all safe . a quick step be hear on the stair , and Inspector Cutting come in , carry a small phial . 
 " out of the way , Patty , " he cry , " you be do more harm than good . " 
 he take up a basin of cold water , and pour half the content of the little phial into it . 
 " now hold her arm up , Patty , as high as you can . I never know arnica fail . " 
 my hand be put into the water , and the bleeding be stanch in a minute or two . however he keep it there for a quarter of an hour , till it be quite benumb . 
 " now you may look at your hand , Miss Vaughan ; it will not be disfigure at all . there will be no inflammation . Patty , fetch I some cambric and the good lard ; put the young lady to bed at once , and prop her arm up a little . " 
 I look at my hand , and find three parallel gash across it , for every edge of the weapon be keen . but only one wound be deep , viz . that across the palm , which be very deep under the thumb . I have the mark of it still . all the wound be edge with a narrow yellow line . 
 " Inspector Cutting , " I cry , " no power will move I from here , until you promise not to steal my property . steal it be , and nothing else . you have no warrant , and my information to you be wholly unofficial . " 
 the last word seem to move he . they all like big word , however clear - head they be . 
 " Miss Vaughan , under these special circumstance , I will promise what you require ; upon condition that you give I accurate drawing , for I see that you can make they . " 
 " certainly , when my hand be well enough . " 
 " believe I , I be deeply concerned at what have occur . but the fault be all your own . how dare you obstruct the Police ? but I wish some of my fellow have only half your spirit . a little more experience , and nothing will escape you . come , Miss Vaughan , though you be a lady , or rather because you be one , give I your left hand , in token that you forgive I . " 
 I do so with all my heart . I like he much well since I have defeat he ; and I see that it be well worth the pain , for he would do his utmost to make amend . he wish I good night with a most respectful bow . " I will come and inquire how you be to - morrow , Miss Vaughan . Patty , quiet , and coolness , and change the lard frequently . no doctor , if you please ; and above all hold your queer little tongue . " 
 " never fear I , Uncle John ; you be right , my good friend , it be a little tongue , but no queerer than my neighbour . " 
 Inspector Cutting would have form a far low opinion of my spirit , if he have see how I cry that night ; not from the pain of the wound , I be sure , but to think of the fuss dear mother would have make about they . 
 CHAPTER XI . 
 in spite of the arnica , my cut be not heal for a month ; not enough , I mean , for I to handle a pencil . Mr. Cutting , when he come , accord to promise , tell I something to quiet I , because I be so feverish . whether he believe it , or only act medically , be more than I could decide . the opinion he give I , or the substance of it , be this . 
 that the deed be do , not for money , or worldly advantage in any way , but for revenge . here I think of Mrs. Daldy . what wrong the revenge be wreak for , he could not even guess , or at any rate would not hint to I . 
 that the straight clue to the mystery be to be seek in Italy , where my guardian 's track should be follow carefully . the idea of force , or worming , the truth from he be reject at once through my description of his character ; although the Inspector quite agree with I , that , even if guiltless of the crime , Mr. Edgar Vaughan know all about it now . 
 that no importance should be attach to the anonymous letter from London ; in accordance with my promise to Mrs. Elton , I do not mention the Polish lady 's name ; and Mr. Cutting do not press I to do so , for he firmly believe from what I say that she have make a mistake in the address she give , and would not help we now , even if we could find she . that nevertheless a strict watch should be keep in London , whither flock nine - tenth of the foreigner who ever set foot in this country . London moreover be likely , ere long , to draw nearly all the migratory stranger to the business or pleasure of next year 's " great exhibition , " provide only that it should prove successful , as the Inspector think it would . 
 as for my enemy be attract by work of industry , it seem to I quite against nature that a base assassin should care for art or science , or any national progress . but the remembrance of several case , among the dark annal I use to delight in , soon prove to I my error ; while the long experience of a man , verse from his youth in criminal way , convict I of presumption . 
 to put myself more on a level with fraud , and stealth , and mystery , I do a thing for which I feel guilty to myself and my mother . I change my name . but , in spite of Inspector Cutting , I do not travel out of the family . my father 's second name be " Valentine , " take from his mother . this name I assume in a short form , become " Clara valence ; " it save change of initial and a world of trouble , and I feel warm in it , because it seem to have be my father 's . in the neighbourhood I know no one except Mrs. Elton , to whom   as I grow intimate with her   I partly explain my reason . as for Mrs. Shelfer , she be delighted at the change . she say that her Uncle John have christen I , that it sound much pretty , and would always remind she of valentine . nevertheless I long for the day when I might call myself " Clara Vaughan " once more . 
 by the time I be able to go about freely again and use my hand as of old , it be the middle of November . the first use I make of my pencil be to copy most carefully all that Inspector Cutting require . he promise to keep these drawing , and indeed the whole matter , most jealously to himself ; by which term he mean , as I afterwards find , Inspector Cutting and those to whom he be bind to report . 
 what I now want be money , to send an adroit inquirer throughout the North of Italy , and other part where my guardian 's shift abode have be . I know that he dwell awhile at Pisa , Genoa , and Milan , also at an obscure little village name " Calva , " which I could not find in the map . all I have learn of his roving be from the lesson my father would give I sometimes , when he use to say , " now , Tooty , put your finger on Uncle Edgar . " to every one , but myself , it seem a strange thing that after so many wandering , Mr. Edgar Vaughan have bring no valet , major domo , or courier , no dependant or retainer of any kind , and not even a foreign friend to England , or at any rate to Vaughan Park . 
 but now for the needful resource - the only chance of procure they lie in my young and partly self - tutor art . I brace myself with the remembrance , that while none of my family ever lay claim to genius , the limner 's faculty have never be want among they . inferior gift be often as heirloom in the blood , though high original power follow no vein except its own . the latter none of we ever possess ; but taste and the knack of adaptation have seldom be alienate . observation too , in a small way , and the love of nature seem inborn in we all . my father 's drawing be perfect , but for the one thing want ; and in sketch from outdoor nature that want be less perceive . my grandfather have be know among the few amateur of the day as a skilful colourist . as to habit of observation , a little tale hand down in our family will show that they have exist in one of its member seven generation ago . 
 in the autumn of 1651 , when King Charles be steal along from Colonel Wyndham 's house to the coast of Hampshire and Sussex , the little band be overtake by nightfall , somewhere near the New Forest . it be shortly after the narrow escape of the King from that observant blacksmith , who see that his horse be shod with north - country iron . though he be take it easily , his three trusty friend know well that a Roundhead Squadron be near , and that his last chance depend on speed and night travel . what could they do now in the tempestuous darkness ? they be in a tract thinly inhabit , half woodland , half heather , and the road be hopelessly lose . no rain fall as yet it be true , and the wind be wait for rain , but the lightning come fitfully from the horizon all round . the King alone be on horseback , his three companion afoot . they stand still in doubt and terror , for they could not tell north from south . suddenly Major Cecil Vaughan espy a faint gleam familiar to he of old in the waste land round Vaughan Park . to an accurate eye there could be little doubt as to the source of the lambent light - flame it could not be call . it play in a pale yet constant stream on a certain kind of moss , know to botanist , not to I , for the waste land have be reclaim . this light be to be see at no time , except when the air be surcharge with electricity . 
 " follow I all ; I know the way ! " cry Major Vaughan , right cheerily . 
 " and if you do , man , " say the King , " your eye be make of dasher . " 
  what this meant , I use as a child to wonder ; but now I know . 
 for six dark mile the Major lead they without default , until they come to a lonely heathman 's house , where they sleep in safety . he never tell they how he do it ; be apt , I suppose , as man of the second order be , to hug superior knowledge . but it be a most simple thing . that strangely sensitive moss follow the course of the sun , and therefore the lambent light can only be see from the west . so all the time he could see it - the other never see it at all - he know that they be wend from west to east , which be their proper course . 
 to return to myself . I put the finishing touch to a view of rock and woodland scenery , north - west of Tossil 's Barton , and set off to try my fortune with it . some young lady , bear to my position , would have think this errand one of much degradation , but it do not appear so to I . so I walk briskly - for I hate an omnibus , and could ill afford a cab - to the shop of a well - know dealer in picture , not far from the haymarket . it be my first venture into the heart of London , but I find the way very easily , have jot it down from a map . the day be dark and drizzly ; the pavement grimy and slimy , and hillocke with mud at the joint of the flag . it be like walk on a peeled kneading - trough with dollop of paste leave in it . along the far reach of the street , and the garden in the square , wisps of fog be crawl , and almost every one be cough . 
 the dealer receive I politely . too politely in fact : for it seem to savour of kindness , which I do not want from he . what I want be business , and nothing else . he take my poor drawing , do only in water - colour , and set it up in a square place make perhaps for the purpose , where the brown flaw fall upon it from a skylight form like a Devonshire chimney . then he draw back and clasp his hand , then shade his eye with they , as if the light be too strong , whereas the whole place be like a well turn upside down . he seem uneasy because I do not care to follow he throughout all this little performance . 
 " and now , " I say , for my foolish pride be up , and I speak as I would have do to the porter at our lodge , not with the least contempt - I be never so low as that - but with a long perspective , " now , Mr. Oxgall , it will soon be dark . what will you give I for it ? " 
 " allow I , Miss ; allow I one moment . the light be a leetle too strong . ah , the mark of the brush come out . strong touch , but indiscreet . a year of study require . Shade too broad and massive . a want of tone in the background . great feeling of nature , but inexperienced rendering . More mellowness desiderate . full however of promise . all the fault on the right side . Most energetic handling ; no weak stippling here . but water - colour be down just now ; a deal depend on the weather and time of year . " 
 " how so , Mr. Oxgall ? " 
 " hot sun , and off they go . fog and murk and frost , and the cry be all for oil . excuse I , Miss - a thousand pardon , your name escape I , you do not pronounce it strongly . " 
 " Miss Valence ! " I say , with an emphasis that startle he out of his mincing . 
 " Miss Valence , you think I very long . all young lady do . but my object be to do they justice , and if they show any power , to encourage they . " 
 " thank you , I want no encouragement . I know I can draw a little ; and there it be . the fog be thicken . I have far to go . your price , if you please ? " 
 I go up many step in his opinion , by reason of my curtness and independence . 
 " Miss Valence , I will give you three guineas , although no doubt I shall be a loser . " 
 " then do not   give it , " say I in pure simplicity . 
 I go up several step more . how utterly man of the world be puzzle by plain truth ! 
 " Miss Valence , if you will forgive the observation , I would beg to remark that your conversation as well as your painting be crisp . I will take this little piece at all hazard , because it be full of character . will you forgive I for one word of advice ? " 
 " there be nothing to forgive . I shall thank you heartily for it . " 
 " it be simply this : - the bad part of your work be the perspective . and figure - drawing will be of service to you . study at a school of design , if you have one near you ; and be not above draw stiff and unsightly object . house be the true guide to perspective . I can not paint or even draw ; but I be so much with great artist , that I know well how to advise . " 
 " thank you . can you kindly suggest anything more ? " 
 " yes . your touch be here and there too harsh . keep your hand light though bold , and your brush just a leetle wetter . but you have the grand thing quite unattainable , when not in the grain . I mean , of course , freedom of handling and an artist 's eye . " 
 " do you think I could do any good in oil ? " 
 " I have no doubt you could , but not for a long time . if fame be your object , take to oil . if speedy return , stick to water - colour . leave I your address , if you have no objection ; and bring I your next work . if I do well with this , I will try to give you more . " 
 he take from a desk three new sovereign and three new shilling , wrap they neatly in silver paper , and hand they to I . I never imagine I could be so proud of money . 
 light of heart I leave the shop , not that I have make my fortune yet , but what be great happiness , I think myself likely to make it . 
 soon I perceive , with some alarm , how thick and murky the air have grow . the fog be stoop heavily down , and be now become like a wash of gamboge and lamp - black . all the street - lamp be light , though they could not see one another , and every shop - keeper have his little jet . the pavement be no long slippery , but sticky and dry ; and a cold , that pierce to the bone , be steal along . already it have begin to freeze ; and I , so familiar both with white and black frost , observe with no small interest the grey or fog - frost , which be new to I . how different from the pure whiteness when the star be sparkle , and the earth be gleam , and the spirit of man so buoyant ! this grey fog - frost be rather depressing to most nature , and a chilly damp creep to the core of all thing . thick encrust rime come with it , and sometimes a freezing rain . 
 before I reach the New Road , the fog have grow so dense and dark , that I be much inclined to take a cab , for fear of lose my way . but I could not see one , and find myself at last in a main thoroughfare call the Hampstead Road , I walk on briskly and bravely till I reach Camden Town , when I know what course to pursue . 
 slowly wend up College Street , for I be get tired and the fog thick than ever , indeed every step seem a thrust into an ochre wall , I hear a plaintive , and rather musical , voice chant , much as follow : - 
 " christian friend , and sister in the Lord , all who own a heart that feel for undeserved distress , aid , I implore you , a bereaved wife and mother , who have this very moment seven small lovely child , starve in a garret , three of they upon a bed of sickness , and the inhuman landlord , for the sake of a few shilling about to turn they this bitter night into the flinty street . christian friend , may you never know what it be to be famish as I and my seven darling be this very night , in the midst of plenty . from Plymouth in Devonshire , I walk two hundred and fifty mile afoot all the way to join my beloved husband in London . when I come to this christian city - Georgiana , pick up that halfpenny - he have be order off in the transport ship Hippopotamus , to shed his blood for his queen and country ; and I who have know the smile of plenty in my happy rustic home , I be compel for the sake of my child to the degradation of publicly solicit alm . the small trifle , even an old pair of shoe or a leave off garment will be receive with the heartfelt gratitude of the widow and orphan . my eld child , ma'am , the old of seven , bad in the whooping cough . Georgiana , curtsey to the pretty lady , and show she your broken chilblain . " 
 " no thank you , " I say : I could just see she through the fog . she look like one who have see well day , and the thought of my own vicissitude open my heart towards she . how could I show my gratitude well for the money I have just earn , than by bestow a share in charity upon worthy object ? so I take out my purse , an elegant little french one give I by dear mother , and place my three new shilling in the poor creature 's hand , as she stand in the gutter . she be overpower with gratitude , and could not speak for a moment . then she come nearer , to bless I . 
 " sweet lady , in the name of seven famish innocent , whom you have save from death this night , may he who guard the fatherless and the widow from his mercy - seat above , may he shower his rich blessing - " 
 Snap - she have get my purse and be out of sight in the fog . Georgiana 's red heel be the last thing I see . for an instant I could not believe it ; but think that the fog have affect my sight . then I dart across the road , almost under the foot of a horse , and down a place call " Pratt Street . " it be hopeless , utterly hopeless ; and not only my three pound be go , but half besides of all I have in the world . I have take that money with I , because I mean , if fortunate with my landscape , to buy a large box of colour in rathbone - place ; but the fog have deter I . she have snatch my purse while I try to clasp it , for my glove have first get in the way . all be go , dear mother 's gift , my first earning , and all . More than all I feel sore at heart from the baseness of the robbery . nothing be so bitterly grievous to youth as a blow to faith in one 's specie . 
 I be not ashamed to confess that feel all alone in the fog , I lean against some iron railing and cry away like a child . child I be still at heart , despite all my trial and spirit ; and more so perhaps than girl who have play out their childhood . in the full flow of my passion , for I be actually sob aloud , ashamed of myself all the while , I feel an arm steal round my waist , and start in fear of another thief , confront the lovely face that human eye ever look on . with soft caress , and sweetest smile , it draw close to my own stormy and bitter countenance . 
 " be you well now , dear ? oh do not   cry so . you will break your poor little heart . do tell I what it be , that be a dear . I will do anything to help you . " 
 " you can not   help I : " I exclaim through my sob : " nobody can help I ! I be bear to ill luck , and shall have nothing else till I die . " 
 " do not   say so dear . you must not   think of it . my father , who never be wrong , say there be no such thing as luck . " 
 " I know that well enough . People always say that who have it on their side . " 
 " ah , I never think of that . but I hope you be wrong . but tell I , dear , what be the matter with you . I be sure you have do no harm , and dear papa say no one can be unhappy who have not injure any one . " 
 " can not   they though ? your papa be a moralist . now I will just tell you fact . " and to prove my point , I tell she of this new trouble , hint at previous one and my many great loss , of which money be the least . even without the controversial spirit , I must have tell she all . there be no deny anything to such a win love face . 
 " dear I ! " she cry very thoughtfully , with her mite of hand out of her muff - she have the prettiest set of fur I ever beheld , and how it become she ! - " dear I ! she could not   have mean it , I feel quite sure she could not . you will come to my opinion when you have time to consider , dear " - this be say so sagely that I could have kiss she all over like a duck of a baby . " to steal from you who have just give she more than you could afford ! now come with I , dear , you shall have all the money I have get ; though I do not   think it be anything like the nine pound you have lose , and I be sure it be not new money . only I have not   get it with I . I never carry money . do you know why , dear ? " 
 " no . how should I ? " 
 " well , I do not   mind tell you . because then I can not   spend it , or give it away . I do not   care a bit about money . what good be it to I ? why , I can never keep it , somehow or other . but papa say if I can show five pound on Christmas - day , he will put five more on the top of it , and then do you know what I will do ? I will give away five , and spend the rest for Pappy and Conrad . " and the lively little thing clap her hand at the prospect , quite forget that she have just offer I all her store . presently this occur to she . 
 " no . now I come to think of it , I will not   have the five pound on Christmas - day . as the girl at the College say , I will just sell the old Pappy . that will be well fun still . he will find a good reason for it . he always do for everything . you shall have every bit of it . come home with I now , that be a dear . you be well now , you know . come , that be a love . I be sure I shall love you with all my heart , and you be so terribly unlucky . " 
 I yield at once . she be so loving and natural , I could not resist she . she break upon I like soft sunshine through the fog , laughing , smiling , dancing , her face all light and warmth , yet not a shallow light , but one that play up from the fount of tear . her deep rich violet eye seldom use their dark lash , except when she be asleep . she be life itself , quick , playful , love life , feel for and with all life around ; pitying , trust , admire all thing ; yet true as the hearth to household tie . I never find another such nature : it be the perfection of maiden womanhood , even in its unreason . and therefore nobody could resist she . with I , of ten time her strength of will , and power of mind - small though it be - she could do in a moment exactly as she like ; I mean of course in trivial matter . it be impossible to be offend with she . 
 when she have lead I a few step towards her home - for I go with she   not , of course , to take her money , but to see she safe , she turn round suddenly : - 
 " oh I forgot , dear ; I must not take you to our house . we have have new order . but where do you live ? I will bring you my little bag to - morrow . they will not   let I out again to - night . now I know you will oblige I . I be so sorry that I must not   see you safe home , dear . " this she say with the fine air of protection imaginable . 
 I give she my name and address , and ask for her . 
 " my name be Isola Ross , I be seventeen and a half , and my papa be Professor at the College . I run away from old Cora . it seem such fun to be all alone in the fog . what trouble I shall get into ! but they can not   be angry with I long . kiss I , darling . mind , to - morrow ! " 
 off she dance through the fog ; and I go sadly home , yet think more of she , than of my serious and vexatious loss . 
 CHAPTER XII . 
 Inspector Cutting , upon the first tiding of the robbery , come at once , and assure I that he know the " party " well , and want she for several other plant , and crafty as she be   " leary " be the elegant word he use   he be sure to be down upon she in the course of a very short time . 
 Isola Ross , to my great surprise , do not come the next day , nor even the day after ; so I set out to look for she , at the same time wonder at myself for do so . know that College Street must take its name from some academic building in or near it , I conclude of course that there I should find Professor Ross and my lovely new friend . so without consult Mrs. Shelfer , who would have chatter for an hour , away I go one tine frosty morning to ask about the College . 
 I find that a low unsightly building , which I have often pass , near the bottom of the street , be the only College there ; so I enter a small quadrangle , to make further inquiry . 
 the first person I see be a young man dress like one of my father 's groom , and crack a long whip and whistling . he have a brilliant scarlet neckcloth , green sporting coat , and black boot up to his knee . I study he for a moment because it strike I that he would look well in a foreground , when tone down a little , as water colour would render he . he appreciate my attention , and seem proud of it . 
 " now , Polly , what can I do for you , dear ? " 
 he must have be three part drunk , or he would never have dare to address I so . of course I make no answer , but walk on . he crack his whip like a pistol , to startle I . 
 " splendid filly , " I hear he mutter , " but cuss high action . " what he mean I do not know or care . 
 the next I meet be a fussy little man , dress all in brown , who smell of musty hay . 
 " will you kindly tell I , " I ask , " where to find Professor Ross ? ' 
 " Ross , Ross ! do not   know the name . no Ross about here . what be he Professor of ? " 
 " that I be not tell . but it be something the young lady study . " 
 " no young lady about here . but I see you have bring your dear mamma 's lapdog . take it out of the bag . let I look at it . " 
 " be not this the College ? " 
 " yes to be sure . the good College in London . quick , let I see the dog . " 
 " I have no dog , sir . I have make some mistake . " 
 " then you have get a pony . pet over - feed . shetland breed . " 
 " no indeed . nothing except myself ; and I be look for Miss Ross . " 
 " young lady , you have make a very great mistake . you have keep I five minute from a lecture on the navicular disease . and my practice be controvert by an upstart youth from the country . I be in search of authority . " and off he dart , I suppose to the library . 
 it be clear that I have make some mistake , so I find my way back to the street , and ask in the near shop what building it be that I have just leave . 
 " oh , they be the weteran , " say the woman , " and a precious set they be ! " 
 " why , they do not look like soldier . " 
 " no , no , Miss. Weterans , where they take in all the sick horse and dog . and very clever they be , I have hear say . " 
 " and where be the College where the young lady be ? " 
 " I do not   know of no other College nearer than High Street , where the boy wear flat cap . but there be a girl ' school down the road . " 
 " I do not   want a school . I want a College where young lady go . " 
 " then I can not help you , Miss. " and back I go to consult Mrs. Shelfer . 
 " bless my soul , Miss Valence , " cry the little woman , out of breath with amazement , " have you be among they nigger ? it be a mercy they do not   skin and stuff you . what do you think now they do to my old Tom ? " 
 " how can I guess , Mrs. Shelfer ? " 
 " no , no , to be sure not . I forget , my good friend . why , they know he well it seem , because he have be there in dear Miss Minto 's time , for a salmon bone that have get crossway in his oesop , so they say at least , but they be the big liar - so only a year ago come next boxing - day , here come to the door half a dozen of they , bus - cad and coachman all in one , all look as grave as judge . when I go to the door they all pull their hat off , as if I have be the Queen at the very least . ' what can I do for you , my good friend ? ' say I ; for Shelfer be out of the way , and catch I let they in for all their politeness . no , no , thank you . ' Mrs. Shelfer , ' say the big of they , a lantern - jaw young fellow with cover over his pocket , ' Mrs. Shelfer , you be possess of a most remarkable cat . an animal , ma'am , of unparalleled cemetery and organic dewelopment . our Professor , ma'am , be deliver a course of lecture on the Canonical Heapatightness of the Hirumbillycuss . " 
 " well do , Mrs. Shelfer ! what a memory you must have ! " 
 " pretty well , Miss , pretty well . Particular for long word , when I like the sound of they . ' well sir , ' I say , feel rather take aback , ' thank God I have not   get it . ' ' no , ma'am , ' say he , ' your bloom countenance entirely negative any such dyingnose . but the Professor , in pass the other morning , observe some symptom of it in your magnificent cat , for whom he entertain the most sincere attachment , and whom he will cure for our advancement and edification upon the lecture table . and now , ma'am , Professor Sallenders desire his most respectful compliment , and will you allow we to take that dear good cat to be cure . the Professor be instrumental once in preserve his honoured existence , therefore he feel assure that you will not now refuse he . ' well you see , Miss , I do not   half like to let he go , but I be afraid to offend the Professor , because of all my animal , for I know that he could put a blight upon they , bird and all , if he choose . Old Tom be lie roast his back again the fender , the same as you see he now , poor soul ; so I catch he up and put he in a double cover basket , with a bit of flannel over he , because the weather be cold ; and he be so clever , would you believe it , he put up his old paw to fight I , he know he be go to mischief , and that turn I rather . ' now will you promise to bring he back safe ? ' I say . ' Ma'am , ' say the lantern - jaw young man , bow over his heart , and as serious as a pulpit , ' Ma'am , in less than an hour . rely upon the honour of Weteran Arian Gent . " 
 " well , Mrs. Shelfer , I be astonish . even I should never have be so silly . poor old Tom among the Philistines ! " 
 " well , Miss , I begin to feel very uneasy directly they be go . I think they look back so queerly , and old Tom be mew so dreadful in the basket . presently I begin to hear a mewing out of the cupboard , and a mewing out of the clock , and even out of the dripping - pan . so I put on my bonnet as quick as I could , and run right away to the College , and somehow or other by the time I get there , I be in a fright all over . as good luck would have it , the man be at the gate ; a nice respectable married man , and a friend of Charley 's . ' curb , ' I say , ' where be Professor Sallenders ? ' ' down in the country , ' say he , ' since last Friday . he never stop here at Christmas , Mrs. Shelfer , he be a deal too know for that . ' my heart go pop , Miss , like an oyster shell in the fire . I hold on by the door , and I think it be all up with I . ' do not   take on so , Missus , ' say Curbs , ' if any of your museum be ill , there be half a dozen clever young cove in the operating room over there , only they be busy just now , cut up a big black cat . my eye , how he do squeal ! ' I scream out and run - Curbs think I be mad , and he be not far out - bang go the door before I , and there on the table , with the lantern - jaw young man flourish a big knife over he , there lie my precious old Tom strap down on his back , with his mouth tie up in white tape , and leather glove over his foot , and stick truss across he the same as a roasting rabbit , and a streak of white all along his bless stomach - you know , Miss , he have not   get one white hair by right - where the nigger have shave and flour he , to see what they be about . he turn up his dear old eye when he see I ; it would have make you cry , and he try to speak . oh you precious old soul , do not   I scatter they right and leave ? I scratch that lantern - jaw hypocrite 's face till I give he the hirumbillycuss and hirumtommycuss too , I expect . I call a policeman in , and there be not   one of they finish his Christmas in London . but the poor old soul have never be the same cat since . the anxiety he be in , turn his hair white on both side of his heart and all round the back of his ear . he would not   come to the door , he shake so , at the call of the cat's - meat man for well than a month , and he will not   look at it now , while there be a skewer in it . " 
 the poor little woman be cry with pity and rage . Old Tom look up all the time as if he know all she say , and then jump on her lap , and show his paw , and purr . 
 meanwhile , a change have come over my intention . perhaps all the rudeness I have meet with that day have call my pride into arm . at any rate , much as I like pretty Isola , and much as I long for her fresh warm kindness , I now resolve to wait until she should choose to seek I . so I do not even ask Mrs. Shelfer whether she know the College where the Professor lecture . what be love and warm young heart to I ? I deserve such a rebuff for swerve so from my duty . now I would give all my thought to the art , whence only could spring any hope of attain my end , and the very next day I would follow the picture - dealer 's advice . 
 CHAPTER XIII . 
 there be a school of design not very far from my lodging , and thither I go the next morning . my landlady offer to come with I and see I safe in the room ; and of course her Charley , who seem to know everybody , know some one even there , to whom she kindly promise to recommend I . so I gladly accept her offer . 
 in some respect , Mr. Shelfer be more remarkable than even his wife . he be so shy , that on the rare occasion when we meet , I never could get he to look at I , except once when he be drunk ; yet by some mysterious process he seem to know everything about I - the colour of my eye , the arrangement of my hair , the dress I put on , the spirit I be in - a great deal more , in fact , than I ever care to know . so that sometimes my self - knowledge be largely increase , through his observation repeat by his wife . but I be not allow to flatter myself that this result from any especial interest ; for he seem to possess an equal acquaintance with the affair of all his neighbour . mention any one anywhere around , and he , without seem to mean it , would describe he or her unmistakably in half a dozen word . he never praise or blame , he simply identify . he must have see more with a blink of his eye , than most people see in five minute of gazing . he seldom bring any one home with he , though he often promise to do so ; he never seem to indulge in gossip , at any rate not with his wife . " cut it short , old ' ooman , " be all the encouragement he ever give she in that way . when he be at home - a thing of rare occurrence - he sit with his head down and a long pipe in his mouth ; he walk in the street with his head down , and never accost any one . where do he get all his knowledge ? I doubt if there be a public - house in London , but what Shelfer know at the furth a cousin of the landlord , and a brother of one of the potboy . " Charley Shelfer " everybody call he , and everybody speak of he , not with distinguished respect , but with a kindly feeling . his luck be proverbial ; he have a room full of thing which he have win at raffle , and he be in constant requisition to throw for less fortunate people . as for his occupation - he call himself a nurseryman , but he have no nursery that I could discover . he receive a pound a week for look after the garden in the great square ; but when any one come for he , he be never to be find there . I think he spend most of his time in job about , and ' swap "   as Mrs. Shelfer call it   among his brother gardener . sometimes , he bring home beautiful plant , perfectly lovely flower , unknown to I even by name , and many of these he present to I by Mrs. Shelfer 's hand . every Sunday morning he be up before the daylight , and away for an excursion , or rather an incursion , through the Hampstead , Highgate , and Holloway district . from these raid he use to return as I come home from the morning service . by the way , if I have want to puzzle he and find a blank in his universal acquaintance , the good chance would have be to ask he about the clergyman . he never give the pew - opener any trouble , neither indeed do Mrs. Shelfer , who call herself a Catholic ; but the lively little woman 's chief terror be death , and a parson to she be always an undertaker . if Mr. Shelfer have not spend the Sunday morning quite so well as I have , at any rate he have not waste his time . I think he must have rob hen - roost and allotment ground ; and yet he be too respectable for that . but whence and how could he ever have come by the gipsey collection he always produce from his hat , from his countless pocket , from his red cotton handkerchief , every Sunday at 1 P.M. ? egg , chicken , mushroom , stick of horseradish and celery , misletoe - thrush , cucumber , cabbage red and white , rabbit , watercress , Aylesbury duck - I can not remember one quarter of his manifold forage . all I can say be , that if these thing be to be find by the side of the road near London , Middlesex be a far well field for the student of natural history than Gloucestershire , or even beloved Devon . Mrs. Shelfer say it be all his luck ; but I hardly think it could have rain Aylesbury duck , even for Mr. Shelfer . 
 all the time he be extract from his recess this multifarious store , he never once smile , or show any symptom of triumph , but gravely go through the whole , as if a simple duty . 
 how be it such a man have not make his fortune ? because he have an incurable habit of " back bill " for any one who ask he ; and hence he be always in trouble . 
 Mrs. Shelfer and I be admit readily into the school of design . it be a long low room , very badly light , and fit up for the time until a well could be provide . it look very cold and comfortless ; form instead of chair , and desk like a parish school . the whitewashed wall be hang with diagram , section , tracing , reduction , most of they stiff and ugly , but no doubt instructive . at one end be a raise platform , reserve for lecturer and the high power . shelf round the wall be fill with cast and model , and book of instruction be to be have out of cupboard . of course we be expect to bring our own material , and a code of rule be exhibit . the more advanced student be permit to tender any work of their own which might be of service to the neophyte . from no one there do I ever receive any insolence . at first , the young artist use to look at I rather hard , but my reserved and distant air be quite enough to discourage they . 
 after the introduction , which Mrs. Shelfer accomplish in very great style , I dismiss she , and set to in earnest to pore once more over the rudiment of perspective . one simple truth as to the vanish point strike I at once . I be amazed that I have never perceive it before . it be not set forth in the book I be study ; but it be the sole key to all my error of distance . at once I close the book ; upon that one subject I want no more instruction , I have catch the focus of truth . book , like bad glass , would only refract my perception . all I want now be practice and adaptation of the eye . 
 strange as it seem to I then , I could draw no more that day . I be so overcome at first sight by the simple beauty of truth , mathematical yet poetical truth , that error and obscurity   for there be a balance in all thing   have their revenge for a while on my brain . but the truth , once see , could never be lose again . Thenceforth there be few high penance for I , in a small way , than to look at one of my early drawing . 
 when my brain be clear , I return to do a real day 's work . for the cup , and vas , and plate , and thing of " asthetic art "   as they choose to call it , I do not care at all ; but the copy and model and figure be most useful to I . unless I be much mistaken , I make more advance in a fortnight there , than I have in any year of my life before . 
 with my usual perseverance - if I have no other virtue , I have that - I work away to correct my many shortcoming ; not even indulge   much as I want the money   in any attempt at a finished drawing , until I feel sure that all my foundation be thoroughly lay and set . " and now , " I cry towards Christmas , " now for Mr. Oxgall ; if I do not   astonish he this time , my name be not Clara Vaughan ! " it do I good when I be alone , to call myself by my own name , and my right to be my father 's daughter . 
 CHAPTER XIV . 
 meanwhile old Christmas be come , and all I be worth in the world be change for half a sovereign . true , my lodging be pay for , a fortnight in advance , because good Mrs. Shelfer want to treat all her pet to a Christmas dinner ; but as for my own Christmas dinner - though I can not   say I care much for it - if I get one at all , it must be upon credit , since my drawing would not be finish for another week . credit , of course , I would not think of . any day in the week or year , I would rather starve than owe money . however , I be not go to cry about plum - pudding , though once or twice it make I hungry to think of the dinner in the great hall at Vaughan Park on the Christmas eve ; a much more elaborate matter in the old time , than the meal serve in the dining - room next day . 
 now I sit in my little room this dreary Christmas eve ; and do what I would , I could not help think a little . it be a gusty evening , cold and damp , with scud of sleet and snow , as yet it have not make up its mind whether to freeze or thaw . nevertheless , the street be full of merry laugh party , proud of their bargain for the Christmas cheer ; and as they go by , the misletoe and the holly glisten in the flickering gaslight . 
 for old recollection 's sake , I have make believe to dress my little room with some few sprig of laurel and unberrie holly ; the sceptre branch , all cobbe with coral bead , be too expensive for I . Misletoe I want not . who be there now to kiss I ? 
 from the sheer craving of human nature for a word of kindness , I have call , that afternoon , upon Mrs. Elton . but good as she be and sweet to I , she have near relative come ; and I see or fancy , that I should be in the way . yet I think that her mother heart yearn toward I as she say " good bye , " and show I out by the Christmas tree , all tremble to be light . 
 now I sit alone and lonely by the flickering of three pennyworth of wood which I have buy recklessly for the sake of the big ash - tree that use to glow with the lichen peel round it on the old Christmas hearth , where I be believe the heiress . the little spark and sputter of my sallow billet   chop by the poor old people at St. Pancras workhouse   lead I back through eight sad year to the last merry time when my father be keep his late Christmas , and I his pride and hope be prouder than all , at be just ten year old . 
 how he carve and ladle the gravy ; how he flourish his knife and fork with a joke all hot for every one ; how he smile when the thrice - help farmer send for another slice , and laugh when the crow - boy be nearly choke with plum - pudding ; how he pat I on the head and catch I for a kiss , when I , dress up as head - waitress , with my long hair all tie back , pull his right arm and point to widow Hiatt 's plate - the speech he make after dinner , when I be amazed at his eloquence and clap my little hand , and the way he make I stand up on a chair and drink the Queen 's health first - then the hurrah of the tenant and servant , and how they kiss I outside - all this go through my memory as the smoke of the billet go up the chimney , and the tear steal under my eyelid . 
 then I see the long hall afterwards , with the table clear away and the light hang round the tapestry , and the yule log roaring afresh ; my father   a type of the true english gentleman , not of the past but the present century , hold the hand of his wife   a lady of no condescending air , but true womanly warmth and love   - both dress for the tenant ' ball as if for the lord - lieutenant 's ; both eager to lead off the country dance , and beat their foot to the music . next they , a laugh child in a little white frock and pink slip   scarce to be know for myself , hand - in - hand with my brave chevalier , Master Roderick Blount , account by Cooky and both lady' - maid , and most of all by himself , my duly affiance lord . 
 then the housekeeper , starch beyond measure , yet not too stiff to smile , and open for the nonce even to joke about courtship , yield her gracious hand for the dance to the senior tenant , a man with great calf , red face , and snow - white hair . after they come - 
 Hark ! a loud knock and a ring . it be just in time before I begin the palinode . who can want I to - night ? I want no one but those I can not have , whom the fire have now restore I , though the earth have hide they . 
 Mrs. Shelfer be hard at work in the kitchen , prepare a wonderful supper for Charley , who have promise to come home . she have canvass the chance of his keep this promise fifty time in the day . hope cry " yes ; " experience whisper " no . " at any rate the knock be not his , for he always carry a latch - key . 
 she call up the stair " Miss Valence ! " before she go to the door , for who know but she might be murder in the midst of her Christmas pudding ? I come out to prove my existence and stand in the dark on the landing . she draw back the bolt ; I hear a gruff voice as if it come through a hat . 
 " Young ' ooman by the name of Clara Waun live here ? " 
 " yes to be sure ; Miss Valence you mean , my good friend . " 
 " the name on this here ticket be not   Walence , but Waun . " 
 " all right , my good friend . all right . it be just the same . " 
 " Hor , I do not   know that though . Jim , the name of the party here be not   waun after all . it be Walence . and three bless day we have be all over London ! " 
 Jim , from the top of the van , suggest that , after all , Walence and Waun be much of a muchness . for his part , he will be bless if he will go any far with it . let he and Ben look at the young lady , and see if she be like the card . meanwhile , of course , I come forward and claim the parcel , whatever it be . Mrs. Shelfer redouble her assurance , and call the man a great oaf , which have more effect than anything . 
 " why , Jim , this must be Charley 's missus ; Charley Shelfer 's missus ! he as beat you so at skittle last week , you know . " 
 " ah , he do so . and I would like to back he again you , Ben , for a quart all round . " 
 this fact be decisive . who can doubt any more ? but for all that , the book must be sign in the name of " Waun , " with which of course I comply . when the two strong man have , with much difficulty   of which they make much more , lower the enormous package from the van , Ben stand wipe his forehead . " Lor , how hot it be to - night to be sure ! and the job we have have with this big lump sure ly ! both the handle come off long ago . I wish my missus have get a featherbe half the weight of that . five - and - twenty year I have   be along of this company , man and boy , but I never see such a direction as that there in all my bear day . do ever you , Jim ? " 
 " well , " reply Jim , " I have   seed a many queer one , but none as could come up to that . and who have a thought after all their trouble - for I be bless if they write that there under a week - who have a ' thought they have a put ' waun ' on it when they mean ' Walence . ' but the young lady be await for we to drink her health , Ben , and a merry Christmas to she . " 
 " how much be the carriage ? " I ask , tremble for my change of the half - sovereign . 
 " nothing , miss . only eightpence for delivery . it be pay to Paddington , and if ever our company airne eightpence , I be bless if they have not   airne it now . thank you , Miss , and werry handsome on you , and we hop the content will prove to your liking , Miss , and make you a merry Christmas . " 
 away they go with the smoking horse , after carry into the little kitchen the mighty maun , which Mrs. Shelfer , with my assistance , could not stir . 
 " bless I , Miss Valence , what a direction ! " cry Mrs. Shelfer , when the full light fall upon it . 
 the direction be write in round hand upon a strip of parchment , about four inch wide and at least eight foot in length . it come from the bottom all up over the cover and down upon the other side , so that no one could open the basket without break it asunder . it be as follow : - 
 " Miss Clara Vaughan lodge at number seven in Prince Albert Street in London town near Windsor Castle in Gloucestershire the daughter of Mr. Henry Valentine Vaughan Esquire a nice tall young lady she always wear black thing and walk very peart pale with a little red on her cheek when they let she alone can not   be no mistake without it be do a purpose if so be this here little maun hain't   bring to her safe and sweet and wholesome will be prosecute with the utmost rigour of the law sign John Huxtable his mark x witness Timothy Badcock his'n x. " 
 I wonder much whether Mr. Beany Dawe have be call in to achieve this masterpiece of manuscript , which be all in large round hand , but without any stop . it seem beyond poor Sally 's art , yet be some loop and downstroke that must be dear little Sally 's . I take it off with much trouble - the parchment be join in four place - and I have it now . 
 meanwhile Mrs. Shelfer be dance around it , neglect her supper in the wonder of this gigantic hamper . " let I get a chopper , Miss , you will never get it open . why it be sew as tight as an oyster . " 
 however , I do get it open at last , and never shall I forget the content . there be a month 's food for a family of twelve . first come hay , such as I never smell out of Devonshire ; then eighteen roll of butter , each with a snowy cloth around it ; the butter so golden even at that time of year , that Mrs. Shelfer compare it to the yolk of an egg look out of the white . then a storey of clot cream and beautiful lard and laver , which they know I love . then a floor of hay . below it a pair of guinea fowl , two large turkey , and most carefully wrap from the rest a fine hare fill with dry sweet herb . below these a flitch of bacon , two wood - smoke ham , a pair of tongue , a leg of Exmoor mutton , and three bottle of good elder wine . then a brown paper parcel contain Sally 's last copy - book   I have set her copy for half a year to come   and a long letter , the first I have ever receive from Tossil 's Barton . 
 when all be out at last , after the great delight and laughter as each thing appear , I fall back in utter dismay at the spectacle before I . Mrs. Shelfer sit on the floor unable to find her way out , she be so flounced and tippete with good thing . when I come to her relief , she do nothing but go round and round what be leave of the little room , hum a catholic hymn , and press both hand to her side . 
 but something must be do at once . Waste be wickedness ; how could we stave it off ? everything would depend upon the weather . at present all be beautifully fresh , thank to the skilful packing and the frost , albeit the mighty package have make the round of all the Albert Streets in London . Mrs. Shelfer would have look at it for a month , and at interval exclaim , " bless I , my good friend , that beat Charley 's pocket . how they must eat in Devonshire ! " 
 " come , Mrs. Shelfer , what good be you at housekeeping ? you do not   help I at all . let we put most of it out of door at once . you have no cellar , and I suppose they have none in London . at least we can give it the chance of the open air , and it be not snow now . " 
 " oh , but the cat , Miss ! " 
 " well , I must find some plan for they before we go to bed . now come and help , that be a good little creature , and I will give you some eld wine when we have do . " 
 so we get all that be taintable into the little yard , while Tom , who never steal , except when quite sure of impunity , look on very sagely . there we fix it all up to the wall secure , except from cat , of whom a roving band serenade I every night . I present Mrs. Shelfer at once with a turkey - a speciman of natural history not find by the roadside , even on Mr. Shelfer 's Sabbath journey - also a ham , and three roll of butter . as to the rest , I would think what to do with it afterwards . 
 Mrs. Shelfer keep off the cat until midnight , after which I hold they at bay by the follow mean . with one of my mineral paint mingle with some phosphorus , I draw upon a black board a ferocious terrier , the size of life , with fang unsheathe , bristle erect , and eye start out of his head . we try the effect in the dark on poor Tom , who arch his back , and sputter with the strong execration , then turn and flee ignobly , amid roar of laughter from Mr. Shelfer , who by this time be come home . this one - head Cerberus be hang so as to oscillate in the wind , right across the cat - leap , I feel quite safe , so long as my chemical mixture should continue luminous . 
 CHAPTER XV . 
 dear little Sally 's letter give I the great delight . it be all in round hand , and have take at least a week to write , and she must have wash her hand almost every time . there be no stop in it , but I have put some . the spelling be wonderfully good for she , but here and there I have shape it to the present fashion . 
 " please Miss Clara dear , father and mother and I beg their most respectable duty and love and they hop no offence and will you be so kind as to have this here little hamper and wish it be ten time as much but hop you will excuse it and please to eat it all yourself Miss. all the pegmate be our own doctrine , and very wholesome , and we have take all the hair off , please Miss , because you say one time you do not   like it . likely you will remember , Miss , the young black sow as twist her tail to the left , she as Tim be ring the day as I write first copy , and the other chiller run out , well most of it be she , Miss. Father say as he do not   think they ever see butter in London town , but Beany Dawe say yes for they make a plenty out of red herring and train oil . 
 please Miss , Tabby Badcock would go on the ice in the old saw - pit last Sunday , by the upper linhay when I tell she it would not bear , and so she fall through and would have be drownde at last , only our little Jack crawl over the postesse and give she his heel to hold on by , and please miss it would have do your heart good , mother say , to see how Tim Badcock dress she when he come home from church for get she good frock all of a muck . 
 please Miss , Beany Dawe come when you be go , and make a poem about you , and father like it so much he give he free of the cider and as he be go home he fall into a bit of a ditch down Breakneck hill , and when he come to himself the road have take to run the wrong way beany do not   know how for the life of he , so he come back here ' nolus wolus ' he saith and that be the way to spell it and no mistake , and here he have be ever since a - making of poem and saw up hellum out of the low cleeve , and he sleepth in the onion loft and Suke can not   have no rest of night for the noise he make make verse . Mother tell Suke to pote he down stair and too good for he , but father say no , he be a fine chap for sure and airneth his meat and drink , let alone all the poetry . 
 please Miss he want to larn I to write , but father say no I have get well learn than hisn , and I say he may learn Tabby Badcock if he will , but he shall not   learn I . no tino . " 
 how she toss her pretty curl when she write this I will be bind . I wish that I could see she . 
 " please Miss I be force to write this when he be away , or he have a make it all in poetry ; and Tim Badcock tell I to be sure to tell you as how at the wrastling to Barnstaple fair , week after you be go , father be so crule unkid that in play off the tie he heave a Cornisher up through the chandelier , and a come down with a candle stick so fast down his throat doctor be force to set it a - fire and blow with a pair of bellis afore he could put he to right . cornisher be all right again now , Tim saith , but he have a make up his mind not to wrastle no more in Devonshire . 
 please Miss , father saith before this here go he will shoot the old hare as sit in the top of the cleeve if Queen Victoria transport he for it with hard labour . Tim have make four pop at she , but he say the powder be crook . 
 please Miss Clara , all the egg as my little black hen have lay , since the last of the barley be house , be to be sew up inside the Turkey with the black comb ; he be strut about in the court and look at I now as peart as a gladdy ; but she have not lay more than a dozen to now , though I have be up and whistle to she in the tall at every morning and evening same as we use to do when you be in good spirit . but the other hen have not lay none at all . 
 please Miss , father say as how he have sell such a many beastie , he be afeared to keep all the money in the house , and he have tell mother to sew up the rent for next Ladyday in the turkey with the white comb when he be kill and he humbly hope no offence . 
 please Miss Clara , we have have three letter from you , and I read they all to father and mother every Sunday evening , and Joe the Queen 's boy do not   know but what he lose another one in leather the jackass across the brook after the rain . Joe tell as he can not   say for certain , because why he baint no scholar the same as we be , and Joe only know the letter by the pin they stick in his sleeve afore he leave Martinhoe . whoever ' twas for he think there be crockery in it by reason it sink so quick . anyhow mother give he a little tap with a mop on the side of his head , to make he mind the Queen 's business , and do not   he holler a bit , and he fling down the parson 's letter all in the muck , but we wash they in a bucket and let parson have they on Sunday . Joe Queen 's boy have not   be nigh we since , and they do say to Martinhoe we should not   have no more letter , but father say if he do not   he will show the man there what a forehip mean pretty smart . 
 please Miss Clara , we would have write afore , but mother say no , not till I finish twelve copybook one every week , that the folk to London town might see the way as they ought to write and spell . Father say London be in Gloucestershire , but I be most sure it baint , and Beany Dawe shake his head and will not   tell , and mother believe he do not   know . 
 please Miss , there be a new babby come a month agone and well , and mother find out as how it be a girl , and please if you have no objection Miss , and if you do not   think as it would be a liberty , we have all make up our mind upon have it christen Clara , and please to say Miss if it be too high , or any way unfitty . Father be ' most afeared that it sound too grand for the like of we , but mother say as the Huxtables be think brave thing on , to Coom and Parracombe a hundred year agone . 
 please Miss , father hear to Coom market last week , as there be go to be a french invasion , and they be sure to go to London first , and he beg you to let he know as soon as ever there be one , and he come up at once with the big ash - stick and the ivy on it as grow in challacombe wood , and see as they do not   hurt you , Miss. 
 please Miss , the young chap as save you from the great goyal come here to ask for you , day after you be go , and mother believe he baint after no good , by token he would not come in nor drink a drop of cider . 
 please Miss , father say it make his heart ache every night , to think of you all to yourself in the wicked London town , and he go down the lane to the white gate every evening in the hope to see you acome , and mother say if you be a sell red and blue pictur her hope you will send for they as father give the hog 's pudden for , and we will not miss they at all . 
 and Miss Clara dear , I expect you will be mazed to see how I write and spell , father say it must be in the family , and I will not   write no more till I have finish another dozen of copy book ; and oh dear how I do wish that you be come back again , but father say to I to say no more about it for fear to make you cry , Miss. all the little childer except the new babby who have not see you yet , send their heart ' love and duty and a hundred kiss , and father and mother the same , and Timothy Badcock , and Tabby , and Suke , and Beany Dawe , now he know it . 
 I remain , Miss Clara dear , your thankful and love scholar to command , 
 sarah huxtable . 
 sign all this here papper scrawl in the settle by the fire . 
 JOHN HUXTABLE his mark X 
 HONOR huxtable hern X. " 
 CHAPTER XVI . 
 I be much grieve at the loss of my last letter to Tossil 's Barton , because it contain my little Christmas present for all the family . it be register for security , but I suppose they " take no count " of that where the delivery of letter depend so much upon luck . of their Christmas present to I I resolve to give the surplus to those who would be the well for it , and not   accord to the usual law of such thing   to those who do not want it , and would make return with interest . so on the Christmas morning Mrs. Shelfer and myself , each carry a large basket , go to the mew round the corner , and distribute among the poor lodger there , more Christmas dinner than have ever enter those door before ; and how grateful the poor thing be , only they all want the good . 
 now the school of design be close for a while , and I work hard for several day at the landscape for Mr. Oxgall , though the store of provision send I and the rent enclose in the turkey have save I from present necessity . 
 on the day of all day in the year the sad and darkest to I , I could not keep to my task , but go for a change of thought to the school , now open again . 
 it be the 30th of December , 1850 , and , though I crouch not to the mumming of prig scollop out at the throat , who block out with a patchwork screen the simple hearth of religion , and kneel at an ashbin to warm themselves ; though I do not   care a herring for small anniversary dot all over the calendar , and make by some Murphy of old ; yet I reverence deeply the true feast of Church and Chapel , the refreshing of faith and charity , whereupon we forgive and be sorry for those who work hard to mar they . neither do it seem to I - so far as my timid and waver judgment extend - to be superstition or vanity , if we dare to set mark by those date in our own little span which God have scar on our memory . 
 in the long dark room so bare and comfortless , and , to - day , so lonely and cold , I get my usual book and study , and try , all in vain , to fix my attention on they . find the effort so fruitless , I pack up my thing in the little black bag and rise to depart . turn round , I see on the table , where student ' work be exhibit , a small object newly place there . it be a statuette in white marble of a magnificent red deer , such as I have see once or twice in the north of Devon . the listening attitude , the turn of the neck , the light poise of the massive head , even the mild , yet spirit eye , and the quiver sensitive lip , I could answer for they all , they be do to the very life . truth , power , and elegance triumph in every vein of it . for a minute I stand overcome with wonder . if this be the work of a youthful sculptor , England might hope at last for something beyond the grotesque . 
 before I rise at once all the woodland scenery , the hill - side garb with every shade of green , the bramble quarry stand forth , the tree , the wind vale embosome the light , the haze that hover above the watersmeet , bold crest of amaranth heath behind , and far away the russet wold of Exmoor . the stag in the foreground of my landscape , I feel so grateful to he for this expanse of vision that I stoop down and kiss he , while no one can see I . as I bend , the gordit drop from its warm home in my breast . by some impulse undefined I lift the ribbon from my neck , and hang the little fairy 's heart on the antler of the Devonshire deer . out spring from behind a chest full of cast and model - what model can compare with she ? - the lovely of all lovely being , my little Isola Ross . 
 I hide the tear in my eye , and try to look cold and reserved . what use be it ? one smile of hers would have disarm Belial . 
 " it be not   my fault , dear . it be not   indeed . oh , please give I that cordetto . no do not . that be why I love you so at first sight . and here be all my money dear . I have carry it about ever since , though I sew up the purse not to spend it , and only once cut it open . they make I promise , and I would not eat for three day , and I try to be sulky with Pappy because he do not care ; they make I promise with all my honour not to go and see you , and Cora come about with I so that I have no chance of break it . and I would not tell they where you live , dear ; but I lead old Cora a dance through your street on the side you live , till she begin to suspect . but I could never see you , though I look in at all the window till I be quite ashamed , and the people kiss their hand to I . " 
 poor little dear ! I live upstairs , and could not have see she without stand out on the balcony , which be about the size of a chess - board . if she have not be so simple as to walk on my side of the street , she must have see I ere long , for I sit all day near the window to draw , when I be not away at my school . 
 I forgive she most graciously for have do I no wrong , and kiss she with all my heart . her breath be as sweet as violet in Spring clover , and her lip warm and soft as a wren 's nest . on receive my forgiveness , away she go dance down the long room , with her cloak throw off , and her hair toss all out of braid , and her exquisite buoyant figure float as if on a cloud . of course there be no one there , or even impulsive Isola would hardly have take her frolic ; and yet I be not sure . she never think harm of any one , and never imagine that any one could think harm of she . 
 after a dozen flit of some rapid elegant dance quite unknown to I   who have never have much of dancing , but which I suppose to be Scotch , back she come out of breath , and kiss I ever so many time , and kiss my gordit too , and tell I never to part with it . one thing she be sure of , that her Papa could not resist I now , and when he be tell of it I should come to their house the next day . and she know I be dreadfully proud , but would I , for her sake , forgive her Pappy ? of course , he know nothing about I , and she have never tell he my name , though she could not help tell my story , at least all she know of it ; but he be so dreadfully jealous of she , he do not want any one to have a touch of her glove but himself . 
 look at her pure sweet face , I could well believe it ; but how could he bear to see that dear little thing go three day without food ? most likely she have exaggerate . although she be truthful as light , sometimes her quick fancy and warmth , like the sunshine itself , would bring out some point too strongly . however , I be prepare , without that , to dislike the Professor , for , as a general rule , I do not   like man who moralise ; at least if their philosophy be frigid . nevertheless , I promise very readily to forgive her Papa , for I do so love that Isola . her nature be so different to mine , so light and airy , elastic and soft ; in short   if I must forsake my language , the complement of my own . we chat , or rather she do , for at least half an hour ; and then she tell I old Cora be come to fetch she at three o'clock . once more I rise to depart , for I fear she might get into trouble , if the old nurse should find she so intimate with a stranger . 
 but Isola tell I that she do not care for she a bit , and she have quite set her heart on my meeting her brother Conrad , the sculptor of that magnificent stag . perhaps he would come with Cora , but he be so altered now , she could never tell what he would do . since the time she first see I , Conrad have come of age , and she could not guess what it be all about , but there have be a dreadful disturbance between he and his father , and he have actually go to live away from the family . she think it must be about money , or some such nasty thing ; but even Cora do not know , or if she do , the old thing would not tell . it have make poor Isola cry till her eye be sore , but now she suppose she must make up her mind to it all . but she would tell the truth , she do hate be treat like a baby when she be a full - grow woman ; how much tall do they expect she to be ? and what be much bad , she do want so to comfort they both , and how could she do it without know what be the matter ? it be too bad , and she wish she be a boy , with all her heart she do . 
 she go on talk like this till her gentle breast flutter , and her coral lip quiver , and the tear steal down her long lash , and she creep to I close for comfort . 
 I be clasp her round little waist , and kiss the bright drop away , when in burst a dark , scraggy woman , who must , of course , be old Cora . she tear the poor child from my arm , and scowl at I fiercely enough to frighten a girl unacquainted with real terror . 
 I meet her dark gaze with a calm contempt , beneath which it quail and fall . she mumble some word in a language or patois , which I suppose to be Gaelic , and lead off her charge towards the door . 
 she have mistake her adversary . be I to be push aside , like a gingerbread woman tempt a weak - stomach child ? I pass they ; then turn and confront the hag . 
 " have the goodness , old woman , to walk behind this young lady and I . when we want your society , we will ask for it . Isola Ross , come with I , unless you prefer a rude menial 's tyranny to a lady 's affection . " 
 Isola be too frightened to speak . I know not what would have be the result , if the old hag , who be glare about , rather take aback , but still clutch that delicate arm , have not suddenly spy my fairy 's heart , as yet unrestored to its sanctuary . 
 she star , for a moment , in wide amazement ; then her whole demeanour be alter . she cringe , and fawn , and curtsey , as if I have wear a tiara . she drop my dear Isola 's arm , and fall behind like a negress . my poor little pet be tremble and cold with fright , for   as she tell I afterwards   she have never see old Cora in such a passion before , and the superstitious darling dread the evil eye . 
 as we go towards Isola 's home , I could not help think how fine the interview would be between Mrs. Shelfer and Cora , if I only choose to carry that vanquished beldame thither ; but sage discretion   be I not now eighteen ? , and the thought of that solemn day prevent I . so I take they straight home , lead Isola while she guide I , and turn sometimes , with complacency , to encourage old Cora behind we . 
 the house they live in be a high but narrow one , dull - looking and dark , with area rail in front . some little maiden come to the door , and I take my leave on the step . Dear Isola , now in high spirit again , kiss I , like a peach quite warm in the sun , and promise to come the next day , about which there could now be no difficulty . 
 Old Cora bent low as she wish I good evening and beg leave to kiss my cordetto . this I grant , but take good care not to let it pass out of my hand ; she admire it so much , especially when allow to examine it , and there be such a greedy light in her eye , that I be quite sure she would steal it upon the first chance ; and therefore I go straightway and buy a guard of thick silk cord , as a substitute for the black riband , which be get wear . 
 and so I come home before dark , full of wonder , but feel rather triumphant , and greatly delighted at have recover dear Isola . 
 END of VOL . I. 
 BOOK II .   continue . 
 CHAPTER XVII . 
 late in the evening of that same day , I sit in my room by the firelight only   for I could not work   and try to look into myself , and find out the cause of my strange attraction or rather impulsion towards Isola . somehow or other I do not wonder so much that she should be draw quite as strongly towards I , although an impartial observer would perhaps have wonder far more . Alter puzzle myself in vain with this inquiry , my thought begin to move , in their usual gloomy train . 
 eight year have now elapse , and what have I discover ? nothing ; but at long dark interval some impress of the deed itself , more than of the doer . have I halt in pursuit , or have my vengeance cool ? to the former question my conscience answer " yes , " to the latter " no . " gentle influence have be shed around I , sorrow have bedew the track of hate , intercourse with happy harmless people , and gratitude for unmerited kindness ; it be not in human nature , however finely constitute for evil , entirely to repulse these power . 
 I could not deny , that the religion of my heart , during the last twelvemonth , have be somewhat neglect . for my devotion to dear mother , no plea be require . but the time since that , what business have I with laugh child , and snug fireside , with dickybird , and Sandy the squirrel ? even sweet Isola cause I a pang of remorse ; but no , I could not quite abandon she . but now , thank God , I be in the right road again , and plod resolutely as my father could expect . to his spirit , ever present with I , I kneel down and pour out my remorse ; and swear to make amend , whatever it might cost I . yet even then , a gentle shadow seem to come as well , and whisper the word that calm the face of death . 
 my musing , if so mild a word may suit they , be roughly interrupt by a loud step on the stair . Inspector Cutting , who could walk when needful like a cat , love to redress this injury to the Goddess Echo , by make double noise when not on business . farmer Huxtable , a man of twice the weight , would have come up those stair at half the expense in sound . 
 when he enter the room , he find himself in a semi - official state again , and I see that he be not come for nothing . in a few brief word , he tell I what he have do , which be not very much ; or perhaps my suspicion be right , that he only tell I a part of it . then he say abruptly , 
 " Miss Valence , I know pluck when I see it . " 
 " what do you mean , Mr. Cutting ? " 
 " excuse I , I forget that you have be rear in the country . what I mean be , that I believe you possess an unusual share of courage . " 
 " as to that , I can not say , have never be severely try ; but in such a cause as mine , I could go through a good deal . " 
 " and not lose your presence of mind , even in real danger ? " 
 " that again I can not say , and for the same reason . but I be quite ready to make the trial . " 
 I feel the colour mount in my cheek . how glad I should be to prove to myself that I be not ignoble . he observe I closely , and appear quite satisfied . 
 " what I have to propose to you , be attend with no little danger . " 
 " I will do my utmost not to be afraid . I be more impulsive perhaps than brave , but what be life worth to I ? I will try to think of that all the time . no doubt you have a good reason for expose I to danger . " 
 " certainly I have , Miss Valence . for your own purpose it be most important that you should be able to identify certain person , whom I shall show you to - night ; that be , unless I be misinformed . " 
 " to - night ! so late as this ? " and I begin to tremble already . 
 " yes , we must go to - night , or wait for another fortnight ; and then it would be no early , even if we get such a chance again . and for your sake it be well than to be in a fright for a fortnight . " 
 " Inspector Cutting , I be in no fright whatever . at least I mean no more so than any other girl would be , who feel a vague danger impend . I hope and trust that my father 's memory and the justice of God will be with I . " 
 " young lady , I see that I may safely venture it . if you have boast , I should have hesitate , though I have have some proof already of your determination . the chief , and indeed the only danger , be lest you lose your presence of mind , and that most female would do , if place as you will be . now I wish you to make deliberate choice , and not to be carry away by impulse vindictiveness , or the love of adventure ; which , when the spirit be high like your , too often lead young female into trouble , from which it be not always possible even for the most capable member of the force to extricate they . " 
 " of course I know all that . how much long be we to talk ? must I disguise myself ? when be I to be ready ? and where be we go ? " 
 " now you be grow impatient . that be not a good sign . remember , I can easily procure another witness ; but for your own sake I wish to give you the chance . probably you will see to - night the man who kill your father . " 
 as he speak my flesh be creep , and my blood run cold , then suddenly flush through my system like electric fluid . he begin again as coolly as if he be report a case of some one discover " drunk and incapable . " from force of habit , he touch his forehead , and stand at attention , as he speak . " in consequence of information which I have receive , I have be induce to make certain inquiry , which have result in the conviction that the criminal I be in search of will be present at a certain place this night , at a certain hour . it be therefore my intention to embrace the opportunity of - " 
 " catch he ! " cry I in a breathless hurry . 
 " to embrace the opportunity , " continue the Inspector , like a talk oak , " of conduct my investigation personally , and in the presence of a witness . the effect thereby produce upon my mind shall be enter duly , the moral effect I should have say , and the cause of justice will be promote as rapidly as be consistent with the principle of our glorious constitution . " 
 " do you mean to say that you will let he go ? " 
 " no , I shall not let he go , Miss Valence , for the simple reason that I shall not apprehend he . I see that you be inclined to take the law into your own hand . that will never do for I . " 
 " oh no , I be not . a year ago I would have do so . but I be old and wise now . " 
 I be think of dear mother ; and begin to feel already that my character be change . 
 CHAPTER XVIII . 
 Inspector Cutting give I some minute instruction , and in less than half an hour we set forth upon our enterprise . I be wrap in a loose grey cloak have a hooded cape ; and carefully hide I carry for self - defence a very keen stiletto . I have procure it indirectly from the good cutler in London , but neither workmanship nor material could be compare to that of Italy . 
 the night be dark and cold , the street be almost deserted , and all the shop except the chemist ' and the public - house close . we walk straightway to the near cabstand , where Mr. Cutting order a vehicle , and put I inside , himself rid with the driver . so little do I know as yet of London , that after the first turn or two , I could not even guess what direction we be take . I have such confidence in my guide , a staid respectable man with a grow up family , that I never think there could be harm in my journeying with he at night . and even have I think so , most likely I should have do it all the same . ever since the time he wound I , or allow I to wound myself , his manner towards I have be most kind , considerate , and respectful ; though he find it his duty now and then to repress my impetuosity . 
 with all my perception alert , I keep a sharp look - out from the window , but vainly strove to find anything that might serve for a landmark . once we stop for about five minute , at a police - station somewhere in Clerkenwell , where , by the light of a lamp , I read , without leave the cab , the ghastly description of all the dead body recently find in London and wait identification . Hereupon my courage begin to ooze , and the weather seem much colder . the type be hard to read at that distance , and the imagination have fair play , as it do when word come slowly . 
 Anon the inspector reappear , so alter in dress and countenance , that I do not know he until he make I a bow . with a glance of encouragement , and a little grin of dry humour , he mount the box again . after another long drive , in the course of which we run silently over a wooden road , - probably High Holborn , - we stop in a broad but deserted thoroughfare , very badly light . here Mr. Cutting open the door , help I out , and discharge the cab , but whisper something to the driver before he let he go . 
 " now take my arm , Miss Valence , if you please . I have escort many a lady of high birth than your . " 
 " of high title perhaps , Mr. Cutting ; and their grandfather money - lender , or perhaps far bad . " 
 " I be sure I do not   know ; we must take thing as we find they . I think you despise such nonsense . but the cabbage that run to seed be the tall in the field . no Englishman see the nonsense of it , unless he happen to be a detective or a grave - digger . " 
 " do you mean to say that those of lofty birth be bad than those of low birth ? " 
 " no , I mean nothing of the sort . but I do mean that they ought to be well , and on the whole be not so . nature hold the balance , and temptation and education chuck into the opposite scale , and I think the first chuck fast . at any rate I would rather have a good drunken navvy than a lord to take to the station . I mean of course when my own rank be not what it be . " 
 this little dissertation be mean to divert my thought . I make no reply , be ignorant of such matter ; neither do I care to talk about they then . nevertheless , I believe Inspector Cutting be wrong . as we enter a narrow street he suddenly turn and look at I . 
 " poor child ! how you tremble ! draw your cape more forward ; the bitter cold require it . be you tremble from fear ? " 
 " no ; only from cold . " but I try in vain to think so . 
 " a steady hand and steadfast nerve be want for your task . if you can not rely on they , say so at once . in five minute you will have no retreat . " 
 " I shall be well directly . but I be so cold . Inspector Cutting , it must be freeze hard - ten degree , I should think . " 
 " it do not freeze at all . I see we must warm you a little . but no more ' Inspector Cutting , ' if you please , until to - morrow . " 
 Hereupon he lead I into a little room , fence off from the bar of some refreshment - house . a glorious fire be burn , by which he set and leave I . presently he return , with a small glass in his hand . 
 " drink this , young lady . it will warm you , and brace your nerve . " 
 I see by the firelight that it be brandy , or some dark - coloured spirit . 
 " no , I thank you . do you suppose that I require dutch courage ? " 
 I throw such emphasis on the personal pronoun , and look at he so indignantly , that he laugh outright . 
 " I thank you in turn . you suppose that I do . I will justify your discernment . " and with that he tip it off , and then return to business , all the graver for the interlude . 
 " now , if you be really warm , we will start again . stop one moment . I have hear you cough two or three time . can you keep it under ? " 
 I assure he that I could very easily do so , and that it be nothing but the sudden effect of the cold . forth we go again into the winter night , after I have learn from he that we be now in Whitechapel , not far from Goodman 's Fields . 
 after another short walk , we come to the end of a narrow by - street , where there be an archway . pass through this archway , we descend some steep and broken step . then the Inspector produce a small lamp brightly burning , which he must have light at the public - house . it be not what be call a bull's - eye , but a reflector - lamp . by its light I see that the chief entrance to the house must be round the corner , and perhaps in another street . with a small key which he take from his pocket , Mr. Cutting unlock a little iron gate , and we enter a narrow passage . at the end of it be a massive door stud with great nail . here my guide give a gentle knock , and hide the lamp as before . 
 presently we hear a shrill sound from the keyhole , like a dryad 's voice . the Inspector stoop thereto , and pronounce the password . not without some difficulty the lock be turn and the bolt withdraw , and we stand inside . a child , under - sized and unnaturally sharp , star at we for a moment , then dodge away from the lamp , as if more accustomed to darkness . Mr. Cutting close the door and refastene it , then lead I through some basement room unpaved and unfurnished , until we come to an iron step - ladder . this he ascend , and help I up , and we find ourselves in a small dark lobby , contain no furniture , except a high three - legged stool . when he close his lamp all around be dark , but on the rafter overhead a faint patch of light appear - ceiling there be none . 
 " do you see that light ? " he whisper to I , point , as I could just perceive , to a narrow glaze opening high in the wall , whence the faint gleam proceed . 
 " then jump upon this stool , and do your good to see through . " 
 he cast the light of his lamp upon the stool for a moment , while I do as he bid I . stand there , I find that I be tall enough to look through ; but the narrow pane which form the window be thickly cover with size , or some opaque integument . all I could tell be , that the space beyond be light . 
 " I know you can not   see now , " he say , as I come down despairing , " but you shall see by and by . the fool who be here before sized the glass on the wrong side , and this lot , though much sharp , have not correct the error . they keep that window for escape in the last resort . now take this bottle and this camel's - hair brush ; it will make the glass transparent without the small noise . the man be not there yet . we could easily rub it clear now , but they will examine it . when the time come , use the liquid most carefully and lightly , and do not   spread it high than an inch from the bottom of the frame . the light be at this end ; the shadow of the sill will allow you just an inch . " 
 " and how far may I go horizontally ? " 
 " the whole length of the glass , to command as much view as possible . the effect will pass in three or four minute , but you must not do it again . if you do , the glass will fly , and you will be in their hand . desperate man they be , and though I shall be near , I might be too late to save you . see all you can , to be able to swear to they all . " 
 " how shall I know the one ? " 
 " I can not tell you . I must leave it to your instinct , or your intuition . I only know myself that he be one of the four . my information , such as it be , be obtain very oddly , and I trust to this night 's work to make it more precise . one thing more : no noise , if you value your life . keep the bottle stop . do not   let the stuff drop on you ; do not   put your eye to it , or it will blind you for ever . there be very little of it , because it be so deadly . " 
 " when shall I do it ? " 
 " in one hour from this time . take this repeater . I have show you how to use it . look well at it now , while you have the light . " 
 I look at the watch ; it be nearly midnight . 
 " be I to be leave in the dark - all in the dark here , by myself ? " 
 " yes . I must be see elsewhere , or the whole thing fail . they know I even in this dress , and they watch I as I do they . but for to - night I believe I have mislead they . when it be over , wait here till I come for you , or the little girl you see . " 
 " oh ! I wish I have never come ; and all so vague and indecisive ! " 
 " you can go back now , if you please ; though ever that would be dangerous . " 
 " I will not go back . no doubt I shall know he . when will you secure he ? " 
 " when my evidence be complete . now , remember , you have to deal with man keen as hawk , and stealthy as tiger . but there be no real danger , if you keep your self - command . observe all four as narrowly as you can , both for your own sake and for mine . be careful to stand on the centre of the stool . but you have well not get upon it until they have search the room . now , good - bye . I trust to your courage . if any harm come , I will avenge you . " 
 " a comfort that ! what good will it be to I ? " 
 " if vengeance be no good , what be you do here ? " 
 " thank you . that be no business of your . do not   let I detain you . " 
 he tell I afterwards that he have vex I on purpose to arouse my mettle . and I be sure I need it . 
 " ah ! now you be all right . if your caution fail you , the man who slay your father will be sure to escape we . " 
 " if it fail I , ' twill be from anger , not from terror . " 
 " I know it . let I look at you . " 
 he throw the full light on my face . the burnished concave be not bright or firm than my eye . 
 " pale as death , and quite as resolute . rely only upon yourself . " 
 " God and myself , " I whisper , as he glide out of sight along the vault below . I could see no other entrance to the place in which I sit ; but how could I tell ? 
 for a minute excitement keep I hot ; but as the last gleam of the light die upon the wall below , my heart begin to throb heavily , and a chill come over I . the pulse thump in my ear , like a knocking in the cellar . " be it fear ? " I ask myself , in scorn that I should ask . no , it be not fear , but horrible suspense . the balance of life and death , of triumph and disgrace , swing there before I in the dark , as if my breath would turn it . no dream of a child , no vagary of the brain - the clear perception of strong will and soul poise upon this moment . 
 the moment be too long ; the power begin to fail , the sens grow more faint and confused at every heavy throb . little image and little question take the place of large one . in vain I look for even a cobweb , or the skeleton of a fly , where the dull light flicker through the pane of glass . in vain I listen for a mouse . even a rat   much as I hate he   would have be welcome then . the repeater be purposely make so low of tick , that I get no comfort thence . all be deep , unfathomable silence , except the sound of my rebel heart . 
 as a forlorn hope , I begin to reckon sixty slowly , as a child keep with a tick clock . 
 it would not do . my heart be beat louder than ever , and my hand be tremble ; even my tooth rattle like dice in a box as the time approach . 
 the nerve will not be hoodwink ; the mind can not swindle the body . I once slap the cheek of my governess . I can not treat nature so . try the sweet influence , and the honest coin of reason . it will not do . all tremble , I strike the repeater . five minute more , and the trial must come . my heart be flutter like a pigeon 's throat . the long suspense have be too much . oh ! why be I submit to this cruel ordeal ? the wall be thick . I can hear no movement in the secret room . 
 there come a creep , fingering , sound , as of one whose candle be out , grope for the door . it pass along the pane of glass , and a shadow be throw on the rafter . who can it be ? what stealthy hand but that of my father 's murderer ? 
 the word - the thought be enough . what resolution , reason , justice , all in turn , have fail to do , passion have do at once - passion at myself , as well as at my enemy . be it Clara Vaughan , who , for eight long year of demon 's reign , have breathe but for this moment - be Clara Vaughan to shake like the wooden - legged blackbird now her chance be come ? 
 a rush of triumph burn , like vitriol , through my vein . every nerve be brace , every sense alert and eager . against the light of that window , dull as it be , I could have thread the fine needle that ever be make . 
 I strike my repeater again . it be the hour , the minute , when my father die . with the mere spring of my instep I leap upon the stool . I could see it clearly now . I dip the broad camel's - hair brush in the flat phial , hold it carefully at arm 's length , and then draw it lightly along the pane , quite at the bottom , from corner to corner . one more dip , one more stripe above , a steam hover on the glass , and there be a gazing - place , clear as crystal , and wide enough to show most of the narrow room . of the room itself I take no heed ; the occupant be my study . 
 only four in all . one man at a high desk write rapidly ; three man sit round a small table , talk earnestly , and with much gesticulation , but the tone too low for I even to guess their language . from the appearance , manner , and action of the speaker , I feel sure that it be not English , and I think that it be not french . why , I can not say ; but my attention fix itself upon the man who be write at the top of the room . perhaps it be because I could see he well , for he stand with his face full towards I . 
 he be a man of middle age and stature , strongly frame , closely knit , and light of limb , with a handsome , keenly oval face , broad forehead , black eye , glance quickly and scornfully at his three comrade , long hair of an iron grey , fall on his shoulder , and toss back often with a jerk of the head . his hand be white and restless , quick as light in their motion . on the left thumb flash a large red jewel . though I could not see the paper , I know by the course of the quill that the writing be very small . but one minute I watch he , for the film be return upon the glass , and I must scan the other ; yet in that time he have write several line , half of they without look at the paper , but with his eye upon the other three . 
 I know he now he be in clear light , I could swear to he anywhere again . the last glance I could spare he send a shudder through I , for in his impatience he shift one foot from the shade of the desk . it be small , pointed , and elegant . 
 the film be thickening , like frost upon the pane , when I begin to observe the other . but I see enough to print their face on my memory , or those at least of two . the third I could not see so well . he seem old than the rest . all the man wear loose grey tunic , with a red sash over the left shoulder . I judge that the three be debate hotly , as to some measure , upon which the fourth have resolve . every now and then , they glance at he uneasily . 
 at he I gaze again , with deadly hatred , cold as ice , upon my heart . I feel my dagger handle . oh for one moment with he ! in my fury I forget the Inspector 's warning . the film be close over . I touch the glass with my lash . a flash of agony shoot through my eye . with a jerk I draw back , the stool rock under I , one foot of it strike the wall . I clutch the window sill , and throw my weight inward . down come the foot of the stool , loud as the bang of a door . 
 I think it be all over . how I stifle a scream I know not ; have it escape I , I should never have tell this story . I have the presence of mind to stand still , and watch , though my eye be madden I , what the cut - throat would do . through the agony , and the dimness , I could just see they all start , and rush to the door at the side of the room . the writer stand first , with his paper thrust anyhow into his bosom , a pistol in one hand , a poniard in the other . do I know the shape of it ? the other three be arm , but I could not see with what . they crouch behind a heavy screen , present   I suppose   their pistol muzzle at the door . find no attack ensue , they begin to search . now be the real danger to I . if they search that window before the size return , my life end there . fear be past . desperation seize I . if I be doom to blindness , just as well to death . but I clutch my dagger . 
 my left ear be against the wall . I hear a hand graze the partition inside , then a chair place under the embrasure , and a step upon it . I be still upon the stool , stoop close beneath the window frame . suddenly the light streak vanish , the size fly over it , as the breath fly over glass in the hard frost . the hand feel along the window frame , the dull shadow of a head flit upon the beam . it be within a foot of mine . the searcher pass on , without suspicion . 
 strange it be , but now the deadly peril be over , triple fear fall upon I . the heat fly back to my heart , just now so stanch and rigid ; my hair seem to creep with terror . dear life , like true love scorn , would have its way within I . quietly I slide down from the stool , and cower upon it , in a storm of trembling . my eyelid drop in agony , I could not lift they again , but blue and red light seem to dance within they . I have make up my mind to blindness ; but not , oh not just yet , to death . 
 how long I remain in this abject state , scorn myself , yet none the braver , be more than I can tell , or even care to ask . may it never be the lot of any , not even the base murderer ! wear out at last , in a lull of pain and terror , I fall into deep sleep , from which I be awaken by a hand upon my shoulder . 
 I try to look up , but could not . Sight be flee , and as I think for ever . but I feel that it be a friend . 
 " ah , I see how it be " - the voice be Inspector Cutting 's - " my poor child , there be now no danger . give I your hand : " he try to lift I , but I fall against the wall . 
 " take a sip of this , we must restore circulation . it be the cold as much as anything ; another sip , Miss Vaughan . " he use my true name on purpose ; it help to restore I . he be most humane and kind ; he do not even remind I of dutch courage . 
 CLARA VAUGHAN 
 BOOK III . 
 CHAPTER I. 
 in the morning I dream of Isola . across a broad black river , I see her lovely smile . Thick fog rise from the water , in which two swan be beat a dog , and by snatch only could I see my darling . she wave she little hand to I , and beg I , with that coax smile which bent cast iron and even gold , to come across to Isola . in vain I look for a boat , even in my dream I know that I could not swim , and if I could , the lead upon my eyelid would have sink I . so I call to she to come to I , and with that cry awake . 
 it be strike ten - my own little clock which my father give I . I count every stroke . what be Mrs. Shelfer do , that she have not call I yet ? what be I do , that I lay there so late ; for I always get up early ? and what be the sun about , that no light come into the room ? I know it be ten in the morning . 
 I feel all round . I be in my little bed , the splinter at the side of the head - board run into my finger as usual . there I be , and nowhere else . be it a tremendous fog ? if it be , they should have tell I , for they know that I like fog . at least they think so , from the interest I feel . 
 I grope for the little bell - pull , a sleezy worsted cord , which mean to break every time , but be not strong enough to do it . I jerk with all my strength , which seem very little somehow . what a pleasure ! the bell ring like a fire - peal . I fall back on the pillow , exhaust , but determine to have it out with Mrs. Shelfer . I put my hand up to arrange my hair , to look a little more like Clara Vaughan , when the light should enter , and to frighten Mrs. Shelfer . 
 there be something on my head . I never wear a night - cap ; my long black hair would scorn it . be I in a madhouse , be this put to keep I cool ? cold it be , and my brain so hot . all Wenham lake on dive , and he will only hiss . while I be pull at it , and find it stream wet , in come - I know her step - Mrs. Shelfer . but there be no light from the passage ! 
 " Mrs. Shelfer , what do you mean by this ? " 
 " by what , my dear good soul ? I have do all the bless thing I be tell to do for you . you might have put a ostrich feather or a marabout to my mouth , Miss Valence , and tuck I up , and a headstone , and none the wiser , when Uncle John bring you home last night . " 
 " I suppose I be dream . but I be sure I ring the bell . " 
 " Miss Valence , you do so , and no mistake . bless I ! I start in my shoe . a good job , Shelfer be not   home , he be so nervous . he would have go for gin straightway . now get up , that be a dear good soul , and when you have have some breakfast , we will talk over it , Miss Valence . let I see how your eye be . Uncle John say they be bad , and I be to keep they cover . I expect he here every minute . now turn they up to the light . what large eye you have , to be sure . bless I ! where be your long black lash ? " 
 " Mrs. Shelfer , there be some strange mistake . let the light into the room . " 
 I have rise in the bed , and her breath be on my forehead . 
 " Light , dear child , I can not   let more . the sun be on your face . " 
 I fall back upon my pillow , and could rise no more . the truth have be tingle through I , all the time she talk . I be stone - blind . I fling the bandage from I , and wish my heart would break . Mrs. Shelfer try some comfort . she seem to grieve for my eyelash , more than for my eye ; and address her comfort more to my look than sight . of course , I do not listen . when would the creature be go , and let I try to think ? 
 poor little thing ! I be very sorry ; what fault be it of her ? who and what be I , blind I , to find fault with any one who mean I well ? I drop my eyelid , I can feel they fall ; I lift they , I can feel they rise ; a full gaze , a side gaze , a half gaze ; with both eye , with one ; it be all the same ; gaze there may be , but no sight . henceforth I want no eyelid . 
 the sun be on my face . I can feel his winter ray , though my cheek be wet . what use be he to I ? 
 I have the dagger somewhere by which my father die . let I find it , if I can . 
 I could have swear that the box be in that corner carefully conceal . I strike against a washing - stand . ah , now I have it ; the box be lock , my key be in the top - drawer . I bear the box to the bed , and go grope for the chest of drawer . already I can tell by the sun - warmth on my face , which way I be go . surely , if I wait , I shall have the instinct of the blind . 
 what care I for that ? the coward love of life suggest that poor solace . now I have the key . quick unlock the box . 
 at length I throw the cover back . the weapon handle be to the right . I stoop to seize it . I grasp a square of colour . pretty instinct this ! I have get my large drawing box . 
 oh paint , my paint , so loved but yesterday , that ape the colour I shall never see , my hot tear make you water - colour indeed ! if God have rob my eye of sight , he have not dry my tear . 
 the gush flood relieve I . what right have I to die ? even without ask if my case be hopeless ! who know but what these lovely tint may glow for I again ? may I not once more intone the carmine damask of the rose , the gauzy green of April 's scarf ? soften scene before I rise . I lie my box of colour by , and creep into my bed for warmth . 
 presently the doctor come . Inspector Cutting have choose he , and choose well . from his voice I know that he be a gentleman , from his word and touch instinctively I feel that he understand the case . 
 when he have finish the examination he see I tremble for the answer which I dare not seek . 
 " young lady , I have hope , strong hope . it be quite impossible to say what course the inflammation may pursue . all depend on that . at present there be a film over the membrane , but the cornea be uninjured . perfect quiet , composure , so far as in such a case be possible , cold application , and the exclusion of light , be the simple remedy . all the rest must be leave to nature . avoid excitement of any kind . Diet as low as possible . do not admit your dear friend , unless they will keep perfect silence . even so , they be well away , unless you pine at loneliness . " 
 " oh no . I be quite accustomed to that . " 
 " that be well . I shall make a point of call daily , but shall not examine your eye every time . the excitement and the effort would strain the optic nerve . our object be to keep the inflammation from strike inward . I should not tell you all this , but I see that you have much self - command . on that and your constitution , under Providence , the cure depend . one question . I be not a profess ophthalmist , would you prefer to have one ? " 
 " oblige I with your opinion . " 
 " it be a delicate point for I . there be no operation to perform . it be a medical , not a surgical case . I have deal with such before . be you my own child I would call in no ophthalmist , but as you be a stranger to I , I wish you to decide for yourself . " 
 " then , I will have none . I have perfect confidence in you . " 
 he seem gratify , and take his leave . " please God , Miss Valence , you shall look I in the face ere long . " 
 CHAPTER II . 
 " composure be my only chance . " what chance have I of composure until I know the meaning of what I see last night ? blind though I be , one face be ever before I . no thickening of the membrane can exclude that face . Inspector Cutting be still below ; I will send for he at once . 
 Mrs. Shelfer remonstrate . " it will excite you so , my good friend . the doctor say perfect quiet . " 
 " just so . I can have none , until I have speak to your Uncle John . let he stay in my sitting - room , open the folding - door a little , and then , Mrs. Shelfer , please to go down stair . " 
 I hear the Inspector 's step , not so heavy this time . he ask how I be , and express his sorrow . I feel obliged to he for not remind I that the fault be all my own . then I implore he , if he wish I ever to see again , to tell I all he know about the man I see last night . 
 thus entreat , he can not refuse I , but first look up and down the stair , as I know by the sound of his step ; then he shut the door of the sitting - room . all he know be not very much . they be refugee , italian refugee ; two political and two criminal exile , leader now of a conspiracy to revolutionize their country . 
 " but why do he not arrest they ? ' 
 " simply because he have no right . as for the political refugee , of course , we never meddle with they ; as for the two criminal , they have not be demand by their government . wonderful now , be not   it ? the two fellow who have commit murder their government would not give sixpence for they ; but the two man who have only spout a little , it would give a thousand pound for either of they . he can not   understand such a system . " 
 and Inspector Cutting suck his lip - I know it by the sound - he always do it when he be in a puzzle . be a true Englishman , he know no more of serfdom , than of the dark half of the moon . I mean , of course , political serfdom . of social slavery we have enough to last ten generation more . 
 " would he be afraid to arrest they ? he say they be desperate man . " 
 " he should rather hope he would not . they have get their knife , and pistol , and all that humbug . but it be more show than fight . they be desperate man in a private quarrel , particular when they could come round a corner , and when woman be concern ; but as for show honest fight , he would soon come across three of they , than one good irish murderer . " 
 " what be his proof against my enemy ? I need not ask he which it be . " 
 the excitement of this question send needle through my eye . and I could not see he , to probe his pupil . 
 " well , his proof be very little . in fact it be no proof at all as yet . but he be not like a juryman . he be quite convince ; and his eye should never be off that man , until he have he under warrant , and the whole case clear . would that satisfy I ? " 
 he speak with such hearty professional pride , that I could not help believe he . but as for be satisfied - why should his evidence be a mystery to I ? " catch he at once , " be my idea ; but a hot and foolish one . " get up the evidence first , " be Inspector Cutting 's , " I can catch he at any time . " that be the whole gist of it . could he always catch he ? 
 he scorn the idea of there be any difficulty about it . the man could leave for no part of the continent ; he be a political refugee . America be his only bourne beyond the Inspector 's jurisdiction . and thither he could not try to go without the Police be down upon he at once . 
 by this time I be wear out , though my reason be not exhaust . in a word , I be only half satisfied , but I could not help myself . if , in my helpless blindness , I offend Inspector Cutting , the whole chance disappear . only one question remain . " why do he take I thither ? " 
 " for excellent reason . as to the one , it be most important that I should always know he again . moreover , it save my energy from waste . as to the other three , he have his own reason for require an intelligent witness about their proceeding . " 
 I think of the thousand pound , and say no more . Inspector Cutting be an Englishman , and proud , in his way , of english freedom . but , like nine - tenth of we , he think that we alone understand what freedom be . what good be it to such fellow as those ? they would only be free of one another 's throat . and like all of we , with most rare exception , next to freedom , he value money . for our love of this , many foreigner jeer we . all we can say be , that with we it be second , with they it be first . but we be of such staple , our second be strong than their first . 
 when the Inspector be go , I form a very sensible resolve . since there be nothing more to be do or learn at present , my only care should be the recovery of my sight . if I be to be blind till death , the purpose of my life be lose , and I might as well die at once . but now the first blind agony , the sudden shock , be over ; and I have too much of what the Inspector denominate " pluck , " to knock under so . 
 in the afternoon , when all be quiet , lovely Isola come . strict order have be give that no one should be admit . but Mrs. Shelfer be not proof against the wile of Isola . 
 " she smile so bootiful , when I open the door , Miss , it fetch out all my hair pin ; and when I tell she you be ill in bed , and strike stone blind along of some chemical stuff , two big tear come out of her long blue eye , same as the wet out of a pennorth of violet , Miss ; and as for stop she , she throw her muff at I , and tell I to stop that if I like , and to run and tell you that she be come , quick , quick ! 
 " to be sure , and here I be ! " cry the cheery voice I love so well . " oh , Clara dear , dear Clara ! " the little darling fling her soft warm arm around I , utterly forgetful of her dress , forgetful of all the world , but that little bit of it she hold . her delicious breath come over my fevere cheek , her cool satin flesh be on my burn eyelid . what lotion could be compare to this ? how long she stay , I can not tell ; I only know that while I hear her voice , and feel her touch , blindness seem no loss to I . she pronounce herself head nurse ; and as for doctor , what be they , compare to her own father ? if she could coax he , he should come next day , and deliver his opinion , and then the doctor might betake himself to thing he understand , if indeed he understand anything , which she do not believe he do , because he have say she be not to come . my drawing too she admire , much more than they deserve , and her brother Conrad must come and see they , he be so fond of drawing , and there be nothing he could not do . she be so sorry she must go now , but old Cora must be tired of patroling , and she herself have a lecture to attend upon the chemical affinity of body . what it mean she have no idea , but that would not matter the least ; some of the clever girl say they do , but she would not believe they ; it take a man , she be sure , to understand such subject . she would bring her work the next day , such as it be , and the nice bit of sponge that be ever see , it could not be buy in London ; and she would answer for it I should be able to paint her likeness in a week ; and she would not go till it be dark ; and then the Professor should come for she when his lecture be over , and examine I ; he know all about optic , and retina , and pencil of light , and refraction and aberration , and she could not remember any more name ; but she feel quite certain this be a case of optical delusion , and nothing else . 
 how I wish I could have see she , when she pronounce this opinion , with no little solemnity . she must have look such a sage ! the thought of that make I laugh , as well as the absurdity of the idea . but I only ask how the Professor be to examine my eye , if he do not come till dark . 
 to be sure ! she never think of that . what a little goose she be ! but she would make he come in the morning , before his work begin ; and then old Cora would fetch her home to tea . and she have very great hope , that if she could only persuade her papa to deliver a lecture in my room , it would have such an effect on my optic nerve , that they would come all right directly , at any rate I should know how to treat they . 
 delight with this idea , she kiss I , and hug I , and off she run , after tell I to be sure to keep my spirit up , and the bandage not too tight . 
 the latter injunction be much easy to obey than the former . she have enliven I wonderfully , as well as nurse I most delicately ; but now that she be go , the usual reaction commence . moreover , although as the saying be , the sight of she would have be good for sore eye , the effort at see she , which I could not control , when she be present , be , I already feel , anything but good for they . and the loss , when she be go , be like a second loss of light . 
 light ! what million thought flash through I at that little word ! swift thing the mind have meet , too like itself to understand . be it stee or wing of mind ? Nay , not swift enough for that . be it then the food of life , prepare betime ere life appear , the food the blind receive but can not taste ? if so , far well to be blind from birth . well I know the taste from memory ; shall I never taste it else ? have beauty lose its way to I ? the many golden fold of air , the lustrous dance of sunny morn , the soft reclining of the moon , the grand perspective of the star   long avenue to God 's own home , be these all blank to I , and night make one with day ? 
 oh God , whose first approach be light , replenisher of sun and star , whence dart anew thy gushing flood   solid or liquid we know not , whose subtle volume have no bourne or track ; light , the dayside half of life , leaping , flash , beaming ; glistening , twinkle , steal ; light ! oh God , if live I must , grudge I not a ray ! 
 CHAPTER III . 
 low fever follow the long prostration to which the fear of outer darkness have reduce my jade nerve . this fever probably redeem my sight , by generalize the local inflammation , to which object the doctor 's effort have be direct . toss on my weary bed , without a glimpse of anything , how I long for the soft caress and cool lip of Isola ! but since that one visit , she have be sternly exclude . the Professor have no chance of deliver his therapeutic lecture . in fact he do not come . " once for all , " say Dr. Franks , when he hear of that proposal , " choose , Miss Valence , between my service , and the maundering of some pansophist . if you prefer the former , I will do my utmost , and can almost promise you success ; but I must and will be obey . none shall enter your room , except Mrs. Shelfer and myself . as to your lovely friend , of whom Mrs. Shelfer be so full , if she truly love you , she will keep away . she have do you already more harm than I can undo in a week . I be deeply interested in this case , and feel for you sincerely ; but unless you promise I to see - I mean to receive - no one without my permission , I will come no more . " 
 it sound very hard , but I feel that he be right . 
 " no crying , my dear child , no crying ! dear I , I have hear so much of your courage . too much inflammation already . whatever you do , you must not cry . that be one reason why I will not have your friend here . when two young lady get together in trouble , I know by my own daughter what they do . you may laugh as much as you like , in a quiet way ; and I be sure Mrs. Shelfer can make any one laugh , under almost any circumstance . can not   you now ? " 
 " to be sure , my good friend , I have see such a many rogue . that is , when I know Charley 's a - come home . " 
 " now good bye , Miss Valence . but I would recommend you not to play with your paint so . there be an effluvium from they . " 
 " oh , what can I do , what be I to do to pass the endless night ? I be only try to build a house in the dark . " 
 " sleep as much as you can . I be give you gentle opiate . when you can sleep no long , let Mrs. Shelfer talk or read to you , and have a little music . I will lend you my musical box , which play twenty - four tune : have it in the next room , not to be too loud . and then play on the musical glass , not too long at a time : you will soon find out how to do that in the dark . " 
 he most kindly send we both the box that very day ; and many a weary hour they lighten of its load . poor Isola come every day to inquire , and several time she have her brother with she . she make an entire conquest of Mrs. Shelfer , who even give she a choice canary bird . I be never tired of hear the little woman 's description of her beauty , and her visit to the kitchen form the chief event of the day . Mrs. Shelfer   who have irish blood in her vein   use to declare that the ground be not good enough for they to walk on . 
 " such a pair , Miss ! to see she so light , and soft , and loving , trip along , and such eye and such fur ; and he walk so straight , and brave , and noble . I be sure you would go a mile , Miss , to see he walk . " 
 " you forget , Mrs. Shelfer , I may never enjoy that pleasure . " 
 " no , no . quite true , my good friend . but then we may , all the same . " 
 exactly so . there lie all the difference to I , but none to any other . this set I moralise in my shallow way , a thing by no mean natural to I , who be so concentrated and subjective . but loss of sight have do I good , have turn the mind 's eye inward into the darkness of myself . I think the blind , as a general rule , be less narrow - minded than those endow with sight . less inclined , I mean , to judge their neighbour harshly , less arrogant in exact that every pulse keep time with their own . if eye be but the chink through which we focus on our brain censoriousness and bigotry , if ray of light be shafts and lance of ill will ; then well be it to have no crystalline len . far well to be blind , than print the world - distort puppet of myself . I , that small speck of dust , blow upon the shore of time , blow off when my puff shall come ; a speck ignore by moon and star ; too small   however my ambition leap   for earth to itch , whate'er I suck ; and yet a speck that be a mountain in the telescope of God ; shall I never learn that his be my only magnitude ; shall I wriggle to be all in all to my own corpuscle ? 
 CHAPTER IV . 
 be there any Mocha stone , fortification agate , or Scotch pebble , with half the vein and mottling , angle , flux and reflux , that chequer one minute of the human mind ? be ever machine invent to throw so many shuttle ? 
 at present I be gauge for little thread of thought - two minute since , the small thing I could think of be myself . now it be the large . must I grope from room to room , shall I never be sure where the table be , where my teacup stand ; never read , or write , or draw ; never tell when my hand be clean , except by smell soap ; never know   though small the difference   how my dress become I , or when my hair be right ; never see my own sad face , in which I have be fool enough to glory , never - and this be bad of all - never catch another 's smile ? 
 here be I , a full - grow girl , full of maiden 's thought and wondering , know well that I be shape so but to be a link in life ; must I never think of love or of be love , except with love like Isola 's ; sweet affection , very sweet ; but white sugar only ? 
 when my work be over , and my object gain , when my father 's spirit know the wrong redeemed , as a child I use to think I would lay I down and die . but since I come to woman 's fulness , since I cease to look at man and they begin to look at I , some soft change , I know not what , have come across my dream . 
 be my purpose alter ? be my tenor break ? not a whit of either . rather be they strong set and well lead , as my heart and brain enlarge . yet I see beyond it all , a thing I never use to see , a glow above the peak of hate , a possibility of home . " saw " I should have say , for now what have I to do with see ? 
 on the fourteenth morning , I have give up all hope . they tell I it be bright and sunny ; for I always ask about the weather , and feel most cruelly depress upon a sunny day . by this time I have learn to dress without Mrs. Shelfer 's aid . still , from force of habit I go to the glass to do my hair , and still draw back , as far as be allow , the window curtain . 
 off with my wet bandage , I be sick of it ; let I try no long to delude myself . 
 suddenly a gleam of light , I be sure of it ; faint indeed , and like a will of the Wisp ; but I be quite sure it be a gleam of light . I go near the window and try again . no , there be no more for the present , it be the sudden change produce it . never mind ; I know what I have see , a thing that come and cheat I in dream ; this time it have not cheat I ; it be a genuine twinkle of the sun . 
 I can do nothing more . I can not put another stitch upon I . I be thrill with the sun , like Memnon . I fall upon my knee , and thank the Father of light . 
 when the doctor come that day , and look into my eye , he see a decide change . 
 " Miss Valence , the crisis be over . with all my heart I congratulate you . another fortnight , and you will see well than ever . " 
 I laugh , and weep , and , blind as I be , could hardly keep from dancing . then I want to kiss the Doctor , but hear Mrs. Shelfer 's step , make a reckless jump and have it out upon she . 
 " bless I , why bless I , my good soul , if I be a young gentleman now - " 
 " why , Miss Valence , I be perfectly astonish , " say Doctor Franks , but I know he be laugh ; " if I have be request , only two minute ago , to pick out the most self - possess , equable , and courageous young lady in London , I should have say , ' I do not   want any look , I know where to find she , ' but now , upon my word - " 
 " if you be ask to point out the most delighted , grateful , and happy girl in London , you know where to come for she . let I kiss you , Dr. Franks , only once . I will not   rob your daughter . it be to you I owe it all . " 
 " no , to Providence , and yourself , and an uncommonly good conjunctiva . now be prudent , my dear child ; a little ecstasy must be forgive ; but do not   imperil your cure by over - excitement . it be , as I hop it would be , a case of epiphytic sloughing "   I think that be what he say , " and it may become chronic if precipitate . the long and more thorough the process , the less chance of recurrence . " 
 " oh I be satisfied with one eye , or half an eye . can you promise I that ? " 
 " if you will only follow my direction , I can promise you both eye , more brilliant than ever ; and Mrs. Shelfer say they be wonderfully bright . but what I order must be do . slow and sure . " 
 he give I short direction , all upon the same principle , that of graduation . 
 " and now , Miss Valence , good - bye . henceforth I visit you only as a friend ; in which I know you will indulge I , from the interest I feel in the case , and in yourself . Mrs. Shelfer 's wonderful young lady may be admit on Thursday ; but do not   let she look at your eye . girl be always inquisitive . if there be any young gentleman , lucky enough to explain your strange anxiety to see , you will make short work of he , when your sight return . your eye will be the most brilliant in London ; which be say a great deal . but I fear he will hardly know you , till your lash grow ; and all your face and expression be alter for the time . " 
 " one thing will never alter , though it can find no expression , my gratitude to you . " 
 " that be very pretty of you , my dear child . you kiss I just now . now let I kiss you . " 
 he touch my forehead and be go . he be the first true gentleman I have meet with , since the loss of Farmer Huxtable . 
 CHAPTER V. 
 when Isola come on the Thursday , and I obtain some little glimpse of she , she express her joy in a thousand natural way , well worth feel and seeing , not at all worth tell . I love she for they more and more . I never meet a girl so warm of heart . many woman can sulk for day ; most woman can sulk for an hour ; I believe that no provocation could have make Isola sulky for two minute . she try sometimes   at least she say so , but it be no good . 
 and yet she feel as keenly as any of the very sulky woman can do ; but she have too much warmth of heart and imagination to live in the fold of that cold - blooded snake . neither have she the strong selfishness , on which that serpent feed . 
 in the afternoon , as we still sit together , in rush Mrs. Shelfer with her bonnet on , quite out of breath , and without her usual ceremony of knock at the door . I could not think where she have be all the day ; and she have make the great mystery of it in the morning , and want to have it notice . up she run to I now , and push Isola out of the way . 
 " got them at last , Miss. get them at last , and no mistake . no more Dr. Franks , nor bandage , nor curtain down , nor nothing . save a deal of trouble and do it in no time . but what a job I have to get they to be sure ; if the cook 's mate have not   know Charley , they would not have let I have them , after go all the way to Wapping . " she hold up something in triumph . 
 " what be it , Mrs. Shelfer ? I be sorry to say I can not see . " 
 " and right down glad of it , I be , my good friend . yes , yes . or I should have have all my journey for nothing . but Miss Idols know , I will be bind she do , or it be no good go to College . " 
 " let I look at it first , " say Isola , " we learn almost everything at college , Mrs. Shelfer ; but even we senior sophist do not   know every thing without see it yet . " 
 " then put your pretty eye on they , Miss Idols ; I will be bind it will make they caper . I never see such fine one , nor the cook 's mate either . why they be as big as young whelk . " 
 " Mollusca , or Crustacea , or something ! " exclaim Isola , with more pride than accuracy , " what queer little thing . I must take they to my papa . " 
 " now , young lady , " cry Mrs. Shelfer in her grandest style , " I see I must explain they to you after all . they be the blessed shell the poor sailor put in their eye to scour they out , and keep they bright , and make they see in the dark against the wind . only see how they crawl . there now , Miss Valence , I will pick you out two big lively fellow , and pop one for you in the corner of each eye ; the cook 's mate show I how to lift your eyelid . " 
 " how kind of he , to be sure ! ' 
 " and it will crawl about under the lid , you must not mind its hurt a bit ; and it will not   come out till to - morrow when the clock strike twelve , and then it will have eat up every bit , and your eye will be bright than diamond . Charley have see they do it ever so many time , and he say it be bootiful , and they do not   mind give five shilling a piece for they , when they be scarce . " 
 " do Mr. Shelfer ever try they ? his eye be so sharp : perhaps that be the reason . " 
 " no . I never hear that he do , Miss. but bless you he never tell I half he do ; no , nor a quarter of half . " at this recollection , she fetch a little short sigh , her near approach to melancholy , for she be not sentimental . " Care kill the cat , " be her favourite aphorism . 
 " then when he come home , Mrs. Shelfer , pop one of these shell , a good big one , into each of his eye ; and let we know the effect to - morrow morning , and I will give you a kiss , if you do it well . " 
 this be the bribe Isola find most potent with everybody . 
 " Lor , Miss Idols , bless your innocent heart , do you suppose he would let I ? why he think it a great thing to let I tie his shoe , and he will not   only when he have have a good dinner . " 
 " well , " cry Isola , " I be astonish ! catch I tie my husband 's shoe ! I shall expect he to tie mine , I know ; and he shall only do that when he be very good . " 
 with a regal air , she put out the prettiest foot ever see . Mrs. Shelfer laugh . 
 " Lor , Miss , it be all very well for girl to talk ; and they all do it , till they know well . though for the like of you , any one would do anything a most . pray , Miss Idols , if I may make so bold , how many offer of marriage have you receive ? " 
 " let I think ! oh I know ! it be one more than I be year old . eighteen altogether , Mrs. Shelfer ; if you count the apothecary 's boy , and the nephew of the library ; but then they be all of they boy , papa 's pupil and that , a deal too young for I . they be all go to die , when I refuse they ; but they be all alive so far , at any rate . be not   it too bad of they ? " 
 " well , Miss Idols , if you get as good a husband as you deserve , and that be say a deal , he will tie your shoe may be for a month , and then he will look for you to tie his . " 
 " and long he may look , even if he have shellfish in his eye . why look , Mrs. Shelfer , they be all crawl about ! " 
 " bootiful , be not   it ? bootiful ! I wish Miss Valence could see they . and look at the horn they go rout about with ! how they must tickle your eyelid . and what coorious eye they have ! ah , I often think , Miss Idols , I like this sort of thing so much , what a pity it be as I be not   bear in the country . I should never be tired of watch the snail , and the earywig , and the tadpole . why , I like nothing well than to see they stump - legge thing come to table in the cabbage . I have not see one now for ever so long . oh that Charley , what dreadful lie he do tell ! " 
 " what about , Mrs. Shelfer ? " 
 " why , my good friend , he say they green thing with stripe on , and ever so many leg , turn to live butterfly , after they be dead . but I be too many for he there . yes , yes . the last one as I boil , I do not say a word about it to he , but I put it by in a chiney - teacup , with the saucer over , in case it should fly away . bless your heart , young lady , there it be now , as quiet as anything , and no sign of a butterfly . and when he tell I any lie , about where he be last night , I just go to the cupboard , and show he that ; and never another word can he say . and so , Miss Valence , you will not   try these little snail , after my journey and all ! " 
 " of course I will not , Mrs. Shelfer . but I be sincerely oblige to you for your trouble , as well as for all your kind nursing , which I can never forget . now let I buy those shellfish from you , and Miss Isola will take they as a present to her papa . " 
 " no , no , unless he will put they in his eye , Miss. I will not   have they waste . Charley will sell they again in no time . he know lot of sailor . most likely he will get up a raffle for they , and win they himself . " 
 away she hurry to take off the bonnet she have be so proud of , for the last two and twenty year . though I decline the service of the ophthalmist snail , my sight return very rapidly . how delicious it be to see more and more every day ! plenty of cold water be the present regimen . Vision be less a vision , every time I use it . in a week more , I can see quite well , though oblige to wear a shade . 
 one morning , dear Isola run upstairs , out of breath as usual ; but , what be most unusual , actually frown . have Cora tyrannise , or what ? through the very shade of her frown , come her sunny smile , as she kiss I . 
 " oh , I be so vexed . I have bring he to the door ; and now he will not   come in ! " 
 " who , my darling ? " 
 " why , Conny , to be sure . my brother Conrad . I have set my heart on show he to you , directly you could see . " 
 " why will not   he come in ? " 
 " because he think that you ought not to see stranger , until you be quite well . he have not get to the corner yet . I can run like a deer . send word by I , that you be die to see he . " 
 " not quite that . but say how glad I shall be . " 
 " I will say that you will not   get well till you do . " 
 " say what you like . he will know it be only your nonsense . " 
 off she dart ; she be quick as light in her movement , and soon return with her brother . 
 I lift my weak eye to his bright one , and recognise at once the preserver of my mother and myself . but I see , in a moment , that he have not the faint remembrance of I . my whole face be alter by my accident , and even my voice affect by the long confinement . when he meet I in the wood , he seem very anxious not to look at I ; when he save my life from the rush mountain , he have little opportunity . very likely he would not have know I , under another name ; even without this illness . so let it be . I will not reveal myself . I thank he once , and he repulse I ; no doubt he have a reason , for I see that he be a gentleman . let that reason hold good : I will not trespass on it . 
 he take my hand with a smile , the counterpart of Isola 's . he have hear of I so constantly , that I must excuse the liberty . a dear friend of his sister 's could be no stranger to he . a thrill shot through I at the touch of his hand , and my eye be weak . he see it , and place a chair for I far from the light . on his own face , not the sun , for the " drawing - room " window look north , but the strong reflection of the noon - day light be fall . 
 how like he be to Isola , and yet how different ! so much strong , and bold , and more decide , so tall and firm of step . his countenance open as the noon , incapable of concealment ; yet if he be the same   and , how can I doubt it ? , then at least there seem to be some mystery about he . 
 Isola , with the quickness of a girl , see how intently I observe he , and could not hide her delight . 
 " there now , Clara dear , I know you would like he . but you must not look at he so much , or your poor eye will be sore . " 
 little stupid ! as I feel my pale cheek colour , I could almost have be angry , even with my Isola . but she mean no harm . in spite of lecture and " college , " she be gentle nature personify ; and no professor could make anything else of she . all these thing run in the grain . if there be anything I hate , I be sure I hate affectation . but there be a difference between we . 
 probably it be this : I be of pure English blood , and she be not . that I know by instinct . what blood she be of , I be sure I can not tell . gentle blood at any rate , or I could not have love she so . how horribly narrow - minded , after all my objectivity ! well , what I mean be , that I can like and love many people who be not of gentle , but   I suppose   of ferocious blood ; still , as a general rule , culture and elegance be well match for nature , after some generation of training . my father use to say so about his pointer and setter . the marvel be that I , who belong to this old streak , seem to have get some twist in it . my grandmother would have swoon at the name of some people I love more than I could have love she . my mother would not . but then she be a Christian . probably that be the secret of my twist . 
 all this have pass through my mind , before I can frown at Isola . and now I can not frown at all . dear little thing , she be not eighteen , and she know no well . I have attain that Englishwoman 's majority three week ago ; and I be sorry for Isola . 
 to break the awkwardness , her brother start off into subject of art . he have hear of my drawing , may he see they some day ? I ask he about the magnificent stag . yes , that be his , and I have no idea how long it take he to do . he speak of it with no conceit whatever ; neither with any depreciation , for the purpose of tempting praise . as he speak , I observe some peculiarity in his accent . Isola 's accent be as pure as mine , or purer . her brother speak very good English , and never hesitate for a word ; but the form of his sentence often be not english ; especially when he warm to his subject ; and   what strike I first , for I be no purist as to collocation of word   his accent , his emphasis be not native . the difference be very slight , and quite indescribable ; but a difference there be . perhaps it be rather a difference of the order of thought than of language , as regard the cast of the sentence ; but that will not account for the accent ; and if it would , it still show another nationality . 
 there be a loud knock at the door . I be just prepare   with Isola 's help   my little hospitality . if London visit mean much talk and no food , I hold by Gloucestershire and Devon . I have a famous North Devon ham , and be proud of its fame . surely no more visitor for I . 
 no ; but one for Mrs. Shelfer . the Professor have hear of the eyeshell ; and what politeness , humanity , love of his daughter fail to do , science have effect . he be come to see and secure they . his child hear his voice . of course , we must ask he to come up . Mr. Conrad rise . Isola run to fetch her father . Isola love everybody . I do believe she love old Cora . Conrad be of sterner stuff : but surely he love his father . as for I - we be just get on so well - I want no Professor . Isola 's brother will not tell a lie . he do not remember , all at once , any press engagement . he hold out his hand , say simply , 
 " Miss Valence , I heartily beg your pardon for leave so suddenly ; and just when we be give you so much trouble . it would be impertinence for I to tell you the reason . it be a domestic matter . I trust you will believe I , that no light reason would make I rude . may I come again with Isola , to see your drawing soon ? " 
 he meet the Professor on the stair . the latter enter the room , under evil auspex for my good opinion . 
 CHAPTER VI . 
 if Professor Ross enter my room under evil auspex , it be not long before he send the bird the other way . for the first time , since my childhood , I meet a man of large and various knowledge ; a man who have spend his life in amass information , and learn how to make the most of it . a little too much perhaps there be of the second , and more fruitful branch , of the sour - sweet tree . once I have be fool enough to fancy that some of my own little bopeep at nature be original and peculiar . to Thomas Kenwood , Farmer Huxtable , and even Mr. Shelfer , a gardener , I have be quite an oracle as to the weather , the sky , and the insect about . moreover , in most of the book I have read , there be such blunder , even in matter that lie on nature 's doorstep , that , look back at they , I think I have cross her threshold . 
 as the proverb have it , nature always avenge herself ; and here be I , a mere " gappermouth "   I use a devonshire word , to be teach that I have not yet crop even a cud to chew . true , I do not expect   like Mr. and Mrs. Shelfer   that a boil caterpillar would become a live butterfly ; neither do I believe , with Farmer Huxtable , that hip and haw foretell a hard winter , because God mean they for the thrush ; but I know no more than they do the law and principle of thing . my little knowledge be all shred and patch . it do not cover even the small subject . odd thing here and there I know ; but a person of sound information know the odd and the even as well . my observation might truly be call my own ; but instead of be peculiar to I , nearly all of they have be anticipate century ago . I be but a gipsey straying where an army have be . 
 all this I suspect in less than ten minute from the Professor 's entrance ; he do not leave I long in doubt about it . it be just to myself to say that the discovery do not mortify I much . my little observation have be make , partly from pure love of nature 's doing , partly through habit draw from a dark spring . at first I have feel no pleasure in they , but it could not long be so . now they be mine as much as ever , though a thousand share they with I . 
 as the Professor lay bare my ignorance and my error , and prove that the little I do know be at second hand - which it certainly be not - I attempt no reply ; I be too young for argument , and too much interested to be impatient . so he demolish my ham and myself , with equal relish and equal elegance of handle . he seem to have no intention of do either , but manage both incidentally , and almost accidentally , while he open his mental encyclopadia . 
 at length , Isola , who be tired of lecture , such as she get and forget every day , feel that it be high time to assert her prerogative , and come to my rescue . 
 " come , Pappy , you fancy you know everything , do not   you ? " 
 he be just begin to treat of moss ; and I know that he be wrong upon several point , but do not dare to say so . 
 " my dear child , of the million thing I never shall discover , one be the way to keep you at all in order . " 
 " I should hope not , indeed . come now , here be another thing you do not   know . how long do it take to boil this delicious ham ? Clara know , and so do I. " 
 " upon that matter , I confess my total ignorance . " 
 " hear , hear ! Pappy , you can lecture by the hour upon isothermic law , and fluid , and fibrine , and adipose deposit , and you can not   tell how long it take to set this delicate fat . I will tell you what it be , Pappy , if you ever snub I in lecture again before the junior sophist , as you dare to do yesterday , I will sing out , ' ham , Pappy , ham ! ' and you will see how the girl will laugh . " 
 " no novelty , my dear , for they to laugh at you . I fear you never will learn anything but impertinence . " 
 his word be light , and he strove to keep his manner the same ; but his eye belie he . 
 Isola run round , and administer she never - fail remedy . there be that sweetness about her nobody could resist it . return to her seat , she give I a nod of triumph , and begin again . 
 " now , Papples , when you be good again , you shall have a real treat . Clara will show you her cordetto , will not   you , dear ? it be twice as big as your , and more than twice as pretty . " 
 I take it from my neck , where it have be throughout my illness . Isola tell I continually that it have save my sight ; and so old Cora devoutly believe , cross herself , and invoke fifty saint . long afterwards I find that Cora know it to be the heart of the Blessed Virgin , perpetuate in the material which her husband use . if so , it have be multiply as well . 
 Dr. Ross take my pretty gordit , and examine it narrowly , carry it to the window to get a strong light . 
 " beyond a doubt , " he say at last , " it be the fine in Europe . I have only see one to compare with it , and that have a flaw in the centre . will you part with it , Miss Valence ? " 
 " no ; I have promise never to do that . " 
 " then I must say no more ; but I should have be proud to add it to my collection . " 
 " to carry it about with you , you mean , pappy . you know you be a superstitious old Pappy , in spite of all your learning . " 
 Weak as my eye be , I could see the scowl of deep displeasure in his . Isola be frightened : she know she have go too far . she do not even dare to offer the kiss of peace . no more be say about it , and I turn the conversation to some other subject . but when he rise to depart , I find a pretext for keep Isola with I . 
 " good - bye for the present , Miss Valence , " Dr. Ross say gracefully - he do everything but scowl with an inborn grace - " I hope that your very first journey in quest of natural history will terminate at my house . I can not show you much , but shall truly enjoy go over my little collection with you whenever you find that your sight be strong enough . meanwhile , let I earnestly warn you to abstain from chemical experiment " - this be the cause of my injury assign by Mrs. Shelfer - " until you have a competent director . Isola , good - bye . I will send Cora for you in good time for tea . your attendance at lecture will be excuse . " 
 all my interest in the subject he have discuss , and in his mode of treat they , all my admiration of his shrewd intellectual face , do not prevent my feeling it a relief when he be go . he be not at all like his child . about they there be something so win and unpretentious , few could help like they at first sight . they do all they could to please , but without any visible effort . but with the Professor , in spite of all his elegance and politeness , I could not help perceive that he be not do his good , that he scorn to put forth his power when there be neither antagonist nor   in his opinion   duly qualified listener . nevertheless I could have tell he some thing he do not know concern lichen and moss . 
 when I be leave with my favourite Isola , that gentle senior sophist seem by no mean disconsolate at her papa 's departure . she love he and be proud of he , but there be time , as she tell I , when she be quite afraid of he . 
 " would you believe it , dear , that I could be afraid of old Pappy ? " - his age be about four and forty - " it be very wicked I know , but how be I to help it ? be you like that with your papa , when he be alive ? " 
 " no , I should think not . but I be not at all sure that he be not   afraid of I . " 
 " oh , how nice that must be ! but it be my fault , be not   it ? " 
 I could not well have tell she , even if I have know it , that the fault in such case be almost always on the parent 's side . 
 CHAPTER VII . 
 that same evening , when dear " Idols " be go , and I feel trebly alone , Mrs. Shelfer come to say that her uncle John be there , and would be glad to see I . though he have be several time to ask how I be , he have not see I since the first day of my blindness . 
 after express his joy and surprise at my recovery , he assure I that I must thank neither myself nor the doctor , but my luck in not have touch the liquid until its strength be nearly expended . 
 " have you any news for I ? " I ask abruptly . as my strength return , the sense of my wrong grow hotter . 
 " yes ; and I fear you will think it bad news . you will lose my help for awhile in your pursuit . " 
 " how so ? you talk of my luck ; I be always unlucky . " 
 " because I be order abroad on a matter too nice and difficult for any of my colleague . to - morrow I leave England . " 
 " how long shall you be away ? " 
 " I can not tell . perhaps one year ; perhaps two . perhaps I may never return . over and above the danger , I be not so young as I be . " 
 I feel dismayed , and stricken down . be I never to have a chance ? all power of earth and heaven and hell seem to combine against I . then come a gleam of hope , obscure immediately by the remembrance of his word . 
 " be you go to Italy ? " 
 " no . to Australia . " 
 thereupon all hope vanish , and for a time I could not say a word . at last I say - 
 " Inspector Cutting , the least thing you can do before you go , and your absolute duty now , be to tell I every single thing you find out , in the course of your recent search . something you must have learn , or you would not have do what you do . all along I have feel that you be hide something from I . now you can have no motive . now I be your successor in the secret ; I , and no one else . to no other will I commit the case . how much I have suffer from your secresy , none but myself can know . henceforth I will have no help . three month you have be on the track , and I almost believe that you have discover nothing . " 
 I speak so , partly through passion , partly in hope to taunt he into disclosure . his chief weakness , as I know well , be pride in his own sagacity . 
 " you shall suffer no more . I have good reason for hide it , one of they your own hastiness . now I will tell you all I know . in fact , as you well say , it have become my duty to do so , unless you will authorise I to appoint a successor before I go . " 
 " certainly not . my confidence in you can not be transfer to a stranger . " 
 " one chance more . let I report the matter officially . it be possible that my superior may think it more important than my new mission , which be to recover a large amount of property . " 
 " no . I will not allow it . I have devote myself to one object . I alone can effect it . it shall not pass to other . I feel once more that it be my destiny to unravel this black mystery ; myself , by my own courage . in ask your aid I be thwart my destiny . since then I have have nothing but accident . there be a proverb in some language , ' who cross destiny shall have accident . ' " 
 " Miss Valence , I could never have dream that you be so superstitious . " 
 " now tell I all you have do , all you have discover , and your own conclusion from it . " 
 he tell I all in a very few word , and his conclusion be mine . to any other except myself , the ground on which he have base it , would have seem insufficient . I take good care to secure every possible mean of follow up the frail clue . Ere he wish I good - bye , he offer one last suggestion . " if , during my absence , Miss Valence , you press your evidence far enough to require the strong hand , or if before you have do so you require a man 's assistance , apply at once to my son - you can always find he through Patty Shelfer . he be only a serjeant as yet , and not in the detective force ; but he have quality , that young man have , he have get all my ability , and more ! ah , he will be at the top of the tree when I be in my grave , please God . " 
 his shrewd eye soften as he speak , and I like he ten time as well for this little flaw in his sheathing . of course he know that I could not entrust myself to a young man , as I could to he . when he be go , with many good wish on both side , and a little keepsake from I , I feel that I have lose an intelligent , honest , and true friend . 
 CHAPTER VIII . 
 vigorous and elastic as I be , I can not deny that the air and weather have great dominion over I . it be always so with my own dear father . two day spend indoor , without any real exercise , would make he feel as uneasy as a plant in a cellaret . Crusty and crab , nothing could ever make he - not even gout I believe , if he have live long enough for it - but when he have lose his fishing , or shooting , or bit of gardening , too long , he be quite unlike himself . it be a bad time then to coax for anything - no song , no whistling , no after - dinner nap . 
 I too be not of a sedentary nature , though upon due occasion I can sit writing or draw for some hour together . but how fine a thing all the while to see any motion outside - a leaf that can skip , or a cloud that can run ! how we envy a sparrow his little hop , even across the gutter . it be now a long month since I have be out of door , except just to sniff the air , without any bonnet on . I have never be box and pannelle so long since first I crawl out of my cradle . it be a sharp bright frost - it seem to freeze hard in London than in the west of Gloucestershire , but not half so cleanly . 
 Isola come , like a tea - china rise bed in poplin and ermine . her close - draw bonnet of velvet , mazarin blue , be freak with snowdrop , nod , nod , nodding , not too many of they . I hail the omen of spring , and my spirit rise already . idol be up for a lark   as the junior sophist express it   and she have set her heart upon lead I such a dance . shall she ever set that sweet heart upon anything , and not obtain it at once ? who know ? never , I be quite sure , when another heart be the object . 
 " come , you grave old Grandmother . you be young than I , I believe , in spite of all your story ; and you be old enough in your way , for old mother Hubbard that live in a cupboard . oh my tippet and furbelow , if I wear as tall as you , and half as long in the waist , what a dress I would have . fifteen guineas at least . come along , you bed - ride dump of a Clara ; it be freeze like brick and silica , and I be in such spirit , and Giudice be frightening Tom out of his life in the kitchen . " 
 she dance round my little room , like a leaf when the wind be rise . the pixie - king of my gordit could not have be light of foot , nor half so lovely of form . how she manage to spin so between the ' stick , " none but herself can tell . what would poor Mrs. Shelfer have say ? in spite of her fear for the furniture , she would have laugh , I believe , and bless the pretty foot . 
 " come along , Clara child . do you think I be go to stand still here all day ? " 
 " if you call that stand still , pray give I the senior sophist 's definition of motion . " 
 " oh I want to skate , so dreadfully . and Pappy and Conrad will not   let I . they say it be not   become . but what on earth can be more so ? would not   I skim on one foot ? I will skate , in spite of they , Clara , if you will only keep I in countenance . " 
 " can you imagine I skate ? " 
 " no . I know you will not   do it , you be so fearfully grave . but there be more fun in you , when you like , or when you can not   help yourself , as I have   see you once or twice , than there be in a hundred such Merry - Andrews as I . at any rate we will go and see they . on with your bonnet now , I can not wait a minute . have something to cover your eye . Conny ' 11 be there I know . " 
 on go my bonnet , nothing loth to have an airing again . it be fade in the box . 
 " now lot of warm thing , darling . you have no idea how cold it be , and scarcely sun enough to thaw the long frost in your eye . let I look at they , Donna . oh if mine be half as bright . you can not   have get they in England . " 
 " now , Idols , do not   talk nonsense . every inch of I be English , and not an inch of you ; although your eye be so blue . you be Scotch all over , or else you be all swiss . " 
 for answer she begin sing " the Merry Swiss Boy , " and be go to dance to her song , when I dance she off down stair . Giudice be in the kitchen , with Tom , from the top of the coffee - mill , sputter anathema at he . a magnificent dog he be , of the race of maltese bloodhound , now so scarce , fawn - colour , long in the flank , deep in the jowl , pouch - eare , and grave of eye . he regard Tom no more than if he have be an old hat brush the wrong way ; and the bird , who be all in a flutter , he take for british butterfly . he come leisurely to I , walk one side at a time , and solemnly deposit his great moist nose in my hand . I know he then as the friend who address I , long since , in the Villa Road . 
 " why , you graven image " - a popular person always have fifty nickname ; Isola have a hundred at least , and she like they all - " what depth of secresy and statecraft be this ! you know how I love dog , and you never even tell I of this splendid fellow 's existence ! " 
 " well , Donna dear , do not   look so indignant . he do not   belong to I , and he will not   come with I unless he be tell , and then he make such a favour of it . see his long supple stride . he walk just like a leopard - do not   you , you pious panther ? I wonder he take to you so . he be not fierce at all , except when he ought to be ; but he hardly ever make friend . " 
 " whose dog be he ? ' 
 " Conrad 's to be sure . and I do believe Conny think more of he than he do of I . get along , you yellow mammoth ! why he would keep his head there all day ? " 
 " all dog love I , Idols . it be so when I be a child . they know how honest I be . " 
 " well , I believe you be , Donna ; and too honest sometimes . but I be honest enough , and Giudice do not appreciate it . come along , Judy . be you go to stick there all day ? " 
 away we go , and the great dog walk behind , keep his head most fairly adjust between we , never shift its place an inch , whether we walk or run - as we do where the street be empty , and when we get into the Park . 
 oh the cold air of heaven , fresh from the clear North Pole , where the Great Bear stalk round the Little Bear with the vigilance of a mother , how it tighten the clip of the joint , put a sting into every step , flush the cheek with Aurora , and sparkle in young eye ! for the nonce we forget who we be , never think how our clothe blow about , our spirit be on the north wind , what be we more than snow flake , let we glisten and lift on the air . 
 cross the Park   lightly furrow with snow at the drain , like our hair when we part it   we come to a broad sheet of ice . we have hear a long way off a crisp musical hollow sound , like tap a box with a hole in it . the ice be not like the old ice at Vaughan Park , but seam and channel , and up and down , and powder light grey with scraping from skate and shoe . thousand of people be on it , some skating , some slide , some rush about and play hot game with crooked stick , some sweep away with short broom , some cry thing for sale and offer skate for hire , many stand still and wistfully eye the land ; but all in the height of good humour , laughing , chaffing , holloaing , drinking , and order more . every now and then some great performer   in his own eye   would sail by the woman grandly   like a ship heel over , with his arm fold and foot over foot , and a long cigar in his mouth . for these one devoutly desire a fall . the skater of real eminence scorn this common show - off , and each have his special admirer form a ring around he , where he have cut his own circus of smoother and greener ice . 
 along the brink of firm land , stand nurse and child innumerable ; the maid on the giggle at every challenge bear to they from the glaze water , the little one tugging , and kicking , and frantic to get on . the background of all the cold scene , whiter as it recede , and break by gliding figure , be form by some low fringe islet , with open water around they , and crane - neck wild fowl wheel about , and warning board , and iceman push flat - bottom boat along . in the far distance , to the right , be two or three canvas tent , where they keep the range of the mercury , and the list of the accident . the long vista be close now and then , as high as hat and bonnet , by scud of the drift ice and snow . 
 here as we stand on the bank , Giudice forsook we shamefully , and bound over the ice , with a levity quite scandalous for a serious - minded dog , towards one of the charmed circle , where eminent skater whirl , like peg - top full of steam - engine . be it likely that we , two girl of spirit , would halt ignobly there ? first on the ice go I , hold Isola 's hand , and tempt she nothing loth . in spite of her boast about skating , Idols be frighten at first , and hold very tightly by I , and want to run back . but the little foot grow braver at every step , and she venture even to clap her hand and dance . to I the thing be no novelty , except from the number of people , and the puckering of the ice . I have even the courage to slide with one foot , but never with both at a time . as for the cracking and bend when some heavy man scour by , on purpose , I dare say , to frighten we , I laugh with my heart in my mouth . Isola be amazed . she never could have conceive that I have so much effrontery . what care I , if a hundred people star at I ? I be do nothing unseemly , and dozen of lady be there . the scene , and the air , and the spirit of youth set my blood all on the bound , and oh , blessing of blessing , my blessed sight be come back . how manly , and stirring , to feel , that a slip - and a limb may be break ; a crack - and one may be drown . 
 but , as usual , I suffer for my temerity . first we follow Giudice , and find he in the centre of the ring , where the great throng be gather , the dog skating with his master , who be one of the very good skater in the world . Giudice be graver than ever , but wistfully glance as he whirl round , at every point of escape . with his heavy fore foot on his master 's shoulder , and his tongue loll out , and his eye roll sadly at each reluctant caper , and his poor tail between his jerked leg , it be impossible not to see that his dignity and self - respect be suffer . so when Conrad come to speak to we , I earnestly beg that Giudice might be set free , which be do in a moment , to the great disappointment of the bystander , and the boundless delight of the dog , who come and gratefully kiss my hand . 
 " why , Donna , " cry Isola in a small pet , " Giudice take you for his mistress : he would never do that to I , if I coax he a hundred year . " 
 Through , the colour the north wind have spread on my cheek , I feel the warm blood rushing , and bend over the dog to hide it ; then much as I long to see Isola 's brother skate , I drag she off rather rudely towards the rougher part of the ice . Conrad look rather surprised and hurt , but resume his figuring with much apparent philosophy . 
 idol and I , with the flush in our cheek , and the flash in our eye , and our form all buoyant with innocent fun , come suddenly round a corner on a party of low - look man , who be cast flat stone , bowling , or curling , or play at drake , with a great tin can for their mark . we turn and be off in a moment ; but we have be observe by the sharp and slyest eye in London . a man give chase in half - skate fashion , have bone tie under his boot , in lieu of skate . we could easily have escape , in spite of his bone ; but be I go to run away , like a skittish servant - maid ? I draw up Miss Isola sharply , whether she would or no , and confront the enemy . it be Mr. Shelfer himself , the man so modest and bashful , who could never bear to look at I . though a dozen more come after he , I feel no alarm at all , know his wonderful shyness and diffidence . but his first address amazed I . 
 " now be your time , lad . at them , I say . here be the two prettiest gal in London . " 
 the low scoundrel ! I see that he be quite tipsy . but frighten as I be , for none but they be near , I could hardly help laugh at he . he have his usual slouch , and the long sly nose , and the pen - house gleam of the eye , and his gaunt cheek draw as if he be always suck they , and the chimneypot hat , that have once belong to some steady go Churchman , with the crown flap in , like the gill of a fish . all this be balance by the skill and comical courage of Bacchus , upon a pair of grate marrow - bone . behind he his countless pocket yawn and look brown on the wind . and this be the being bow down to by Mrs. Shelfer ! 
 " Clara dear , stop , Clara ! " the impudent sot cry out . 
 I have stop without that , and be already face he . for a moment he be abash , for my eye be full upon his ; but the other be come up . 
 " now this be what I call harmony , dash if it be not . why look at the tree and the bush . there be harmony in they tree , ay in every one on them . fine tree and pretty gal , they be the jockey for I . that be what I call natur ' and something like . house ! Lor , there be no harmony in house and pantile . fine tree be all harmony , and so be lovely woman . do not   tell the old gal at home . she never would understand . why idol there be a pretty duck as ever swam on the ice . but Clara 's a - - fine swan , and no mistake . duck be all very well , but a swan be the jockey for I . there be something to lay hold on there . give I a swan I say , and the harmony of they tree . Bob Ridley , I will lay you a tanner I kiss that there swan . ever see such eye , Bob , and look at the way she stand . wonder there be a bit of ice leave here . " 
 the low rogue have a long pipe " in his head , " - as Farmer Huxtable express it , - and at every leer sentence blow out a puff of smoke . 
 " bet you a tanner , Charley , you do not   kiss that stunnin ' gal , " cry his friend , as drunk as himself . 
 " here go , neck or nothing ; " and the niddering make a dash at I . I draw my clenched hand from my muff , where it have be tingle in my glove , and in his tipsy rush , his face come full against it . it be a very odd thing , and I know not how it happen . he reel on his bone from the collision , and stagger in star amazement . before he have time to recover , Conrad dash up like a hawk at an owl ; by some wonderful back - stroke he stop in an instant , wring Shelfer 's crooked stick from his hand , hook he under the collar , strike out again , and tow the poor wretch away backward , at the speed of a mile in a minute . the fire fly from his skate as he dash towards the open water . Giudice , at full gallop behind , try in vain to keep up . every man and woman there turn to watch the issue . shelfer throw out his hand wildly , and scream : he be utterly helpless , his tooth rattle more than the bone on his boot . at the edge of the open water , three hundred yard away , Conrad stop suddenly , like an engine in collision , unhooked Mr. Shelfer , and let he go with full impetus . sprawl and yell in vain , he fling up his arm , and fall backward into the water headlong . the iceman come run with boat , and rope , and grapnel . but before the first splash be over , another be see ; Giudice , at a sign from his master , plunge in , draw the poor man of harmony out , and lay he high and wet on the ice . he be take at once to the tent ; where , as I afterwards hear , he make a fine afternoon of it with the society 's man ; most of whom , it be needless to say , he know . be that as it may , the lesson do he good . he never insult a lady again , or   what be still bad   a poor honest girl , with no education , and no one to defend she . as for I , I really believe he never durst blink his sly eye in my direction again . 
 I love good justice , in or out of the pod . the bean be as sweet to I from the rough air of heaven as from a juryman 's pocket . but I think Master Conrad have overdo it this time . he have no right to risk the poor man 's life . and so I tell he when he come back , as calm as if he have cut a spread eagle . he assure I that he have not risk the man 's life at all . he know the depth of the water there by the island . it be five foot and no more . then I feel all of a glow and long to give he the kiss which have cost Mr. Shelfer so much . the next minute I feel humiliate , and burst into a passion of tear , to think what my father would say at his pet of grace and luxury be insult like that . idol and Conrad , not know my story , could not understand it at all . 
 they come home with I at once . Conrad , " under the circumstance , " venture to offer his arm , which I , under the circumstance , venture to accept . at the door he leave I ; but idol come in with Giudice , commission to see her safe home . she come in partly lest I should feel lonely , partly to arraign Mrs. Shelfer   already condemn by both of we girl   for dare to have such a reprobate drunken husband . 
 CHAPTER IX . 
 when Isola have tell Mrs. Shelfer everything , and a little more than everything   for her imagination be lively , the dominant feeling in the little woman 's bosom be not indignation , as we have expect , but terror . terror of two evil ; the first and chief evil , the possibility of Charley catch cold ; the other , the probability that he would crush Conrad , and tread he into the earth , at the early opportunity . I assure she warmly that Mr. Conrad could well defend himself , even if Shelfer should dare to meddle with he . 
 " oh , my good friend , you have no idea what a terrible fellow Charley be . why he break the head of the skittleman at the " Load of Hay . " so he tell I himself . ah , he be a terrible fellow , when he be put out . " 
 " but you forget , Mrs. Shelfer , he have not   be put out this time ; he be put in . " that Isola always love small joke . 
 " put in , Miss Idols ? " Mrs. Shelfer never understand any joke but her own - " oh yes , put into the water you mean . true , true , and serve he right   so long as he do not   take cold   for call I , his lawful wife who keep he together , ' the old gal at home ! ' but Charley be a terrible fellow , terrible . " 
 " terrible coward more likely , " I cry , " or he would never have dare his low insolence to I . I be sorry for it , Mrs. Shelfer , utterly as I scorn he , because it compel I to leave your house ; and you have be truly good and kind to I . " I think of Mrs. Huxtable ; but how different be the fibre of her kindness ! 
 " leave my house , Miss Valence ! no , no , my good friend , that will never do , not to be think of , and we so use to you and all , and Tom , and the blackbird , and the new squirrel ! a likely story , my good friend , and with your eyelash come ! and do you know who would come instead of you ? " 
 " of course not , Mrs. Shelfer . " 
 " why a nasty stink hussy , that would steal the feather out of my good bed again , the same as they do before . my very good bed , Miss Idols , as dear Miss Minto leave I by her will , not a well bed in London , unless it be the Queen 's , and so I use to tell she when I help to shake it up . my mouth water over it so , that she say one day , and the knife - boy hear she on the stair , ' Patty , you have   be a good girl to I , and you deserve it , and you shall have it , when I be tuck up for good and all . ' and so I do , very honourable , and all above board . yes , yes ; I have a commercial gent one time , a wonderful heavy man to be sure , and he stay with I three year for the sake of that same bed . and he know what bed be , and no mistake . it be bootiful to see when he be a getting up . it begin to rise up , up , the same as Tom 's back , when he see your dog , Miss Idols . " 
 " come , Mrs. Shelfer , I fear we can hardly wait . " 
 " ' twas like dough put afore the fire , Miss. there be no such Dantzic now . you could not   put your fist into one side of it , but out it would come the other . oh Lor , I could cry ; that nasty sly minx , she be soft than parsnip , you would say , and one leg more than the other . I could not   think why it be she would always make her own bed . ' thank you , Mrs. Shelfer ' - with her lip suck in like a button - hole - ' thank you , you be too kind . it do not   at all fatigue I , and my doctor pronounce the exercise good for my chest and arm . ' thank God , she get some exercise good for her leg as well . six month on the treadmill . Charley get I an order , and it do my heart good to see she . but my twenty pound of good feather never come back again , and that be not   the bad of it neither . " 
 " oh dear no , " say Idols , " the bad of it be the sin , Mrs. Shelfer . " 
 " the bad of it be that she stuff it with sawdust , and oakum , and jovanna , I do believe , by the smell of it . " 
 " what do you mean , Mrs. Shelfer ? " 
 " Lor , Miss Valence , do not   you know jovanna that the kingfisher lay on the top of the sea , and the gardener make water with it ? " 
 " and what do she do with your feather ? " 
 " sneak they out of the house in the crown of her bonnet , and sell they at eightpence a pound , and they worth three and sixpence , every flue of they . but the rag and bottleman get two month , thank God for it . ah , it will never be a bed again under 5 l.   at least . " 
 " be it the one I sleep on , Mrs. Shelfer ? " 
 " yes , my good friend , the very same . " 
 " and you have put I to sleep on guano ! well , I think it smell very odd . " 
 " no , no , my good friend , wait a bit . we get most of that out again , and give it to our geranium . she steal it out of a sack as Charley keep in the washhouse . there be feather in it . that put it into her head , I suppose . but as for your going , Miss Valence , that will never do . never , never . will it now , Miss Idols ? and to see her dress , to be sure , that baggage ! why , my good tarlatan , as dear Miss Minto give I to be marry in , be not   good enough for she to sweep the stair in . sweep the stair - yes , yes , she do sweep the stair when I see she last ; and she have afore , I know ; she be so clever at it ; and that be why one leg be so much more than the other . " 
 " Mrs. Shelfer , do you expect we to listen to you all night ? " 
 " true , my good friend , quite true . but when I think of my feather , something come over I , I must out with my trouble , or burst . but you musn't   go , Miss Valence . that will never do , never ; ask Miss Idols now . " and she turn to Isola , who be quite ready to be turn to . 
 " of course it will not , Mrs. Shelfer . you be quite right , my good friend . I will not   hear of it for a moment . why Mr. Shelfer be drunk . I know it by the way he hold his pipe . quite ' drunk and incapable , ' you know . and he will be so sorry , and he will never do it again . and he do not mean to be drunk at all , but the frost be very hard , and the cold get into his head . I be sure it would into mine , if I have stay much long ; and he do not   understand brandy - ball , as we do at College - you could not expect it , you know . " 
 the pure good faith of this last be too much for I . I laugh outright , have no husband concern in it . as for the dry little woman , she actually cry . I have never see a tear in her quick , shy eye before , though the feather - bed nearly bring they , and so do the death of the eld Sandy , the squirrel . she turn away . she be always ashamed of emotion . 
 " bless your innocent heart , Miss Idols , if you do not   marry a king ! not one of we be good enough to tie your shoe as you talk of , you be that simple and good of heart . " 
 be there any goodness more touching to a veteran than a soft young nature 's disbelief in evil ? but for bitter experience , I might have be sweet as Isola . thank God , that in spite of all vinegar , the ailment be still infectious . Isola could not make it all out . 
 " to - morrow morning , Miss Valence , " begin Mrs. Shelfer again , " to - morrow morning , after I have wig he well all night , and then give he a good breakfast , he will come and beg your pardon like a child , and be ashamed to look any high than your flounce ; and I know you will forgive he . " 
 " Mrs. Shelfer , I have forgive he long ago . I can not bear enmity against such people " - these last three word have well be away - " for such little wrong . and I owe you a great deal for all your kindness to I . the only question be , whether self - respect and prudence allow I to stay here . I will leave the decision to Miss Isola . young as she be , and innocent and confide , she can not be wrong on a question of delicacy . as for prudence , she know more of London than I do . " 
 Hereon I sit down with a womanly air . but I could hardly help laugh when the senior sophist jump up , proud to deliver judgment . to look tall , she shake her flounce down , throw back her plump white shoulder - her bonnet and cloak be off - draw her rich flow hair down the pearly curve of her ear and , scarcely satisfied yet , think of mount a stool , then take her foot off the too convictive bema . after all these anabolism , she begin with much solemnity . she be think of the College , and her father in the rostrum . 
 " Miss Valence and Mrs. Shelfer , since you have honour my weak judgment by appoint I umpire , and as I be lead to believe without any right of appeal , I will do my utmost to be discreet and impartial . in the first place I award that Miss Valence remain in this house , forget and forgive her wrong . in the second place I recommend   in such a matter I will not presume to command   that till Mr. Shelfer have make a humble apology and promise faithfully never to be intoxicate again , however cold the weather be , Mrs. Shelfer shall not permit he to have a single kiss , nor a single bit of hot dinner . now I have deliver my decree . " 
 " Lor , Miss Idols , you be too soft for the Old Bailey . he never kiss I , unless it be when he know I have get some money . but he do like a good hot dinner . right enough there , my good friend . " 
 so this knotty point be settle ; and Giudice , who be very loth to leave I , escort Miss Idols home , before go , he make another solemn deposit of his great jowl in my hand , and look at I with an air so tutelary and encouraging , that I could not help laugh ; at which he feel hurt , but condone it . Isola tell I that when he be put in charge of she , he feel the responsibility so strongly that he would not stir from her side , not even to speak to the most colloquially gifted dog ; though at other time he would stay gossip near a lamp - post for five minute together . one evening when he be thus commission , a rude fellow push between they , and say something to Isola . Giudice have he down in an instant , and stand over he , like a tawny thundercloud , with growling so fearful and such flash eye , that two policeman feel it wise not to act as conductor . idol herself be oblige , at the entreaty of her prostrate foe , to coax the great dog off ; but when the ungrateful man get up , he insist on give Giudice into charge , and have he drag to the Station . " very good , Sir , " say the policeman , " we will enter the charge when you bring he there ; let he go , Miss , for the Gent to collar he . " the " Gent " be away in no time , and Giudice and his mistress walk off amid loud hurrah from all the boy of the neighbourhood . 
 Conrad call with his sister the day after Mr. Shelfer 's ducking , to reassure himself as to my nerve , which be never well . he look over some of my drawing , and without seem to give , but rather to seek information , afford I many a hint , which I afterwards find most useful . I now learn what his profession be ; and it give I pleasure to find that he be not , as I have fear , a mere lounger upon town . instead of that , he be work very hard , be   as he tell I   nothing more or less than a journeyman sculptor . though , as himself admit , by no mean a novice , he be go through the regular course of study and hand - labour under an eminent artist . but Isola tell I , and no doubt it be true , that he could beat his master out and out , and that for any choice design , where original power and taste be need , they always come to he . of late the frost have lighten his task ; for warm the room as they would , the weather always affect the material ; and they fear to attempt the more delicate part of the work during the rigour of winter . so when the thaw come , he must lose the pleasure of see I for a while , unless dear Isola wish to be escort home on a Sunday ; if , indeed , I allow she to come on that day . why , that be the very day when I could well indulge in a walk with my gentle friend , after go to church ; and I be sure her society do I more good than the sermon . on her part , Isola find that the service always make she so nervous   her nerve be as good as mine , and that she do not much like walk about with a big dog on Sundays , and Cora be always cross all the day after mass , so Conrad must promise upon his honour always to come for she , rain , hail , or shine , on a Sunday . this he promise so readily , that , for a moment , I fancy it have all be preconcerte . then I despise myself for the suspicion . the trick would have be not out of the compass of Isola , but very unworthy of Conrad . 
 CHAPTER X. 
 soon as ever my sight be fully restore , and I have Dr. Frank 's permission , I take to my drawing again , and work at it till my eye ache . this be the symptom upon which I have promise immediately to leave off . then out I would rush , towards dusk , and away into the great square , full of the pure air of heaven , round by the church at the top , and six time round it till my breath be short . the senior sophist remind I that round a square be impossible . after square the circle , extract the square root , dear idol , by the binomial theorem . you do learn so much at college : but I write simple and often foolish English . never mind ; I would rather write bad English , than the good French ever write . one be the tongue of power and multitude : the other the language of nicety and demarcation . which of the two be the more expansive , even a woman may guess . 
 high time it be for I to recruit my exchequer . Dr. Franks have charge I far less than I even dare to hope . how I tremble when I open the envelope ! what quick terror be half so bad as the slow fear of gather debt ? I be accustomed to medical charge of the time when I be an heiress : but his appear to I now to be even below reason . the sum could hardly have pay he for his numerous walk to and fro . then a wretched idea shoot through I : have he charge I so little , because he know I be poor ? I take Mrs. Shelfer into my confidence ; she be likely to know what the London scale should be . the little thing soon reassure I : it be quite enough , she declare ; if she be in my place , she would demand a discount for ready money ! 
 " oh you dreadfully mean little woman ! I should lose my sight , and deserve it , if I do . " 
 however , in spite of all this , money be scarce and scarcer every day , and none of my grand revenue would fall due for ever so long . so another visit must be pay to Mr. Oxgall . Isola insist on come with I ; to my surprise I find that , with all her soft simplicity she have much more idea of make a market than I have . the reason probably be that she have much less pride . no pocket would hold mine , when a tradesman attempt any familiarity . and whoso stand on a pedestal to sell , be like to find the buyer 's arm too short . 
 whether it be that , or the golden charm of her manner , or of something else , let Mr. Oxgall say ; certain it be that the man of crackly canvas   for whom , by - the - bye , I have a sincere respect , because he cheat I so little and so neatly   - this man , I say , regard she with a wide - mouthed , brooch - eye , admiration , which he hardly ever expend on anything out of oil . for the king of painter himself she be a vision sweet than dream of heaven . such a tint in her lustrous eye , such tone in her dainty cheek , such perfection of line in her feature , and every curve of her exquisite shape . and bound and sparkle through all , from the ripple wealth of her hair to the light - curve arch of her foot , the full play of her innocent , joyous , love life . 
 no wonder the picture - dealer shade his eye and gaze , and rub they and gaze again . I have frequently see respectable elderly gentleman , whose rakishness have never be more than find vent in the cock of a hat , magisterial man I mean , who would no more think of insult a girl in London or anywhere else , than of give their daughter as prize for competitive skill in poach , such good man and true , also simple - hearted clergyman   for some there still be from the country   these and the like , I Clara Vaughan have see , when they meet my Isola , stop short , wink frequently , and without much presence of mind , until she be go by ; then shumble hotly across the street , with hand in their tail - coat pocket   for these gentleman always expect most to be rob when there be least chance of it   pretend to look at a shop , then march at top speed , fumble all the while for their spectacle , until they get well a - head of we . then I have see they cross again , some thirty yard in front , with spectacle nicely adjust , and become again wholly absorb by the beauty of metropolitan good . but when the light foot sound , from a fair gaze distance , these same gentleman have   by some strange coincidence   alway turn full upon we , in an absent and yet nervous manner , and focusse their green or pale blue eye upon the rich violet orb of Isola . I have even know they to look at I   when they could see she no more , to find some sympathy for their vague emotion . idol know it : of course she do . and she rather glory in it . she have much respect for a fine old gentleman ; and I know not how it be , but nobody ever think of insult she when she could be clearly see . 
 a " pretty girl " you would never call she - though Mr. Shelfer do - the term would be quite unworthy ; even a " beautiful girl , " sweetly beautiful though she be , would hardly be your expression , at least for a while . but a " lovely girl , " and the lovely one ever see , that be what she would be call at once , if you could take your eye off , to analyse your idea . 
 Isola know it of course , as I say before , she know all her wondrous gift ; but as for be conceite , a trull with a splay foot and a crop of short - horn carrot have often thrice her conceit . a certain pretty graceful pride she have , which throw a rosy playful halo round she , but never make other woman look plain in her eye . she will not value her beauty much , until she fall in love ; and bless be he who shall be the object , if she be allow to abide with he . 
 meanwhile Mr. Oxgall wish for nothing but to hear and see her talk ; and this she do to some purpose . I like a man who at the age of sixty be still impressible to the gay vein of youth . I know at once by his eye whether his admiration be abstract and admissible . if it be , I reciprocate it . what clear proof can we find , that his heart have not wither with his body ; that he be not a man of mammon , tinsel , or phylactery , - in a word , no mummy ? 
 shall I ever finish this bargain ? I have never be so reflective before ; and all the time no less a sum than five pound hang upon it . five guineas   which sound well   be the amount at which dear idol let off Mr. Oxgall . I believe she might have get ten , but she have an excellent conscience . it work like a patent chronometer , with compensation balance . mine be still more sensitive . I could hardly think my landscape , perspective mare 's nest and all , worth that amount of money , and I wish to throw off a guinea , but idol would not hear of it . 
 " Miss Valence , I be your factor for this beautiful landscape , which have cost you so much labour . either accept my term , inadequate as they be , or take the agency from I , and recommence with Mr. Oxgall ' de novo , ' as we say at College . " 
 betwixt her beauty and my stately integrity , poor Mr. Oxgall know not where he stand . I hear he mutter that he would rather go through fifty auction , even if it be George Robins . but if she have come to sell he a picture the very next day , he would have go through it all again with the same infatuation . so I take the money ; and now my evil demon , who have chafe beneath all this trampling , have his turn again . we have foolishly bring the great dog Giudice , for our delight and the expansion of his mind . in Mr. Oxgall 's shop he behave to admiration . with the air of a connoisseur he walk from picture to picture , close one eye , and faintly wag his tail . then he find a Scotch terrier scarcely worth a sniff , and a mastiff whom he salute with a contemptuous growl . the only work of high art he could discover be an interior , with a flitch of bacon in the foreground uncommonly well draw . before this he sit down , and receive no invitation , bedew the board with a stalactite from either side of his mouth . the dog be so well behave , he never take anything without leave and say t a long grace . 
 unluckily Mr. Oxgall , mainly I believe to prolong his interview with Idols , insist upon take we to the shop of a carver and gilder close by ; where my first drawing   which have be sell   be to be see in its frame . he declare that we could not tell what a painting be like , until we have see it frame . observe several large mirror in this shop , I beg that Giudice might be leave outside . and so he be , but he do not stay there . Scarcely have we begin to discuss the effect of the frame on my drawing , when Giudice push his way in , and look about with a truly judicial air . the shop be long , and the owner be with we at the further end . I see what would follow , and dash off to stop he , but it be too late . Giudice have see the very fine dog he ever behold in his life - a dog really worth fight . up go his crest and his tail , one savage growl , and he spring at he . Crash , - and the large mirror there be a wreck , and Giudice the rock beneath it . for a time he lie quite stunned ; then to my great delight he stagger to I , not Isola , lay his cut paw in my hand and his bleed nose in my lap , and explain it all to I with much entreaty for sympathy . this I give he readily , even to tear and kiss . Isola want to scold and even to beat he , but I would not hear of it . he have see another great dog between himself and we , how could he help attack he ? I order a sponge and some water at once , and bath his fore paw , which be terribly cut ; then remember the inspector , I send idol for some arnica . but the blood be not stanch by it as I expect ; perhaps the drug be not pure , or the hair obstruct its action . so I hold his paw in the basin , and he whinge , and lick I , and make my face all bloody . 
 meanwhile the poor carver and gilder think much more of his look - glass than of noble flesh and blood . the picture - dealer as well be in a great predicament . 
 " Mr. Oxgall , " I cry , still sponge the wound dog 's nose , " let we hear no more about it . tell I the full value of the mirror , and I will pay for it . what be glass and quicksilver , or even gold , compare to a noble dog like this ? not worth a wag of your tail , be they , my duck of diamond ? give I another kiss , you delicious pet of a dog . " 
 the delicious dog be entirely of my opinion . his beautiful eye be unhurt . his nose taste wholesomely salt . but Isola be not half so romantic . little she care about money for herself ; yet she have no idea of see a friend disburse . empower by nature to wind all man round her finger , she now call art to her aid , and Mr. Oxgall , who be half - way round already , have no chance of escape . 
 she settle it thus : the carver and gilder , in consideration of his dealing with Mr. Oxgall and his own " careless exposure " of the mirror , should accept cost price for the article . that amount should be pay in equal share by all three of we : by Mr. Oxgall because he would drag we thither , by herself as the mistress of the dog , and by I as the cause of the expedition . she have attend a course of lecture upon jurisprudence , and her decision be well than that of a judge , because she have see the whole of it , and because the dog be her - at least her brother 's , which be all the same . as for the owner of the mirror , he must think himself wonderfully lucky in have meet with such honest people , and in have sell his glass , and have not   he get all the piece , and she must have the large one for Judy to dress his hair by . and so indeed she do . 
 after our dear Portia have finish , and the whole thing be settle , it strike I that no lecture upon jurisprudence could turn wrong into right . Mr. Oxgall be quite blameless , so be I , so be Idols , except in bring unlucky Giudice with she , which , from the outset , I have discourage . she , as the temporary owner of the dog , should have bear all the loss ; and so she would have do gladly , only she do not see it in that light . as it be , she try afterwards to force upon I her last three guineas   that be the sum which I have pay , as my third of the whole , but of course I would not accept they . she have no money with she , so I pay her contribution , but allow she to repay I . Mr. Oxgall 's third I make good to he   without consult she   when he pay I for my next drawing . so I have earn five guineas , and lose six . be it always to be so when I labour to make a little money ? 
 at my earn entreaty - Idols could refuse I nothing , when I be in earnest - darling Giudice be bring home in a cab to my lodging . I know that he would not be care for at the stable where he be board ; and his wound be very serious . as for home , Professor Ross , who detest dog in general , would not admit he into the house . he even think it a great stretch of grace to allow old Cora to watch the dog back to the stable , after he have be patrol all the afternoon with his mistress . how I hate such low ingratitude ! an animal be to serve we , body and soul , to crouch and fawn for our notice - not that Giudice ever fawn to he , but growl awfully - and we be to think it well off with a curse or a kick , which we durst not give it but for its loyalty to we . 
 what pleasure I have in nursing that poor Giudice , and how grateful he be ! when we get home , I wash his wound again , with warm water this time , as the bleeding be stanch ; and then I " exhibit "   as the doctor absurdly say   a little friar 's balsam . " oh , it do smart so ! " Giudice exclaim with his eye , " but I know it be for the good , and you will not   see I give one wince . " neither do I. then a nice soft bandage over his lovely paw , and a plaister across his nose , and he lie snugly , at the proper distance from the fire , as proud as possible of be nurse , and with an interesting air of pallid refinement on his feature . he will hardly notice idol , but exclaim , at length , with the petulance of an invalid , " Isola , can not   you let I alone ? Clara understand a dog , and I like she much the good . " so he follow I all round the room with his eye , and beg I to come and talk to he , which I would not do , because he need quiet and composure . 
 CHAPTER XI . 
 Beloved Giudice remain many day under my care , until he become convinced that he be my dog absolutely , and have no claim on any other human being . he more than pay for his board and medical attendance , by sit repeatedly for his portrait ; in which at last I succeed to his and my own satisfaction . though by no mean a conceited dog , there be nothing he love well than have his likeness take ; and directly after breakfast he always assume the most become attitude , and watch intently for the appearance of the pencil with his massive head a little on one side , and his dark brown eye full of dignified interest , and his great ear curve down through russet tuft , like tawny cascade in autumn , he seem fit study for a real artist , who should quicken as well as copy he . however , he be too much of a gentleman to sneer at my weak effort , for he see that I do my good . oftentime he would gaze steadfastly at the portrait and then at I , and hobble up , and nudge I , and whine , a little , and then sigh in self - abasement at his want of speech . whenever he do this , I know that he wish to have something alter ; but it be long before I could discover what that something be . I try every change of line or colour that I could think of - all to no purpose . at length it strike I that as he criticise more with nose than eye , the defect must be in the smell . happy idea ! I satisfy my Giudice at last , and do it thus . after shade around the nose and mouth , before lay on the colour , I take a clean dry brush , and pass it lightly round the hollow of his own sweet saltish nostril , carefully avoid the cut ; then one turn of the brush , not on the palette , but on a dry square of colour , and with that I express the dear dog 's nose so well , that he would have spoil it in a sniff ecstasy , if I have not pull it away . his portrait now possess the life which he require . 
 meanwhile I receive almost daily visit from Isola and her brother ; the latter be , of course , very anxious about his poor dog , and could only relieve that anxiety by long interview with he . it happen strangely enough , yet more and more often as time go on , that Isola during these interview feel an especial desire for Mrs. Shelfer 's society , which she could only enjoy by betake herself to the kitchen . there , with all the pet , except old Tom , who be constancy itself , and the lame blackbird who be all gratitude , her influence begin to supersede mine , and even Mrs. Shelfer 's ; for this I care but little , so long as Giudice keep to I . 
 over that great dog , as he turn upon his side , and lift one hind leg   the canine mode of show submission to the will of God , over he we bent , Conrad and I , in most interesting diagnosis , until it seem the proper thing that our hair should flow together , and our breath make one soft breeze . from this position we would rise with a conscious colour in our cheek , and a flutter at the heart , and a certain awe of one another . then it would be ever so long before either of we dare to seek the other 's eye . haply when those eye be meet - unwitte yet inevitably - they would drop , or turn away , or find some new attraction in the dog or cloud . 
 then some weak remark would follow , for which the hearer care no whit , yet feign deep interest therein . 
 why labour thus to cheat ourselves - each other we can not cheat - why feel we so confused and guilty , why long so heartily to be a hundred league away , yet know thoroughly that , if it be so , all the space between be void and heartache ? the reason neither we nor other mortal know ; the cause be this , that we love one another . 
 I have feel that it must be so , at least on my part , ever since the day he come with Isola , and know I not , though I know he so well . do he know I now as the Clara Vaughan whom he once avoid ? these eyelash be as long and dark as ever ; the large eye , shade by they , be as deep a gray as twilight in a grove of willow . my cheek have regain their curve , my hair be never injure ; let I hie to the glass now he be go , and see if I be like myself , and whether I have face and form likely to win Conrad 's love . 
 no , I be not like myself . no wonder he do not know I . the gloom habitual to my face be go . it be the difference betwixt a cavern well and a sunny fountain . I see a laugh graceful girl , with high birth mark in every vein , and self - respect in every motion ; her clear cheek glow with soft wonder , her red lip part with delight , her arch neck and shoulder curve gleam through a night of tress , her forehead calm and thoughtful still , half - belie the bright eye where love and pleasure sparkle . for a moment self - approval heighten the expression . at my silly self my foolish self be smile ; but the smile have warm source than maiden 's light conceit . I smile because I see that , as regard exterior , he who slight I must be hard to please ; and some one , whom I think of , be not hard to please . straight upon the thought of he - ah well . 
 my father use to quote from the " Hero and Leander " a beautiful verse , which neither he nor any other could in English render duly , 
  greek : aidous hyron éreuphos apostazousa pros"pou .   - v. 173 . 
 " shower from her cheek the flow carmine of her shame . " 
 CHAPTER XII . 
 but when Conrad should have learn who it be that nurse his dog , would he feel the tender gratitude and delight which he now display so freely ? would he say , as in his fervour he now say every day , " Miss Valence , I do believe there be no one like you in the world ! " would he not rather say , " Miss Vaughan , how basely you have deceive I ! Giudice , come away ! " a whistle and the last sound of the foot , for which I listen now by the hour . 
 this thought be continually with I . it poison half the flavour and ruin all the digestion of my happy moment . but what could I do ? how unmaidenly , how presumptuous of I to imagine that he be likely to break his heart for I ! and if he do - why then he should break my own as well . I be not one of the drawing - room young lady , who receive a modify proposal every Sunday afternoon , and think much more about the sermon afterwards . I can not play with the daffodil upon the brink of love , sleepily thrust my admirer in , and lounge with half - open breast , which neither love - knot may secure , nor flutter sigh unzone . no , here I be , such as I be , such as God have make I . no usury , no auction for my heart : once for all I give it , and my life go with it . 
 so it must always be with a girl of any feeling , who have train her own existence . but for my wild ignorance , I would dare to say - so it must be always with a girl of feeling , twist and warp she as you will . yet I be tell , by those who know the world , that it be not so with nine girl out of ten among the lady caste . if , beneath the roc of fashion , they prefer the diamond to the meat , let they have it , and starve thereon . the choice be of their own young crop . no parent bird can force the bauble down . but what have I to do with this ? all I know be that neither I , nor any child of mine , will or shall be gullete thus for life . 
 after every little burst of thought , every feeble sally of imagination , come   as always be the case with I   come the slow pusillanimous reaction . all that I have any right to do be to paint , earn money , and be off for Italy . 
 little as I know about the expense of travel , I feel sure that it would be vain to start with less than a hundred pound . enormous sum ! how could I ever hope to win it , though I paint day and night , and live on bread and water . to this diet , or what in London be quite synonymous , bread and milk , I have already reduce myself , in my stern resolve to lay by two pound every week . farewell to meat , so soon as my Devonshire " pegmate " be go , and farewell to what I care much more about , a glass of good London stout . I suppose there be something horribly " vulgar " in my taste , for I will confess that the liquid call " black draught " by Mr. Dawe have much charm for I . however , I abjure it with all other luxury , and throve no whit the bad . the kindly little woman , whose summum bonum   next to her ' stick "   be plenty of good fare , take it much to heart that I should live so plainly . 
 " why , Miss Valence , you be the queer young lady as ever I set eye on . all as ever I see , and I have   see'd a many , they pick a little bit so dainty , like a canary crack a hemp seed when the gentleman be by : then off they go when there be nobody look , and munch like so many pig in a potato bury . Miss Violante you know . but as for you , why bless I and keep I , you feed that great horse of a dog with all the fat of the land , and you live on a crust yourself . now do come down , that be a good soul ; there be a clod of beef a - bile with suet dumpling , and such lovely parsnip , you can smell it all up the stair , gallop , gallop , my good friend , and that rogue of a Charley will not   come home I know , he be get along with that thief Bob Ridley ; and I expect the boy every minute with a little drop of stout , and the good pewter pot for you . now if you will not   come down , Miss Valence , my dinner will all stick in my throat , and I be so hungry . " 
 " so be I , Mrs. Shelfer , you have make I so . " 
 in her excitement , she slip from the edge of the chair , whereon she always balance herself when I make she sit down . she think it disrespectful to occupy too much room , and cuddle herself in the small compass possible . 
 let no ill be think of Giudice . who think ill of I I care not , for I can defend myself , if it be worth while . so can giudice with his tooth - the fine set in London - but he have no tongue , no merop tongue , I mean . it be true that Giudice have good fare , and thoroughly he enjoy it . that dog know a juicy bit of meat , short of staple , crisp , yet melt , quite as well as I do . true , he have a love of bone , transparent gristle , and white fibre , which I , from inferior structure , can not quite appreciate . yet all this be no part of his mind , much less do it affect the greatness of his soul . he keep , as all of we do who be good for anything , a certain alter ego , a high voice , a purer sense , a vein which fashion can not leech , or false shame tourniquet . so the good dog use to come to I , before he touch his breakfast , lunch , or dinner , and entreat I to devour all I could , there would be lot still leave for he . 
 in my hurry to get start of time , to spin a little fast the revolving moon , I do a thing which I could ill - approve to myself , even at the moment . I write to Sally Huxtable to obtain Mr. Dawe 's permission for I to sell my gordit . Professor Ross have offer I no less than ten guineas for it . as a gentleman he should not have make the offer , after what I have tell he . but the love of science - falsely so call by collector - drive man to discern propriety " by the wire - draw line of their longing . "     however , I be not quite so blind upon right and wrong , as to mean to keep all the money . I offer Mr. Dawe half , if the plaything should be sell . 
     " Exiguo fine libidinum . " 
 I know not why , but I could not bear the idea of a bargain and sale with Conrad 's father , wide apart as the two always be in my mind . I rather hop that Beany Dawe , though sorely tempt , would refuse . 
 and now the time be almost come for news from Tossil 's Barton . Dear Sally must have fill the twelve copybook , at the rate of one a week . Ere I quite expect it , the letter come ; but before its tiding be impart , I must in few word describe the visit of Inspector Cutting 's son . George Cutting come one evening to see his good Aunt Patty , for so he call Mrs. Shelfer , who be in truth his cousin . though I have be so assured that my enemy could not escape , I be not equally convinced , and at time a deep anxiety and despair possess I . 
 therefore I go to the kitchen to see the Inspector 's son , and request Mrs. Shelfer to allow I five minute of conversation with he . he stand all the while , and seem rather shy and confused . he have not hear from his father , since the ship sail ; but he have see in the paper that she have be speak somewhere . " the party as I know of " be still safe in London - my blood run like lava at the thought - or I should have hear of it . he , George Cutting , have his eye upon he , and so have two of the detective force ; but what be they in comparison with his father ? this he ask , despite his shyness , with so large a contempt , that I begin to think the cut family admire the cutting only . 
 upon I , who be no cutting , he leave the simple impression that the quality , so laud by his father , lie as yet beneath a bushel . however , his Aunt Patty declare that he could eat three time as much as Charley . not unlikely , if he only drink one - third of Charley 's allowance . 
 Mrs. Shelfer , who know that I be lay by a fix sum every week , begin to look upon I as a fine young miser . of course she quite fall in with what she suppose to be my idea , for she never contradict any one , unless it be a cabman . 
 " oh , I do love money , my good friend ; gold , gold , it be so bootiful . do you ever hear tell of the marrow bone I have ? oh dear ! " 
 " what marrow bone , Mrs. Shelfer ? " 
 " why a big beef marrow bone , that long , full of sovereign and guineas after dear Miss Minto . I stop it with a bung and a piece of bladder , and for well than a twelvemonth , while they be execute her will , I sleep with that beneath my pillow for fear the priest should get it . Lord , how they do fight over the poor old lady 's rag and bone , that leathery priest and three yellow kite of cousin , they say they be , as come from Portugal . at last they get a ministration     with the testament and text , and they rob I shameful , shameful , my good friend . never catch I go to mass again , or you may tell I of it . " 
     ? letter of Administration cum testamento annexo . 
 " and what become of the marrow bone , Mrs. Shelfer ? " 
 at this inquiry , she wink both eye rapidly , and screw up her little mouth . 
 " oh what a thief that Father Banger be , to be sure ! you see , Miss , I have strict order to shut he out , when Miss Minto be near her end , because he have kick her dear cat Filippina from the top of the stair to the bottom , after he have give her unction . what a pretty sight it be to see they seven dear cat , all sit round the fire , each one on his proper stool with his name do on it in different coloured worsted . I have so much a year leave I on the Bank of England , honourable to the day , for each one of those cat , and change of diet every week , and now there be only one of they leave , and that be my dear old Tom . " 
 " but , Mrs. Shelfer , about the marrow bone - " 
 " well , my good friend , I be go to tell you . the way that Father Banger get into the house again to steal the poor old lady 's money , for build a school or some such villany . he know how fond the poor soul be of cat , so he borrow a cat somewhere , and he get two boy to let it down the area with a whipcord round its stomach , and to jerk , jerk , jerk away at it , and the poor thing do squeal sure enough . ' pain , Patty , ' say my poor mistress , and she could hardly speak - ' oh , Patty , there be some cruel Englishman torture a cat again . ' so out I run into the area , and in pop Father Banger , who have his back to the wall , with a great sheet of paper ; and he begin to make a list of all the thing in the house . I take the cat to dear Miss Minto , and how pleased she be ! ' please God , ' say she , ' to let I live a few day more till I make a Catholic of this poor heretic ' - she always convert her cat the first thing - ' and then it shall have a stool and a good annuity . ' but next day the poor thing go . " 
 Little Mrs. Shelfer have so great a fear of death , that like some ancient nation she shun all mention of his name , by euphemistic periphrase . she have never know real illness , and even a stitch or a spasm would frighten she for day . when I speak calmly , as I sometimes do , of our great inevitable friend , whom we so labour to estrange , up would jump Mrs. Shelfer with a shudder and a little scream . 
 " oh do not , my good soul , oh do not ! how can you ? let we live , Miss Valence , let we live while we can , and not think of such dreadful thing . you make my blood run cold . " 
 " but , Mrs. Shelfer , surely you know that we all must die . " 
 " of course , my good friend , of course . but then you need not   remind one of it . I meet Doctor Franks to - day , and he say , ' why , Mrs. Shelfer , I do declare , you look young than ever , ' and a very clever man he be , yes , yes ; and not a gray hair in my head , and my father live to eighty - eight . " 
 " and how old be you , Mrs. Shelfer , now ? " 
 " oh I be sure I do not   know , Miss Valence , I do not   keep no account . let we talk of something else . do you hear what Tom do to your Judy to - day ? " 
 ah , poor little thing ! but I be not go to moralise . shall I ever know the history of that marrow bone ?   
     I have now ascertain that a rove dog pop in and away with the marrow bone , sovereign , guineas , and all . - C.V. 1864 . 
 CHAPTER XIII . 
 Tossil 's Barton , estimate the British Post by the standard of Joe Queen 's boy , place but little confidence in that institution . moreover , Tossil 's Barton hold that a " papper scrawl , " as it term a letter , be certain to be lose for want of size , unless it be secure in something large , ' something as a man can zee and hold on to , " as the farmer himself express it . 
 therefore I be not surprised at receive , instead of a letter by post , a packet deliver by the parcel van . this packet be bind round like the handle of a whip . and stick at either end with a mass of cobbler 's wax . bear the vivid impress of a mighty thumb . within the wrapping first appear an ominous crumpled scroll . ye star , where angel so buffoone by eminent painter dwell ! once more I behold Eli on the turnpike gate , the great western steamer , Job with a potsherd of willow - pattern plate , the Prodigal Son , and bad than all , that hideous Death and the Lady . recklessly I tumble out all the rest of the packet . three great bolt with silver clasp , three apostle spoon , two old silver salt - cellar mark W.H.J.H. , a child 's christening cup , a horn tobacco - stopper with a silver tip , an agate from the beach , a tortoise - shell knife with a silver blade , half a dozen coin and a bronze fibula find upon the farm , an infant 's coral , a neck - pin garnish with a Bristol diamond , a number of mother - of - pearl button and blue bead , and a mass of mock jewelry buy by the farmer from the Cheapjacks at Barum fair with the produce of his wrestling triumph . separate from the rest , and pack most carefully , be all but two of the trinket I have send as Christmas gift for the family . 
 touch to the heart by all this love kindness , I feel so ashamed of my paltry petulance at Eli , Jonah , and the rest , that I would not indulge in a peep at Sally 's letter , which come last of all , until I have starve myself for a day . that literary effort show so much improvement , both in writing and in spelling , that any critic would have endorse Mr. Huxtable 's conclusion that the gift must be in the family . a few word still there be of rather doubtful texture , but who can bind or bind the caprice and luxury of the english language ? moreover , Sally 's stop be leave once more to the discretion of the reader . but if Lord Byron could not grasp the mystery of punctuation , how could sally huxtable ? yet that eager little maid would have learn in half an hour the art which might have mellow the self - tormentor 's howling . Sally 's be a healthy , sweet , and wholesome nature . 
 Tossil 's Barton Farm , Trentisoe . 
 the tenth day of March A.D. 1851 . 
 " DEAR MISS CLARA DEAR , - if you please , father and mother and I and our little Jack hope this letter will find you in good health as it leave all of we at this present , or when it will be finish , thank God for the same , and hop no offence . the baby as be bear on the 20th day of October last be a very fine and lusty wench at this time of writing , and have get two tooth , and her hair come again , and answer to the name of Clara , as you know Miss you be so kind to give her leave and liberty , and father call Clara to she now , and so do I and Jack , but mother will call she Babby still , and so the chiller do . 
 Father often say , " Babby ! why there be a hundred babbie in the world , and a thousand either , for ought I know again it , but I reckon there be not   half a dozen Claras . " but mother say she can not   help it : she always do call they babbie till they be put into short - clothe , and long too , if so be there be not   another , and she feel a call on she to do it , and no offence Miss Clara for that same . if you please Miss , when the parson say " name this child , " and Aunt Muxworthy , from over to Rowley Mires , say , quite peart , " Clara , sir " - father have be learn she , you see Miss , all the morning - parson look , so mother say , the same as a skinned sheep all skivere out to dry ; and Tim Badcock go haw haw , till father be force to slip behind the godmother and fetch he a little clout on the side of his head . then parson say at last , " Clara maam ! there be no child of that name to this side of Coom , and it seem to I to go again the rub rick . " Father say the parson must be a high farmer , for none of we ever hear tell of that rick in this country . " now take my advice and think well of it Mrs. Muxworthy , " the parson say again . so she look to father , for you see Miss she be not edify about it be right , because she could not find it in the Bible nowhere . and she say , " think well of it farmer now ; if you want a handsome name , there be Tryphena and Tryphosa , and have be in the family afore . " " Mother , " say my father , and he look the way he do when he do not   intend to talk about a thing , " Mother , go home with the child , and I will take she to Parracombe Church next Sunday : and tell Suke not to put the goose down . " 
 you see , Miss , we be go to have a supper after church , and the good goose on the farm , and the parson be come too . " Sober now , " say the parson , " if so be now , farmer John , you have put your mind upon name this here infant Clara , why I will christen she so , only an under protestant , and with difference to the chapter . " Father only say " amen , so be it ; " and then parson do it , and do it uncommon well too , father say . and she only laugh when they give she the splash . Father tell we afterwards as he believe parson be fear he could not   spell Clara fitty ; but mother say he be wrong there , and all along of his pride , for parson be a college chap and so he can spell anything amost , in one way or another . 
 Miss Clara , all they beautiful thing as you send for we to Christmas time , with the forepart of all our name upon they , except Sally , be sink in the bottom of the brook in the hole below the stickle by the hollow ash , where the big trout hath his hover , all along of Joe the Queen 's boy ; and we never know ought about it till your after letter come . then our little Jack , who be quite a big boy now , and button his own corduroy , go down to the brook at once , and pull off all his thing , and there he rake and feel among the stone for the big part of a day , though the ice be on the edge but the water be quite clear ; and Tabby Badcock want to pull off her thing and go in too , but Jack would not let she , and be ashamed of herself , and I sit on the bank and Tabby , and Jack pull out nine beautiful thing , as be mean for father , and mother , and he , and Billy , and little Honor , and Bobby , and Peggy , and the two weanie , but he could not   find nothing as be mean for I Sally , unless Tabby steal it , and she be quite equal to it I be afeare : and we all return you many many kind thank and love , especially the one as have it , and I . our Jack say , no she would not   do it , he will go bail for that , no fie ! but I shake my head ; though perhaps she never have the chance , if so be there be not   none mark Sally , and thank you every bit the same , Miss , so long as there be not   none for Tabby . " 
 poor little Sally ! she must have cry bitterly to think of she be forget . but the good of all , next to the farmer 's , be for she , and there be one for Tabby too . 
 " Miss Clara dear , the thing be not hurt at all by be under water for a week , and father say they must be make of the very same gold as Queen Victoria 's crown and sceptre be , as never can rust with the briny wave ; and Beany Dawe feel cock sure as it be the fairy of the brook steal they from Joe 's breech pocket , and keep mine still he say because it be the prettiest . but there , he never know much , any more than Tabby do . 
 if you please Miss , ask your pardon , when Aunt Muxworthy be here , to the christening time , she say she never see such writing in her life as mine , and it be not   my good copy neither , and she say it be a sin to make a scholar of a honest wench like that , and I should want to be the parson next , and read the forty - two generation and play the fort piano ; and I do not   know , Miss , whether to laugh or cry , so I begin to eat an apple ; but father say quite slowly , " Sister Muxworthy , you be never gift with no eddication no more nor I Jan Uxtable , and how be we to know if it be good or bad ? once I have a horse , say father , as afore ever he go into the field , turn up his nose at the grass like , and with turn up so much he die at last of the glander . but I never see that there horse persuade the other to starve . " Aunt Muxworthy toss her head , and we think she would not   eat no goose , but the smell of the stuffing and the weather be too many for she ; and she eat a wing , and a leg , and one side of the breast , and it do she good . and afore she have have much brandy , " John , " she say , " you be right and I be wrong . let the little wench crack on , and some day they will hear of she to tother side of Hexmoor . " so father laugh and kiss she , and the chiller be put to bed , and we drink your health Miss , and Clara 's nine time nine , and father say he will learn himself some day , when he give up wrestling , only he fear it would make his hand shake terrible , and then some laugh and some of we cry , and they have more hot water , and Beany Dawe set to , and make so many poem he turn the stair somehow inside out , and Suke and Tim be force to heave he into the tallat , and keep he from go abroad by a rope of onion round he and two truss of hay on the top . next day , he make no poem at all till he drink more than a gallon of cider . 
 oh Miss Clara dear , what ever be the matter with you ? Father be in such a taking I never see . to - day your letter come about sell that knob - thing of Beany Dawe 's , and we know it must be all along of the crown jewel you buy for we , as we mean to keep in the family to the end of all our time . mother double up , and cry into the churn , and spoil all the butter ; and father be that upset he stamp out of the house a try hard to whistle , and he could not   see no one there to let it off on but Timothy Badcock , and he be a little saucy , so he toss Tim up on the linhay roof and his leg come through the thatch , and father be force to ease he out with the pitchfork . Tim be stiff a bit in the evening , and serve he right say mother , for laugh so at the Cornishers ; but father give he some neatsfoot oil and cider , and we know we could not   hurt he because he be double - jointed . 
 and if you please Miss Clara dear , we would not stoop to ask Beany Dawe and he nothing but a saw poet ; so father go to the old oak chest with the whitewash on it , and pull it open without the key , and take out some old rubbish he saith , and order mother to pack it without a word , and mother want to put in a pair of linen sheet and the good table - cloth , but father say quite crusty like , " do e take our Miss Clara for a common packman ? " and when I say , " please father what shall I say about it all ? " he answer I quite low , " how ever can I tell child ? ask your mother there . only give my good respect and most humble duty , and tell Miss Clara I wish I could find a man to throw I all four pin , for be such a drunken hosebird not to have more to send she . but I know she will not   take money from the like of we . stop , " father say , " ask she to please to lift our horn up as the horn of an unicorn . I know where to go for lot of money and all to be have for ask . I will go to Bodmin town next week , " say father , " and show they cornisher a trick of Abraham Cann . since honest Abraham take the sprain , he leave it all to I , though God know , and thank he for the same , I never want it yet . I should like to see the Cornisher as could stand my grip . " and then father pull both his hand out of his pocket . mother say he wear they out he do spraddle both his thumb so . 
 it seem a curious thing , Miss Clara dear , father never get vex or weist like , but what he want to wrestle , and other time he never think of it , unless it be to fair or revel time . 
 when I ask mother and say as father tell I to , the tear be in her eye , and she try to look angry with I , and then she break out cry as loud as Suke when the cow molly kick she . so between the both of they , Miss , I can not   know what to say , so please to make it yourself Miss , for I be sure I can not   find any thing only the good love of our heart and a side of bacon we would like to send , and the butter from my own little cow , all sweet hay and no turmot ; I be to sit in Coom market , all by myself , on Saturday , and mother not come nigh I , and I know you will let I send you the money , and I expect elevenpence a pound , because you never be proud with your love scholar ever to command and obey . SALLY HUXTABLE . 
 all this here underneath and over the leaf be go to be write after the rest of this here paper . 
 if you please Miss Clara dear , there come now just a very fine speak gentleman with a long coat the colour of udder , and blue flap , and blue at the hand , and ever so many great silver button with a print like pat of good butter , and gold ribbon round his hat . we seem at first he be an officer of dragoon , till we see'd the flour in his hair , and then we know he be the Queen 's miller . Father be a great mind to show he a forehip and send his button to you Miss , because he see they be worth ever so much more than these little thing all put together , only mother stop he . 
 then the gentleman say he know Mr. Henwood well , and respect he much , and he be send here by expression to discover where you be Miss Clara , and it be most particular , and if we wish you well , we would tell he to once . Father and mother and I put he in the parlour and give he a jug of the very good cider , and then we go and lay our head together about he in the cheese - room , and mother and I be for tell he , only father say no . you never give we leave , and we want to do what be right and upright , unless you order we contrary , and we have no right to tell without ask you , and you so full of enemy . 
 so father say , very grand for he : " honoured sir , we hop the honour of a papper scrawl from Miss Clara in ten day time , or may be a fortnight , accord to the weather please God , and we be satisfied too . my eld daughter here be write to Miss Clara for a week or more , and if so be she have get room leave on the papper scrawl she ask Miss Clara 's leave , and we shall have time enough to hear what she say in a fortnight , or mebbe three week . " 
 " oh then , she be go to Hitaly at the least . " the gentleman say . Father never hear tell of Hitaly whether it be in London town or no , but he look to mother and I to hold our noise . the gentleman say something sound very much like " Dang , " and father hop he would be saucy , because then he send his button in spite of mother and I ; but when he look at father he think well of it , and go off very civil in the carriage he come by , only say he would find out in spite of we . 
 and please Miss Clara dear , mother say she be ashamed to send you a parcel all rubbage , except the picture , but she do hope they will not cheat you about they there , for they be the fine ever come to these part , and warrant real London make . all the farmer hereaway want to buy they of we . and father say , " dang the picture , tell Miss Clara to come to we , and she shall not   want Beany Dawe 's thing , nor the Queen 's miller either . " oh do come , Miss Clara dear , the bank be yellow with primrose , and white and blue with violet , and I know three blackbird nest already and an ousel be down by the river . oh do come . I have get such a lot to tell you , thing as I can not   make head or tail of when I try to spell they , and you shall milk my own cow Sally , and have all my black hen 's egg , and the duck too if they hatch , - and sle all the small potato from the plough field to the hazel hedge . your good scholar as ever be and love pupil . 
 SALLY huxtable . " 
 CHAPTER XIV . 
 from Sally 's eager description of the coat and button , I conclude easily that a servant from Vaughan St. Mary have be send in quest of I . my father hat showy livery and loathe hair - powder , but Mr. Edgar Vaughan return to the family usage , or rather allow they to re - establish themselves ; for on such question he be wholly indifferent . now what could be his motive for send so expressly to discover I ? I know not , neither care very greatly , but write at once to Tossil 's Barton , first to return their love contribution , which consist mainly of ancestral relic prize for generation , secondly , to set free the secret of my address . 
 into my own self I return once more . somehow I seem to expand whenever I come in contact with the yeoman 's family , and their lowly greatness . I be like a worm when it rain , after the drought of summer . surely the God , who leave we to stifle ourselves with the dust of fashion and convention , have his own gracious time to breathe upon and scatter it . at interval we may see through the reek of our own exuding , and inhale a more brace air than sleep in mausoleum . but instead of be exalt and feed by the open breeze , we shudder at the draught and replace our respirator . 
 I return into myself , and find little comfort there . I do not live inside myself , as most people live in theirs . true , I be apt to resent any slight to it offer from the outside . true , I seek its keep and comfort in a mechanical sort of way . but as for crust in its bottle , ripen in its husk , rust in its watch - case , I have be too long the toy of wind and weather not to be turn inside out . never can I moulder into the fungoid nucleus the british taste admire . and yet there be about I , if I must not say within I , a stanch cleave , a cohesion , a concrete will , which be of genuine anglo - saxon fibre . so I thrust aside all dream of Tossil 's Barton and Vaughan Park , and certain wilder sweeter dream which have begin to flutter and thrill through I , and in earnest I return to my task of money - making . 
 Giudice still be faithful , and comfort much my solitude . he have never ask his master 's leave or mine , he have never receive any formal invitation , yet here he look all at home , sleek and unblushing , though long since quite convalescent and equal to livery stable diet . once indeed , as we pass the entrance , he pretend to I that his conscience prick he . to ease it , he sniff about , and halt just for a moment , then turn his nose up , recocke his tail , and trot jauntily on . since then he have always avoid that left side of the street . he be affable still to Isola , but clearly regard she as no more than a pleasant acquaintance . whenever she enter the room , he walk from his corner with a stretch and a yawn , sniff all round her dress , to learn where she have be , and what dog she have speak to ; then , in the absence of any striking discovery , he look into her face with a grave complacence , and bring I his conclusion . Tom , and the bird , the squirrel , and the little marmoset   Mrs. Shelfer 's new and dear pet , he gaze upon from a lofty standing as so many specimen of natural history , interesting so far , but otherwise contemptible . he be now allow free run of the house , understand all the lock , and present himself in every room at the proper meal - time . even the little dress - maker be then honour with his attention . everybody love he , he be so gentle and clever and true . back he come to I , with his mouth rather greasy I must admit , give I one kiss   as a form , I be afraid , and exclaim , " dear I ! what a life this be ! ' sit down on his rug to think . 
 no one can tempt he far than the corner of our street , except his master or myself . Miss Flounce , with my permission , grant not without jealousy , once aspire to the escort of Giudice . although she carry a bag of his favourite biscuit   make perhaps of bone - dust , and keep one of they in her hand , Judy flatter she only to the corner ; then he turn abruptly , and trot firmly   rudely she call it   home , with his eye upon my balcony . I give he more of his biscuit than he would have get from she . 
 all this be very delightful . but there be two sad drawback . in the first place , Giudice expect I to forego every other line of art , and devote all my time to portraiture of himself . this be unreasonable , and I could not do it . apart from other consideration , Mr. Oxgall , after buy three study of he , decline to take any more until those three should be sell . to Giudice himself I have base my refusal upon more delicate ground . I have quote to he , 
 " although , lest I profane your hallowed part , 
 Queen Nature chill the blood around my heart ; 
 sweet dog , permit I to indulge my dream 
 of country valley , and the mazy stream . " 
 but he take no heed , and never would permit I so to do , without the keen jealousy . 
 the other drawback be still more serious . either by maintain the dog , I place his owner under an obligation ; or by engross the dog 's society , I lay myself under obligation to his owner . either view of the case be unpleasant ; the latter , which I adopt , soon become intolerable . so I speak about it to Isola , for I could not well explain myself to her brother , who ought indeed to have perceive my dilemma . 
 " oh Donna , " she cry , " what nonsense you do talk ! oblige to we indeed ! I be sure we be all greatly oblige to you ; and many a stir it save we at home , for the dog detest papa so ; and when Conrad come to see we , he can not   bear to have Judy shut out like a thief , and he the most honourable dog that ever wag a tail . " 
 " to be sure he be . you know you be , do not   you , oh combination of Bayard and Aristides ? " 
 that union of justice and chivalry wag his tail to I , and nod gravely to Isola . 
 " but I have say all along that Conny should pay for his board , and he feel it too : but we could not tell how to propose it to you , dear Donna , you be so very outrageous . " 
 " I should hope so indeed . " 
 " and then I be sure it would break poor Judy 's heart to go . would not   it now , Judy ? " 
 Giudice do not answer she , but come and lay his great head on my lap , and look up at I as only a dog can look . in that wistful look he say as plainly as possible - 
 " you know I be only a dog . but you , Clara , happen to be a human being ; and so you know all we dog know , and ever so much besides . only you can not   smell . you can talk , as fast as you like , both to each other and to we , but we can talk to none except our fellow dog . now do not   take a mean advantage of I . I know that I be make only to be your servant , and I love you with all my heart , that I do . I can not   tell at all where I shall go when I die , or if I shall go anywhere ; and I be sure I shall die , if you cast I away like this . " 
 so I kiss his dotty whisker , and promise not to desert he , though I should go all the way to the stable twice a day to see he . 
 " and another thing , Clara dear , " resume his master 's sister , " I consider he now more my dog than Conny 's . you know he be give between we " - this be the first time I hear of it - " and I only lend Conrad my half as long as he like to pay for he . " 
 Lovely Isola , like most other lovely girl , be keen about money - matter . not that she be ungenerous . that impulsive little mortal would give away all her substance , the moment her heart be touch , and it be not hard to touch , despite all the quick suspicion which her London life and native shrewdness have now begin to produce . but as regard small dealing , she be thoroughly qualified to keep a meat - pie shop , or go upon board wage , or even to take furnished lodging : by which climax I mean no disrespect to Mrs. Shelfer , who   consider her temptation   be the very pink of honesty , especially since Giudice can . 
 as to these small matter , and as to many large one , I be dear Isola 's cardinal opposite . she would make , for most man , a far well wife than I should ; although she will never love with a tenth part of the intensity . she can not   even hate like I . when I hate , I loathe and abhor . I never hate any one lightly , and hardly ever be reconcile , or suppress it . Isola talk about hat , but have never learn what it mean . spite she can carry , and nurse like a doll , and count it a minor virtue , albeit she can not be sulky ; hate be too heavy a burden . Scorn , which be with woman the hate of thing beneath they , Isola hardly know . perhaps she will learn it when her knowledge of the world narrow and condense , as with most woman it do . 
 another great difference there be between Isola and I . although she never would think of deceive any one seriously , and would on no account tell a downright malicious lie , yet she be not so particular about tell little fib , or at any rate colouring matter so highly that other be mislead . this she can justify to herself in a charming warm - hearted way . and yet she rarely make mischief . her departure be half unconscious , and always arise from good will . 
 " and so now , Clara dear , " conclude the senior sophist , " as Conrad have own all the dog so long , it be my turn to own every bit of he for an equal period , and I must pay you half a crown a week for his keep , and half a guinea for doctor he so well . " 
 I be much inclined to take she at her word , it would have be such a surprise . but what a disgrace to Giudice and to I ! 
 " oh Donna , " she continue , " you have no idea how fond dear Conny be of you . I be get so jealous . he think much more of you than he do of I . " 
 I bent over my drawing with more carmine on my cheek than be on the palette . what folly to be sure ! and Isola would come round in front . 
 " why do not   you answer I , Clara ? do you ever know such a shame ? well , I do believe you like be admire every bit as much as I do , in spite of all your sublimity . why there come Conny himself ; " and to my great relief she step into the balcony . " I think so . I know the ring of his heel . he will wear such clumsy boot , though his foot be as pretty as mine . I always know his step , and so do Judy . " 
 alas ! and so do i. how weak and paltry of I , with a life like mine before I ! 
 " I will go and open the door , " cry his sister ; " how rude he be to come when you be so busy , Clara . " 
 away she run , then usher he grandly in , and away again to nurse the marmoset . I know that I look slightly discompose . there be a glow upon I as if I have step into sunlight . Conrad fail to notice it , or conceal the perception . he stand before my easel . how I long for his approbation ! that of course be only from his knowledge of art and his native taste . yet I fear to look at his face , but wait for he to speak . with a stretch like a windlass , and a cavernous yawn , up come Giudice , and poke himself right in front of my work . could I have foresee that effrontery and execrable taste , less bread and milk would he have have for breakfast . conrad perceive my vexation , and despite his good breeding be too natural not to smile . the smile be infectious , and I obtain no more than a look of commendation . but that be enough for I . I resolve to keep the drawing : Mr. Oxgall may bid what he like . 
 as our eye meet , Conrad 's and mine , I see that he be not in his usual spirit . something have happen to vex he . oh that I dare to ask what it be . I also be heavy at heart , and ill at ease with myself . be it any wonder ? my nature be true and straight - forward as well as proud and passionate . but here have I be , for week and week , stoop below its level . I have even be deceitful . perhaps there be no dishonour in my change of name , with such an object in view . perhaps there be good excuse for maintain disguise with Conrad , when first we meet in London . but be it right and honourable to persist in my alias , when I could not help suspect his grow attachment to I ? peradventure my conscience alone would not account for all the misery I feel about this . have I no selfish misgiving as well ? now as I stand before he , my breast begin to flutter with fear , not so acute , but deeply than my alarm in the dark , when I crouch from the conspirator . 
 " Miss Valence , " at last he begin , " I be grieve in my heart by hear that you be not treat at all politely last night . " he be greatly move , and begin to lose his command of colloquial English . I have spend an evening at the Professor 's house in Lucas Street , the second time only of my be there . now I come to recollect it , Dr. Ross have certainly be a little overbearing , but I do not feel hurt thereby , because I care not for he , and know it to be his manner . Isola have tell her brother , but without mean any harm . her father no doubt have be vex , because I could not sell he my gordit . 
 " oh , Mr. Ross , " I reply , " I think nothing at all of that . a learned man like your father can not be expect to bear with every ignorant girl 's curiosity . " 
 " to a lady 's love of knowledge every gentleman should administer and be gratify . all man of lofty science enjoy to meet with a gentle mind inquire . " 
 it be not the first time Master Conrad have disparage , by implication , his father 's great acquirement . to I it seem scarcely graceful , and very far from dutiful , but many of my sentiment be dreadfully old - fashioned . an awkward pause ensue ; how could I answer without condemn one or the other ? though I could not quite acquit Conrad , my heart be entirely with he , for I have long be aware that he be not happy at home . there he stand , with an angry countenance , have decline the chair I have offer he . suddenly he take both my hand and look I full in the face , though his eye be glisten . I gaze full at he , with vague apprehension rise . how or why , I know not , but at that very moment my hair , which be always a trouble to I , fall in a mass down my cheek and neck . he start back , but still hold my hand . 
 " I be make certain that I have see you long ago . I will think , I will think . " 
 I see at once how it be , the fear on my face remind he . I mean to tell he some day , but I never mean he to find out . scorn myself for a hypocrite , I look stedfastly at he and smile . 
 " you will forgive I , Miss Valence , you know that I would not use a freedom . " 
 he see in my eye that I know it , and drop my hand , and go on . 
 " you will think I the weak in mind and most wicked , but I be most unhappy . " 
 I start in turn , and how I long to console he . what use be pride if it can not even command one 's eye ? 
 " it be to I a disgrace to come to you with my trouble . but I do it from no unmanly temper . I do it alone for the sake of my precious sister Isola . I have no long any one whom I dare to love but she , and now I be compel to abandon she at the last . " 
 " do you mean to be long away ? " this I manage to ask pretty well , though it be sore work . 
 " I shall not be away from London , but I shall be depart from Isola . the house where she live I be no more to visit . a long time I have go there only a little , and alone to see she . she be order now to come no more to I . this day I speak very violently . but I will not detain you with that . I will confess I do wrong ; but I be richly provoke . my object in burden you be double : - first to implore you , if I may without use liberty , to endure well with the Professor , lest she should be interdict from come to visit you , and then she would have no one remain to love she . second to ask , a thing that I hesitate because I can not narrate to you all thing , whether you would indulge I , if there be no wrong , to come now and then to see my own and my only sister . " 
 " of course you do not mean without her father 's knowledge . " 
 " I would never insult you , Miss Valence , by ask a thing like that . I desire nothing of what you call clandestine . you be so free and open , you would never have to do with any sort of concealment . neither be I in the habit to do anything like that . it have only be command that I may not go there , or invite she to come to my house . the Professor have great power in the present , but he do not pretend to interdict I from my sister . " 
 his eye flash , as he speak , with an expression quite unfilial . remember how differently I have love my own dear father , I feel disappointed and grieve , but have no right to show it . 
 " only one more thing I will entreat of you , Miss Valence ; poor Isola have never learn what mean any grief . if she be vex by this , I pray you to sustain and comfort she ; for I shall never make a wrong advantage of your most kind permission , so as to see she very often . " 
 he raise my hand to his lip in gratitude for what he call a kindness beyond all value to he , and his voice be tremble as he turn away . but I have do no kindness , I have give no permission ; for I be not calm enough to distinguish right from wrong . strange indeed it seem to I that I , for the most part so decide , could not now determine , but be all perplexity . my great iceberg self - reliance , build in bleak and lonesome year , be now adrift and melt in the bright sun of friendship and the warm sea - depth of love . 
 CHAPTER XV . 
 Isola happen that day to leave I before the usual time , be afraid that her father , who be not in his sweetest mood , would be angry with she . she be grieve of course at the new dissension , and think I   her idea be of loose texture   somewhat to blame somehow . nevertheless she soon forgave I the crime I have not commit . 
 that day I could paint no more , but sit I down to meditate . suddenly a loud ring and a loud knock echo through the house . Quickly Mrs. Shelfer 's little foot come patter up the stair , and her grey eye actually seem to come in first at the door . on the crown of her head her black cap hung , like the top of a chaise double back . 
 " oh my good friend , look here ! I be never so frightened in all my life . " 
 she hold as far from she as she could reach a closed envelope , address " Miss Clara Vaughan . " I tear it open and read - " Mr. Vaughan be die , come instantly . send by Mrs. Fletcher . " 
 " Telegraph , my good soul , " cry Mrs. Shelfer , " Electric Telegraph Company , all scream the wire red hot , and you must sign the message he say . and be there any answer ? and they give he eighteen penny . oh dear , I shall never get over it . never have such a turn since my brother John go , and they tuck he up so bootiful , and I say to the clerk at Barbican - " 
 " out of my way if you please . let I sign the form , and leave I alone a minute . there be no answer . " 
 should I go or not ? bitterly as I dislike he , could I let he die among hireling and stranger - I , his brother 's daughter ! a year ago I would have do so and think it the judgment of God . now I remember my dear mother 's death , and doubt about go only because I know not how he would take it . my hesitation be very brief . a cab be order , Giudice entrust to Mrs. Shelfer 's care , a short note leave for Isola , a few thing put together anyhow , and I be ready to start . 
 even in this hurry a selfish terror smite I , and I caution Mrs. Shelfer strictly to conceal both name and destination . she have only to say that some relative be suddenly take ill , somewhere down in the country ; the country be to her mind a desert mark with milestone , my description do not seem unreasonably vague . 
 as I stand in the passage wait for the cab , the poor dog , who have be quite flurry , and scented indefinite evil , commenced , prolonged , and would not conclude a howl of pass sadness . 
 " oh , my good friend , " cry Mrs. Shelfer , " let I stop the cab . all waste of money to go . the good gentleman , whoever he be , be as dead as a crabshell now . there be a terri with a split ear , next door but one , when my poor brother John be ill ; his name be Jack , I think , no , Tom ; bless I , no , what be I think of , Bob - Charley know , I dare say - " 
 " well , send I his name by telegraph . here be the cab , Mrs. Shelfer . " 
 heavy thump of weary wambling foot , grating of wheel , a needless " whoa , " and we open the door . 
 giudice bolt first into the cab , and sit upright with his tongue out and a sprightly pant , occupy the whole . it take the united strength , address , and authority of cabman , landlady , and myself to get he out again . then he coil his tail to his stomach , droop his ear and eye , and receive two hot tear and a kiss be sidle and delude into the narrow passage . the last thing I hear be a howl that wind far round the corner and beyond the square . 
 in an hour and a half from the delivery of the message , I be in a second - class carriage , and we shriek away from Paddington . the hurry and rush overcome I for a while . soon the April evening be spread with shadowy gray , and we be rush past the woode wave of pangbourne , and cast silver ring of steam on the many - finger spruce , before I could collect and feel my thought again . as we glide through plantation and between the wind hill , with the partridge begin his twilight call , the pheasant come out of the coppice to feed , and the late rook ply his dusky wing , at length the dust and city turmoil lag round the corner mile away , and we sparkle in the dewy freshness of the silent moon . though all alone in the carriage , I vainly try for prudence ' sake to creep into the cloak of sleep . every vein and every pore be full of gush thrill electric life . the country , the country ! the heavenly country 's glory ! how have I breathe and grope in the city grave so long ? for every thought that dribble there and gutter in my brain , a hundred thousand now flow through I , not of brain , but soul . thought I can not call they , for there be no volition , neither have they sequence , impress , or see image : only a broad stream gliding , whence and whither I know not . how can I describe to other what I can not tell myself ? 
 " Glost ' ! Glost ' ! change here for Chelt'm ! "   c. break my dreaming suddenly . it be eleven at night . I have come unwrapped ; the heavenly country and nature 's tide forget to keep I warm . out I come upon the platform , and dreamily begin to seek my carpet - bag , for I have no heavy luggage . the moon be struggle with the gas - light , as nature in I fight with modern life . 
 " Fly , Miss , fly ? " the lonely porter ask . 
 " yes , please , " say I. 
 " where for , Miss ? " 
 " Vaughan St. Mary . " - at this part of my life , I drop the grand " Vaughan Park ; " it seem too fine for I , and I be well content to be of Conrad 's class in the world . 
 " oh , there be a carriage wait at every train , if you please , Miss. " 
 and with tenfold politeness the porter show I across the square to one of the family hearse , which my father and I so detest . it so happen that the driver and footman be take some light refreshment at the bar of a neighbouring edifice , while the horse champ their bit and whinny . the man come out against their will , and star at I in the broad moonshine . I be very simply , plainly , and cheaply dress , in deep mourning still for my darling mother ; but no servant of even slight experience could take I , I think , for anything but a lady ; little as it matter . the man be half - drunk , very surly at be disturb , and incline to form a low estimate of my dress and carpet - bag . 
 " you mean to say you be Miss Vaughan , young ' ooman ? " stutter the reel coachman , with his hand beneath his flap and a short pipe in his mouth , " now I tell you plainly , there be no mistake about I mind , I can not   noway credit it . it do not   seem likely , do it , Bob ? " 
 " likely , Jacob ? yes , like enough to a fool ; but nohow creditable to the like of we . think I do not   know now ? perhaps the young ' ooman will answer a few question , Jacob . " 
 " ah , let you alone ; let you alone , Bob ! specially for young woman ! " 
 " Porter , a cab at once , if you please ; or a fly I think you call it here . " oh my London impudence ! 
 " to be sure , Miss ; the good in Gloucester directly . and , Miss " - confidentially , " if I be in your shoe , I would walk they chap about their business to - morrow . how they have be carry on here , to be sure , ever since the six o'clock train come in . why , in the time of the old Squire Vaughan - " 
 " thank you , the fly , if you please . " 
 in two minute I be off for my father 's home with mighty rattle of glass , and many jerking noise . about three mile from Gloucester we be pass by Jacob and Robert , who be sit side by side and drive furiously . convince at last by the porter of my genuine Vaughanship , they have set off full speed to secure first audience . 
 at length we pass the lodge , where the gate creak as of yore , and dear old Whitehead tremble at my voice , and so along the great avenue where I have study the manner and way of every tree , and where Tulip   Nestor among deer   come to stare at we with his grey face silver in the moonlight . poor old friend , he know I as well as Giudice do , but I could not stop to talk to he . soon as the bell be ring the broad bolt of the great lock , which I be once so proud to draw , fly back with suspicious promptitude . 
 albeit he have change the cloth too ochrously describe by Sally , for a suit of gentle gray , and have draw out his face to a most unjovial length , and assume an attitude of very profound respect , there he be , quite unmistakeable to observant eye , the Bacchanalian Bob . 
 " and please , Miss " - after he have fuss awhile - " what train do you please to come by ? I understand that the carriage have be wait there all day ; indeed , I see it come back from the pantry window myself , and they say in the yard the last train be in afore they come away . " 
 " I come by the train that ought to be there at half - past ten o'clock . " 
 " well to be sure ! that must be the very train as Samuel and Humphry say they wait for ; but they never have much judgment , they two man . and to let you come in a common fly , Miss ! " 
 " I see my father 's carriage at the station , and two low - look servant quite tipsy . their name , however , be not Samuel and Humphry , but Jacob and Robert . " 
 strange servant now come throng round , with an obsequiousness so long unknown that it quite disgust I . no familiar face among they , none whom I could bring myself to ask how my guardian be . but from their servility to I I conclude that his time be short . 
 " will you step into the small drawing - room , if you be so kind , Miss ? there be a good fire there , Miss , and a lady wait for you . " 
 " thank you . take my thing to my own little room , if you please ; that be , if you know which room be call mine . " 
 " tilly know , Miss. I will run and fetch Tilly , " cry the officious Bob . 
 " if Matilda Jenkins be still here , let she answer my bell as long as I remain . " 
 and therewith I be show into the room where the lady be expect I . she sit with she back to the door , and I could only see that she be richly attire in full evening dress . there be a powerful smell of vinegar in the room , and two pastile be burn . as I walk round the table she rise with some reluctance , and I confront Mrs. Daldy . 
 CHAPTER XVI . 
 we stand for a moment , examine each other . she be fatten nicely on what she call " holy converse and spiritual outpouring at Cheltenham . " she rush forward with great enthusiasm . 
 " why , Clara , darling , be it possible ? can this be you - so grown , and improve in every way ? I never should have know you , I do declare ! why , you have quite a brilliant colour , and your eye , and your hair - oh dear , how proud your sweet mother would have be ! you lovely creature , I must have a kiss ! what , not even your pretty hand ? " 
 " no , Mrs. Daldy ; never more my hand to a person who dare to insult my father . I you might have insult a thousand time , and I would have forgive you . " 
 " come now , let bygone be bygone , that be a dear . oh for a little more of the essence of Christianity ! let we stoop to the hem of the garment of the meek and lowly " - I will not write the sacred name she use - " let we poor grovel fellow - sinner - " 
 " do not   couple I with yourself , I beg . " I be lose my temper , and she see her advantage . 
 " not even as a sinner , dear ? I think in my humility that we all be sinner . " 
 " so we be ; but not all hypocrite . " 
 she keep her temper wonderfully , in all except her eye . 
 " ah , you impetuous young people can not understand the chasten lowly heart , which nothing but heavy trial and the grace of God produce . you know , Clara , you never could . " 
 this last truth be put in the form of an exclamation , and in such a different tone from the rest , moreover it be so true , that I could hardly help smile . 
 " since last I see you , I have be try severely and chastise most heavily . I bow to the rod . all work together for our spiritual good . until that bless day , when all the sheaf - " 
 " Mrs. Daldy , I as well have see and suffer much since last we meet . if I could not be hoodwink then by this sham religion , be it likely that I can be now ? I wonder that you waste your time so . " 
 the truth be that she talk in this strain less from hope than habit . 
 " then if I must treat you , Miss Vaughan , but as a sister worldle , let we at least combine , for Providence have see fit to make our interest the same . " 
 " how so ? " I be do my utmost to bear with her awhile . 
 " first , before I tell you anything , have you as keen an eye for the perception of your own sweet interest as for the discovery of what you kindly call ' hypocrisy ? ' ah well , it be all for my good . " 
 her rolling compendious eye glisten at the thought that she be about to catch I here . I pretend to be catch already . 
 " what of it , if I have ? " 
 " then I will tell you something . sit down by I , Clara . " 
 " thank you , I will stand . " 
 " now first , before I tell you anything , we must make some little arrangement for our mutual benefit , and then resolve upon united action . you must give I one little pledge . that be do I will tell you everything , and it be of the last importance to you . " 
 " be it about my father ? ' 
 " no . it have nothing to do with he ; it be about your uncle , who now lie at the door of death . all , it be all for the good . there be , I fear , no chance of his recovery , and the disposal of this splendid property be in our hand , if we know how to play our card , and if we act together . but there be no time to be lose . only think , 15,000 l.   a year , for it be now worth every farthing of that , besides this beautiful place . why , Clara , all the pleasure of life will be at our foot ! " 
 in her greedy excitement , she forget all her piety ; but I like she well so . in a moment she see that she have lay her wicked heart too open . in my eye there be no co - partner flash of avarice . 
 " what be the matter with my poor uncle ? " 
 " first a paralytic stroke ; since that low gastric fever , and entire prostration . do you remember when you come to your dear mother 's funeral ? " 
 " of course , I do . " 
 " and could you help observe how altered he be even then ? the hour he hear of her death , he be seize with violent illness , yet he would go out of door alone , on the very day of the funeral . something then excite he ; he come home worse , and in the night be visit with a slight paralytic stroke . however , he quite recover the use of his limb for a time , though never his former spirit - if we can call they spirit . for several month he go about as usual , except that instead of a horse he ride a quiet pony . he see to the property , receive the Michaelmas rent , and invest large sum of money both in land and the fund ; he even commence some great improvement , for he have always be , as you know , a most skilful and liberal steward and manager . " 
 " that I never deny . there could not be a well one . " 
 " but suddenly , after no Christmas festivity   for he would hear of none , for the sake of your dear mother , he be find on the morning of the last day in the year bolt upright in his study chair , and fully dress , with two pistol , load and cock , on the table , no sign of life in his face or pulse , his body stiff yet limp , like a sand - bag tightly stuff . the man who find he describe it well than I can . ' poor master , whichever way I put he , there he stop , like a french dog do trick . " 
 " how terrible ! " 
 " yes , but it be true . at first they think it be catalepsy only ; but when that pass off , paralysis remain . I want to send for you at once . " 
 here she meet , for she could not help it , but do not answer , my gaze ; and I know it be a lie . 
 " however , I be over - rule ; and your poor uncle lie bed - ridden , but in no actual danger , until this horrid low fever come . he must have a frame of iron to have bear up as he have . the doctor say this fever be partly from the prostration of the nerve . " 
 " who be the doctor ? " I feel almost as if I could love my uncle . 
 " a very eminent man . his name be Churchyard . " 
 " that be not our old medical man . where do this gentleman come from ? " 
 " Cheltenham , I believe . " 
 " surely , you must know that , if he be an eminent man ; live there yourself ! " 
 I see that she have bring he . 
 " well , " she answer sharply , " it matter little where he come from , and I have not verify his residence . I fear all the doctor in Europe could not save your poor dear uncle . " and here   from habit when death be think of   she fall into the hypocritical vein once more - " ah , how true it be ! the thing that will most avail he now , when his poor sinful frame be perish , and the old man with all its work - " 
 " thank you . I know all that . which room do my uncle occupy ? " 
 " surely , you never would think of disturb he at midnight ! " 
 " do death look what o'clock it be ? if he be really die , I must see he at once . " 
 she seem resolve to prevent I . I be determined to do it . it be needless to tell all her stratagem , and needless to say   unless I have fail to depict myself   that they prove utterly vain . I be only surprised that she do not come with I . 
 CHAPTER XVII . 
 how vast the room appear to I , how endless the main passage , after the dimension long familiar at Tossil 's Barton , and Mrs. Shelfer 's . I even fear to lose the way , where my childish foot have measure every step . first I hurry to my own snug room , or room - for I have parlour and bedroom adjoining - in the western wing , where mother use to live . everything there be in beautiful order , a lamp and a good fire light ; and Matilda Jenkins meet I at the door . 
 directly after our departure for Devonshire , Mr. Vaughan have think fit to discharge all the old servant , except the housekeeper and Matilda . they be all in league against he , for they could not bear that the " rightful owner , " whom they have know so long , should be eject . moreover , his discipline be far more stern than our ; for my father and mother have always rule by love . the housekeeper , a great friend of mine , be retain from respect and policy , and poor Tilly   who enter life through a dust - bin   from contempt of her insignificance . by that time she have rise to the rank of scullery - maid and deputy dishwasher ; now she have climb in the social scale to the position of under - housemaid . 
 " why , Matilda , how well you look , and how smart ! I declare you be get quite tall . I suppose the new time agree with you well than the old . " 
 " oh do not   say that , Miss Clara , please do not ! I would tear the gownd off my back " - look savagely at the neat print - " if I think it make you think that . no , I get a little more wage , but a deal more work , and I never get a kind word . oh it do my heart good to see you here again , in your own house , Miss Clara dear , and evil to they as drive you out " - and she lift the corner of her new white muslin apron ; - " and I have tend your room all myself , though it be not   in my part , and never let no one else touch they , ever since I be take from the kitchen , and always a jug full of flower , Miss , because you be so fond of they . " 
 " thank you , Matilda . how kind of you , to be sure ! " 
 " many be the time I have   cry over they , Miss , and the new shilling you give I , when we be little girl together . but please to call I ' tilly , ' Miss , the same as you always use . " 
 " I can not   stop to talk to you now , Tilly ; how be Mrs. Fletcher ? " 
 " quite hearty , Miss , all but the rheumatic . ah , she do suffer terrible from they . Us both wait up , Miss , and I to and fro the door , till the carriage come home ; and then she go off to bed , and I be up with she , and never know when you come . but she be get up now , Miss , to come here to see you . " 
 " go and stop she , at once . I will see she to - morrow . stop , show I first your master 's room ; knock gently and bring out the nurse . the doctor be go I believe . " 
 " yes , Miss , he leave here at eight o'clock , for he have a long way to drive , and he could not   do nothing more . but you must not go , Miss , oh pray , Miss , do not   go there ! " 
 we go along the passage , until we come to the door . I be surprised to see a new door across the lobby , very closely fit . there be an inner door also , and the nurse do not seem very wakeful . instead of knock again , Matilda retreat hastily . at last the nurse appear , and I find she to be a very respectable woman , who have be with my mother , through several attack of illness . a dark suspicion , which I have scarcely confess to myself , be partly allay hereby . after whisper for a few moment , she lead I into the dimly light room , and to my uncle 's bed . 
 I start back in terror . prepare as I be for a very great change , what I see astound I . the face so draw and warp aside , wither and yet pulpy , with an undercast of blue ; the line of the mouth so trenched and livid , that the screw lip be like a bull' - eye in a blue diamond pane ; and the hair , so dark and curly when last I see he , now shred in patch of waxy gray . the only sign of life I see , be a feeble twitching of the bed - clothe , every now and then . the poor eye be closed , hard , and wrinkle round ; one waste arm lie on the quilt , the hand bend up at the wrist , the finger clutch yet flabby , and as cold as death . it be a sight for human pride to cower at , and be quell . 
 " be he like this always ? " 
 " no , " she reply , " but he have be so now for ten hour and more : generally he be take with pain and thirst , every six hour ; and it make my heart ache to hear he moan and cry . " 
 " do he say anything particular then ? " 
 God know I be not pursue my own fell purpose in ask this . thank he , I be not such a fiend as that . all I wish be to relieve he whom I pity so . 
 " yes , he open his eye and stare , and then he always say , and he try to shake his head only he be not   strong enough , ' my fault , ah I , my fault , and to rob they too ! if I could but see she , if I could but see she , and die ! ' he always say that first , and then that exhaust he so , he can hardly say ' water ' after , and then he moan so melancholy , and then he go off again . " 
 the tear stand in her eye , for she have a tender heart . I burst into my usual violent flood , for I never have any half - crying . 
 " have you any medicine to give he ? " 
 " no , Miss , no more ; he have take a shopful already , though he can only swallow at the time he wake up . the doctor say to - night he could do no more ; this awful black fever must end in mortification ; no medicine move it at all . " 
 " do the doctor call it black fever ? " 
 " yes , the very bad form of typhu of the real irish type , such as they have have once or twice in Manchester . it have settle most on the stomach , but all the blood be poison . " 
 and she sprinkle herself , and the bed again , with disinfect fluid , and throw some over I . 
 " excuse I , Miss , you would not   allow I , so I be bind not to ask you . you know you come in dead against my will , and dead against all order " - this be what the whispering have be about - " and if anything happen to you , Miss Vaughan , who be to have all the property , but that bad Mrs. Daldy ? " 
 oh ! in a moment I see the whole ; though it be too black for belief , blacker than any fever that fester the human heart . this be the purpose with which that woman have send for I . she have lie to I as to the character of the disease . she have oppose I , because she know it the sure way to urge I . she have bring I too at night , when fever be doubly infectious . 
 " you see , Miss , we be force to keep the three window open , and the passage door all close . it be a wonder I have any of the fluid left , for they never send it up this afternoon ; but I have a drop put by , no thank to they for the same . Mrs. Daldy bring the first nurse , but she run clean away when the fever take the turn ; and they be force to send for I , for nobody else would come near he . but my poor old man have no work , and I have   minded as bad a case as this , and they say I be fever - proof . but you , Miss , you ; I should never forgive myself , if anything happen to you , and in your youth and bloom . though I could not stop you , you know I do my good . and they say you catch thing most when you come off a journey . " 
 " Jane , whatever happen , you be not to blame . I have no fear whatever ; and now I be here , I will stay . it be safe so , both for myself and other . " 
 " well , Miss , so I have hear say . once in for it , keep to the air . but come into this little room , if you want to talk to I , Miss. we can hear the poor gentleman move , or even sigh ; and the air be a little fresher there . but we must keep the window open . " 
 she lead I into the dressing room ; but even there the same crawling creep smell pervade , as if a grave have be open , when the ground be full of gas . instead of talk to the nurse , I begin to think . it break upon I vaguely , that I have hear of some very simple remedy for a fever of this nature , and that my dear mother , who in her prosperous time be the village doctoress , have be acquaint with the case . but in the whirl of my brain , I could not bring to mind what it be . oh what would I give , only to think of it now ! though not , I be sorry to say , at all of a pious turn   at least if Mrs. Daldy be so , in the strong feeling of the moment , I fall upon my knee , and pray for help . so have my mother teach I , and Mother Nature teach I now . I will not be so daring as to say that my prayer be answer . perhaps it be only that it calm my mind . 
 " Jane , have they be brew lately ? " alas the bathos ! but I can not   help it . 
 " yes , Miss ; last Thursday and Friday . they will not   let I go near the kitchen part : but I know it all the same . " 
 " go and get I a nice jug of fresh yeast . I will watch your master . " 
 she star , and hesitate ; but see that I be in earnest . 
 " I do not   know where to find it , Miss ; and none of they will come near I ; and they will stop I too if they can . why they will not   bring my food to the door , but put it half - way down the passage . they want to lock I in , only I would not   stand that ; and they break all the plate and dish , and to - day they send word that my dinner must come in at the window to - morrow . " 
 " low coward and zany ! now find the yeast , Jane , if you have to search for an hour . they must all be go to bed now , except Matilda Jenkins ; and she dare not stop you if you say you have my order . " 
 " bless you , Miss ; she will run away as if I be a ghost . " 
 " then call to she , that I say she must go to bed directly . " 
 after a few more word , Jane go her way stealthily , like a thorough - breed thief ; and I be leave alone with my poor die uncle . wonderful as it seem to I , I feel now a tender affection for he , I the resolute , the consistent , the bitter Clara Vaughan . even if he have tell I that moment , that he have plot my father 's death , I would have perille my life for his ; because I should have know that he be sorry . yet I be full of cold fear , lest he should awake to consciousness , and utter that awful cry , while I alone be with he , in the dead hour of night . 
 soon than I expect , the nurse come back with a jug of beautiful yeast , smell as fresh as daybreak . we put it outside the window on the stone sill , to keep it cool and airy . she have see no one except Matilda , who be wait for I , and cry dreadfully , predict my certain death , and her own too ; if she should have to attend I . she keep at a most respectful distance from Jane ; and , with all her affection , be glad to be clear of I for the night . 
 for nearly two hour , the nurse and I sit watch , with hardly a speak word , except that I ask one question . 
 " how often have Mrs. Daldy be to see my uncle ? " 
 " she would hardly leave his bedside , until the fever declare itself . since then she have not be once . " 
 Broad awake at that strange hour , and in that strange way , I begin to pass through the stereoscope of my brain the many strange slide of my life . of all of these , the last for the moment seem the strange . suddenly we hear a low feeble moan . run into the bedroom , there we see the poor sick one with his eye wide open , vainly attempt to rise . I put my arm around he , and raise he on the pillow . he try to say ' thank you , ' for he be always a gentleman in his manner ; then he gaze at I with hazily wonder eye . then he open his mouth in a spasmodic way , and begin that bitter cry . 
 Ere he close his mouth again , I pour well into his throat a table - spoonful of yeast , hand to I by Jane . to my great pleasure , it glide beyond the black tongue ; and I give he two more spoonful , while he be star at I with a weak and rigid amazement . 
 " no water , Jane , not a drop of water ! it will work far well alone . he do not   know what it be , and he think he have have his water . keep he thirsty that he may take more . " 
 as he lie thus in my arm , I feel that one side be icily cold , and the other fiery hot . his face look most ghastly and livid , but there be not that mystical gray upon it , like the earth - shine on the moon , which show when the face of man be death 's mirror , and the knee of death on man 's heart . in a minute he slide from my grasp , down on the pillow again , and , with a long - draw sigh , become once more stiff and insensible . my hope be faint indeed , but still it be hope : if he have hope 's vitality , he might yet be save . 
 the rest of that night be pass by the nurse and myself in heavy yet break sleep . Jane assure I that there be no chance of my poor uncle become conscious again , for at least six hour . I be loth to forego my watch , and argue that the dose we have give might cut short this interval ; but lo - while I keep repeat at weary and weary period , that I could do no harm , since the physician give up , and I might do good - sleep , the lover of repetition , lay his hand alike on my formula and myself . Dear Judy 's howl be in my dream , and Mrs. Shelfer 's never cease prattle . 
 CHAPTER XVIII . 
 cold and fresh be the morning air , and the open window invite the sound of country life . who could think of fever with the bright dew sparkle on the lawn , the lilac bud grow fat enough to claim their right of shadow , the pleasant ring of the sharpen scythe , and the swish sweep of the swathe ? from the stable - yard , round the corner , come the soothe hiss of the groom , the short stamp of the lively steed   I fancy I know my own favourite " Lilla " , and the gruff " stand still , mare , wull'e ? " far down the avenue whistle the cowboy , waddle - footed , on his way to the clover ley , or the milkmaid sing with the pail on her hip , and the deer come troop and stoop their horn along . be it not one of my own pet robin , who hop on the window - sill , peer bravely at himself in the jug , and try to remember the last of his winter note ? 
 but it be cold , Jane , very cold indeed ; and we have never be to bed ; and now the mower have descry we , why do they stop their work , and shake their head together so , and keep outside the ranunculus bed , and agree that the grass beneath our window do not require cut ? why , if they be Papists , they would cross themselves , and that save many an oath . but the grass do want cutting , Jane . it can not have be cut for a week . I will call to they . no , it might disturb my uncle . 
 there be no sound from the bed - room yet : all deep and deadly silence . I will go and see . 
 there my patient lie , just as when I see he first , except that I have arrange the wreck of his hoary lock , and apply a lotion to his temple on the burn side . and yet , now I look close , the face be not quite so livid ; or be it the difference between the candle - light and the morning ray ? 
 even while I look , he start up , as if my eye revive he . he do not moan or cry ; but open wide his filmy eye , and gaze feebly and placidly at I . for a time he do not know I : then a great change gradually creep through his long faltering gaze . fear the effect of excitement upon he , I try to divert his attention by another good dose of yeast . three time he take it with resignation like a well - train child , but his eye all the time intent on I . presently they begin to swim and swerve ; the effort of the faint blood - tissue brain and the exertion of swallowing have be too much for his shattered power . he fall off again into the comatose state , but with a palpable difference . the pulse , which have throb on the hot side only , could now be feel most feebly move in the other wrist , and the tension of the muscle be relax : circulation be be restore and balanced , and the breathing could now be trace , short as it be and irregular . 
 I have not time to describe all the symptom of gradual improvement , and I have not the medical knowledge needful to do so clearly . enough that the six - hour interval be shorten that day by half , that the breathing become more regular , and a soft perspiration break through the clogged and clammy pore . Jane want to second this by an additional blanket , but I fear to allow it in a case of so utter prostration . when the perspiration be over , then I prescribe the blanket for fear of a chill reaction . 
 at every return of consciousness , our patient make an effort to speak , but I hush he with my hand on his lip , and he even manage to smile , when he find that I would be obey . in the evening he try to open his arm to I , and then try to push I away , in some faint recollection of the nature of his disorder . to I the interest be so intense , and the delight so deep , that if I have lose he now , it would surely have break my heart . 
 at sunset of that day , as nurse and I sit near the dressing - room window , watch the slant ray flicker on the sward , and the rook alight and swing over their noisy nest , a black cloud hang for a moment just above the sun , a black cloud with a vivid edge of gold . it temper the light in a peculiar manner , and seem to throw it downwards . peer through my finger at it , for it be very beautiful , I see a whitish mist or vapour steam and hover above the disk of the set sun , between my eye and that golden marge . I wonder what this could be ; there be no heat to cause strong evaporation , nor any mist or dewy haze about , nor be the sun " draw water . " but what I see be like that trembling twinkle of the air , which we often observe on a meadow footpath in the hot forenoon of July . I draw Jane 's attention to it , not expect any solution , but just for something to say . 
 " dear I , Miss , do not   you know what that be ? I see it every evening ; it will be twice as plain when the sun go down , and then it will be quite white . " 
 " well , what be it ? why can not   you tell I ? be everything here a secret ? " 
 I be rather irritable , but vex with myself for be so . too much excitement and too little sleep be the cause . 
 " no , Miss , there be no secret at all about that . every one know what that be . it be only the scum that rise through the grass from the arch pool that take all the drain of the house . some of the arch fall in they say , and the ground shake when they mow it ; they be afraid to roll there . " 
 " be it possible ? and you know it , a practised nurse like you ! do my uncle know it ? " 
 " I be sure , Miss , I can not   tell : most likely not , or he would have have it mend , he hat thing out of repair . but it can not   do any harm , with the mould and the grass above it . " 
 " can not   it indeed ? and you can see it rise . shut all the bedroom window in a moment , Jane . I will shut this . " 
 she think my wit be wander , from what I have go through ; nevertheless she obey I . 
 it happen that I have attend , at Isola 's urgent request , one lecture of the many deliver by Dr. Ross . she forget what the subject be to be . it prove to be an unsavoury and " unlady - like " one - Mephitis . Isola want to run away , but I have none of that nonsense about I , when human life be concern , and listen with great attention , and even admiration ; for he handle the matter eloquently and well . 
 " now , Jane , throw all the door open , and the lobby window that look in the other direction . when do you think it will be possible to move our poor patient from these room ? the air here be deadly poison . " 
 " well I be sure , Miss ! and he could not   have a nice nor a more airy room ; and all my thing in order too , and so handy , and so many cupboard ! " 
 " out of this poison he must go . when can he be move ? " 
 " well , Miss , he might be move to - morrow , if we could only get plenty of hand , and do it cleverly . " 
 " surely we can have plenty of hand . there use to be twenty - five servant here ; and I have not hear that my uncle have lessen the number . " 
 " no , Miss ; but save and keep we , we shall not   get one of they here . " 
 " Nonsense ! I will have they , or they leave the house . of course I will not   peril their life . we shall only want two or three ; and they may take a bath of disinfect stuff , with all their clothe on , before they come ; and they may smoke all the while . " 
 the nurse laugh grimly , and shake her gray head . 
 " and we will fumigate , Jane , fumigate tremendously . surely englishman have more self - respect than to be such baby , and you a woman , and I a girl , sham they out of face . " 
 " it do not   matter , Miss ; they will not   come . I know they well , the lot I mean that be in the house now . " 
 " very well , Jane , we will have Gamekeeper Hiatt , and his eld son ; they be man I know . and if that be not enough , we will send to Gloucester for Thomas Henwood . but why do not   you open the lobby door , as I tell you ? " 
 " if you please , Miss , I can not . they have fasten it outside . " 
 " do you mean to say that they have dare to lock we in ? " 
 " indeed I do , Miss ; we have be fasten in since the morning . " 
 " and pray , why do you not tell I ? ' 
 " because I fear to excite you , Miss. I know your temper when you be wrong , ever since you be that high ; and in this fever air , excitement be sure to kill you . brute ! but I suppose they do not   know it . " 
 " they know it well ; at least the master - spirit do . and for that very reason I will crush my indignation . since I be that high , Jane , I have pass through much tribulation , and have drop my lady - heiress tone . I can now command myself . " 
 " then , Miss , I will show you what they send this morning , round the handle of the coffee - jug . I be afraid to let you see it before . " she give I a twist of paper , on which be write as follow : - 
 " for the safety of the household , Mrs. Fletcher order that the person in the fever - room be allow no communication with the other servant . the intercept door be fasten , because a most sinful un - christian act be perpetrate last night . due supply will be deliver once a - day , at 10 A.M. no empty vessel and no correspondence receive . any attempt to break these rule will be punish by suspension of supply . servant be forbid to come beneath the sick - room window . may the Lord have you in his keeping , in his tender mercy , accord to his holy will . you be request to read Philippians i. 8 - 11 inclusive . there be three holy bible on the drawer and dressing - table . " 
 when I have read this , and perceive , by the blasphemy at the end , that it could proceed from no other than that awful woman , I confess that my spirit be cow within I . not from selfish fear , nor yet from the taming of passion , but from the lowering think that I belong to the same race of be as the author of such satanity . presently , I become too indignant to speak , or even think . it add , if that be possible , to my indignation , that I have see she leave the house , about nine o'clock that morning , in our good close carriage . she keep the window up until she be past the lawn and the light iron gate , beyond the arcade of rose ; then , at the first turn in the avenue , she let down the glass and gracefully kiss her hand to I . I do not believe , however , that she be go back to Cheltenham . with so much at stake in our house , and depend on her direction , she would surely stop in the neighbourhood , if only to watch the course of event . 
 soon than I dare to expect , I regain the command of myself ; horror within I be strong than wrath , and strong than either become the resolve to survive and win . " there can be no God , " I exclaim , in my presumptuous ignorance , " if this scheme of the devil be permit to triumph . " 
 first I try the door , which sever we from the rest of the house . my uncle 's room be in the western wing , very near those which my dear mother have occupy , and not very far from my own . they form one floor of the western gable ; the three bedroom window and that of the dressing - room look to the west , while the great lobby window , from which I have see Mrs. Daldy 's departure , look southward along the avenue , the curve of which could be see also from the bedroom window . an oaken door , at the end of the main passage , cut off the room in this storey of the gable from all the rest of the house . this door Jane have leave lock from the inside , fear lest other should lock she in , as they have threaten to do . but now we find that a strong iron bolt have be fix upon the outside , while we be asleep in the morning , and that we have no chance of force it . 
 next I ask Jane , whether she think that the house , now Mrs. Daldy be go , would be still in the hand of our enemy . would not Mrs. Fletcher at once re - assert her authority ? might not Matilda Jenkins be expect to fly to the rescue ? the nurse , know all the politic of the servant ' hall , assure I that there be no hope of either of these event . Robert , a drunken Wesleyan , turn out of the sect in Cheltenham , be Mrs. Daldy 's lieutenant , and would take all care of Matilda , to whose good grace he have be make overture . as for Mrs. Fletcher , she be probably in the same plight as ourselves . from what I hear about Robert , I begin to believe that he have private order to disown I at the station , for the double purpose of yield a tit - bit of insolence , and warning of my arrival . 
 however , that matter very little ; but out of those room I must get , either by door or by window ; and that , too , without delay . do they expect to triumph so easily over Clara Vaughan ? and in her father 's house ? the window be about twenty foot from the ground , as nearly as I could guess , and the room beneath be empty . at once I resolve to attempt an escape that way , and to do so before the moon , which be southe now , should shine on the western aspect . Good Jane be terrify at the thought ; and then , upon my persisting , implore I to let she make the attempt , if it must be make at all . 
 " now , Jane , no more , if you please . we can not   waste time about that . you have a husband partly dependent upon you , and several child to think of . for I nobody care . " but I hop somebody do . " and you know I be far more active and much light than you be . help I out with the feather bed . " 
 the little bed in the dressing - room , which she have to sleep on , be speedily bring to the window , and drop just underneath it . it fall upon the grass with a pleasing and quiet flop . then the two strong bell - rope , already cut down and plait together , be tie round the bar of the double window sash , the low sash be throw up to the full extent , the glass press quietly out with a pair of wet towel , and the splinter remove , so as not to cut the rope . the latter still fail to reach more than half - way to the ground , but I would venture the drop if I could only descend so far . after wind a linen sheet around my body and dress , with the end tie round one ankle , so as to leave I free use of my limb , I sit upon the window - sill in the broad shadow , and calculate my chance . should I begin the descent with face , or with back , to the wall ? face to the wall I resolve on , for though I should have to drop backward so , yet what I fear most of all be have the back of my head crush against the house . next to this I dread a sprain of the ankle , but all our family be well - knit and straight in the joint . 
 so I launch myself off , begin as gently as could be , Jane have firm hold of one hand , until I be well on the voyage . though not well verse in calisthenic art , I get on famously almost as far as the end of the rope , keep away from the wall by the over - saling of the window - sill , and the rapid use of my foot . then I rest a moment on a project ledge - call , I believe , a ' string - course " - and away hand below hand again . but I strike my knuckle terribly against that string - course , and very nearly lose hold from the pain of the blow ; then bend my body forward I give one good push at the wall , and shut both eye , I believe , let go the rope altogether . Backward I fall , and roll over upon the feather bed . I be not even stun , but fear for a moment to try if my limb be sound . 
 there I sit and strip off the wind sheet . presently , up I get , and , in my triumph , alas ! could not help cry " all right , Hurrah ! " like a foolish little child . in a moment I see that my cry have be hear , where it should not have be . a rapid flitting of light along the low window and in the stableyard , and I know that chase would be give . 
 but after leave my father 's house in such a dignified manner , be it likely that I would give in and be catch ? now , Clara , you could beat all your nurse in run , off and away like the wind ! away I go full speed towards the shade of the avenue , while Jane have the wit to scream out of the window , " help ! help ! here be the house on fire ! " this make some little diversion ; I have a capital start , and it be but half a mile to the lodge where old Whitehead live . once there , I should care for nobody . I must have escape very easily , for my foot seem as swift as a deer 's ; but , as my luck would have it , the light iron gate between the lawn and the park be fasten . what on earth should I do ? I see man run across the lawn , and , what be bad , they see I . in vain I pull at the gate ; they rattle , but would not yield . have I own true presence of mind , I should have walk boldly up to the man , and dare they to touch I fresh from the fever - room . in the flurry of the moment I never think of that , but dart into the shrubbery , and crouch among thick laurel . presently I hear they rush down the main drive and begin the search , with some heavy swearing . two of they come to the very clump I be hide in , and push a pitchfork almost into my side , but the stupid fellow have lantern , which blind they to the moonlight . on they go with grumbling and growling , which tell I exactly where to shun they . judge at length , from the silence , that the search have pass to the right , I slip from my tangled lair , and glide away to the left , beyond the shrubbery spring , where a little gate , as I know , lead to a glade in the park . the deep ha - ha which I have fear to jump in the dark , because of the loose stone at the bottom , be here succeed by a high oak pal , and probably through that gate have come the murderer of my father . 
 with a cold shudder at the remembrance , I steal along through the shadowy place , and have almost reach the little gate , when I see two of the searcher come straight towards I . to the right of I be the park - pal , on the leave a breastwork of sod , which I could not climb without be clearly see ; to fly be to meet the enemy ; should I yield , and be baffle after all ; insult too , most likely , for I know that the man be tipsy ? 
 in my hand be the tightly - wound sheet , use as a rope to confine my dress . I have fold it short and carry it , on the chance of its prove useful . in a moment I be under the paling in deep shadow , with the white sheet throw around I , fall from my forehead , and drape artistically over the right arm . stock still I stand against the black board , and two great coil of long black hair flow down the wind sheet . the man come up , tired of the chase , and grumble ; and by their voice I know they for my good friend Jacob and Bob . suddenly , they espy a tall , white figure , of tremendous aspect . they stop short , both tongue and foot , and I distinctly hear their tooth chatter . with a slow and spectral motion , I raise my drape white arm , and fetch a low , sepulchral moan . down fall the lantern , and , with a loud yell , away go the man , as hard as their leg could carry they . 
 laugh heartily , I refolde my sheet , and take the short cut across the park to the lodge where old Whitehead live , arrive , without have meet even my old friend " Tulip . " 
 the old man , in hot indignation , draw forth his battered musket - for he have once be in the militia - and swear that he would march upon the - - rogue at once . instead of that I send he for the two Hiatts , and the village constable ; and soon , without invitation , half the village attend . with my tear dress tuck up by good Mrs. Whitehead , and a hat on my head , newly buy for her clean little grandchild , I set forth again in the moonlight , at the head of a faithful army , to recover my native home . 
 Hiatt easily open the gate , which have defy my flurry effort , and we present ourselves at the main entrance , a force that would frighten a castle . it be needless to say that we carry all before we . the state of siege be rescind , Mrs. Fletcher and Tilly set free , all the ringleader turn away neck and crop , and what be far more important , my poor uncle remove , without be conscious of it , to a sweet and wholesome room . the sturdy Gloucestershire yeoman scorn all idea of danger . 
 tired with all my adventure , before I sleep that night - still near my uncle 's bed - two reflection come dreamily over my mind . 
 the first be a piece of vanity . " ah , Mrs. Daldy , you little know Clara Vaughan ! " 
 the second be , " dear I , how Conrad would be astonish at this ! and how strange that his father should thus have save my uncle 's life ! for he must have die , if leave in that noisome room . " 
 CLARA VAUGHAN 
 BOOK IV . 
 CHAPTER I. 
 before that week be over , my uncle could sit up in bed for a short time every day , be duly prop in a downy nest of pillow . one arm , however , remain quite impotent , and part of one side rigid and numb . his recovery be slow and tedious , as might well be expect with one who have be drag not from the jaw but the very throat of death . for a long time also his mind be feeble and dim , a mirror overcast by the vapour of the body . 
 to I , who be fond of observe , in my own little childish way , it be interesting as well as delightful to note how , day by day , the mind and body , hand in hand , rise strong . More than all be I teach , and humble in my own conceit , by take heed how tardily come back the power to guide and control the imagination . that object - glass of the mind - not achromatic even in first - rate intellect - have long be out of the focal distance from the lens of reason 's eye . upon it have be glance loose distorted image , render home imperfectly , if at all , to the retina of the brain . Herein its state be the very opposite to that of my own phrenoscope . I have no large imagination ; but the image it present be vivid , and I see well round they . every one of they be not cast , but cut , on my sensorium . whether I can strike they off in word - whether my telegraph can print its message - be quite another question , and beside its purpose . have render home to I the idol   oftentime invert , though distinct   it leave expression and judgment to do their good with the copyright . 
 now , both in fabric and in mould , my uncle 's mind be different . naturally his power be far superior , but he seem to take no pride in they . no dark and settle purpose have ever throw its shadow , and even its weight , upon they ; nor have they feel , so far as I know , the rough grasp of adversity . therefore they be long in recover from the blow , than I think my own would have be . 
 there be few thing , among the many desire by Mrs. Daldy , which she fail to reconcile with her strong sense of religion . " there be not one " - I have hear she say - " not one of the thing we believe to be for our good , which we should scruple to lay before the Throne of Grace . even the throbbing of that little unregenerate heart " - Clara Vaughan 's to wit , who have kick she that morning , quite by accident of course - " even they be know and sift there " - slight confusion of metaphor cause by strong conviction of sin - " infinite mercy know the thing that be for our edification , and confirmation in the faith . yes , backslide sinner , the want of real heart - feel spiritual life can be supply by prayer alone . be it not so in your experience , elder ? " " Prayer , my dear Madam , and search of the heart . oh the depth of the wickedness of the unconverted heart ! " and he take another glass of sherry . that night I remember she work very hard , for she ; and the next day she present I with marker the size of a gallow , progge with many hole ; on one be do in cross - stitch , " pray without cease , " and upon the other " wrestle thou in prayer . Gen. xxxii . 24 . " both of these I throw into the fire there before her eye . 
 from this it will be clear , that in her devotion she still remember I , and doubtless pray in good Scriptural phraseology for my release from this wicked world . Dr. Churchyard 's last report have raise her terror to the high pitch , and instead of wrestle in prayer , she have run away in high panic , upon hear that the fever - nurse be see at large the night before . " we must use the mean of grace , " she say to Mrs. Fletcher , before she lock she in , " and accept the mercy vouchsafe to we . and it would be sinful , dear Mrs. Fletcher , in I to neglect such a warning as this . " 
 it be wise , as well as righteous , in she to keep aloof for a time , while her device work their consummation . for the present it appear to I that they be fail signally . my uncle be regain strength of mind and body ; while native air , a sense of triumph , and daily exercise , keep I in bloom health . my patient , who otherwise could hardly bear I to leave he for an hour , insist upon my take a long ride every day . Lilla be charm , and so be I , with the sweet spring air , and the rich familiar scenery . and how it do make I eat ! thankful indeed I ought to be , and be , that it please God to spare I that awful and deadly pestilence . but the bad injury do by cant hypocrite be , that the repulsion they create drive away other from good . truly I may say , that for day after be in contact with that slimy sanctity , I could not say my own prayer , as a little child should do . 
 of that fever there have be three fatal case in the village , before it enter our house ; and I find that it be spread rapidly . with my uncle 's authority , I have the drainage survey and amend at once ; and so the p be stay . of course we do not neglect our own weak point ; and the crawl noisome smell be no long perceive in the room , nor the white vapour on the grass . 
 and so three week go by ; no news from London or Devonshire , no explanation between my uncle and myself , no arrangement as to my expectation in life . as yet my uncle be too weak to bear any sort of excitement , and seem desirous only to be passive in my hand . his eye always follow I to every part of the room , and he would even be prop on the sofa to see I ride down the avenue ; and there I always find he watch for my return . meanwhile I yearn to be once more in a certain little room with a north aspect , opposite a cheesemonger 's shop in an obscure street of London . nightly I dream of Giudice , and daily I dream of dear Isola and Conrad . the dog in the stableyard , who have hitherto own no especial attraction for I , suddenly find himself pet , and coax , and feed   which he think much more of   to the scandal of Mrs. Fletcher , and the great alarm of the groom , who would rather not have I there . moreover , the dog himself , though I strove to invest he with every chivalrous attribute , be of a low and ungenial order , adorn with no grace of mind , and little taste , except for bone and gravy . but perhaps my standard be too high : peradventure I even commence with more prejudice than a bulldog 's . be that as it may - and if I can see round thing , I ought to see round myself - every day fall heavier and heavy from the fair balance of time ; and every night the star - for there be now no moon - look weary in the heaven , and less incline for business . how long , how long shall you go round the pole in your steady pacing way , as if the sky be for auction , and you be pace the lot ; while I , with more fire in I than you can strike or steal , be ditch like a glow - worm kick under a dock - leaf , and see no polestar at all ? 
 here be May , the height of May : I be full of life and spirit : the garb of death , like an April cloud , blow over . let I see . last birthday I be eighteen : I have know more trouble than year , and enjoy no youth as yet . last year I spend in grow , and pining , and starve . now the Power , that balance earth and heaven , have fill I with joy and light . 
 neither be I renegade to my life , in open wide my heart to this flood of love and happiness . still be I set upon one strong purpose . still be I swear , and will not repent , that if filial duty demand it , I will trample love under my foot , and cut the throat of happiness . 
 during most of this time , I have no idea where the queen of hypocrite be ; though doubtless she know all that be happen to we . as soon as he hear of my uncle 's surprising rally , Dr. Churchyard come over , and claim all the merit for his own last prescription . bring face to face with the awkward fact that the medicine have not be procure , he be not in the least disconcert , but find that we have misunderstood he , the prescription to which he refer be the one before the last . at any rate , he enhance his own fame immensely , and become " instrumental under Providence " in kill more people than ever . in reply to Mrs. Fletcher , for I would not deign to ask he , he state that the excellent and devoted Mrs. Daldy have not be see lately in Cheltenham . her son , however , be there , and foremost in the rank of pump - room Lady - killers . just what he be fit for . 
 the doctor entertain a belief , and spread the report in Cheltenham , that Dorcas be lodge in a humble cot among the haunt of pestilence , imperille her life and lavish her substance to relieve the fever - stricken . this be more than I could stand , I ask the worthy doctor - who , after all , be a man of the world - what three wealthy person Dorcas have carry with she . at first he feign not to understand I , then look sly , and change the subject cleverly . of course I refer to the well - know fact , that she support her grandeur and her son 's extravagance by play an admirable rubber . she be play a well one now . 
 Dr. Churchyard finish by write another prescription , which , after his departure , I hand to the husband of Venus , legitimate disposer of mineral medicine . 
 CHAPTER II . 
 London ! London ! be still the cry of my heart ; and be I not summon thither by duty long ago ? what might become , during all this time , of the man whom I be bind to watch at every turn , and whom I be now in a well condition to deal with ? my first visit , every morning , be to my parent ' graf , and neither of they would be there but for his ruthless hand . as I sit there how lonely I feel ! how sadly forlorn in the world , be my lot wealth or poverty , victory or defeat ! 
 one morning as I sit there my spirit be move by dream of the night before , and I vow , in that bodily but invisible presence , that none , except one whose name I whisper , should ever kneel on that turf hand in hand with I . 
 Borne out of my usual vein by the deed myself have do , I enter the ancient church , always leave open for I , and , kneel at the altar - rail , with many a Vaughan supine in prayer , pennon , helm , and trophy round I , stately dame in marble white , and old crusader clutch still the cross - there I make my vow upon the knee - cupped stone , that if he claim I not , the race should end with I . 
 it be a presumptuous and unholy act , with all around I quell by time , with age lay aside in dust , with many a stouter heart and large mind than mine , helpless even to superintend the wasting of his tenement , with all his bygone bliss and woe , stanch love and deadly hate , less eloquent now than the fly whom the spider have catch in his skull . 
 return across the park , after a warm interview with " Tulip , " who insist mainly upon have his ear well scratch , I find my uncle in his snug wheel - chair , wait near the side - door for I to help and accompany he forth . this be our good way to take he out , because of the step at the front - door . he have not yet be in the open air since his terrible illness , but , judge by my own experience , I think that he pin for the breeze , and , after long council , it be resolve to trust he forth this day . with all his heart he be long to be out ; but , instead of express impatience , smile gratefully at I . I now observe that he have a sweet and win smile - a gift bestow not rarely on face of a sombre cast . 
 in return for it I kiss he , and we sail smoothly out . how he revel , to be sure , in the first clear breath from the lip of heaven ! stretch one poor arm forth - the other he could not move - he try to spread himself like a flower to the sun . then he draw long draught of liquid freedom , and be for a time as one intoxicate . in the glorious crystal bath he seem to float away from earth . come to himself at length , he look at I , and say , " now John may go , if he please . " a year ago he would have say , " go , John , " and no more . but illness be a great refiner . when John be out of sight he allow free vent to the tear of joy and gratitude , whereof , in my opinion , he have no call to be ashamed . I kiss he many time . my warm impassioned nature always feel for and delight in any touch like this . then he place his well hand on the cold and rigid one , lift this with that , and pour forth silent thank to the Giver of all thing . 
 " Clara , darling , " at length he say , " how can I ever show you a thousandth part of my gratitude for all the lovingkindness you have heap on I ? coal of fire , indeed ! and they have warm my selfish heart . with loathsome death before your face , in all the pride and bloom of early youth and rich - " 
 I will not repeat his word , because it would not become I ; but I be force by all that have happen to show what his feeling be . 
 " and all this for I - I who have be your bitter enemy , who have turn you out of your father 's house , and cause your mother 's death ! " here I stop he , lest he should be overcome . 
 " dear uncle , talk no more of this - never even think of it . the fault be all my own . you know I would not stop , often as you ask I . there always be a bar between we , and it be my obstinacy . " 
 " no , it be my pride . Clara , in my well mind I love you all along . how could I help admire your truth and courage and devotion to your father ? although I own that you be very bitter against I , yet , if I have only use the proper mean , I might have get the well of it . if I have tell you all my story , you would have pity more even than condemn I . but my pride forbade , and I make the common mistake of regard you as a child , because you be that in year . I forget to allow for the force power of grief . even now , pull down as I be , and humble by the wisdom of Heaven , I can not tell you my strange history without the acute pain . " 
 " then I be sure , uncle , I will never let you do it . " 
 " yes , it be my duty , and the soon do the well . rescue though I be , for the present , by your wonderful courage and skill , I feel that one more blow , even a slight one now , and time for I be end . but if it be God 's will to cut I off to - morrow , I should die in happiness , have make my peace , and win your kind forgiveness . " 
 " you shall not tell I now at any rate . and I will not   have you talk so , uncle . mind , I be head - nurse still . now come and see how lovely the ranunculus be get . " 
 I begin to wheel he over the grass and gather flower   which " he play with like a child , to change , if possible , the current of his thought . stupid thing ! I take the wrong way to do it . 
 " oh , uncle dear ! you will laugh at I , and say I be as bad as ever ; but as soon as you get well I want to be off again , kind and good as you be to I . " 
 he tremble so violently , that I fear the chair would be upset . 
 " what , Clara , can not   you live with I even now ? everything shall be your , as it ought to be . I will never meddle with you in any way , but keep to some lonely corner , and not see you very often . oh , Clara ! dear Clara ! do not   go away ! you know I be quite helpless , and I can not   live long , and you be all in all to I , and I be so proud of you , darling ! but it be not for myself I care . I can not tell , much less can you , what mischief may be do if you leave this house again . that low , crafty woman will be back again directly - she who make coward of all the household , and act the coward herself , who leave I to die in my lonely bed , while she take all my key . if her treachery succeed , I shall rise from my grave . and I know she will poison I yet , if she get the chance , and can make anything by it . " 
 it be the first time he have speak to I of Mrs. Daldy , and I be amazed at his bitterness , for I have hear of no quarrel between they . what on earth do it mean ? 
 " do not   go , Clara ! " he implore I , with the cold sweat on his forehead , and every line in his poor thin face a - quivering . " do not   go , my darling , bless Clara ! I have have none to love for year and year , and to love you be so sweet ! if you go I must die at once , and , bad than that , die wretched in the knowledge that you will be rob . " 
 he fall back in the chair , from which , in his excitement , he have strive to rise , and for some minute there he lie insensible . when I have succeed in bring he to himself , he look at I so piteously , with so much death in his eye , that I promise , with a sink heart , never to leave he more , except upon absolute necessity , until he should be well , or need my care no long . 
 he even try to persuade I not to go to London for the thing I have leave there , but to send a trusty person to pack and bring they home . to this , however , I could not yield , feel , as I do , that , after all my love for Isola , and all her kindness to I , I be bind to see she and say farewell ; and what harm could there possibly be in so short an absence ? my uncle wish I to bring she down for a good long visit , but this at such a time could not be think of . moreover , lively , impulsive Idols would have grow very long - face in a dull sick house , which our must be for the present . it be settle at last that I should go to London the follow Monday , stay there one entire day , and come back the day after with all my trifling chattel . one thing more my uncle propose which I would not hear of . it be , that he should transfer to I , by deed of gift , all the estate , both real and personal , reserve only a small annuity for himself , and a sum of 10,000 l.   for some special purpose , which he would disclose to I at leisure . thus , he say , he should feel as if justice have be do , and there would be some security against Mrs. Daldy 's scheme . of the latter I feel no fear whatever , and think it the effect of a shaken mind that he attach so much importance to they . under no circumstance would I think , for a moment , of allow he so to divest himself . money , to any amount , I could have , though I want very little , see that now , once more , a solemn duty would withdraw I from my long pursuit , and from all the frivolity which many girl delight in . I beg my uncle to appoint an honest steward for the estate , and to assign I a moderate yearly allowance , which would save much trouble . to this he at last consent , and propose for I so large a revenue , that , after remove the last cipher , I have more than I know how to spend . the first thing I do be to send the kind farmer the residue of the sum he have lend I , together with interest at ten per cent . , which do not seem excessive , consider that he have no security . 
 and now , with the utmost anxiety , I look forward to the time when my poor uncle should be strong enough to tell I , without risk , that history of himself which he have distinctly promise I . surely it must shed some light on the mystery of my own . this thought , as well as the sense of duty , reconcile I in some measure to the suspension of my life - long search . he would have tell I everything then and there , in his warm gratitude for my undertaking ; but I durst not let he . he be already fatigue with so much talking , and when the stimulus of the fresh air be go , he suffer a serious relapse . 
 CHAPTER III . 
 on the following Monday , my poor uncle be rather well again , I set off for London , as have be determine , and arrive there late in the afternoon . it have be propose to send a servant with I , but I have be too long accustom to independence , and also have reason of my own for refuse . I be to receive , on the morrow , an account , by telegraph , of my patient 's health and spirit , and promise to give , in return , some tiding of myself . Mrs. Shelfer have not be apprise of my coming , because she would have be sure to tell Miss Isola , whom , as well as her brother , I wish to take by surprise . Dear Isola have often inquire about my family , but only know that I be an orphan , much reduce in the world , poor , and all alone . much as I love she , I know quite well that she could not keep a secret , and whenever she tease I about my " iron mask , " I retort upon she that she have first to discover the secret of her own home . 
 as we rush towards the mighty city , what a flush be in my cheek , what a flutter in my heart ! whom might I not see even upon the platform , or , at any rate , in the street , and , poverty be remove , what obstacle could there be between we ? not that I intend to resign myself to affection , and lead a life of softness , until I have discharge to the utmost my duty to the dead . yet some sort of pledge might pass - some surety there might be , that neither of we would feel thereafter quite alone in the world . but how could I tell that he even care about I ? well , I have a strong suspicion . in some thing the eye be the good detective police . only I have always be so unlucky . be it not too good luck for I ever to be true ? 
 Mrs. Shelfer 's door be open at my knock , not by her own little bustling self , nor even by shock - head and sly " Charley , " but by a short stout man of affable self - importance , with a semi - jewish face , and a confidential air . he have a pot of porter in one hand and a paper - roll in the other , a greasy hat on his head , and one leg of his trouser have lose the low half . upon learn my name and object , he take no notice whatever of I , but put up his paper - roll for a trumpet , and shout along the passage , " Balaam , here be a kick ! I be bother if it be all lie , after all . never dream the old gal could tell a word of truth . have a high opinion of she . blow if the young woman herself be not   come ! " 
 " easy there , Balak " - the mouth of the speaker be full - " keep the door , I tell you . never get a bit of time to my victual . she be up to a plant , I doubt . just let I have a squint at she . " out come another man with a like appearance and air , and a blade - bone in his hand , whereat he continue to gnaw throughout the interview . it be indeed a squint with which he favour I , and neither of they would move for I to pass . 
 " pray what be the meaning of all this ? " I ask , in my grandest manner . " surely I have not mistake the house I live in . this , I believe , be Mrs. Shelfer 's house ? " 
 instead of answer I , they close the door enough to put the slide - chain on , leave I still outside , where , with boiling indignation , I hear myself discuss ; the cabman look on with an experienced grin . 
 " well , Balaam , now , and what do you think of that party ? " 
 " Uncommon fine young gal , and doose mannersome too ; but it do not   follow , for all that , that the thing be on the square , you know . have she get any luggage , Balak ? " 
 " no , mate . and that look fishy , now one come to think on it . stop , let I have another look . " 
 " no ; leave that to I . slip the chain out , Balak : and keep your foot behind the door . she can not   push we both in without assault and battery . " 
 to my shame and indignation , I be subject to another critical cross - fire from half drunken eye . I turn my back and stamp in my vexation ; the cabman give I an approve nod . this little act of mine be so unmistakably genuine , and display such very nice embroidery - I do like a tasteful petticoat - that the hard heart of Balaam be soften ; at the same moment a brilliant idea steal through his cautious mind . 
 " stop now , Balak , put your foot there . she can not   push we both in , I believe ; leastway not without battery and contempt of court . now what do you think of this ? " - and he whisper to his grimy friend . 
 " well , that beat all I ever heer'd on . let you alone for brain , Balaam , and I for muscle and pluck ! " 
 " now , young lady , " begin Balaam in a diplomatic tone , " I and my mate here be in a constitution of trust , or else you may take your oath , and never a pervarication , we never would keep an agreeable young female " - here he give I two ogle intend for one - " on the flinty stone so long ; only we can not   say if you mean honest , and there be such a many bad one go , and we have   get a leary file inside . now listen to what I say . there be a dog as big as a lion in the room as you call yourn ; and he do show his tooth , and no mistake . we be afeare to show our nose there , even at the command of dooty . you can hear he growl now like all the Strand and Fleet Street ; and my mate Balak here leave half his breech behind he , save your presence , Miss , and lucky to get off so . now if so be you undertake , honour bright , to march straight into that front room , my mate and self have conclude to let you in . " 
 " of course I will , " say I , smile at their terror . so I pay the cabman , take up my little bag , and run right up the stair . Balaam and Balak fear to come round the corner . " you must unlock the door , Miss , " cry one of they , " we be force to lock he in . " 
 " oh Judy , my darling Judy , my own pet love of a Judy . " he let I say no more ; his paw be on my shoulder , and I be in a shower - bath of kiss . in the ecstasy of my joy , I forget all about the two man and their mysterious doing , and fling myself down on a chair , while Judy , out of his mind with delight , even try to sit on my lap . he whinny , and cry , and laugh , and yell , and could find no vent for his feeling , until he throw his great head back and tell all in a wow - wow , that must have be hear in Oxford Street . a little familiar knock , and Mrs. Shelfer appear , look rather well than ever . 
 " why , dear Mrs. Shelfer , how glad I be to see you ! and you look much young , I declare ! " 
 " and , Miss , you do look bootiful , bootiful , my good friend ! splendid thing , " - I be dress a little well , but still in sombre colour - ' splendid , Miss Vaughan , and how you become them to be sure ! talk of Miss Idols after that , why it be the Queen to a gipsy ! and pray , Miss , if I may make so bold , what do you give for this ? it beat my sarcenet dress , I do believe . " 
 " nothing , Mrs. Shelfer , only a little kiss . " 
 " gracious I , Miss , then you have   be and get engage , and to a lord at least . I hear you be come into your great fortune at last ; more than all Middlesex they tell I , Regency Park and all ! and that poor straight - legged young man , as come here every day to see Judy , and to ask for you . " 
 " now , Mrs. Shelfer , do not   talk nonsense , " - my heart be jump , but I do not want she to see it . " I only hope you have not   say a word to he about these foolish report . " 
 " I , Miss ! do you think I would now ? " 
 " yes ; I know by your face you have . you can not   cheat I , Mrs. Shelfer . never mind , if you have not mention my name . " it never strike I that Conrad would be frighten at my money . 
 " no , never , Miss , as I hope to be save . " and she cross herself , which I have never see she do . 
 " come , Mrs. Shelfer , now ; I have   get some pretty little trifle for you in this bag . " 
 she jump with pleasure ; she be so fond of knick - knack : then she put her finger on her lip and go to the door and listen . presently she come back with a mysterious air . 
 " pray , Miss , as you be so very kind , excuse my take the liberty , but would you mind give Judy the bag in his paw ? no fear of they get it there . " 
 " why , what on earth be the matter ? why do not   you let I in ? who be those nasty man ? " 
 " oh , it be nothing , Miss ; nothing at all to speak of : only they knock my stick so in make the inwentory , and the one they make last time , and the time before , would do every bit as well . but they charge for it , every time , the rogue - and they dare to put the chair down lackered and american cloth , good , morocco as ever be , and as if Miss Minto - " 
 " now , Mrs. Shelfer , tell I in two word what it mean . be it a sale ? " 
 " no , no , Miss , I should hope not ; only an execution , and they two man be the bailiff ; civil tongue enough , and very good judge of porter and periwinkle . they be the one as come last time ; but I would soon have the old one , jolly fellow they be , and know how to wink both eye . but that cross - eyed thief - " 
 " and have they get my thing , Mrs. Shelfer ? " 
 " no , Miss ; only what few be in the bedroom ; they dare not   come here for Judy . it be as much as their life be worth . if I have know they be come , I would have have he at the front door , but they lock he in as soon as he get a piece out of the other fellow 's leg . bless I , how he do holloa ! " 
 " do you mean to say , Mrs. Shelfer , that they have take possession of my thing in my bedroom ? " 
 " to be sure , Miss. I say they be your , and of course they would not   believe I , and the folding door be shut , but Judy would have break it down only they put the bedstead again it . gracious I ! I never see a dog take on so in all my life ! he be like a roar lion . " 
 " I should rather hope so . Giudice , I commend you ; and I have   a great mind to let you out , and what be more , I will if they do not   give I back my thing . surely , Mrs. Shelfer , they have no right to my property . " 
 " well , so I say , Miss ; because it be not   for the landlord ; but they will not   believe they be your . " 
 " if they do not   believe I pretty soon , Giudice shall convince they . he be a judge you know , and I have   no idea of robbery any more than he have . but who be do all this , and why do you seem so unconcerned about it ? I should cry my eye out , I be sure . " 
 " bless your pretty heart , Miss ; this make the fifteenth time I have   have they here in the last four year . at first I be terribly put out , and make myself a figure cry ; but now I only think it be company , and they drink as if they be , that be certain . you must have see the inwentorie , Miss , round the candle lot of time . only one thing they do that do not   strike I as wery honourable , though it be law I b'lieve ; they charge I , and wery high too , for eat up my victual , and they will have meat four time a day . why , that Balak , he with his breech go - " 
 " who put they in , Mrs. Shelfer , and how much be it for ? " 
 " oh , it be one of Charley 's bill or note , of course . Quinlan hold it , he as keep " the little dust - pan , " down Maiden Lane , and Charley say that all he get for it be ten shilling and a waggon - load of water - cress . now they will be here directly , Miss , with you to keep the dog in . excuse I , Miss , I see you have get one of they new wide thing as go all round and up - capital thing , I must have one before they come again . and could you manage to sit upon the sofa , Miss , and the three good chair in your petticoat , with the tea - poy on your lap ? " 
 " what on earth do you mean , Mrs. Shelfer ? " 
 " why , Miss , they can not   lay hold of any article in use , I believe , and you have get so much room in your thing . " 
 " do you suppose I intend to let they come here , for a moment ? now let I look at my bedroom . come , Judy . " 
 " oh , Miss , they do have such a hunt here for Charley 's double - barrel gun ; a regular beauty it be , and that big rogue Quinlan be after it . they know it all round this neighbourhood , it be make by a famous maker , Joe something , I b'lieve , and the good he ever make ; it be poor Miss Minto 's brother 's ; and they shall not   have it , not one of them . I would soon shoot they with it . I keep it always in the safe place I know on , and twice a year I see that it do not   get rusty . " 
 " what safe place do you keep it in ? " 
 she put she little mouth up to my ear , and her little hand up to her mouth , and whisper - 
 " at the broker 's , Miss , in Barbican . he have have it now six year . it be in for a quarter its value , but that be all the well for I : I have less to pay for keep it , and I carry the ticket night and day in my bosom . and do you know , my good friend , they think they have get it just now ; they get a key that fit that box of your , that you always lock so carefully , and they make sure that be it ; ha , ha , how I laugh at they when they open it ! " 
 " what ! have they dare to open my mahogany box ? " it be the repository of my precious relic . 
 " to be sure they do , Miss , and they find such curious thing there ! a lovely thing all set with jewel , they say , a baggonet fit for the Duke of Wellington , and plaster shape like a cobbler 's last , and colour paper with queer letter on it , and a piece of long black hair , and a plan with distance on it - Lor , Miss , what on earth be the matter ? water ! water ! you be like death - Balaam ! balak ! " 
 " Stop , Mrs. Shelfer " - I have fall on the bed - " I would not for ten thousand pound have have that box expose to those low ruffian , ransack , and even catalogue . if I can punish they I will ; and you too , you low , miserly , meddling , inquisitive old crone . " 
 she care for nothing - though afterwards she tell I she never see such eye in her life - until I luckily call she an " old crone . " at that , she fall back upon the towel - horse , and sob with both hand over her eye , as if her heart would break . I have pierce she in the tender point - her age . 
 I do not feel sorry for she at all for at least two minute , but let she cry away . " serve she right , " I think . even if she could not have stop they from open that box of mine , at any rate she have no right to gossip about it , and enjoy it all , as she evidently have do . furthermore , I know well that she have always be on the tingle to learn the content of that box , and many a time I have baffle she . now she have triumph thoroughly , and I should not have be female if I have calmly allow it . but see she great distress   through all of which she talk , with sob for affirmation , I begin to think what a pity it be ; then to wonder whether she deserve it all ; next , to believe that she have do no harm ; lastly , to feel that I have be a brute . thereupon I rush to coax and kiss she , wipe away her tear with my own lawn handkerchief - the feel of which console she , for the edge be lace - and beg her pardon fifty time in a thousand foolish word . finally she be quite set up again by this : 
 " I tell you , my dear Patty , when I come to your age , when I be five and thirty " - she be fifty - two at least - " I shall fully deserve to be call an old woman for this ; and much old I shall look , there be no doubt , than you do . " 
 " right , my good friend , you be quite right there " - this expression show I that she herself be right . - " why the young man from the butcher 's , he say to I this morning , and beautiful black hair remind I of your , Miss , all stick together with the fat from off the kidney - " 
 " come , Mrs. Shelfer , let I see about my box . " 
 " to be sure , to be sure , my dear Miss Vaughan ; but what do you think he say ? ' now , William John , ' say I , ' a good steak mind , a tender juicy steak , for the gentleman visitor here ' - Balaam , Miss , and Balak , if you please , - ' do like good juicy meat . ' ' Mrs. Shelfer , ma'am , ' he say , a bow with his tray like that , ' you shall have a steak , ma'am , as fresh and as juicy as yourself . ' now be not   that pretty , my good friend ? " 
 " beautiful , Mrs. Shelfer . but see about my box . " 
 " surely , surely , Miss Vaughan . but it be very pretty , like a valentine , do not   you think it be now ? " 
 " where be it ? " 
 " Downstairs , Miss , in my little parlour . " 
 " then send it up at once , by one of the man . " 
 presently Balaam come up , look askance at Judy , and with the mahogany box under his right arm . he touch his dirty hat , for Mrs. Shelfer have fill he by this time with the wonder of my wealth , and then he look doubtfully , and with sorrow , at his burden . 
 " put it here if you please , " and I point to some chair , " the dog will not touch you while I be here . now what be the amount of this execution ? " 
 " debt fifteen pound , Miss ; expense up to five o'clock , four pound ten . " 
 " here be the money . now give I a receipt . " 
 " no , Miss ! you do not   mean to pay all ! " 
 " of course , I do . " 
 " then , Miss , I beg your pardon , but I can not   allow you . I have a duty to my employer , and I have a duty to the public too , not forget Mrs. Shelfer , and Charley an old friend , and all so handsome in the way of victual . and I be sure she would not   wish you to be cheat , Miss. pay ten pound for the debt , Miss , and that be a deal more than it cost they or they expect to get . ' twixt you and I , Miss , every stick of this here furniture be in a dozen bill of sale already ; and we come here more for practice like , than for anything else . " 
 in short , I pay 10 l.   for the debt , and 4 l.   for the expense : whereupon Balaam look at I with a most impressive and confidential glance . 
 " now , Miss , you will not   think I rude ; but you have come down so handsome , I can tell you something as you may like to know . I have   seed the very moral of that sword of yours before . " 
 " be you certain ? pray where be it ? " I tremble with excitement . 
 " it be in a place in Somers - town , Miss ; where I make a levy , some eight year agone . " 
 " what be the name of the people ? " 
 " Dallyhorse , or Jellycorse , or something of the sort . foreigner they be , and they have only just come to this country . but I can tell you the name more shipshape from the book . ah , the very moral of it ; only there warn't   no serpent . " 
 " do you know what have become of they ? " 
 " no that I do not , and do not   want to come across they again . a mean set of mongrel parlywoo ; I get starve amost . but I do hear they be rid the high horse now , and something about court . " 
 " be you quite sure that the weapon be exactly like this ? look at this again . " 
 " Miss , I can take my oath it be the fellow pea , all but the little snake , and he be not   a fixture , I do not   believe . I would have swear it be the very same , only you tell I not . I notice it most particular ; for I never see one like it , though I have have a sight of foreign weapon in my hand ere now . and the gent have get it put away so ; we come across it only through a cat as happen to be confine - " 
 " and what become of it ? do your employer have it ? " 
 " not he , Miss. when the gent find we have get it , he be put out and no mistake ; though he sham not . away he go and get the money somehow , and have we all away in no time . " 
 " how many be there in the family ? " 
 " well , let I see . they be only live in lodging , and have but half the house . there be Dallyhorse himself , and a queer - look lady , and some child , I do not   know how many child , for they keep they out of the way ; and a nice young woman as do the cooking for they , and precious little it be . " 
 " what be his profession ? and who be his creditor ? ' 
 " I do not   know . they call he an artist I think , but he look to I more like a sailor . it be a boarding - house bill , as I be on he for . Rum - temper fellow . I think he would have stick I when I get his sword thing . a tallish man he be , slight build , and active , and such black eye . " 
 " now , Balaam , if you can trace that man , and find out where he be live now , I will give you two hundred pound . here be ten pound for you as an earnest . " 
 Balaam be so amazed , that he almost look straight at I . 
 " please , Miss , may I tell Balak ? I shall not   be happy if I do not . we always work together , and it would not   be on the square like . " 
 " be he with you then ? and can he keep a secret ? " 
 " yes , Miss , he be with I , and I would trust he with a gallow secret . I can not   do no good without he . " 
 " then , certainly you may tell he ; but not while in this house . here be my country address , that you may know who you act for . keep clear of the Police . keep the whole matter to yourself . in two day , I leave London ; if you discover nothing in that time , write to I here , and I will take good care to have the letter forward . do nothing , but find out that one thing , and when I have verify it , I will pay you the two hundred pound . " 
 " would you mind , Miss , put it on paper ? " 
 " yes : for many reason , I will not write it down . but you be at liberty to inquire who I be , and whether I be likely to disgrace my word . " 
 after take his address , " Balaam Levison , Dove Court , Chancery Lane , " I allow he to depart , and hear he pause on every stair , to ponder this strange matter . 
 presently Mr. Shelfer come home , and be delighted to see the bailiff ; and the pleasure be mutual , and my cash burn to be quench , a most hilarious evening be the natural result . my health be drunk , as I could hear too plainly , to unfathomable depth : and comic song from three loud organ , provide with patent nasal stop , with even Patty 's treble pipe audible in the chorus , break from time to time the tenour of my sad and lonely thought . 
 CHAPTER IV . 
 the bailiff 's discovery , and the pursuit commence thereon , appear to I so important , that in reply to the message receive the next morning - that my uncle be much the same , and longing for my return - I send word that my journey be put off until the day after the morrow . this allow I one day more for tiding from my new scout , as to the success of their effort . I be very sorry to disappoint my poor sick uncle , but it seem still bad to run away all in the dark . 
 the next thing I do be to arrange with Mrs. Shelfer about the money I have pay for she . it be not the money I care for , but I have other view . although she be politely thankful , I perceive that she think it a very bad job indeed , and a most romantic transaction . thirty per cent . be the very large dividend she have ever intend to pay . but the plan which I propose be so much for her benefit , while it suit I , who otherwise must have lose the money , that it almost recover she from the shock of have pay a debt . the plan be simply this , that she should reserve my room for I , air and clean they duly , and always keep the bed in a fit state to be sleep on at an hour 's notice . my previous rent have be twelve shilling a week , the utmost I could afford out of my narrow income ; attendance , and linen , and other trouble be now dispense with , I think it fair to allow her ten shilling off her debt to I , for every week I should so retain the room . the 4 l.   for the expense of the execution I forgive she altogether ; inasmuch as I have pay without consult she . directly my payment should be exhaust , to wit in twenty week , I would send she a further sum , if I still require the room . 
 she be delighted with this arrangement , which in fact enable she to have she ' stick " all to herself , to pet they and talk to they every day , and even to clean they , if such a freak of destruction ever should enter her brain . she could use the sitting - room for her own pleasure and pride , as much as ever she choose , so long as it always be ready for I ; and already vision be pass before her mind 's eye , of let the parlour downstair with the onion - room for its dormitory . to I the arrangement be very convenient , as afford a fixed and familiar resort in London , and a pivot of ready communication . nor be it a small consolation to feel that I still retain a stronghold in the neighbourhood of dear friend . 
 all this be comfortably settle , Giudice and I go forth to pay our visit in Lucas Street . the whole of that street we find so utterly change in appearance by a vigorous onset of painter , grainer , and decorator , that it be not easy to know the house we be in quest of . even the number on the door , which have be illegible , or very nearly so , have now be re - arrange and paint over again upon the fashionable and very sensible mode of mark odd numeral on one side , and even one on the other . find myself in a difficulty , and the house all alike as the central pea of a pod , I trust to Judy 's delicate nose , and ring the bell of the door at which he halt . then he draw back , and tremble , and crouch upon the pavement , to wait for my return . as I hear the tinkle , my heart begin to flutter : who could tell what new phase of my life might begin with that little pull ? after some delay , poor old Cora come , look as weird and woebegone as ever - fierce would have be that look to any one but I . I know that I hold she by my magic gordit , like the slave of the lamp . after implore in some mumble word   which I interpret only by knowledge of her desire   gracious leave to kiss that potent charm , she lead I into the breakfast - parlour , where I find sweet Isola in a passionate flood of tear . 
 at sight of I , her beautiful smile break through they , and her quick deep sob spend themselves in kiss . 
 " oh , I be so gug - gug - glad , my own dear Cla - Cla - Clara ; and I will not   cuc - cuc - cry one bit more , the moment I can stop . " 
 she put her arm around I , and her head upon my breast , as if I have be , at the very least , her brother . 
 " my pretty dear , what be it all about ? " 
 I have never see she look so lovely as now , her violet eye brim with liquid brightness , the velvet of her cheek deepen to rich carmine , and the only thing that sweet face ever want , the expression of earnest feeling , now radiant through the whole . 
 " why , dear , I ought not to tell you ; but I must tell somebody , or my heart will break . " 
 here she press her little hand on that pure unfissured casket , where sorrow be as yet an undreame - of robber . 
 " you know , dear , it be all about papa and my darling Conny . the only trouble I ever have , but a very great one , big enough and too big for two little folk of my size . half an hour ago , I go in suddenly to get a book upon the politico - economical science , the very one papa be lecture about so beautifully ; and I do not even know that Conny be in the house . there papa be , white as death with passion ; and Conrad with his eye like coal of sparkle fire ; and what do you suppose my papa call his own son Conny ? " 
 " do not   tell I , if it be anything bad . I can not   bear it , Isola . " 
 " oh , I know you be fond of he , and I be so glad ! " 
 this she say in such an artless way - as if Conrad and I be two doll which she mean to put in one doll 's house - that instead of colour , I actually laugh . 
 " oh , but I must tell you , Clara : it be right for you to know ; one of the lead principle of political economy - " 
 " do not   talk to I of that stuff . " 
 " well , I will not ; because I see that you do not   understand it . but he actually call he - and his voice come from a depth , like an artesian well - he call our darling Conny - " 
 " what ? " and in my passion , I fling off her hand , and stand up . 
 " a low bastard , a renegade hound , a scandal to his country - and then he even say Rimbecco . " 
 she pronounce the last word almost with a scream , as an insult beyond forgiveness . what it mean I do not ask , I have hear enough already . 
 " I must leave this house . where be your brother Conrad ? " 
 " Gone , I believe , to inquire for you . nothing but that compose he . I wish he would never come here . and he be order not to . but it be about some business . oh , he never will come again . " and she begin to cry at the thought of the very thing she have wish for . 
 " neither will I come again . where be your father now ? " 
 " up at his lumber cabinet , where he always console himself , whenever he be put out . but if you be go , dear child , do let I come with you . I shall cry till I die here , all by myself : and Pappy never care about I , when he be in his black dudgeon . " 
 in a few minute we leave the rude unpleasant house , and even Judy seem relieve to get away from the door . by the time we reach Mrs. Shelfer 's , Idols be in capital spirit again , and press I for some account of the wonderful wealth , and the grand house she have hear of . no doubt this rumour have find its way through Ann Maples . 
 " and the great Lord - what be his name , dear Donna ? I would not   believe a word of it ; though I be sure you be a deal too good for all the house of peer . but Conny do ; and be not   he in a way ? but he ought to be very glad you know - wish you every blessing , as they say in the play ; and a peer be the very high blessing to an Englishwoman . but one thing I be quite resolve on : Judy belong to I now , do not   you , lovely Judy ? " 
 " no , " say the judicious , " I belong to Clara . " 
 " though Conny pretend , since he be leave at your place , that he belong to he . now I will give he to you ; and so will Conny too . you can afford to keep he now , and I can not , he do eat such a lot ; and he do not care a pin for I , but he love you with all his heart . " 
 " how do you know he do ? " I be not attend much , but think of some one else . 
 " why , can not   you see that he do , how he wag his tail every time you even look at he ? but I hope poor Conny be here . I should think he would stop , when he find darling Clara come back . " 
 I have jump to that hope long ago , before we even leave Lucas Street , and that have something to do with my walking so fast . 
 no , he be not there , he have not be there to - day . it be my turn now to cry ; what might he not have do , after that fearful insult , and from his own father too ? 
 the tear , which I confide to no one except the wooden - legged blackbird - for Giudice would have make such a fuss about they - be still upon my cheek , when I hear the well - know step - not half so elastic as usual . I flee into my bedroom , and push the box about , to make a goodly noise , and to account for the colour in my face . then out I come at the side - door , and run downstairs perversely , though I know that Conrad and Isola be in my sitting - room . 
 but this first - rate manoeuvre only outwit its author , for Isola run down after I , and send I upstairs alone . all my little nonsense vanish the moment I look in Conrad 's face . his healthy brown complexion be fade to an opal white ; beneath his eye such dark blue rim , that I think he have spectacle on ; and on either cheek a round red spot be burn . so shocked I be , that when he take my hand , I turn my face away and smother down a sob . I feel that I have no right to be so fresh and blooming . nor be it only in health that the contrast between we lay . I be dress with unusual care , have fidget all the morning , and with my utmost taste . poor Conrad be in his work clothe , full of marble dust , tumble , threadbare , and even in need of mending ; his hair sweep anyhow , and his hand not over - lately wash . yet , for all that , he be as clearly a gentleman , as I be a lady . 
 not so would he have be array , I fancy , have he think to see neat Clara . and yet , who know ? " I trust that you will excuse I , " he begin to say , " but such thing have happen lately - you will not account I rude - I have no sense at all of this great pleasure . " 
 " I fear you have not be very happy . " I know not what to say , or how to keep my voice clear . 
 " yes , " he reply , " as happy as I deserve . it serve I aright for esteem so much of myself , before that I do anything . but I will win my way " - and his own proud glance flash out - " and we shall see how many will scorn I then . " 
 " no one in the world can scorn you , " I say very softly , and my voice thrill through he . 
 " ah , you be always kind and gentle : " - be I though , think I - " but I will no more fatigue you with my different lot in life . I be tell that some great nobleman have win you for his own . perhaps you will give I an order . " 
 his throat be swell with these bitter word , and he look at his dusty clothe . somewhat rude I think he , but I know not half his trouble . 
 " whoever tell you that , have make a great mistake . I be engaged to no one . your sister know I well . " and I turn away to the window . for a minute he say nothing ; but I could hear his heart beat . stedfastly I look at the cheesemonger 's shop . oh for a flower , or something on the balcony ! 
 presently he come round the corner of the sofa . without be rude , I could not help turn round . 
 his face be much , much , bright , and his eye more kind . 
 " have I say any harm - I would not for the world - I know not it be harm . " 
 " no harm , " I say , " to think so ill of I ! to believe , for a single moment , that because I be not so poor , I would go and forsake - at least , I mean , forget - any one I care for ! " 
 " can I ever hope , if I serve you all my life , that you will ever care for I ? " 
 " do not   you know I do ? " and I burst into my violent flood . 
 when I come to myself , both his arm be round I , and I be look up at his poor sick face , my hair quite full of marble chip , and he be tell I with glad tear in his eye , which he never take from mine , how he care for nothing now , not for all the world , not for glory or fur shame , so long as I only love he . 
 " with all my heart and soul , " I whisper , " he and no one else whatever , whether in life or death . " 
 all the folly we go through I be not go to repeat , though I remember well every atom of it . let the wise their wisdom keep , we be babe and suckling . neither of we have ever love before , or ever mean to love again , except of course each other , and that should be for ever . 
 " one thing I must tell you , my own sweet love , and yet I fear to do it . but you be not like other girl . there be no one like you , nor have there ever be . I think you will not scorn I for another 's fault . " 
 " of course I will not , my own pet Conny . what be this awful thing ? " 
 " I be an illegitimate son . " 
 one moment I spring from he ; the next I despise myself . but in spite of all my trouble , there still lurk in my heart the narrow pride of birth . down to the earth it fall beneath the foot of true love , and I kiss away from his eye the mingled reproach and sorrow , assure he that at least he should have a legitimate wife . 
 to make amend , I lean upon he one moment , and put my hand on his shoulder , and let he play awhile with the dark shower of my hair . 
 " Darling Conny , you have tell I your , now you shall hear my secret . only promise I you will give tit for tat . you say you love I ever since you see I first ; then you must have love your Clara when you save her life . " 
 " what do you mean , my Clara ? those low ruffian in the Park be not go to kill you . " 
 " no , dearest ; I do not   mean that at all . but there be a kiss for that , I have owe it you ever since . but what I mean no kiss can repay ; no , nor a life of love . you save a life worth fifty of my own . " 
 some dark alarm be grow in his eye , on which I gaze with vague increase terror . 
 " why , dearest , it be nothing . only your own Clara be not Clara valence ; you must call she ' Clara Vaughan . ' " 
 with actual violence he thrust I from his arm , and stand star at I , while I tremble from head to foot ; his face be one scarlet flame . 
 " and pray , Sir , what harm have I do ? be I to suppose that you " - special emphasis mean for illegitimacy - " that you be ashamed of my father and I ? " 
 " yes , I be . accurse low licentious race ! if you know what you have do , you would tear your heart out rather than give it to I . " 
 " thank you - I feel obliged - my heart indeed - to a bastard . take back your ring if you please ; kindly restore I mine . may I trouble you for room enough to go by ? " 
 and I sweep out of the room , and through the side - door into my bed - room , where I crouch in a corner , with both hand on my heart , and the whole world go away . " mad ! " I hear he cry , " yes , I must go mad at last ! " away he rush from the house , and I fall upon the bed , and lie in fit till midnight . 
 CHAPTER V. 
 I believe that my heart would have burst , if they have not cut my stay ; and how I wish it have . when I come back to my unlucky self , there be something shivery cold in the forehead wave of my hair . be it Conrad 's finger ? I put up my hand to dash it away , and catch a fine fat leech . Dr. Franks be sit by I , hold a basin and a sponge . 
 " that be the last of they , my dear child . do not   disturb he . he be do his duty by you . " 
 " his duty ! be it his duty to say such fearful thing ? to break my heart with every word ! ashamed of I - ashamed of my darling father ! low and licentious ! what have I do ? what have I do ? oh , it I only know what harm I have ever do ! " 
 " no harm , my poor dear , no harm in the world ; let I bathe your pretty face . come now , you shall not   cry another drop . what be to become of the beautiful eye I be so proud of save ? " 
 " oh , I wish you have not , how I wish you have not . Dr. Franks , I have no father , and no mother , and no one in all the world to love I , and I be just get so nice and happy again , so proud of myself , and so much prouder of he , and I begin to think how glad my own dear father would be ; and , Dr. Franks , I do love he so , with all my heart , perhaps it be not very large , but with every morsel and atom of my heart - and now , now I must hate he as much as ever I can . oh let I go home , do let I go home , where my father and mother be bury . " and I rise in the bed to start , and the candle glimmer in my eye . 
 " please to go out of the room , every one please to go ; and do not   let Isola come . I can not   bear the sight of she now . it will not   take I long to dress , and I do not   want any luggage ; and , Mrs. Shelfer , please to go for a cab : and I shall not   want the room any more , and it do not matter a bit about any letter . I will tell my father everything when I see he , and then perhaps he will tell I what harm it be I have do . why do not   you go , when you see I want to get up ? ' 
 " do not   you see , my dear child , we be go ? only you must take this glass of wine first , to prepare you for your long journey . will you take it now , while we fetch the cab ? " 
 " yes , anything , anything : I do not   care what it be . only let I get ready . " 
 and I drank , without even taste it , a glass of some dark liquid , which save I from wander far either in mind or body . 
 when I awake , it be broad noon once more , and Dr. Franks be sit by I with one of my hand in his . " magnificent constitution , " I think I hear he mutter , " glorious constitution . " what good be it to I ? at the foot of the bed , sit Isola cry terribly . slowly I remember all my great disaster , but see it only through a dull gray veil . the power of the opiate be still upon my brain . but a cold dead pain lie heavy on my heart , and always seem to want a heavy hand upon it . after he have give I a revive draught , Dr. Franks perceive that I wish to speak to Isola , and accordingly withdraw . 
 Poor Isola come slowly and sit beside my pillow , doubt whether she should dare to take my hand . therefore I take her , draw her face towards I , and cover it with kiss . Isola have do no harm to I whatever , and I feel it something to have even she to love . she be overcome with affectionate surprise . 
 " oh , Clara dearest , I be so very glad to find you love I still . I fear that you would never care for I again . what be it all about , dear , if you be well enough to tell I , what be all this dreadful misery about ? " 
 " that be the very thing I want to learn from you , dear . surely you must know well far than I do . " 
 I would not even ask she what have become of Conrad . 
 " no , I do not   dear . I do not   know at all . all I know be there must have be some dreadful quarrel between you and Conrad . I must tell you , dear , I be so anxious about something you can guess , that I steal up to the door soon after he come in ; and you be so intent upon the window , that you never even see I put the door ajar ; and then I hear he tell you how very much he love you , and I be so glad . and then I think it be not quite fair of I , and I know all I want , so I run downstairs again . and the next thing I hear be your bedroom door bang and then Conny dash out the house , and Judy come down to I look very sorrowful . and I run up to you , and here I find you shriek so , and roll , and clutch at the bedclothe , and I be so frightened I could not even move . and then Judy come and make such a dreadful howling , and Mrs. Shelfer run straight off for the doctor , and I pour the water in the decanter over you , and I can not   tell any more . " 
 " but surely , darling , you have be home since that ? " 
 " oh yes ; when Dr. Franks come , and you be a little well , he would make I go home , because he do not want two patient , he say ; and his eld daughter , such a nice girl , come with I ; and my papa do not   even know that I have be out of the house . he be still upstairs , brood over his relic , and all the sixth form at the College have to go to dinner without their lecture ; but I do believe the stupid girl be glad . " 
 " and do you hear - no , it do not   matter . " 
 " no , I never hear what become of Conrad . no doubt he go back to his favourite chip , chipping . he have get a splendid thing he be full of now , and it prevent his sleeping ; something or other very horrible from Dante , and the lead figure be model after you . I have see the drawing , and he have get you exactly . " 
 " how gratifying to be sure ! I will ask you no more question . pray let I know when I be for sale ; though I should call it a work of illegitimate art . " 
 my eye be on her face , but she show no consciousness whatever , which she must have do have she know the fact refer to , for she be quick of perception , and open as the day . I be angry with myself for the low and bootless sneer , which be pretty certain to be convey to her brother . 
 " now I will delay no long . let I speak to Dr. Franks . I shall go this afternoon . " 
 Poor Isola turn pale ; she have look upon the occurrence as only a lover 's quarrel , sure to be set right in a day or two . she could not harbour any great resentment long , and forget that I could . 
 " do not   talk so , dear ; and you so very weak ! it would be sure to kill you . and what will Conny think ? you must not go , at any rate , till you have be to see he . " 
 " I go to he ! I hope to see he never more until I charge he in another world with this bitter wrong . no , no more if you please ; I will not hear his name again . how can he be your brother ? Darling Idols , I never shall forget you . take this , my pet , and think of I sometimes , for you will never see I more . " 
 I give she an emerald ring , set with lovely pearl , small type of herself . it be not the one I have reclaim from her brother , that be a plain keeper . 
 " oh Clara , Clara , do not   say that , whatever you do , because I know you will keep to it , you be so shamefully obstinate . and I never love any one in the world like you ; no , not even Conny . " 
 " and not even your father or mother ? " 
 " no , not half so much . I like Pappy very well when he be good and kind , but that be not very often now " - the poor little thing 's eye fill again with tear , - " and as for my mother , I never even see she ; she die when I be bear . " 
 " and I love you too , my sweet , good of all the world - now . nevertheless , we must part . " 
 " and never see each other ? I do not   call that love . tell I why : do tell I why . there seem some horrid mystery about every one I love . " 
 and she be overcome with grief . she have not be , like I , apprentice young to trouble . 
 " darling , I will write to you sometimes . you can come here for the letter . I will have no secret any more from you ; but you must never attempt to write to I - only send your name on a bit of paper when my letter go . " 
 " but why on earth may not   I write to you , Clara dear ? " 
 " I can not   tell you why . only I can not bear it . " the truth be I could never have bear to read about her brother . so all that be settle , and I say good - bye with plenty of bitter crying . as for Balaam and Balak , from whom I expect tiding , and George Cutting , whom I have think it right to send for - I have not the heart to attend to any of they . Dr. Franks have do his utmost to oppose my sudden journey , but I tell he truly that I should go mad if I stop there any long . I could not bear the mere sight of the room where I have be , in the height of delicious joy , so trample upon and outraged . my brain be burn , and my heart be ache for the only spot on earth where true love could be find , the spot where lay my father and my mother . 
 see how the fever of the mind be kindle , the doctor , like a good physician , know that the good plan be to indulge , and so allay it . yet he beg I , if I have any regard for he , not to travel all alone while in that dangerous state . with most unlooke - for and unmerited kindness , he even send his eld daughter , at an hour 's notice , to see I home in safety . 
 the last farewell be say to Judy , whom I would not take away , greatly as I love he still ; and he receive most stringent order first to conduct dear Isola home , and then to go to his old quarter at the livery stable . apparently he acquiesce , though with wistful glance ; but at Paddington , as I be get the ticket , to my amazement in he rush , upset a couple of porter , and demand his ticket too . under the circumstance there be nothing for it , except to let he go with we , or to lose the train . so his ticket be take , and he dash into the dog - box with an enthusiasm which earn he a hard knock on the head . 
 CHAPTER VI . 
 Annie Franks be exactly as Isola have describe she , ' such a nice girl . " kind - hearted like her father , truthful , ladylike , and sensitive ; retire too , and humble - minded , with a well of mute romance in the shadow of her heart , a wave of which she would not for the world display . the only vent she ever allow this most expansive element be novel - reading , or a little quiet hero - worship . her great happiness be to sit upon a lonely bank , and read a slash curtel - axe and gramercy romance , with lot of high - bear lady in it , and lot of moonlight love . if history get hard thump among they , and chronology , like an unwound clock , be right but twice in twenty - four , simple Annie smile no less , so long as the summer sun flash duly on pennon , helm , and gonfalon , and she could see bright cavalcade wind through the greenwood shade . in " coat and waistcoat " novel her soul take no delight . not a shilling would she squeeze from her little beaded purse for all the quicksilver of Dickens , or the frosted gold     of Thackeray . yet she be not by any mean what fast young lady call a ' spooney ; " she have plenty of common sense upon the thing of daily life , plenty of general information , and no lack of gentle self - respect . 
     " ice - temper steel " I have write . but alas , the great author be dead , and they say that his kind heart be grieve by nothing so much as the charge of Cynicism . if he be a Cynic , would that we all be dog ! - " greek : Kynos mmat ' ech"n , kradíen d ' eláphoio . " - C.V. 1864 . 
 now she be wend through an upland meet for gray - clothe reverie , where she might dream for day and day , and none but silly deer intrude . as we pass along in the gloaming of the May , through bosom lawn and bosky dell , with lilac plume for cavalier , and hawthorn sweep for lady ' train , the soft gray eye of Annie cease at last to watch I , and her thought be in costume of Chevy Chase or Crecy . 
 by reason of the message send the day before , no one in the house expect I ; so we steal in quietly , lest my uncle should be alarm , and I request Gregory , tipsy Bob 's successor , to bring Jane to meet we , in my own little room . Annie be instal there , to her great delight , and allow free boot of " Marry , Sir knight , " and " now by my halidame , " I go to see my poor dear uncle , who by this time be prepare for my visit . very weak he seem , and nervous , and more rejoice at my return than even I have expect . to I also it be warm comfort in my cold pride - ailment to be with one of my own kin , whom none could well disparage . there be a dignity about he , an air of lofty birth , which my own darling father have be too genial to support . soon I perceive from my uncle 's manner , that something have happen since my departure to add to his uneasiness . but he offer no explanation and I do not like to ask he . he in turn perceive the heavy dark despondency , which , in spite of all my effort , would at time betray itself . pride and indignation support I , when I begin to think , but then I could not always think , whereas I could always feel . moreover , pride and indignation be , in almost every case , prop that carry barb . in a word , though I would scorn the love - lorn maiden 's part , it be sad for I to know that I could never love again . 
 with a father 's tenderness , he feebly draw my head to his trembling breast , and ask I in a tearful whisper what have happen to I . but I be too proud to tell he . oh that I have not be ! what misery might have be spar to many . but all the time my head lie there , I be on fire with shame and agony , think of the breast on which my hair have last be shed . 
 " now , good nurse Clara , " he say at last with a poor attempt at playfulness , " I shall have no more confidence in your professional skill , unless you wheel I forth to - morrow with a cheerful face . you be tired to - night , my love , and so should I have be , if you have not come home . to - morrow you shall tell I why you come so suddenly and save I a day of longing . and to - morrow , if I be strong enough , I will tell you a little history , which may be lose , like many a great one , unless it be quickly tell . stop - one cup of tea , dear , and how proud I be to pour it out for you - and then I will not keep you from a lively friend . to - morrow , you must introduce I . I still like pretty girl , and you should have bring that lovely Isola with you . I can not   think why you do not . she would have be most welcome . " 
 " come , uncle , I shall be jealous . the young lady I have bring be quite pretty enough for you . " 
 he sigh at some remembrance , and then ask abruptly , 
 " do you mean to sleep , my darling , in the little room to - night ? " his voice shake so , while he ask this question , that I be quite certain something have alarm he . the little room be the one I have occupy between the main corridor and his present bedroom . it be mean for an ante - room , not a sleep chamber ; but I have bring my little iron bedstead thither . 
 " to be sure I do , dear uncle ; do you suppose , because I have be off duty , that I mean to be cashier ? only one thing I must tell you ; I have bring home with I one of the very good friend I ever have . you have hear I talk of Giudice . I can not bear the thought of part with he to - night , he will cry so dreadfully in the strange stable ; and in London he always sleep on the mat outside my door . may I have he in the lobby , uncle , you will never hear he move , and he never snore except just after dinner ? " 
 " to be sure , my pet ; I would not part you for the world . God bless you , my own child , and keep your true heart light . " 
 if I have be really his own child , he could not have be more loving to I , than he have now become . 
 after give Annie Franks her tea , which she be far too deep in tournament to drink , I pay a visit to Mrs. Fletcher 's room , and learn from she that nothing , so far as she know , have happen to disturb my uncle : Mrs. Daldy have not be near the house , and there be a rumour afloat that she have be call to take part in a revival meeting near Swansea . so after introduce Judy , who be a dreadful dog for jam , and have he admire almost as much as he ought to be , I return to Annie , and find she in high delight with everything and everybody , and most of all with her tapestry - writer . leave she at last under Tilly 's care , Judy and I be make off for our sleeping quarter , when truant Matilda follow I down the passage hastily . 
 " oh , Miss , please , Miss , I want to tell you something , and I do not like to name it before that nice young lady , because I be sure she be timid like . " 
 Matilda look not timid like , but terrify exceedingly , as she star on every side with her candle guttering . 
 " hold your candle up , Matilda ; and tell I what it be . " 
 by this time we be in the main passage , " corridor " they call it , and could see all down it by the faint light of some oil - lamp , to the oriel window at the farth end , whereon the moon   now nearly full again   be shin . 
 " why , Miss , the ghost be walk last night , and the night before . " 
 " Nonsense , Matilda . do not   be so absurd . " 
 " it be true , Miss. true as you stand there . pale gray it be this time , and so tall , and the face as white as ash . " and a shiver run through Tilly , at her own description - " you know , Miss , it be the time of year , and she always walk three night together , from the big east window to this end and back again . so please to lock your door , Miss , and bolt it too inside . " 
 " well do , Tilly ! do any one intend to wait up for the ghost ? what time do it come ? " 
 " one o'clock , Miss , as punctual as a time - piece . but could you suppose , Miss , any one would dare to wait up and see it ? " 
 " then how have they see it , in the name of folly ? " 
 " why , Miss , I will tell you . one of the carriage - horse get an inflammation in his eye , and the farrier give order to have it sponge never more than three hour between , and so William Edwards , the head - groom if you please , Miss " - Tilly curtsey here , because this be her legitimate sweetheart - " he stop up till one o'clock to see to it , and then Job Leyson go instead . so William come in , Miss , on Monday night , to go to bed , please , Miss , and he take the short cut , not that he be allow , Miss , or would think of take a liberty on no account whatever , but he be that sleepy he do not   know the way to bed , so he go across the corridor for the short cut from the kitchen gallery to the servant ' passage ; and there he see - he have not   any light , Miss , and the lamp all out - goodness I ! whatever be that ? do you hear it , Miss ? " 
 " yes , and see it , Tilly ; it be a daddy in your candle . go on , Tilly , will you . be I to stop here all night and get as bad as you be ? " 
 " there William Edwards , a man who never swear or drink , there he see all in the dark , come so stately down the corridor , as if it have not   room enough , with one arm up like this , a tall pale melancholy ghost , and he know it be the lady who be wrong and kill , when the great war be , Miss , two hundred year agone . " 
 " well , Tilly , and do he speak to it ? " 
 " he be that frightened , Miss , he could not move or speak ; but he fall again the wall in the side - passage , with his eye come out of his head , and his hair up like my wicker - broom . and then she vanish away , and he get to bed , and do perspire so , they be force to wring the blanket . " 
 " Capital , Tilly ! and who see she the next night ? " 
 " why that nincompoop Job Leyson , Miss. our William be a deal too wise to go that way any more , but he tell Job Leyson , and he a foolish empty fellow , perhaps you know , Miss. ' Ho , ' say Job , ' I often hear tell of she , to - night I will have a peep . ' so last night when William go to bed on the servant ' side , down come Job and take the front way , pretty impudent of he I think . and , Miss , I do not   know what he see , I never say much to he ; but there they find he in the saddle - room , at five o'clock this morning , with his heel up on a rack , and his head down in the bucket , and never a bit of sponge have come near the poor mare 's eye . " 
 " oh , thank you , Tilly . perhaps you have well snuff your candle . no ghost will have much chance that come near my Judy . " and with that I go to bed , tired of such nonsense . 
 an hour of deep sleep from pure weariness both of mind and body , and I awake with every fibre full of nervous life . the moon be high in the south - east , and three narrow stripe of lozenge light fall upon the old oak floor . although my uncle have leave the gable where the window face the set sun , he still keep to the western wing . the house , which be build in the reign of Henry the Eighth , cover the site and in some part embody the relic of a much more ancient structure . the plan be very simple , at least as regard the upstair room . from east to west run one long corridor , cross at right angle , in the centre and near the end , by three gable passage . although there be so many servant , not half the room be occupy : all the good bedroom have be empty many a year . no festivity have fill they since my father 's day . gloom and terror still hang over the eastern part , where he have be so foully murder . in most of the downstair window along the front of the house , the rickety lattice of diamond pane have be replace by clear plate - glass , but the old hall , and the corridor , and some of the gable window still retain their gorgeous tint and heraldry . 
 as the shadow of the mullion steal upon my counterpane , there begin to creep across my mind uneasy inkling of the ghost . a less imaginative man than William Edwards , I who have often enjoy his escort , know well there could not be . as for Job Leyson I could not tell with what creative power his mind might be endow ; but - to judge from physiognomy - a light ring snaffle would hold they . 
 Thinking , with less and less complacence , of this apparition story , and the red legend which lie beneath it , for the spectral lady be believe to be a certain Beatrice Vaughan , daughter of the Cavalier who perceive the moss - light , and heiress of the house 200 year ago - thinking of this , I say , with more and more of flutter , I sit up in the bed and listen . my uncle 's thick irregular breathing , the play of an ivy - leaf on the mullion , the half - hour strike by the turret - clock , be all the sound I hear ; except that my heart , so listless and desponding , be re - assert some right to throb for its own safety . with my hand upon it , I listen for another minute , resolve if I hear nothing more to make a great nest in the pillow - I always want three at least - and shut both ear to destiny . but there come , before the minute pass , a low , long , hollow sound , an echo of trembling expectation . in a moment I leap from the bed ; though I have never hear it before , I know it could only be the bloodhound 's cautious warning . 
 I fling a long cloak round I , gather close my hair , hurried velvet slipper on , lock my uncle in , and quietly open the outer door . there stand Giudice in the moonlight , with his head towards the far east window , his ear lay back , his crest erect , and in his throat a gurgle sound , a growl suppress by wonder . he never turn to look at I , nor even wag his tail , but watch and wait grimly . I lay my hand upon he , and then glide down the corridor , avoid the moonlight patch . Giudice follow , like my shadow , never a foot behind I , his tread as stealthy as a cat 's . before I reach the oriel window where the broad light fall , something tell I to draw aside and watch . I withdraw , and Giudice with I , into the dark entrance to my father 's room . here we would see what come . Scarcely have I be there ten throb of the heart , when between I and the central light , where the moonbeam fall askance , rise a tall gray figure . I be not quite a coward , for a woman at least , but every drop of blood within I at that sight stand still . even Giudice tremble , and his growl be hush , and every hair upon he bristle as he crouch into my cloak . slowly the form be rise , like a corpse raise from a coffin by the loose end of the winding - sheet . I could not speak , I could not move , much less could I think . with a silent stately walk , or glide - for no foot could I see - the figure come towards the embrasure where we lurk . Ashy white the face be , large the eye and hollow , all the hair fall down the back , the form be tall and graceful , one arm be lift as in appeal , to heaven , and the shroud droop from it , the other lie across the breast . the colour of the shroud be gray , pale , unearthly gray . for one moment as it pass , I keep my tooth from chatter . Giudice crawl one step before I , with his mind make up for death . back the blood leap to my heart , as the apparition glide slowly down the corridor without sigh or footfall . 
 what to do I know not ; my foot be now unrooted from the ground . should I fly into my father 's death - room ? no ; I be afraid . to stay where I be seem good , but how could I see it come back , as I know it would ? another such suspension of my life , and all , I feel , would be over . 
 suddenly , while still the figure be recede in the distance , I see a great change in the bloodhound . he stride into the corridor , and begin to follow . at the same time , the deep gurgle in his throat revive . in a moment , it flash through I that he have smell the ghost to be a thing of flesh and blood . it might be my father 's murderer . at any rate it have enter as he must have do . close behind the dog I steal after the spectral figure . the supernatural horror flee ; all my life be in my vein . what become of I I care not , I who be so wretched . almost to the end , that gliding form precede we , then turn down a flight of step lead to the basement . triple resolution gush through I at this ; this be the spot where the ghost be know to turn , and glide back through the corridor . when it have descend about half - way down the staircase , where the step be on the turn and narrow , stand at the head I distinctly hear a flop , as of a slipper - heel dropping from the foot , and then catch up again . what ghost be likely to want slipper ? and what mortal presence need I fear , with Judy at my side ? keep he behind I by a gentle touch , I hurry down the stair . luckily , I stop before I turn the corner , for a gleam come up the passage ; the ghost have strike a lucifer . 
 it be a dark and narrow passage , proof to any moon - light , and the spectre lose no time in light a small lamp , to find the study door ; I mean my uncle 's private study , where he keep his paper . the lamp be of peculiar shape , very small , and fit with three reflector , to throw the light in converge plane . 
 still remain in deep shadow , I see the person - ghost no long - produce a key , open the study door and enter . then an attempt be make to lock the door from the inside , but - as I know by the sound - the false key would not work that way , and the door be only closed . whisper into Judy 's ear , that if he dare to move - for his honest wrath at these burglarious doing could scarcely be control - I would make a ghost of he next day , I leave he in the passage , and softly follow the intruder . first I look through the key - hole ; the room be very dark and full of heavy furniture ; I could see nothing ; but must risk the chance . so I slip in noiselessly and close the door behind I . with the ghostly apparel throw aside , and a mask lay on an ebony desk , stand intently occupy at the large bureau , which I have once so long to search , my arch - enemy , Mrs. Daldy . I be not at all surprised , have feel long since that it could be no other . sit upon a stiff - back velvet chair , in the shadow of an oaken bookcase - crouch I would not for she - I wait to see what she would do . already the folding - door of the large bureau be open ; their creaking have drown the noise of my entry . before she be expose a multitude of drawer . all the visible door she have probably explore on the previous night , as well as the other repository of various kind which the room contain . her search be narrow now to one particular part of this bureau . 
 the folding - door be very large , and richly inlay with arabesque and scroll - work of satin - wood and ebony : all the inside be fit and adorn with ivory pillar , small alcove contain baby mirror , flight of chequer step , and other quaint device , besides the more business - like and useful slide tray . with the lamp - light flash on it , it look like a palace for the Queen of Dolls - a place for puppet ceremony and pleasure . every drawer be face with marquetrie , every little door have panel of shagreen . in short , the whole thing would have be the pride of any shop in Wardour Street , when that street be itself . have never see it open till now , I be quite astonish , though I do not   know how often my father have promise to show it to I on my very next birthday , if I be good . probably I be never good enough . 
 without any hesitation , Mrs. Daldy press a fan , or slide , of cedar - wood , in the right corner of the cabinet ; the slide sink into a groove , and disclose two deep , but narrow drawer ; these she pull out from their box , and lay aside ; they be full of paper , which she no doubt have already examine . then she place the diminutive lamp on one of the doll step , and produce from her pocket three or four little tool . before commence with these , she probe and press the partition between the socket of those two drawer , in every imaginable way - a last attempt to find the countersign of some private nook , which have defy she the night before . 
 at length , with a low cry of impatience , she seize a small , thin chisel , and a bottle of clear liquid : with the one she soften the buhl veneer upon the partition 's face , and with the other she remove it . then , after a little unscrewing , she carefully prize away the stop of cedar - wood , while I admire her workman - like proceeding   so far as they be visible to I , and the graceful action of the arm she be so proud of . her shoulder come rather in my way , but I get a glimpse of the narrow , vertical opening , where the cedar - stop have be . she draw a long breath of delight and pride , then thrust a wire - crook into this opening , and hook forth two thin and closely - fasten packet . eagerly she look at they ; they be what she want . no doubt she know their content ; her object be to get hold of they . have place they carefully in her bosom , she prepare for a little more joiner 's work , to restore what she have dismantle . her dexterity be so pleasing , that I let she proceed for a while . she soon refixe the cedar - stop , tap it in the most knowing way with the handle of the screw - driver , then she screw it tightly , and spread the wood with some liquid cement to carry the veneer . she have mislay the narrow strip of tortoise - shell and brass , and be look for it on the chequer step , when I call aloud : 
 " shall I show you where you put it , Mrs. Daldy ? but where on earth do you learn your trade ? " 
 never be amazement write more strongly on any human face . if the ghost have frighten I , I now have my full revenge . she drop the bottle of cement , and it roll on the cabinet step ; she turn , with her face as white as the mask , and glare round the room , for I be still conceal in the recess . I think she would have blow out the lamp , but she have not presence of mind enough : otherwise among all that furniture it would not have be easy to catch she ; and she know nothing of my sentinel at the door . 
 after some quiet enjoyment of her terror , I come forth , and meet she fairly . 
 " what , Clara Vaughan ! be it possible ? I think you be in London . " 
 " be it possible that I have find a Christian , so truly earnest about her soul , so yearn over the unregenerate , commit a black robbery in the dead of night ? be this what you call a wholesome conviction of sin ? " 
 low exultation I confess : but the high blood in the land , if it be blood , could scarcely have forbear it : for how I abhor that hypocrite ! 
 for a time she know not what to do or say , but glare at I without much christian feeling . then she try to carry it off in a grandly superior style . she draw herself up , and look as if I be not worth reason with . 
 " perhaps you be young enough to imagine , that because appearance be at this moment peculiar - " 
 " thank you : there be no need to inquire into the state of my mind . be kind enough to restore those packet which you have steal . " 
 " indeed ! I be perfectly amazed at your audacity . what I have belong to I righteously , and a strong hand than yours be require to rob I . " she grasp her chisel , and stand in a menacing attitude . I answer she very quietly , and without approach nearer . 
 " if I wish to see you tear in piece , I have only to raise my hand . Giudice ! " and I give a peculiar whistle thoroughly know to my dog . he leap against the door , force the worn catch from the guard , and stand at my side , with his great eye flash and his fang lay bare . Mrs. Daldy jump to the other side of the table , and seize a heavy chair . 
 " my dear child , my dear girl , I believe you be right after all . it be so hard to judge - for God 's sake keep he back - so hard to judge when one 's own right be in question . the old unregenerate tendency - " 
 " will lodge you in Gloucester jail to - morrow . once more those paper - or - " and I look at Giudice and begin to raise my hand . his eye be on it , and he gather himself for the spring like a cannon recoiling . in the height of her terror , she tear her dress open and fling I the packet across the end of the table . I examine and fix they to Judy 's collar . then we both advance , and pen she up in a corner . it be so delightful to see she for once in her native meanness , despoiled of she can not and phylactery , like a Pharisee under an oil - press . she fall on her knee and implore I , in plain earnest English for once , to let she go . she appeal to my self - interest , and offer I partnership in her scheme ; whereby alone I could regain the birthright of which I have be so heinously rob . I only ask if she could reveal the mystery of my father 's death . she could not tell I anything , or she would have jump at the chance . at last I promise to let she go , if she would show I the secret entrance under the oriel window . it be not for her own sake I release she , but to avoid the scandal and painful excitement which her trial must have create . when she depart , now thoroughly crestfallen , I follow she out of the house by the secret passage , wherein she have store a few of her stage - property . Giudice , whom , for fear of treachery , I keep at my side all the time , show his great tooth in the moonlight , and almost challenge my right to let she go . after take the packet from he , I give he a sheepskin mat under the window there , and leave he on guard ; although there be little chance of another attempt be make , while the paper be in my keeping . her mask and spectral drapery remain with I , as trophy of this my ghostly adventure . 
 CHAPTER VII . 
 next day when I show my uncle the two seal packet which I have rescue , and tell he all that have happen , at first he be overcome with terror and amazement . his illness seem to have banish all his satirical humour , and that disdainful apathy which be the negative form of philosophy . he take the parcel with a trembling hand , and begin to examine the seal . 
 " all safe , " he say at last , " all safe , to my surprise . dear child , I owe you more than life this time . you have defeat my bad enemy . to your care only will I commit these paper , one of which , I hope will soon be of little value . it be my will ; and by it your father 's estate be restore to you , while the money which I have save by my own care and frugality be divide into two portion , one for you , and the other , upon certain event , for that worthless Mrs. Daldy . this must be alter at once . when you have hear my story , you may read the will , if you like . indeed I wish you to do so , because it will prove that in spite of all our estrangement , I have mean all along to act justly towards you . but that you may understand thing properly , I will tell you my strange history . only one thing you must promise before I begin . " 
 " what be it , uncle dear ? " 
 " that you will forgive I for my one great error . although it be the cause of your dear father 's death . " 
 I could not answer , for a minute . then I take his hand and kiss it , as he turn his face away . 
 " my darling , I be not quite strong enough now after all you have be tell I . although I have dark suspicion yesterday that some plot be in action ; for I have observe that thing in the study be not as I have leave they ; and I have other reason too . but take I , my precious child , to the sunny bank this afternoon , and please God , I will at least begin my tale . " 
 I beg he in vain to defer it : there be a weight upon his mind , he say , which he must unload . so in the early afternoon , I wheel he gently to the sheltered nook . there , with the breeze way - lose among new street of verdure , tall laburnum dangle chain of gold around we , and Giudice stretch out his paw in sunny yawn of glory , I listen to my uncle 's tale , and be too young to understand the sigh which introduce it . how few may tell the story of their life without remember how they play with life ! alas the die throw once for all , but leave to roll unwatched , and lie uncounted ! 
 though I can not tell the story in his impressive way , I will try to repeat it , so far as my memory serve , in his word , and with his feeling . solemnly and sadly fall the history from his lip , for his mind from first to last be burden with the knowledge that the end be nigh at hand , that nothing now remain , except to wait with resignation the impending blow . 
 STORY of EDGAR VAUGHAN . 
 " I have always be , as you know , of a rove unsocial nature . my father be dead before I be bear , and my mother have marry again before I could walk , there be little to counteract my centrifugal tendency . I seem to belong to neither family ; though I always clung to the Vaughans , and dislike the Daldys . the trustee of my mother 's settlement be my virtual guardian ; for all the Vaughan estate be most strictly entail , my father have nothing to dispose of , and therefore have make no will . my mother 's settlement comprise only personal estate , for no power have be reserve under the entail to create any charge upon the land . the mortgage , of which no doubt you have hear , as pay off by your father , be encumbrance of long standing . 
 " the estate , I need not tell you , be shamefully mismanage , during your father 's long minority . an agent be appoint under the Court of Chancery , and an indolent rogue he be . meanwhile your father and myself go through the usual course of education , no difference be make in that respect between we . although we be only half - brother , we be strongly attach to each other , especially after a thorough drubbing which your good papa find it his duty to administer to I at Eton . it do I a world of good ; before that , I have rather despise he for the gentleness of his nature . at Oxford , after your father have leave , I keep aloof both from the great convivial and from the thinly people reading set , and live very much by myself . soon as the humorous doing , whose humour culminate in the title ' lecture , ' soon as these be over , I be away from the freckle stone , punt lazily on the Cherwell , with french and italian novel ; or lounge among the gipsey on the steppe of Cowley . Hall I never frequent , but din at some distant tavern , and spend the evening , and often the night till Tom - curfew , in rid through the lonely lane towards Otmoor , Aston Common , or Stanlake . it be strange that I never fall in love , for I have plenty of small adventure , and fall in with several pretty girl , but never one I care for . gaze on the wreck I be , it be no conceit to say that in those time I be consider remarkably good - look . of course I be not popular ; that I never care for ; but nobody have reason to dislike I . I affect no peculiarity , give myself no air , behave politely to all who take the trouble to address I ; and the world , which I neither defy nor court , follow its custom in such case , and let I have my way . 
 " at Lincoln 's Inn , my life be much the same , except that wherry succeed punt , and evening ride be exchange for moonlight walk in the park . it be report at home , as it be of most man who be call to the Bar , that I be likely to do great thing . there never be a chance of it . set aside the question of ability , I have no application , no love of the law , no idea whatever of touting ; and still more fatal defect , my lonely habit be darken into a shy dislike of my specie . 
 " you have hear that I be extravagant . as regard my early career , the charge be quite untrue . money , I confess , be never much in my thought , nor do I ever attempt to buy thing below their value ; but my want be so few , and my mode of life so ungenial , that I never exceed the moderate sum allot to I as a young son . afterwards this be otherwise , and for excellent reason . 
 " during the height of the London season I be always most restless and misanthropic . not that I look with envy on the frivolous dust of fashion , and cloud of sham around I ; but that I feel myself lower as an Englishman by the cringing , the falsehood , the small baboonerie , which we call ' society . ' I long to be , if I could but afford it , where man have more manly self - respect , and woman more true womanhood . 
 " your parent be marry , my darling Clara , at the end of December , 1826 , six year before your birth . upon that occasion , your dear father , the only man in the world for whom I care a fig , make I a very handsome present . in fact he give I a thousand pound . he would have give I a much large sum , for he be a most liberal man , but the estate have suffer from long mismanagement , and be seriously encumber . I do not hesitate to say that the gross income of this property be now double what it be when your father succeed to it , and the net income more than quadruple . during the four year which elapse between that event and his marriage , he have devote all he could spare to the clearance of encumbrance and therefore , as I say , the present he make I be a most generous one . More than this , he invite and press I to come and live on the estate , and offer to set I up in a farm which I might hold from he on most advantageous term . upon my refusal , he even beg I to accept , at a most liberal salary , the stewardship of the property , and the superintendence of great improvement , which he mean to effect . I remember , as if it be yesterday , the very word he use . he take my hand in his , and with that genial racy smile , which very few could resist , 
 " ' come , Ned , ' he cry , ' there be but two of we ; there be room for both in the old nest ; and you be big enough to thrash I now . ' " 
 at the sweet recollection of his Eton drubbing , as he call it , my poor uncle 's eye grow moist . 
 " so you see , my child , instead of grudge your father the property , I have every reason to love and revere he . however , I refuse this as well as the other offer ; but I accept his present , and invest it rather luckily . after spend a pleasant month at home - as I always call it - I return to London early in April , 1827 . there be no two mind alike , any more than there be two body ; and yet how little variety exist in polite society ! surely it be more reasonable to wedge the infant face into a jelly - mould , to flute its ear and cheek like collared head , and grow the nose and lip and eyebrow into rosette and grape and acorn , than to bow and cramp and squeeze a million mind into one set model . yet here I find man all alike , Dane and Saxon , Celt and Norman , like those who walk where snow be deep , or Alpine traveller lash to a rope , trudge each in other 's footprint , swing all their arm in time , look neither right nor leave , and so on through life 's pilgrimage , a file some million deep . who go first they do not know , why they follow they can not tell , what it lead to they never ask . I be mark and scorn at once , because I dare to adopt a hat that do not scalp I in half - an hour , and a cravat that do not throttle I ; and even have the hardihood to dine when I feel hungry . how often I long for a land of freedom and common sense , where it be no disgrace to carry a barrel of oyster , or shake hand with a tradesman . I know what you be smile at , Clara . you be think to yourself , ' how different you be now , my good uncle ; and wern't   you a little inconsistent in sanction all this livery humbug here ? ' yes , I be different now . I be old and wise than to expect to wipe away with my coat - sleeve the oxide of many century . as for the livery , it make they happy : it be an Englishman 's uniform . and I have see and suffer so bitterly from the violence of an untamed race , that I admire less what I use to call the unlassoed arch of the human neck . I have see a coarse line somewhere , 
 " ' and freedom make a deal too free with I , ' 
 which express briefly the moral of my life . however , at the time I speak of , nurse perhaps a young son 's bias against the social law , and fresh from the true simplicity and unaffected warmth of your father 's character and the gentle sweetness of your mother 's , I could not sit on the spike of fashion 's hackney coach , as become a poor Briton , till the driver whip behind . finding of course that no one care whether I sit there or not , and that all I get at the side of the road be pea - shot from cad in the dickey , I do what thousand have do before I , and will probably do again , I vote my fellow - Britons a parcel of drivel slave , and long to be out of the gang . perhaps I should never have make my escape , for like most of my class , I spend all my energy in small eccentricity , if it have not be for what we idler entitle the force of circumstance . at a time when my life be flow on calmly enough though babble against its bank , it come suddenly on an event which drive it into another and rougher channel . 
 " early one afternoon in the month of April , 1829 , I launch my little boat from the Temple - stair , where I keep it , and feel more than usually saturnine and moody , resolve on a long expedition . so I victual my ship like Robinson Crusoe , and take some wrap and covering . it be then slack water , just at the height of the flood . I mean to have go to Richmond , but be far too indolent to struggle against the tide , I yield to nature 's good pleasure , and pull away down stream . in a few minute a rapid ebb tide be run , and I make up my mind to go with it as far as ever it choose , and to return with the flood whenever that please to meet I . 
 " after row steadily for several hour , I find myself a long way past my customary Cape turn - again . with a strong ebb tide as well as a land - fresh in the river , I have get beyond Barking Reach , and as far as the Dagenham marsh . here some muddy creek , pill , and sluggish channel wind and welter among the ooze - land on the north side of the Thames . all around they stretch and fade away a dreary flat monotonous waste ; no dot of a house , no jot of a tree , to vary the dead expanse ; except that by the river - side one or two low caboose , more like hoy than house , be ground among the slime . this , so far as my memory serve , be the state of these Essex marsh in the year 1829 : how it be now I can not say . 
 " it be high time for I to turn : row as I would , I could hardly get back to my haven by midnight . Outrigger skiff be not yet know ; and an oarsman could not glide along at the rate of ten mile an hour . just as I be work round , a steam packet , which have be moor a short way below , cripple perhaps in her engine , now at the turn of the tide pass up , and be quickly out of sight . as she pass I I hail for a tow - rope ; but either they could not hear , or they do not choose to notice I . there be nothing for it but to bend my back to the oar , and keep a sharp look out . presently the flood begin to make strongly up the river , and I give way with a will , my paddle bend and the water gleam in the early starlight . it be a lonely and melancholy scene . the gray mist return from some marshy excursion , and hug the warm sea - water , float along in dull fold , with a white flaw of steam here and there curdle over the current . not a ship , not a barge be in sight ; no voice of man or low of cattle break the foggy silence : but the wash of the stream on its sludgy marge , or on some honey - comb mooring - post , surge every now and then betwixt the jerk of my rowlock . the loneliness and the sadness harmonise with my sombre mind . all be transient , all be selfish , all be a flux of melancholy . if we toss and dance we be only boat adrift ; we be nothing more than crazy tide - post , if we be philosopher . 
 " suddenly a clear loud cry break my vacant musing . it startle I so that I catch a crab , cease rowing , and gaze around . at first I could not tell whence it come , till my boat , with the way she have on she , shoot round a low spit of the Essex shore , which from the curve of the river I be near rapidly . louder and louder the cry be twice repeat , and I hear in the still spring evening the oath of man and the scuffling of foot . within fifty yard of I be an ill - look house , make of batten , and raise on pile above high water mark . a tattered sign hang on a pole , and a causeway lead to the step . while I be hesitate , two figure cross a lattice window , as if in violent struggle , and a heavy crash resound . three strong stroke of my oar , and the keel grate on the causeway . out I leap with the boat - hook , throw the painter over a post , and rush up the slimy jetty , and the narrow wooden step . the door be fasten , I push it with all my force , but in vain . one faint scream reach my ear , as of some one at length overpower . swing the boat - hook with both hand , I strike the old door with the butt , and break it open . in the low room there be no one , but a moaning and trampling sound over head . Upstairs I run , and into the room where the villany be do . a poor girl lie on the floor at the last gasp of exhaustion . two ruffian with a rope be bend over she . down go one , at a blow of my boat - hook , flat beside his victim : the other leap at my throat . I see and soon feel that he be a powerful man , but in those day I be no cripple . we be most evenly match . I wrench his hand from my throat , but twice he get I under he , twice I writhe from his grasp like a python from a tiger 's jaw . clutched and lock in each other 's arm , in vain we tug to get room for a blow . throttle , and gripe , and roll - which should be first insensible ? an accident give I the mastery . for a moment we lay face to face , glare at each other , draw the strangle breath , loose the deadly grip , panting , throbbing , and watch . my boat - hook lie on the floor , my enemy spy and make a sudden dash at it . instead of withholding , I job he towards it with all my might , and as he raise it , the point enter one of his eye . with a yell of pain and fury , he sink beneath I insensible . shake and quake all over after the desperate struggle , I bind he and his mate , hand and foot , with the twisted tarry junk , which they have mean for the maiden . 
 " at length I have time to look round . on a low truckle bed at the end of the long dark room , in which a ship - lamp be burn , there lie an elderly lady in a perfect stupor of fright and illness . upon the floor with her head throw back against the timber , and her black eye wide open and fix on I , sit a girl of remarkable beauty , though her cheek be as white as death . a magnificent ring , for which she have fight most desperately , be wrench from its place on her finger and hang over the opal nail , for her hand be clench , and her arm quite stiff , in the swoon of utter exhaustion . both lady be in deep mourning . 
 " for the rest a few word will suffice . the poor lady revive at last , after chafing of hand and sprinkling , and tell I where to find the woman of the house , who have be lock up in another room by her husband and brother . there be no one else on the premise . how come the lady there , what be their destination , and why be they so outraged ? they be on their return to London from the continent , be call home by tiding of death , and have sail from Antwerp two day and a - half before , in the steamer which I have see lie to . steamer be then heavy lumber thing , and all that time Mrs. Green and her daughter have be knock about on a pecky sea . no wonder that the poor mother have cry out feebly , to be land anywhere , anywhere in the world , where thing would leave off go round . and before they come to that tedious halt in the river , fair Adelaide , who have enjoy her meal throughout , renew and complete her poor mamma 's excavation , by inquire calmly with her mouth full of pickled pork , where the peas - pudding be . now too Miss Adelaide soon recover from her fearful battle for honour and life . she be what be call now - a - day a girl of ' splendid organisation . " if she have not be so , she would have lain ere now with her mother at the bottom of Barking Reach . the two scoundrel of that lonesome hostelry have be order to send to Barking for a conveyance . but they only pretend to do so ; for they have cast foul covetous eye on the wealth of their unknown guest and on brave Adelaide 's beauty . beyond a doubt both lady would have be murder , but for the gallant resistance , the vigour , and presence of mind of Adelaide . 
 " have restore their watch , and scatter trinket , and lead the poor thing from the scene of the combat , I be quite at a loss for mean to convey they home . barking be a long way off , and the marshy track unknown to I , and not likely to be find in the dark . moreover , there must be some hazard in leave they still in that villanous den , no matter how their cowardly foe might be bind . at last , and with great difficulty , I embark the two lady in my shallop , and wrap they warmly from the night air ; then after relashe my prisoner , and lock they up in separate room , and the woman downstairs , I pull away stoutly for Woolwich . here I obtain a carriage , and start my convoy for London , and then return with two policeman to the " Old row Barge , " as the low caboose be call . but both our bird be fly , as I be inclined to expect . most likely the woman have contrive to get out , and release they . at any rate the " Old Row Barge " have no crew , and the deserter have set it on fire . the flame , as we row away , after vainly search the marsh , cast a lurid glow on the mud - bank , and on the slackening tide ; a true type it be of what soon befell I - the burning of my caboose . the two man be catch long afterwards by the Thames Police , and transport for life on a conviction for river piracy . at least , I be tell that they be the man . " 
 " and of course , dear uncle , you fall deeply in love with the beautiful Adelaide Green . " 
 " of course , my dear , a young lady would conclude so . but at present I must not talk any more . " I have several time try to stop he . " and what I have next to relate be matter of deep feeling . by Jove , to think how I battle with that strong man ! and now your little fist , Clara , would floor I altogether . " 
 he sigh , and I sigh for he . then I think of Mr. Shelfer , and glory in my prowess , as I wheel my uncle home . 
 CHAPTER VIII . 
 my uncle 's tale , as repeat here , will no more be break either by my interruption , which be frequent enough , or by his own pause , but will be present in a continuous form . 
 STORY of EDGAR VAUGHAN . 
 " on the following day , when I call at the house in Bloomsbury - then a fashionable neighbourhood - to which I have be direct , I be meet at the threshold , with power and warmth , by Peter Green himself , an old acquaintance of mine , who prove to be Adelaide 's brother . my nature have be too reserved for I to be friendly with he at College , but I have like he much well than any one else , because he be so decide and straight - forward . the meeting rather surprise I , for Green be not a rare name , and so it have never occur to I to ask the weary Adelaide whether she know one Peter Green , a first - class man of Christchurch . Peter , who be a most hearty fellow , and full , like his sister , of animal life , overpower I with the weight of his gratitude , which I do not at all desire or deserve . as , in spite of your rash conclusion , my romantic Clara , I do not fall in love with Adelaide , who besides her pithsome health and vigour be in many respect astray from my fair ideal , and more than all , be engage long ago to the giver of the sapphire ring , I need not enlarge upon my friendship with Peter Green , whom I now begin to like in real earnest . 
 Young as he be , his father 's recent death have place he at the head of a lead mercantile house , Green , Vowler , and Green , of Little Distaff Lane . and young as he be - not more than seven - and - twenty - his manner be form , and his character and opinion fix , as if he have see all the way , and take stock of the sentiment of all the civilised world . present to he any complexity , any conflict of probability , any maze whose in and out be abroad half over the universe , and if the question be practical , he would see what to do in a moment ; if it be theoretical , he would quietly move it aside . I have know many learn judge sum up a case most lucidly , blow away all the verbiage , sweep aside all the false issue , balance the contradiction , illuminate all the obscurity , and finally lift from its matrix , and lie in the colourless sunlight the virgin truth , without either dross or polish . all this Peter Green seem to have do in a moment , without any effort , without any reasoning process ; not jump at his conclusion , but make it fly to he . he possess what an ancient writer , once highly esteemed at Oxford , entitle the " wit universal , " which confer and comprise the " wit of detail . " for this power when apply to a practical purpose , a great historian employ a happy expression not welcome by our language ; he call it the power to " pontoon the emergency . " excuse my harsh translation , perhaps it be well than paraphrase . 
 with all these business quality , my friend be as merry and unpretentious a man as ever make a bad joke , or laugh at another fellow 's ; liberal also , warm - hearted , and not sarcastic . in a word , he be a genuine speciman of the noble english merchant , who have do more to raise this country in the esteem of the world than would a thousand Nelsons or Wellingtons . 
 now this man discern at a glance the wretched defect of my nature and position . an active mind like his could never believe in the possibility of be happy without occupation . and by occupation he mean , not the chasing of butterfly , or maunder after fox , but real honest anglo - saxon work ; work that string the muscle , or knit the hemisphere of the brain . and work he would himself , ay , and with all his energy . not the man be he to tap the table with his pipe , and cry out , " Bravo , Altiora ! a little more gin if you please , and chalk it down to the strike ; " but he be the man to throw off his coat , and pitch into the matter before he without many word , though with plenty of thought . now , this man , feel deeply indebted to I , and begin to like I as my apathy and reserve go to piece before his energy , this man , I say , cast about for some method of make I useful and happy . wonderfully swift as he be in pounce upon the right thing , I believe it take he at least five minute to find out the proper course for an impracticable fellow like I . and when he have find this out , it take even he a week to draw the snail out of his hole . year of agreeable indolence , and calm objective indifference , seldom ruffle except at fashionable snobbery , have make of I not a Sybarite , or a supercilious censor , much less a waiter on fortune , but a contemplative islander , a Haytian who have be once to Spain , and would henceforth be satisfied with the view of her caravel . but my Adelantado be a man of gold and iron . Green , Vowler , and Green be largely concerned in the oil and dry fruit business . they have ransack the olive district of continental Europe , and find the price go up and the quality go down , so they want now to open another oil vein . 
 Peter Green observe my love of uncultured freedom , the only subject on which I ever grow warm and rapturous , espy the way to relieve I of some nonsense , give my slow life a fillip , and perhaps - oh climax - open a lucrative connexion . he know , for he seem to know everything do or undo by commerce , that there be a glorious island rich in jewel and marble and every dower of nature , and above all teem with olive , lemon , and grape , and citron ; and that this gifted island still remain a stranger , through french and genoese ignorance , to our London trade . this be the island libel by Seneca , idolise by its native , drench with more blood than all the plain of Emathia , yet mother of hero and conqueror of the world - if that be any credit - in a single word , Corsica . once or twice indeed our countryman have attempt to shake hand with this noble race , so ruin by narrow tradition ; and in the end we shall doubtless succeed , as we always do ; but the grain of the Corsican be almost as stubborn as our own . in fact the staple be much the same , the fabric be very different . bold they be , and manly , simple , generous , and most hospitable , lover too of their country beyond all other nation ; but - oh fatal ignorance - industry to they be drudgery ; and labour be an outrage . bad than all be the fiend of the island , the cursed blood - revenge . 
 " just the place for you , Vaughan , " say the indomitable Peter , " every one there as dignified as an eagle after steal a lamb . no institution to speak of , but the natural one of Vendetta , splendid equality , majestic manhood , lot of true womanhood , and it do all the work that be do , which be not   say much . why , my dear Quixotic , the land of Sampiero and Paoli , and where Rousseau be to legislate , only he prove too lazy , - be not that the jockey for you ? after all these levee and masquerade that you so much delight in - you need not scowl like a bandit ; it be only because they do not   want you , you be just the same as the rest , or why do you notice the nonsense ? - after all this London frippery , Monte Kotondo will be a fresh oyster after devil'd biscuit . " 
 " true enough , my friend : but an oyster to be swallow shell and all . " 
 " well , be not that just what you want ? Lime be good for squeamishness . and more than that , you be just the man we want . you can talk italian with excellent opera style and sentiment ; and you will not   be long till you fraternise with the Corsicans . perhaps they will drive out the French , who do not   know what to do with it , and make you their king like Theodore of Neuhoff ; and then you proclaim free trade restrict to the navy of Green , Vowler , and Green . but in sober earnest , think of it , my dear Vaughan . anything be well than this cynic indolence . some of your view will be correct , and all enlarge by travel . a common sentiment . yes , the very thing you be short of . all your expense we pay of course , and give you an honest salary ; and all we ask of you be to explore more than a tourist would ; and to send we a plain description of everything . you have plenty of observation ; make it useful instead of a torment to you . we know well enough the great gift of that island , but we want to know how they lie , and how we may well get at they . " 
 " then you would expect I to make commercial arrangement ? " 
 Peter laugh outright . " I should rather fancy not . somewhat queer one they would be . platonic no doubt , and panisic , but not altogether adapt to double entry . " 
 " then in fact I be to go as a committee of inquiry . " 
 " I have tell you all we want . if you make any friend all the well ; but that we leave to yourself . perhaps you will grow sociable there . though the Corsican do not sing , ' we will not   go home till morning , ' and be go home all the time . " 
 " and how long would my engagement last ? " 
 " till you have thoroughly traverse the country , if you stick to it so long ; and then if you quit yourself well , we should commission you for Sardinia . what an opening for an idle man , though it would soon kill I - so little to do . but you may cut it short when you like . plenty of our people would jump at such an offer ; but for a country like that we must have a thorough gentleman . a coarse - mannered bagman would very soon secure the content of a fusil . he would be kiss the corsican girl , who be wonderfully lovely they say , and their lover amazingly jealous ; and every man carry a gun . a timid man they despise , an insolent man they shoot ; and most of our fellow be one or the other , or both . but will you undertake it ? yes , or no , on the spot . and I ask you to say ' yes ' as a special favour to I . " 
 " then of course I say yes . when shall I go ? " 
 " to - morrow , if you like . next month if you prefer it . we can give you introduction . there be no real danger for a thorough gentleman , or you should not go for all the olive in Europe . mind we want a particular sort , very long and taper - Virgil 's ' Ray , ' in fact . you shall have a sample of it . as yet we know but one district of Italy where it grow , but have get scent of it in Corsica . glorious fellow they be , if half that I hear be true , glorious fellow but for their laziness , and that - - Vendetta . " 
 to be brief , I receive very clear instruction in writing , and be off for Bonifazio the follow week , in a small swift yacht of my own , a luxury to which I have always aspire , and which I could now for a time afford . but before I go , your poor father , Clara , protest most strongly against the scheme , and even come to London in the vain hope of dissuade I . he have some deep presentiment that it would end darkly , and so indeed it do . 
 " Ned , " say he once more , " there be only two of we , and my dear wife be very delicate . I have be at Genoa , where those islander be well know , and even there they be rarely speak of but with a cold shudder . they be a splendid race , I believe , great hero and all that , but they shoot a man with no more compunction than they shoot a muffro . I implore you , my dear brother , not to risk the last of our family , where blood flow as freely as water . and your temper , you know , be not the good in the world . do not   go , my dear fellow , do not   go . I shall have to come and avenge you , and I do not   understand Vendetta . " 
 ah , I ! if I have only listen to he . and yet , I do not   know . after a pleasant voyage we reach the magnificent island , about the middle of May . my intention be to skirt round it from the southern extremity , take the western side first , and touch at every anchorage , whence I would make incursion , and return to my little cutter , as the most convenient head - quarter . of course I should have to rough it ; but what young man would think twice of that , with an adventurous life before he ? 
 I will not weary you , my dear child , with a long description of Corsica . it be a land which combine all the softness and the majesty , all the wealth and barrenness , all the smile and menace of all the world beside . I could talk of it by the hour ; but you want to know what I do , and be do to , more than what I see . from the awful rock of Bonifazio , the street where man should have no elbow , and the tower of Torrione , along the fantastic coast which look as if time be a giant rabbit , we trace the blue and spur - vex sea , now edge with white , and now with gray , and now with glow red , until we reach that paradise of heaven , the garden of Balagna . 
 CHAPTER IX . 
 STORY of EDGAR VAUGHAN . 
 let I hold myself . weak as I be and cripple by premature old age , not the shortness of my breath , not the numbness of my heart , not even the palsy of my frame , can quench or check the fire rekindle by the mere name of that heavenly valley . to live there only half a minute be worth a day of english life . life - it be a space to measure , not by pendulum or clock - hand , not by our own stride to and fro   the ordnance scale of the million , not even by the rolling sun , and nature 's hail and farewell ; but by the well - spring of ourselves , the fount of thought and feeling . every single breath I draw of this live air - air the bride of earth our sire , wed to he by God Creator , air whose mother - milk we fight for in cluster baulk one another - every breath I draw dance with a buoyant virtue , suck , in any other land , but from mountain nipple . bright air of a rosy blue , where northern eye be daze with beauty , where every flower cut star of light , and every cloud be sunshine 's step ; can even lover part thus believe themselves divide ? every rock have its myrtle favour , every tree its clematis wreath ; under the cistus and oleander hide the pink to lace its bodice , watch by the pansy 's sprightly eye . lavishly , as child 's bubble , hover overhead orange , and citron , lemon , almond , fig , vary by the blushing peach and the purpling grape . far behind , and lean forth the swarthy bosom of the mountain , whose white head lean on the heaven , be rank on rank of glaucous olive , giant of a green old age dash with silver gray . and oh , the fragrance under foot , the tribute of the ground , which Corsica 's great son - as we man measure greatness - pin for in the barren isle , where the iron of his selfishness enter his own soul . 
 these be say to be the large olive - tree in the world , and of the very good variety . heap upon heap the rich fruit lie at the foot of the glorious tree ; nature be too bountiful for man to heed her gift . for this district of Balagna , and that of Nebbio far north , my attention have be especially bespeak by my shrewd and sagacious friend . therefore and by reason of the charm around I , here I resolve to pass the summer ; so my vessel be lay up at Calvi , and be quarter in Belgodere at a little Inn - " locanda " it should be call , but I hate interlard - I address myself right heartily to business and to pleasure . 
 first I have to study the grand palladian gift . unless old Seneca be , as the Corsicans say , a great liar , he can not have be the author of that epigram which declare this land a stranger to the peaceful boon . it be impossible to believe that a country so adapt to that tree , so often colonize by cultured race , can have be so long ungifted with its staff of life . the island itself in that same epigram be utterly mis - describe . 
 as regard the inhabitant , the first line of the well - know couplet be verify by age ; to the second it do not plead guilty now , and probably never do . 
 " Law the first revenge . law the second to live by robbery . 
 Law the third to lie . the fourth to deny any Gods . " 
 
 the Corsicans , on the contrary , have always be famous for candour , whose very soul be truth , and for superstition , the wen or hump of religion . for my own part , love not that unprinciple     fellow hard labour , towards whom these noble islander entertain a like antipathy , and love much any freedom not hostile to my own , I get on with the native admirably , for a certain time . Time have reconcile I to their custom of carry , instead of cane or umbrella , long double - barrel gun , whose muzzle they afford the stranger full opportunity of inspect . first - rate marksman be they , but they sle their gun at hap - hazard on their back , and cheek to jowl we come upon the cold metal at the corner of the narrow street . tall and powerful man they be , especially the mountaineer ; with all the Spaniard 's dignity and the Italian 's native grace . the woman be lithe , erect , and beautifully form , with a swan - like carriage , and a free and courteous bearing , such as very few of our high - bear damsel own . 
     " Labor improbus " of Virgil . 
 the olive - grower frankly give I all their little information about that tree whose typical virtue they have never care to learn . the variety chiefly grow , or rather which chiefly grow itself , be one they call the Genoese . the owner afford they very little culture , and many be too idle even to collect the fruit . there be say to be ten million olive - tree in the island ; at least they be reckon up to that number by order of the government ; then the enumerator grow tired , and leave off counting . whatever number there be might easily be triple , if any one have the energy to graft the oleaster , with which the hill be cover . there be also the Saracen olive , and the Sabine , the latter perhaps the Regia of Columella , Raggiaria of Casalpinus , and Radius of Virgil . however , though not unlike my sample fruit , it be not quite identical , and as my employer want a very special sort for very special quality , I be as far from my object as ever . 
 one magnificent summer evening , as I ride along the mountain side near the village of Speloncato , suddenly the track turn sharply into a woode dingle . steep in the dream of nature 's beauty , I be think of nothing at all , as become a true Corsican , when I receive a sharpish knock in the eye . something fall and lodge in my capacious beard . smart from the pain . I catch it , and not be able to see clearly , take it at first for a spent and drop bullet . but when my eye have cease to water , I find in my hand a half - grow olive of the very kind I have so long be seek . I draw forth some of my London specimen which have be chemically treat to prevent their shrivelling , and compare it narrowly . yes , there could be no doubt ; the same pyriform curve , the same bulge near the peduncle , the same violet line in the skin , and when cut open , the same granulation and nucleus . I be truly delighted , at length I should be of some real service ; at least if there be many tree here of this most rare variety . by rid up the dingle , I soon ascertain that it be plant with tree of this sort only , gray old tree of a different habit from any other olive . afterwards I find that it require a different soil , and a different aspect . full speed I gallop back to the hamlet of Speloncato , and inquire for the owner of this olive Eldorado . signor Dezio Della Croce , owner of all this lovely slope , and of large estate extend as far as the road to Corte ; in fact the chief proprietor of the neighbourhood . he be , say the peasant with some pride , a true descendant of the great race of Cinarca , foremost in the island annal for a thousand year , and of whom be the famous Giudice Della Rocca , Count and Judge of Corsica , six hundred year ago . " 
 at the sound of his name , Giudice open his great sleepy eye , and prick his ear : I promise not to interrupt , but he give no such pledge . 
 " let the Cinarchesi blood go for its full value ; but it be worth something to the Della Croce to be descend also from the Tuscan Malaspina ; for the land of those great Marquises be now in the possession of the Signor Dezio . and the Signor have such a daughter , a young maiden . ah , Madonna ! the lovely girl in Corsica . and the vine - dresser cross himself . as I listen to all this information , I begin to look through my unused credential , which I always carry . it strike I that this name of Della Croce be quite familiar to I , though I know not how , until a letter in the sprawl hand of young Laurence Daldy fall out from among Peter 's crab character . Laurence Daldy , my mother 's young son , be now in full career , as a pigeon and a Guardsman , spending at full gallop his dead father 's money . these Daldys be of italian origin , the true name be D'Aldis , which after some year of english life they have naturalise into Daldy . and now I recollect that when we Vaughan boy scorn they as ignoble son of commerce , they use to brag about their kinship to the ancient Della Croce . 
 rid up the forest hill , on whose western bluff stand boldly the gray old tower of the Malaspinas , I begin of course to make forecast about the character of my host . my host I know he need must be , for Corsica be of all the world the most hospitable spot . although by this time well acquainted with the simple island habit , I could not but expect to find a man of stateliness and surrounding , of stiffness and some arrogance . now the sun be set , and the western fire from off the sea glance in spear of redden gold into the solemn timeworn keep . all thing look majestic , but a deal too lonely . where be I to apply , how be I to get in ? the narrow doorway overhung with the wreck of some portculli , be block instead with a sort of mantlet like the Roman Vinea ; the loophole on the ground - tier be board almost to the top , the high window , such as they be , have their rough shutter close . everything betoken a state of siege and fear . two or three magnificent chesnut , which must have command the front of the tower , have be cut down and add to the defence of the approach . over these I manage at last to leap my horse , who be by no mean a perfect hunter ; and there I halt at a loss how to proceed . I have be long enough in Corsica to know , even without a certain ominous gleam from a loophole , and the view in transverse section of a large double - barrel gun , that the owner of this old mansion be now in the pleasant state of Vendetta . 
 expect every moment to be shoot , and nothing say about it , I wave my letter , as a white flag , furiously above my head . presently that frightful muzzle be withdraw , and the slide push back , to reconnoitre I at leisure . I try , for the first time in my life , to look like a real Briton ; my corsican ambition be already on the wane . so I sit my horse , and wait ; and what come be worth a thousand year of wait . 
 round the bastion of the tower , under the rich magnolia bloom , towards I glide through the rosy shadow the lovely being that ever move outside the gate of heaven . she seem not to walk but waft along , like the pearly Nautilus . a pink mandile of light gauze light the sable of her clustering hair , and wreathe round her graceful head deepen the tinge of the nestling cheek . the lithe faldetta of white cashmere , throw hastily over the shoulder , half conceal the flow curve of the slender supple form , half betray they as it follow every facile motion . but when she smile - oh , Clara , I would have leap from her father 's tower , or into the black cave of the Restonica , for one smile of her . the dark - fringe lustre of her eye seem to dance with golden joy , trusting , hop , love all thing , pleasure please at pleasing . and the gleesome arch of her laugh lip , that never shape evil word ! oh , my Lily , my own Lily , I shall see you soon again . 
 my dear Clara , I ought to know well . I be ashamed of myself . and after so many year ! but at the first glance of Fiordalisa , my fate be fix for this life and the other . I never have love before . I never have care to look at a girl ; in fact I despise they all . now I pay for that contemptuous folly . love at one glance , love once , for all , for ever , my heart stand still like the focus of a hurricane ; my speech and every power but that of vision fail I . I dare not try to leave the saddle , such a trembling take I . 
 it be a visitation unknown in our foggy plain , scoff at by our prosy race , but know full well in Southern clime , as the sunstroke of love . my own darling - I can call she nothing less - my own delicious darling be quite startled at I . whether she have a like visitation in a milder form , be more than I can say ; but I hope with all my heart she have ; for then , as the southern tale recite , God place her hand in mine . 
 how I get my horse tie up , how I follow she through the side entrance , and return her father 's greeting , I have not the least idea ; all I know be that she smile , and I want nothing more . but I could not bear to see she in the true homeric fashion still maintain in Corsica , wait on we like a common servant , with her beautiful arched foot glance under the brown pelone , and her taper white arm lay demurely on her bosom ; then at her father 's signal how she fly for the purple grape or the fragrant broccio ! but do what she would , it seem to become she more than all she have do before . as that form of love and elegance flit through the simple room , and those lustrous heavenly eye beam with hospitable warmth , Signor Dezio Della Croce , careworn man with beard of snow , seem at time no little proud of his sweet and only child , but be too proud to show his pride . as for I , he must have think that I speak very poor italian . 
 END of VOL . II . 
 BOOK IV .   continue . 
 CHAPTER X. 
 STORY of EDGAR VAUGHAN . 
 Child Clara , for your own dear sake , as well as mine and my sweet love 's , I will not dwell on that tempestuous time . if you can not comprehend it without word , no word will enable you . if you can , and I fear you do , no more word be want ; and , as an old man weary of the world , I know not whether to envy or to pity you . 
 Hither and thither I be flung , to the zenith star of ecstasy or the nadir gulf of agony , accord as my idol pet choose to smile or frown . though she be no silly child , but a girl of mind and feeling , she have a store , I must confess , of cloud as well as dazzle sunlight in the empyrean of her eye . her nature , like my love , be full of southern passion . it be like the air they breathe , the beauty they behold . one minute of such love compress in a thunder flood all the slow emotion steal through the drought - scrimp channel , where we dredge for gold deposit , through ten year of Saxon courtship . instead of lily - bloom , she should have be call the passion - flower . 
 my life , my soul - how weak our english word be - she love I from the first , I can take my oath she do , although her glory be too great for she to own it yet , though now and then her marvellous eye prove traitor . sometimes when she be rack I most , feign even , with those eye cast down , her pellucid finger point to point , and her little foot tap the orchid bloom , feigning , I say , in cold blood , to reckon her noble lover - long name all and horribly hateful to I - suddenly , while I tremble , and scowl like a true - bear Briton , suddenly up would leap the silky drooping lash , and a spring of soft electric light would flutter through they to the very core of my heart . 
 as for I , I abandon myself . I make no pretence of wait a moment . I fling my heart wide open to she , and if she would not come in , desert it should be for ever . 
 she do come . that life - blood of my soul come in , and would and could live nowhere else for ever . 
 it be do like this . one August evening , when the sun be sink , and the air be full of warmth and wooing sound , the cicale wake from his early nap , the muffro leap for the first dew - drop , the love - bird whispering in the tamarind leaf , Fiordalisa sit with I , under a giant cork - tree on the western slope . the tower be still in Vendetta siege , and the grave and reverend Signor know well than to come out , when the Sbirri be go to the town . lily - bloom be sit by I in a mass of flower ; her light mandile be lay by , that her glorious hair might catch the first waft of the evening breeze . all down her snow - white shoulder fall the labyrinth of tress , twin by I with red Tacsonia , and two pale carnation . her form be pillow in rich fern , that feather round her waist ; of all the frond and plume and stem , not one so taper , light , and rich as that . the bloom upon her cheek be deepen by my playing with her hair , and her soft large eye be beam with delicious wonder . 
 we know , as well as he who make we , that we love one another . none who do not love for ever could interchange such look . suddenly , and without a word , in an ecstasy of admiration , I pass my left arm round her little waist , draw she close to I - she be very near before - and look full into her wondrous eye , find no protest but a thrill of light ; then try her lip and meet her whole heart there . darling , how she kiss I ! no english girl can do it . and then the terror of her maiden thought . the recollection of her high - bear pride , and higher because God - bear innocence . how she weep , and blush , and tremble ; tremble , blush , and weep again ; and then vouchsafe one more entrancing kiss , to atone for the unwitting treason . even thus I would not be content . I want word as well . 
 " do you love I , my own Lily , with every atom of your heart ? " 
 " I have not leave one drop of blood for all the world besides . " 
 and it be true . and so it be with I . I tell her father that same night . and now in the heaven of gladness and wild pleasure , beyond all dream of earth , open the hell of my wickedness and crime ; which but for mercy and long repentance would sever I from my Lily in the world to come . to some the crime may seem a light one , to I it be a most atrocious sin , enhance tenfold by its awful consequence . 
 by my crime , I do not mean my sinful adoration , as cold man may call it , of a fellow mortal . nature have no time to waste , and unless she mean my Lily to be worship , she would not have lavish all her skill in make she so divine . no , I mean my black deceit , in pass for my brother . oh , Clara , do not   go from I . 
 like many another ruinous sin , it be commit without thought , or rather without deliberation . no scheme be lay , not even the least intention cherish ; but the moment bring it , and the temptation be too great . who could have that love pet gaze at he so , and not sell his soul almost to win she to his arm ? 
 Laurence Daldy be a lazy ass . I do not want to shift my blame to he , but merely state a fact . if he have not be a lazy ass , your father would be live now - ay , and my Fiordalisa . when he choose , he could write very good italian , and a clear , round hand , and oh , rare accomplishment for an officer , he could even spell . but his letter to Signor Dezio , scrawl betwixt two game of pool , be a perfect magpie 's nest of careless zigzag , wattle , and sand slap - dash . in those day a hasty writer use to flick his work with sand , which stanch but do not dry the ink . the result be often a grimy dabble , like a child 's face blotch with blackberry . 
 Lily and I have quite arrange how we should present ourselves . like two child we rehearse it under the twilight tree . " and then , you know , " my sweet love whisper , " I shall give you a regular kiss beneath the dear father 's beard , and you will see what an effect it will have . thence he will learn , oh sweetest mine , that there be no help for it ; because we corsican girl be so chary of our lip . " 
 " be you indeed , my beautiful Lily ? I must teach you liberality , to I , and to I alone . " 
 " sweetest mine , " she always call I from the moment she confess her love ; and so , no doubt , she be call I now in heaven . 
 the curtain hang in heavy fold across the narrow doorway of the long dark room . the hospitable board be gay with wine and dainty fruit , melon , fig , and peach , plum of golden and purple hue , pomegranate , pomi d'oro , green almond , apricot , and muscatel from the ladder of Cape Corso . through they and upon they play the mellow light from a single lamp , with dance lustre round it . all the rest of the room be dark . at the head of the table sit Signor Dezio Della Croce , wait for his guest and daughter . post high at the end window on a ledge of rough - hewn board , stand the ancient warder , who have live for fifty year among they , and whose great fusil command the only approach to the castle . 
 as we enter timidly , the maiden 's right hand on my neck , my left arm round her ductile waist , our other hand clasp firmly , I glance toward that noxious sentinel . 
 " never mind he , sweetest mine . do not   believe that he be there . Grandpapa , I call he , and he know all my secret . " 
 Signor Dezio look amazed , as we glide towards he . his life have be one series of crush blow from heaven . three brave son have be barbarously murder in Vendetta , and his graceful love wife have break her heart and die . the sole hope of his house , his petle Fiordalisa , though she call herself a woman and be full sixteen , he look upon she still in his trouble - tear chronology , as only ripe enough to be dandle on his lap . still he call she his " Ninnina , " and sing nannas to she , as he have be oblige to do after her mother 's death . 
 as he sit there , too astonished to smile , or frown , or say a word , Lily drop upon her knee before he , as a grecian maiden would . we English be not supple - jointed ; but for Lily 's sake , I could not stand beside she . then she place her soft right hand in the centre of my hard palm , fling the other arm round my neck , and with her eye upon her father 's , give I a long affectionate kiss . this do , she draw her father 's head down , and kiss his snow - white beard . now , she tell I , after this , any father who be obdurate , must accord to institution blame himself and no one else , if harm befall the maiden . 
 all this time , I speak not , and think of nothing except to screen my Lily . signor Dezio keep a stately silence , but the tear be in his eye , and the long white beard be quiver . lily bend her head , and wait for his word . 
 " Mother of God ! my little child , what be you think of ? " 
 " only thinking of be marry , father . " 
 " and set another Vendetta afoot , and be kill yourself ! signor " - turn haughtily to I - " this lady be betroth , from her early infancy , to her cousin Lepardo Della Croce . " 
 " oh , I hate he , " cry Fiordalisa , clasp her hand piteously . " ah , Madonna , I hate he so ; and thank our Lady , no one have see he for six year . he be dead no doubt in some Cannibal Island . saint of mercy , keep he . I see it in the Spalla , in the Shepherd 's Spalla , and I see my own love there , the eve before he come . " 
 " Grace of Holy Mary ! who read the Spalla for you ? " 
 " the hoary goatherd from Ghidazzo . " and up sprang Fiordalisa , fly to an inner room , and fetch from the dark niche in the wall the box of holy relic . with these she kneel before her father , and place she right hand on the box . 
 " my child , it be not needful . I believe you without an oath . never yet have you pass the boundary of truth . " 
 the old chief bow his head in thought . he have lose his last survive son by neglect the Spalla 's decree . the Spalla be the shoulder blade of a goat , polished , and use for divination ; upon it have be read Sampiero 's death , and the destiny of Napoleon . the old man who have forecast the latter be still alive , and of immense renown , and traverse the island now like an ancient prophet . he be the hoary goatherd of Ghidazzo . 
 Lily see that she be conquer ; she leap upon her father 's knee and hug he ; and her triumph be complete . while she weep upon his breast , and tell he all her little tale , and whisper in his ear , and while he kiss , and comfort she , and think of her dear mother , I rush out and leap the Vinea , and weep beneath the olive - tree . 
 at last the old man rise and call I , he durst not venture from the door ; but he do what be far well , he send my own love after I . at length when we return , and we find cause not to hurry , - 
 " Signor Vogheno , " he begin , " I have observe you well . I be a man of very keen observation " - Lily 's eye give I a twinkle full of fun - " or I should not be alive this moment . I have observe you , sir , and I approve your character . I can not say as much , sir , of all the englishman I have be privileged to meet . there be about they very much of the nature of a dog . forgive I , sir ; pray interrupt I not . I only judge by what I have see . God forbid that I should say so to you , while you be my guest . now you be one of my family , and entitle to the result of my observation . of the little island itself I know nothing at all , though I be inform that its institution be of a barbarous character . " 
 " vendetta for instance , " be on my lip , but Lily 's glance just save it . and I think of his three brave son . 
 " but , Signor belove , you be different from they ; indeed you have the nobility of the corsican nature . and what be most of all , my little child have fix her heart upon you . but she be very young , sir , quite a child you see . " I see nothing of the sort , but a bloom maiden figure , grow lovelier every day . Poor Lily drop her long eyelash , and smile through a glowing blush . so blush Lavinia under the eye of Turnus . 
 " this darling child be now the heiress to these land of mine . and if her cousin Lepardo , whose death she have see on the Spalla , be indeed remove from we , she be the very last of all the Della Croce . I can not easily read the billet of your brother . he do not write good Corsican of our side of the mountain , but some outlandish tuscan . there be something first which I can not well decipher , and then I see your name Signor Valentine Vogheno , and that you be the lord of very large estate , in some district call Gloisterio ? " he look at I inquiringly . 
 instead of explain that I be only the brother of the great Signor Valentino , I bow , alas I bow with a hot flush on my cheek . what could it matter , and why should I interrupt he , if he choose to deceive himself ? Lily charm away all hesitation , by clap her little hand , and cry , " sweetest mine , I be so glad . " 
 " then , upon two condition I will give you my daughter . the first , that you leave this island , and do not see our Lily , write to , or even hear from she , for a period of six month . if she have not outgrow her love , she will then be almost old enough to we d. I mean , of course , if Lepardo do not appear . the other condition be that you shall promise on the holy relic , and you as well , my flower , never to part with these old estate , but keep they for Lily while she live , and transmit they to her second child . " 
 a load of terror be off my heart - I think he be go to bind I to the accursed vendetta . even for my Lily , I could hardly have take that pledge . so I assent readily to the last stipulation , though it be base upon a virtual lie of mine . but with Lily 's eye upon I , brim as they be with tear at the first condition , and her round arm tremble to enfold I , could I stick at anything short of downright murder ? the first proviso I fight against in vain . even Lily coax and cry , without any good effect . 
 when at last we yield to the stern decree , the venerable father , as we knelt before he , join our hand together , and pour a blessing on we , which I do not lack . he have give I my blessing . 
 after this we sit down to supper , and the trusty musketeer , who have watch the whole scene grimly , and without hear all , know what the result be , he , I say , upon his perch begin to improvise , or haply to adapt , and sing to a childish air , some little verse upon the glad occasion . have exhaust his stock , down he leap without permission , and drink our health in a bumper of Luri wine . 
 Lily be now in due course of promotion . no long be she the handmaid , whose eye create and rejoice in countless mistake of mine . now she be sit by my side , as she have good right to be , and be lose in pretty rapture at my gallant attention . they be very nice , she own , but thoroughly un - Corsican . how I wish her father and the old fusileer away ! 
 CHAPTER XI . 
 " six long month to be away from Lily ! and perhaps forget she , and find some lovelier maiden . " 
 " by Lily 's side , all maid be burdock . and yet what if I do ? " 
 she show a small stiletto toy with a cross upon the handle , and grind her pearly tooth together . 
 " will it be for I , or she ? " 
 " both ; and Lily afterwards . " 
 " oh you wholesale little murderer ! three great kiss directly , one for every murder . " 
 " only if you promise , on the relic , never to look twice at a pretty maiden . " 
 and so we spend the precious time , - ten day allow I to prepare my yacht - in talk utter nonsense , and con fifty foolish scheme , to make we seem together . I be for depart at once , that the period might begin to run ; but Lily be for keep I to the last possible moment , and of course she have her way . it be fix that I should sail on the 10th day of September . my little boat , now call the " lily flower , " be bring from Calvi , and moor in a secluded cove , where my love could see it from her bedroom window . it be no long corsican law that I should live in the castle . the privilege of a guest be go ; and the rigorous code of suitorship begin . but to I and my own darling it make very little difference . I never leave Vendetta tower , as I lightly name it , until my pet be order off to bed ; and every morn I climb the height , after a long swim in the sapphire ripple , and meet my own sweet Lily sparkling from the dew of her early toilet . how she love I , how I love she ; which more than other let angel say ; for we could not decide . that ancient Corsican her father , albeit little verse in book , be as upright and downright a gentleman as ever know when his presence be not require . therefore he take my word of honour for his Lily 's safety ; and leave she to her own sweet will ; and her sweet will be to spend with I all her wake hour . for she as yet there be no fear of the blood - avenger . accord to their etiquette they can not shoot the daughter , until they have shoot the father . as to the son the restriction do not hold . the feud we be concern in have last now 120 year , and cost the life of 130 people . it lie between the ancient race of Della Croce , and De Gentili , and owe its origin to the discovery of a dead mule on the road to church . the question be which family should be exterminate first . for many year the house of Della Croce have be in the ascendant , have produce a long succession of good shot and clever bushman . at one time all the hope of the De Gentili hang upon one infant life , which be not think worth the taking . fatal error - that one life have prove a mighty trump . one after one the Della Croce fall before that original artist , who invent a patent method of trunke himself in olive bark and fire from a knot - hole . many a story Lily tell I of his devilish wile ; and in those story I rejoice , because she cling around my neck , and tremble so that I must hold she . happily now this olive - branch be dead , have receive his death - wound while he administer one to Lily 's young brother . ever since that , the feud have languish , and strict etiquette require that the Della Croce should perpetrate the next murder . but her father , say my Lily , with her sweet head on my breast and her soft eye full of fire , her father do not seem to care even to shoot the cousin of the man who have shoot her brother . 
 Darling Lily , my blood run cold , even with your beauty in my arm , to hear you talk of murder so . own pet , I shall change you . you heaven mean for love , and softness , and delight : human devilry have taint even you . it be not an easy task to change she . of all human passion revenge be far the strong . Clara , how your eye flash . you ought to have be a Corsican . it be not an easy task ; but love love difficulty . in my ten short day of delicious wretchedness , almost I teach Fiordalisa to despise revenge . and what do you think avail I most ? not the Bible . no , her mind and soul be swathe by Popery in the rag of too many saint . what help I most , and the only thing that help I at all , except caress , be the broad and free expanse of the ever change sea . her nature be all poetry , her throb breast an Idyl . upon my little quarter - deck I have a cushion niche for she , and there we sit and steer ourselves while the sailor sleep below . alone upon the crystal world , pledge for life or death together , drink deep draught of passion and thirsting still for more , what care we for petty hatred , we whose all in all be love ? how she listen as I speak , how her large eye grow enlarge . 
 at last those eye , pure well of love , be trouble with hot tear . the fatal day be come . Tokens we have interchange , myriad vow , and countless pledge , which even love could scarce remember . with all the passion of her race , and all the fervour of the clime , she bar her beautiful round arm , the part that lie most near the heart and touch it with the keen stiletto , then she throw her breast on mine , and I lay the crimsoned ivory on my lip . how the devil - excuse I , Clara - how the devil I get away , only phlegmatic Englishmen can tell . no Frenchman , or italian , would have leave that heavenly darle so . we put it off to the last moment , till it be quite dangerous to pass the rocky jaw . as my bad luck would have it , there be a purpling sunset breeze . my own love on the furth point , her white foot in the water , grow small and small yet , and stand upon tiptoe to be see for another yard ; my own darling love of age , she loose her black hair down her snowy vest , for I to know she from the rock behind ; then she wave and wave her sweet palm hat , fragrant of my Lily , - I have kiss every single inch of it , - until she think I could not see she ; and then , as my telescope show I , back she fall upon a ledge of rock , and I could see or fancy her delicious bosom heaving to the fury of her tear . we glide past the cavern mouth , and the silver beach beyond it , whence we have often watch the sunset ; and then a beetle crag take from I the last view of Lily . 
 however long the schoolboy may have bleed from some big coward 's bullying , or the sway of the rustle birch and the bosky thrill that follow , however sore he may have weep while hang head - downwards through the midnight hour , with a tallow candle between his tooth , or in the pang of noun heteroclite and brachycatalectic dinner ; yet despite these minor ill , his fond heart turn through after life to the scene of foot - ball and I - spy , to the day when he could jump or eat any mortal thing . and so it be with bygone love . even the time of separation or of bitter quarrel , the aching heart whereon the keepsake lie , the spasm of jealousy , the tenterhook of doubt ; remembrance look upon they all as treasure of a golden age . 
 over the darken sea , we bear away for Sardinia . hour and hour , I gaze upon the cushion , where my own pet darling use to lean and love I . to I they be fair than all the star , or the phosphorescent sea . from time to time our Corsican pilot keep himself awake , by chant to strangely mournful air some of the vocero or dirge , the burden of many age in that lament land . fit home for Rachel , Niobe , or Cassandra , where half a million gallant being , twice the number of the present population , have fall victim to the blood - revenge . so Corsican historian tell ; a thousand violent death each year , for the last five century . sometimes the avenger wait for half a lifetime , lurk till his moment come . before his victim have cease to quiver , or the shot to ring down the rocky pass , he be off for the bush or the mountain , and lead thenceforth a bandit 's life . 
 they tell I , Clara , that thing be well now , and this black stain on a chivalrous race be be purge by christian civilization . be it as it may , I love the island of my Lily still ; and hope , please God , to see it once more , before I go to she . 
 banish though I be , for the present , from the only place I care for , it seem still great severance to go far than I could help . therefore instead of return to England , I spend the winter in cruise along the western coast of Italy , and the south of Spain ; and coast back to Genoa . to Seville , and other place fame for beautiful woman , I make especial trip , to search for any fit to compare with my own maiden . of course I know none could be find ; but it give I some employment , and bitter pleasure , to observe how inferior be all . to my eye , bright with one sweet image , no other form have grace enough to be fit pillow for my charmer 's foot . how I long and yearn for some fresh token of she : all her little gift I carry ever in my bosom , but never let another 's eye rest one moment on they . not even would I tell my friend one word about my love ; it seem as if it would grow common by be talk about . to Peter Green I write , resign my commission , although I do not tell he that I have find the olive . no , friend Peter , those olive be much too near my Lily ; and I will not   have you or any other stranger there . I know she would not look at you ; still I would rather have you a thousand mile away . free trade , if you like , when I have make my fortune ; which by the bye be somewhat the maxim of that school . my fortune , not in olive , oil , or even guineas - all that rubbish you be welcome to - but my fortune where my heart and soul be all invest , and now , no more my fortune , but my certain fate in Lily . 
 at length and at last my calendar - like a homesick pair at school , we have make one for each other , thank God that it be not a leap - year - my calendar so often count , so punctually erase , begin to yield and totter to the stubborn sap of time . my patience long ago have yield , my blood be in a fever . another thing begin to yield , alas it be my money . Green , Vowler , and Green have behave most liberally ; but of course the expense of my vessel have be heavy on I ; and now my salary have cease . Peter Green write to I in the kind and most handsome manner , press I , if tired   as he conclude   of those murderous Corsicans , to accept another engagement in Sardinia . even without impart my last discovery , I have do good service to the firm . I smile at the idea of my be weary of Corsicans : even now the mere word send a warm tide to my heart . 
 it be not for the beauty of the scene , or the work of art , that I remain in Genoa ; but because it be the likeli place to see the Negro 's head . as we lay at the end of the mole , my glass command all that enter ; and every lugger or xebec that bear the sacred emblem - off my little dingy push from our rake stern , and with one man , now my friend because a thorough Corsican , I board she , at all hazard of imprisonment ; and crave for tiding of the sacred land . although , of course , I would not show the nest of all my thought , yet by beat about the bush , I get some scrap of news . the great Signor be flourish , and have harvest an enormous crop of olive : his lovely daughter , now become the glory of the island , have be ill of something like marsh - fever , but be now as bloom as the rose . they do say , but the captain could not at all believe it , that she have be betroth to some foreign olive - merchant . what disgrace ! the high blood and the sweetest maid in Corsica , to be betray to an oilman ! plenty of other news I gather - the good people be great gossip - but this be all I care for . meanwhile your father , Clara dear , reply most warmly to my letter , send I a sum on loan , which quite relieve I from cheese - paring . and now the wind be in the north , and it be almost time to start for the arm of Lily . if I wait any long , I should be too mad to bear the voyage . at the break of day we leave the magnificent harbour , and the cold wind from the maritime Alps chill all but the fire of love . up and down the little deck , up and down all day and night ; sleep I never would again , until I touch my Lily . on the evening of the 8th of March , we be near Cape Corso ; next day we coast down the west to the lively breeze of spring , and so upon the 9th we moor to the tongue of Calvi . at midnight we be under way , and when the sun could reach the sea over the snowy peak , we glide past the mountain crescent that look on the Balagna . in the early morning still , when the dew be float , we round the gray headland of Signor Dezio 's cove , and I climb along the bowsprit to glance beyond the corner . 
 what be that white dress I see flutter at the water 's edge ? whose be that red - striped mandile toss on high and catch again ? and there the flag - staff I erect , with my colour fly ! only one such shape on earth - only two such arm - out with the boat or I must swim , or run the yacht ashore . the boat have be tow alongside for the last six hour : Lily can not   wait for the boat any more than I can . from rock to rock she be leap ; which be the near one ? into the water she run , then away in blush terror - she forget all about the other man . but I know where to find she , she have drop her little shoe , she must be in my grotto . 
 there I press she to my heart of heart , trembling , weeping , laugh , all unable to get close enough to I . 
 " sweetest mine , ten thousand time , I have be so wretched . " her voice be like a silver bell . 
 " my own , I be so glad to hear it . but how well you look ! " 
 if she be lovely when I leave she , what shall I call she now ? there be not one atom of she but be pure perfection . I hold she from I for one moment , to take in all her beauty . she have a most delicious fragrance that steal upon my sens . toilet bottle she never hear of ; what she have be nature 's gift , and unperceive except by love . I have often tell she of it , but she will not   believe it . it be not your breath , you darling ; your breath be only violet ; it come from every fibre of you , even from your hair ; it be as when the wind have kiss a lily of the valley . 
 the ancient Signor be a man of very keen observation , do not delay our wedding any long than could be help . that evening we haul down the family fusileer , give he a goblet of wine , and send he about his business : for one night we would take our chance even of Vendetta . at supper - time the Signor be in wonderful spirit , and drink our health with many praise of our constancy and obedience . one little fact he mention worth a thousand propination ; his daughter 's fever have be cure by some chance news of I . he even go away to fetch a bottle of choice Rogliano , when he see how I be fidgette to get my arm round Lily . then after make his re - entrance , with due clumsiness at the door , he quite disgrace himself , while draw the cork , by even wink at I , as he say abruptly , 
 " Fiordalisa , when would you like to be marry ? " 
 my Lily blush , I must confess , but do not fence with the question . 
 " as soon as ever you please , papa . that is , if my love wish it . " but she would not look at I to ask . in the porch she whisper to I , that it be only from her terror of the bad Lepardo come . do the love creature fancy that I would believe it ? 
 once more we sail together over the amethyst sea ; she be as fond of the water as a true - bear Briton . in her thought and glance be infinite variety . none could ever guess the next thing she would say . thoroughly I know her heart , because I live therein , and sweet lodging never man be bless with . but of her mind she veil as yet the maiden delicacy , strictly as she would the glow rich of her figure . what amaze I more than all , be that while most corsican girl be of the nut - brown order , no sun ever burn the snowy skin of Lily : she always look so clear and clean , as if it be impossible for anything to stain she . Clara , you be always talk of your lovely Isola . I wonder where she get her name : it be no stranger to I . something in your description of she remind I of my Lily . I long to see the girl : and you must have some reason for so obstinately prevent I . 
 CHAPTER XII . 
 Though Lily and I be most desirous to keep thing as quiet as possible , by this time our engagement be talk of in every house of the Balagna . that paternal fusileer and my merry yachtsman , although they look the other way whenever we approach , would not permit the flower of Corsica , as she be now proclaim , to blush with I unseen . my sailor attend to her far more than to their business , and would have leap into the water for one smile of Lily . 
 it be the fashion of the island to make a wedding jubilee ; and the Signor be anxious to outdo all that have ever be do . we , absorb in one another , do our good to disappoint he ; but he scorn the notion of any private marriage . I never shall forget how he knit his silver brow when I make a last attempt to bring he to our view . " Signor Vogheno , to I you appear to forget whose daughter it be that love you . perhaps in your remote , but well regard island maiden may be steal before their father can look round . indeed , I have hear that they leap over a broomstick . that be not the custom here . Fiordalisa Della Croce be my only child - the child of my old age ; and not altogether one to be ashamed of . I can afford to be hospitable , and I mean to be so . " 
 the Corsicans be a most excitable race , and , when affront , seem to lash their side as they talk . by the time the good Signor have finish his speech , every hair of his beard be curl with indignation . but his daughter spring into his arm and kiss away the temp , and promise , if it must be so , to make herself one mass of gold and coral . so the Parolanti , or mediator , be invoke ; an armistice for a week be sign , and honour pledge on either side . free and haughty be the step of the Signor Dezio as he set forth for the town to order everything he could see ; and very wroth again he be , because I would not postpone the day for he to get a shipload of trumpery from Marseilles . this time I be resolve to have my way . besides the fervour of my passion and my dread of accident , the one thing of all other I detest be to be star at anywhere . and it be far bad to be star at by a foreign race . the Corsicans be gentleman by nature , but they could not be expect to regard without some curiosity the lucky stranger who have win their Lily . 
 I will not weary you , as I myself be weary , with all the ceremony of the wedding - day . all I want be my bride , and she want none but I : yet we could not help be touch by the hearty good - will of the commune . the fame of Lily 's beauty have spread even to Sardinia , and many a handsome woman come to measure her own thereby . clever as they be at such thing , not one of they could find a blemish or defect in Lily , and our fair Balagnese tell they to go home and break their mirror . 
 it be a sweet spring morning , and amid a fearful din of gun and trumpet , mandolin and fiddle , I wait with a nervous smile under the triumphal arch in front of my fictitious house . a sham house have be make of board , and bough , and flower , because it be most essential that the bride should be introduce to the bridegroom 's dwelling . here I be to receive the procession , which at last appear . first come fifty well - arm youth , crown with leaf and ribbon ; then four - and - twenty maiden dress alike , sing and scatter flower , and then a boy of noble birth , mount on a pony , and carry the freno , symbol of many scion . none of they I look at ; only for my Lily . on a noble snow - white palfrey , deck from head to foot with flower , her father walk at her side , come the bloom , the flower , the lily of they all , array in clear white muslin , self - possess , and smile . one glorious wreath be round her head ; it be her own black hair by her own sweet finger twin with sprig of myrtle . a sash , or fazoletto , of violet transparent crape , loop at the crown of her head , fall over the shy lift of her bosom , part like a sunset cloud , where the boddice open below the pear - like waist . to I she look like a white coralline rise through an amethyst sea . behind she come the authority of the commune . the sham key be already hang at her slender zone . it be my place to lift she down and introduce she formally . this I do with excellent grace , feel the weight of eye upon I . but when I get she inside , I spoil the fold of the fazoletto . I hear the old man shout , " who be ye gallant son of the mountain , who have carry off my daughter ? to I , indeed , ye seem to be brave and noble man , yet have ye take she rather after the manner of bandit . know ye not that she be the fair flower that ever be rear in Corsica ? " 
 " yes , old fellow , I know that well enough ; and that be the very reason why I have get she here . " one more virgin kiss , and with Lily on my arm , forth I sally to respond . 
 " friend we be , who claim some hospitality . we have pluck the fairest flower on all the strand of Corsica , and we bear she to the priest , fit offering for Madonna . " 
 " bide on , my noble friend ; then come and enjoy my feast . " 
 no more delay . the maid have get all they can do to keep in front of we with their flower . the armed youth stand on either side at the entrance to the church . the taper be already light , the passage up the little church be strew with flower myrtle . lily , hold her veil around she , walk hand in hand with I . 
 Fiordalisa Della Croce now be Lily Vaughan ; amidst a world of shout , shooting , and cornamusa , we be lead to the banqueting - room ; there they seat we in two chair , and a fine fat baby be place on Lily 's lap , to remind she of her duty . she dandle it , and kiss it as if she understand the business , and then present it with a cap of coral and gay ribbon . now Lily Vaughan throw off her fazoletto , and give I for a keepsake the myrtle in her hair . then all who can claim kin with she , to the fortieth generation , hurry up and press her hand , and wish the good old wish . " long life and grow pleasure , son like he , and daughter like yourself . " 
 after the banquet , we be free to go , have first lead off the ballo in the Cerca dance . thank God , my Lily be at last my own ; she fall upon my bosom weary and delight . Clara , remember this : the little church in which we be married be call St. Katharine 's on the cliff ; and I sign the record in my proper name , Edgar Malins Vaughan : the Malins , very likely , they do not know from Valentine , for I always write it with a flourish at the end . the Signor , with all his friend , escort we to the limit of his domain ; there we bid they heartily farewell , and they return to renew the feast . my little yacht be in the bay , and we see the boat push off to fetch we as have be arrange . we be to sail for Girolata , where the Signor have a country - house , lonely enough even for two such lover . three or four hour would take we thither , and the sun be still in the heaven . as no one now could see we , Lily perform a little dance for my especial delight . how beam she look , how full of spirit , now all the worry be over . then she trip roguishly at my side to the wind rocky step that lead to St. Katharine 's cove . the cove be like a well scoop in the giant cliff . as we descend the steep and narrow stair , my Lily tremble on my arm . the house and all the merry - maker be out of sight and hearing . of course we stop every now and then , for the boat could not be at the landing yet , and we have much to tell each other . 
 as we step upon the beach , and under the eave of a jutting rock , a tall man stand before we . his eye and beard be black as jet , and he wear the loose dress of a southern seaman . three sailor , unmistakeably English , be smoke and play card in the corner shade of the cliff . Lily start violently , turn pale , and clung to I , but face the intruder bravely . he be quite amazed at her beauty , I at his insolent gaze . 
 " Fiordalisa Della Croce , " he say with a pure tuscan accent , " behold I ! I be come to claim you . " 
 he actually lay his small , but muscular hand upon my Lily 's shoulder . she leap back as from a snake . I know it must be Lepardo . 
 " Sir , " I say , as calmly as I could , " oblige I by allow my wife to pass . " 
 the sneer , supercilious look which he hardly deign to spare I , be honest , compare to his foul stare at she . 
 " Signor , she be too beautiful . I must have my right . come for she when I be tired , if any can tire of she . " 
 and he thrust his filthy , hairy lip under my own pet 's hat . my muscle leap , and my soul be in the blow . down he go like a flail , and I think he be stun for an hour ; but while I be bear my pet to the boat , which now be close to the beach , up he leap , and rush at I with a dagger - a dagger like one which you know . I do not see he , but Lily do over my shoulder ; she spring from my arm and fling herself between we . he thrust she aside , and leap at I like a panther , aim straight at my heart . how he miss I I can not tell , but think it be through Lily . before he recover , I close with he , wrest away the weapon and fling it far into the sea . but one main thing I omit ; I ought to have stun he thoroughly . into the boat with Lily - I catch up an oar , and away we dash . the three english sailor be run up . as a wave take the boat about , one of they grasp the stern ; down on his knuckle crash my oar , and with a curse he let go . all right , all clear , off for the yacht for your life . I would show fight , for my blood be up , but what would become of Lily ? and we be but three against four , and none of we have arm . 
 meanwhile , that black Italian , I can never call he a Corsican , sneak away to a tuft of sea - grass for his double - barrel fusil . bow with all my might , I see he examine the priming , lie his red cap on a rock , and the glistening gun on the cap , and , close one eye , take steady aim , not at I , but at Lily . Poor Lily sit on the thwart at my side , faintly star with terror . no time to think ; oar and all I dash in front of my darling . a ping in the air , a jar on my wrist , a slight blow on my breast , and at my foot drop the bullet . it have pass through the tough ash handle . down , Lily , down , for God 's sake ; he be fire the other barrel . I fling she down in the bilge water ; the brute can not see she now . not quite so easily off . up a steep rock he climb like a cat , the cursed gun still in his hand . he win fifty foot of vantage , and command the whole of the boat . we be not eighty yard away . there he coolly level at my prostrate Lily . I have grey hair next morning . forward , I throw myself , over my wife ; I he might kill if he choose . one lurch of the boat - a short sea be run - and my darling 's head be show . he see his chance and fire . thank God , he have too little powder in ; my own love be untouched . the ball fall short of Lily , and pass through my left foot , in at the sole and out below the instep . luckily I have retain my dancing shoe , or my thick boot would have keep the ball in my foot . the brute could not see that he have hit any one , and he curse we in choice italian . 
 Poor Lily have quite swoon away , and know nothing of my wound . over the side of the yacht I lift she myself , stand upon one leg . no one else should touch she . so furious I be with that cold - blooded miscreant , that if I could only have walk , I would have return to fight he . my man , too , be quite up for it . but when Lily come to herself , and throw her arm round I and weep , and thank God and her saint , I find my foot quite soak in a pool of blood , and stiffening . poor little dear ! what a fuss she do make about it ! I would have bear ten time the pain for the smile and tear she give I . one thing be certain - under the mercy of God , we owe our life to each other , and hold they henceforth in common . 
 as , with a flow sheet , we double the craggy point , conceal close under the rock we see a low and snake - like vessel , of the felucca build . she be bank for three pair of sweep , and look a thorough rover . this be , of course , Lepardo 's boat . we now bear away for Ajaccio , dear Lily have implore I not to think of Girolata , where no medical aid could anyhow be procure . moreover , she want to fly from that dark Lepardo ; and I be quite willing to own that , despite my delicious nursing , I be not ambitious to stand as target again during our honeymoon . 
 CHAPTER XIII . 
 at first I think a great deal more of the pain than the danger of my wound ; but when I show it to the french surgeon at Ajaccio , he surprise I by shrug his shoulder formidably , and declare that it be the good God if I keep my foot . be of a somewhat sceptical turn , I think at first that he only want to gild the frame of his work ; but when I begin to consider it , I find that he be quite right . the fact be , that I have think much more of my bride than of my metatarsal . two of these be splinter where the bullet pass between they , and it be a question whether it have not be poison . many of the mountaineer be skilled in deadly drug , and use they rarely for the bowl , not so rarely for the sword and gun . 
 at one time there be symptom even of mortification , and my wife , who wait hand and foot upon I , join the surgeon in implore I to submit to amputation . 
 " sweetest mine ! do you suppose that I shall love you any the less because you walk on crutch , and all through your love of I ? and what other difference can it make to either of we ? I shall cry a great deal at first , for I love your little toe - nail more than I do my own eye ; but , darling , we shall get over it . " 
 as she love my toe so much , I resolve to keep they , if it be only for her sake ; and , after a narrow crisis , my foot begin to get well . to her care and tenderness I owe my recovery , far more than to the skill of the clever surgeon . six month elapse before I could walk again , and our little yacht be send to Calvi to explain the long delay . fond as I be of the " lily - flower , " I be anxious now to sell she ; but my darling nurse , although she know before our marriage that I be not a wealthy man , would not listen to the scheme at all ; for the doctor order I , as I grow strong , to be constantly on the water . 
 " not by any mean , my own , will we sell our little love - boat . I should cry after it like a baby ; and another thing , far more important , you can bear no motion except on board our Lily . Papa have get great heap of money , and he never can refuse I anything when I coax in earnest . " 
 conscious as I be of my vile deceit , I would rather have die than apply to Signor Dezio , albeit I be quite sure that he would soon have forgive I . so I write again to my good - natured brother and banker , and tell he all that have happen , but beg he not to impart it even to your mother . I have strong reason for suspect that he do not conceal it from she ; but as I never allude to the subject before she , she be too much a lady ever to lead I towards it . my motive for this reserve be at first some ill - define terror lest my fraud upon Signor Dezio should come to light prematurely . also I hate to be talk about among people whom I despise . afterwards , as you will perceive , I have other and far more cogent reason . 
 I need not say that your father - dear Clara , I ought to love you , if only on his account ! - your father write I a kind and most warm - hearted letter , accompany by a most handsome gift - no loan this time , but a wedding - gift , and a very noble one . also he press I to come home with my bride the moment I could endure the voyage . ah ! if I have only obey he , not Lily and Henry , but myself would have be the victim . 
 we return as soon as possible to Vendetta tower , and find the good Signor in excellent spirit , delight to see his sweet daughter again , and still more delighted by hope of a little successor to the gray wall and the olive grove . when this hope be realize , and a lusty young grandson be lay in his arm , he become so wild in his glory , that he go about boast all over the commune , feast all who come near he , forget the very name of the blood - revenge . many a time we remind and implore he to be more careful . he reply , that his life be of no importance now ; he have come to his haven among his own dear one , and be crown the old ship with flower . moreover , he know that the De ' Gentili be of a nobler spirit than to shed the blood of a gray - haired man , when institution do not very loudly demand it . and so I believe they be . 
 alas ! the poor old man ! - a thorough and true gentleman as one need wish to see - choleric albeit , and not too wide of mind ; but his heart be in the right place , and make of the right material , and easy enough to get at . he be free to confess his own failing , and could feel for a man who be tempt . deeply thankful I be that , before his white beard be lay low , I acknowledge to he my offence , and obtain his hearty forgiveness . Little Henry be on his lap , go off into smile of sleep , with his mother 's soft finger in his mouth . at first my confession quite take the poor Signor aback ; for I do not attempt to gloss the dishonour of what I have do ; but I tell he truly that the meanness be not in my nature , and although I have win my pet Lily , the road run through hemlock and wormwood . and now I perceive how uncalled - for and stupid the fraud have be . 
 when the old man recover a little from the shock cause by the dishonesty - towards which recovery the tear of his daughter and the smile of his grandson contribute - he be really glad to find that I be not a land Signor . he rub his hand and twitch his beard with delight , for now his little Enrico would never be take away to the barbarous english island . be he not rightful successor to the land of the Della Croce ? and what more could he possibly want ? what could he care for the property in Gloisterio ? however , he make we promise that if the present remarkable baby , Master Henry Vaughan , should ever enjoy the property in the unpronounceable county , Lily 's second child , if she have one , should take the corsican lordship ; for his great fear be , that the Malaspina and Della Croce estate should become a servient tenement to the frozen field of the North . to express and ensure his wish , he have a deed - poll prepare accord to his own fancy , read it to we and some witness , then sign , seal , and enrol it . this be one of the document which you , my brave Clara , rescue from that vile , stealthy ghost . 
 and now , for a short time , we enjoy deep , quiet , delicious happiness . the crime which have haunt I be confess and forgive . amply possess of the mean , and even the abundance of life , I be bless with strong health again , and freedom among the free . rich and good of all blessing , I have a sweet , most lovely , and most loving wife , and love she once and for all . no more beautiful vision have any poet imagine than young Lily Vaughan sit under the vine - leaf , her form more exquisite than ever , her soft - eyed infant in her lap wonder at his mother 's beauty , while her own deep - lustred eye carry to her husband 's , without the trouble of thinking , all that flow into her heart - joy at belong to he , hope of bliss to come , fear of over - happiness , pride in all the three of we , and shame at feel proud . then a gay coquettish glance , as quick youth warm the vein , and some humorous thought occur , a tickle for the baby , and a feint of cold - shoulder I . but , jealous as I be , desperately jealous , for my love be more passionate than ever , I can honourably state that Lily 's one and only trial to arouse my jealousy be an ignominious failure , recoil only on the person of the dear designer . however exact little Harry might be , I never grudge he his double share of attention . in the first place I look upon he as a piece of I , still hold on ; and , in the next place , I know that all he lay claim to be only a loan to he , and belong in fee simple to his father . 
 at this time I write to my brother again , announce the birth of our boy , and that we have make he his namesake ; dispense , too , with all further reserve on the subject of our marriage . this letter be never deliver to your dear father . that much I know , for certain ; and at one time I strongly suspect that our cold - blooded , crafty foe contrive to intercept it . but no ; if he have , he would have know well afterwards . 
 after that cowardly onslaught upon my bride and myself , I have of course learn all I could of the history of this lepardo . he be the only son of the Signor 's only brother , but very little be know of he in the neighbourhood , as he come from Vescovato on the east side of the island . he be say to have great ability and very great perseverance , and under the guardianship of his uncle have be intend and partly educate for the French Bar . but his disposition be most headstrong and sullen ; and at an early age he display a ferocity unusual even in a Corsican . neither have he the great redeem trait of the islander , I mean their noble patriotism . one good quality , however , he do possess , and that be fidelity to his word . with one of the contradiction so common in human nature , he would even be false in order to be true : that is , he would be treacherous wherever he be unpledged , if it assist he towards a purpose to which he be commit . while he be yet a boy , his intended career be cut short by an act of horrible violence . he dislike all the low animal , horse and mule especially ; and one day he be detect by a master of the Paoli College , scream , and yell at , and lash , from a safe distance , a poor little pony whom he have tie to a fence . the master , an elderly man , very humane and benevolent , rebuke he in the most cutting manner , and call he a low coward . the young villain run off , with his eye flash fire , procure a stiletto , and stab the poor man in the back . then he leap on the horse he have be ill - treating , and prick he with the dagger , ride away furiously in the direction of Bastia . the pursuer could not trace he through the wild mountain district , but it be believe that he reach the town and take refuge in an english brig , which be lie off the harbour , and sail for Genoa that evening . the pony be find dead , lie by the roadside with the brute 's dagger in its throat . no wonder Lily , who tell I all this , with true corsican rage in her eye , no wonder my Lily hat he . even as a little girl , for she be but ten year old when he disappear , she always feel a strong repugnance towards he . he be about six year old than Fiordalisa , and four year young than I ; so when he shoot at Lily , he must have be three - and - twenty . it be report that after his disappearance he take to a sea - fare life , and make himself very useful , by his knowledge of language , in the english merchant service . quarrel with his employer , he be say to have resort to smuggle in the Levant , if not to downright piracy . 
 Clara , for reason I can not explain , I wish you to follow my story step by step in its order , note each landing - place . to do this with advantage , you must have the date carve upon each of the latter : therefore I beg you to copy they as you pass . 
 I arrive in Corsica , as you hear , during the month of May , 1829 . on the 12th of August in that same year I first behold my Lily . that day I remember , beside other reason , because I have wonder , as I ride idly along , whether my brother be open his usual Highland campaign , and whether he would like to shoot the muffrone . lily and I be marry on the 21st of March , 1830 , when I be twenty - seven year old : and our little Henry first see the light on the 24th of December follow , more than two year before your birth . your father have no child as yet , I look upon my Harry as heir presumptive to these estate . although your birth appear to divest he of the heirship , it have since , through cause then unknown to I , prove otherwise ; and if he be live now , he would in strict law be entitle to this property after my death . but if he be alive , he never should have an inch of it , that be if I could prevent it ; because in strict righteousness all belong to you . and now I hold the property in fee simple , under an Act which abolish fine and recovery ; for I have suffer so much from remorse , ever since your dear mother 's death , that even before you save my life , dearest child , I enrol a deed in Chancery , which give I dispose power ; and as I think you know , I make thereupon a will devise the land to you . this also be one of the document you catch that vile hypocrite stealing . 
 to return to the old Signor . he be now as happy as the day be long , and desirous , as an old man often be , to set on foot noteworthy scheme , which might survive his time . of this desire I take advantage to inoculate he with some english view . it be rather late to learn another catechism , at threescore year and five ; but a green old age be his , hale and hearty as could be . " why should all those noble olive shed , and rot upon the ground , all those grape of diver colour be of no more use than rainbow ? why should all the dazzle marble slumber in the quarry , the porphyry of Molo , the verde antique of Orezza , the Parian of Cassaconi , the serpentine near Bastia , and the garnet of Vizzavona - nay even the matchless white alabaster - 
 " Mother of our Lord , I have get such pretty stuff in my cavern on the gulf of Porto . some one tell I it be the very fine alabaster . but then it would require cut out . " the last thought seem a poser . 
 " well , father " - so I call he now - " when Harry have finish his tooth , suppose we go all together in the yacht and see it . " 
 and so we do ; and it be worth a voyage all the way from London only to look at it . pillar of snow , pellucid , and fancifully vein , like a glaci shot with sea - weed ; clean - work moreover , and tough , and of even texture , as I prove to my Lily 's delight . there be now a small piece in the drawer of my walnut - wood desk . but I take home a square block with I , and under my wife 's most original criticism , work it into a rough resemblance of the baby Henry . perhaps I have a natural turn for sculpture , perhaps it be a wife 's flattery ; but at any rate the young mother be so charmed with it , that in one of her pensive moment she even make I promise , that if she die soon and alone , I would have the little recumbent figure lay upon her breast . 
 meanwhile the Signor be gayer than ever : he tell we to have no anxiety about anything less than a score of child ; to such effect would he work his great olive ground , quarry , and vineyard . some ingenious plan he form , which delight he hugely , but be past my comprehension . as fast as he quarry his alabaster , he would plant young vine in the hole , and every one know how the vine delight to run away over the rock . so at once he must set off for Corte , the central town of the island , to procure a large stock of tool well - temper in the Restonica . that turbulent little river possess a magic power . its water be say to purify steel so highly that it never can rust again . I have even hear that the cutler of Northern Italy import it , for the purpose of anneal their choice production . for my part , little as I know of commerce , I strongly recommend that arrangement for shipping and sell the alabaster should be make , before it be quarried . but the Signor scorn the idea . 
 have in prospect all the rich of Croesus , and in possession enough to make we happy , and have work , as we think , uncommonly hard , we all four indulge in a tour through Sicily and Italy , propose to visit and criticise the principal marble quarry . by the time we have do all this and enjoy it thoroughly - dear I , how my wife be admire in the sculptor 's studio ! - and by the time we have fall to work again , survey and geologise all the estate , take , or rather listen to , long earful of advice , settle all our plan summarily over the Rogliano , and reopen they all the next morning , by this time , I say , nearly three year of bliss have slip by , since my recovery from the linger wound ; and it be now the summer of 1833 . my love wife be twenty year old , and we be look forward to the birth of a brother or sister for Harry . meanwhile we have hear of your birth , which delight we all , especially my Lily . she use to talk , in the fond way mother discover , to Harry , now gravely perch up on a stool , about his little sweetheart away in the dark north country . 
 it be in the month of July 1833 that the Signor find he could no long postpone his visit to Corte . alone he would go , rid his favourite jennet , as sure - footed as a mule , and as hardy as a mustang . behind he he sling his trusty fusil , with both barrel load , for he have to traverse a desert and mountainous district haunt by bandit . he be to travel through by - way to Novella , and so on to the bridge where the road from Calvi and Bastia meet , put up in rude quarter there for the night , and follow the steep descent to the town of Corte next day . in vain we beg he to take some escort , or at least to let I go with he . no , I must stop to guard the Lily and the little snow - drop ; could he possibly take I at such a time from home , and do I think a Della Croce be afraid of bandit ? it be a Monday morning when he leave the tower , and he would be back on Saturday in good time for supper . he kiss and bless his Lily , and the little snow - drop as he call young Harry , who cry at his departure ; and then he give I too an earnest trembling blessing . by this time he and I have come to love each other , as a father and a son . 
 I go with he quite to the border of the commune ; and there , in a mountain defile , I light for he his cigar . with some dark foreboding , I wait till I see he reach and pass the gap at the summit of the rise . there he turn in the saddle to wave his last adieu , and his beard , like a white cloud , float on the morning sky . 
 CHAPTER XIV . 
 on the Saturday night , an excellent supper be ready : the Signor 's own particular plate be at the head of the table , and by it gleam , in a portly bottle , his favourite Rogliano . Little Harry , who could say anything he be tell , and know right well what be good , or at least what taste good - that beloved child be allow to stop up , that grandpapa might kiss he ; this be a sovereign specific , believe in the nursery creed , to ensure sweet sleep for both . 
 that silver beard never kiss the chubby cheek again . all night we wait and wonder : Harry be send to bed roar ; no grandpapa appear . the olive rustle at midnight , and out I run ; the door creak afterwards , and I open they , all in vain ; the sound of hoof come up the valley before the break of day ; but no step or voice of man , no bark of his favourite mountain hound , no neigh of the jennet to her sleepy brother - horse . 
 all Sunday we remain in terrible uneasiness , try to cheer each other with a hundred assurance that the dear old man must have turn aside to see an ancient friend live now at Prato . when Monday morning come , but bring no tiding of he , I set off , amid a shower of tear , to seek the beloved father . the old fusileer be leave on guard , and I take two young and active man , well acquainted with the mountain pass . all well mount , and well armed , we purpose to ride hard , and search the track quite up to the town of Corte . there , if indeed he have ever arrive , we should be sure to hear of he . but it prove unnecessary to go so far from home . 
 along that dreary mountain road , often no more than a shepherd 's walk difficult to descry , we find no token of any traveller either live or dead , until we come to the Ponte Leccia , where the main road meet . here our fear be double , and the last hope nearly quench ; for on ask at the shepherd 's hut , where Signor Dezio mean to put up , we find that he have sleep there on the Friday night , as he be return from the town . the shepherd 's wife , who have know he for year , assure we that he be in wonderful spirit and health , insist upon she sup with they - which be contrary to corsican usage - and boast much of the great thing he would do , and still more of his beautiful grandson . his goatskin wallet be full of sample tool , which be to astonish his english son , and he have a toy gun no big than the tail of a dog , with which he intend to teach the baby to shoot . tell we all these little thing , and show we her present , the poor woman cry at the thought of what must have happen to he . right early on Saturday morning he set off , as impatient as a child , to see his beloved one again , and exhibit all his treasure . for love of the Della Croce her husband have groom the mare thoroughly , and she neigh merrily down the hill at thought of her stable friend . moreover , the shepherd 's wife tell we that there have be in those part no bandit worth the name , since the death of the great Teodoro , king of the mountain , whose baby still receive tribute . 
 after rest our horse awhile , with heavy heart we begin to retrace our step through that awful wilderness . instead of keep together , as we have do in the morning , we now ride in parallel line , right and leave of the desert track , wherever the ground permit it . all this district be very barren and rugge , and the way wind up and down , often along the brink of crag , or through narrow mountain gorge . the desolation and loneliness grow more oppressive , as the shadow lengthen . 
 we have thoroughly search two - third of the distance homeward , and have cross some granite height whence the sea be visible ; the sun be low over Cape Bevellata , and the vapour from the marsh be crouch at the mountain 's foot . here as I ride to the left of my two companion , I hear the faint bay of a dog far down a deep ravine , that trend leftward from our course . put my jaded animal to his utmost speed , I make for the hollow which echo the dismal sound - a feeble bark prolong into a painful howl . turn the corner sharply I scar two monstrous vulture , who be hover over and crane at a dog . the dog so gaunt and starve , that at every bark the rib seem burst the skin , still be fight past despair with his loathsome enemy . he stand across the breast of the noble Signor Dezio . there lie that gallant cavalier , stark and rigid , with his eye wide open , and his white beard tip with crimson . there he lie upon his back , his kingly head against a rock , his left hand on his clotted breast and glue thereto with blood ; his right hand hang beside his chin whence it have slip in death , and in it still securely grasp be a trinket newly make , contain a little sheaf of the baby 's flossy hair tie with a black wisp of the mother 's . the poor old man have drag himself thither to die , and die with that keepsake on his lip . the fatal shot have be fire from above , and pass completely through his body . it pierce his lung , and I believe that he feel little pain , but gasp his simple life away . near he be his wallet , with the tool still in it ; I think he have be play with the toy gun when he receive the wound ; at any rate it lie separate from the rest , and at the old man 's side . 
 examine by the wan light , with icy awe upon I , the scene of this damned atrocity , I find that the hoary traveller must have dismount here , to eat his frugal dinner . a horn cup and a crust of bread be on a rocky shelf , and a little spring well down the dingle , with the mark of the dog 's foot here and there . the craven foe have be sneak along behind , and take advantage of the old man 's position , as he sit upon a stone to make certain of he from the granite loophole . we find the very place where the murderer must have crouch , but the cliff - side keep no footprint . the victim 's gun be go , and so be the spanish mare : no other robbery seem to have be commit . 
 this glen lead to a short but more difficult track towards home , which the Signor , in his impatience , must have resolve to try . reverently we lay he on the fresh horse ; while I with the faithful mountain dog on my saddle - for he be too exhausted to walk - rode on to break the melancholy news , and send assistance back . 
 to break bad news - the phrase be a failure , the attempt it imply a much bad one . Lily know all in a moment , and in her delicate state she receive so appalling a shock , that for a week she lie on the very threshold of death . at the end of that time , and three day after the old man 's funeral - at which for his daughter 's sake I allow no wailing or voceros - a lively little girl be bear , who seem to be none the bad for her mother 's bitter suffering . her innocent caress , or some baby doing optimise by her mother - though even as a new - bear babe she seem a most love creature - all those soft endearing way , which I could not understand , do more to bring my Lily 's spirit back than even my fond attention . 
 but as yet , though able to walk again , and nurse her child , whom she would not commit to another , my wife remain in a fearfully sensitive and tremulous condition . the creak of a door , the sound of a foot , the rustle of the wind - and she , so brave and proud of yore , start like a cicale , and shake like a forest shadow . in everything she fear the ambush of that sleuth cold - blooded reptile , on whom alone , truly or not God know , she charge the blood of her venerable father . but still she have the comfort of a husband 's love , a husband even fonder than when the flower fall on his path ; and still she have the joy of watch , with a mother 's tender insight , the bud promise of two sweet infant . infant I call they , why Master Harry be now a thorough chatterbox ! with all this love around she , she by far the lovely , the pride and glory of all , be sure to find her comfort soon upon the breast of time , even as small Lily find it in her own sweet bosom . deeply and long we mourn that ancient signor , chivalrous and true gentleman , counsellor of all thing . every day we miss he ; but could talk of it more as time flow on . Rogliano have no sparkle , Luri not the tint of old : never could I pour out either from his favourite flagon , without a thought of he who teach we the proper way to do it ; who ought to be teach we still , but be lie foully murder in his lonely grave at St. Katharine 's on the Cliff . 
 we have do our utmost to avenge he : soon as I could leave my wife , I have scour all the neighbourhood . the Sbirri too have do their good , but discover nothing . brave fellow they be , when it come to fighting , but very poor detective . only two thing we hear that seem at all significant . one of these be that a spanish jennet , like the Signor 's favourite " Marana , " but dreadfully jade and nearly starve , have be sell on the Friday after the murder , be the very day of the funeral , at the town of Porto Vecchio on the south - eastern coast . I send my coxswain Petro , an intelligent and trusty Corsican , to follow up this clue ; for I durst not leave my wife as yet . Petro discover the man who have buy the mare , and re - purchase she from he , as I have direct : but the description of the first seller do not tally with my recollection of Lepardo . however , it prove to be the true Marana ; and glad she be to get home once more . 
 the other report , that seem to bear upon the bloody mystery , be that a swift felucca , flush - build and bank for triple sweep , have be see lie close in shore near point Girolata , during the early part of the week in which the Signor leave home . and it be even say that two maltese sailor , belong to this felucca , have encamp on shore in a lonely place near Otta , and be likely to be find there still . 
 Lily be strong now , I determine to follow this last clue myself ; and so I put the little yacht into commission again , and man she with Calvi man , for all my english crew have be dismiss long ago . leave my wife and child under the care of the old fusileer , away I sail from St. Katharine 's , intend to return in three day ' time . all this coast I now know thoroughly , and Otta be not far beyond the poor Signor 's cave of alabaster . it be a wild and desert region , far away from any frequented road , and little visit except by outlaw . 
 we find no trace of any tent , no sign of any landing , and an aged fisherman , whom we meet , declare that no felucca or vessel of any sort have lately be near the bay . I begin to fear that , for some dark purpose , I have be beguile from home , and despatch upon a fool 's errand . the dreary coast be still the home of solitude , the alabaster cave untouched since our pic - nic survey ; the mark of which be undisturbe except by wind and weather . so I crowd sail , and hurry back to St. Katharine 's , with a strange weight on my heart . to add to my vexation , a strong north wind set in , and smartly as our cutter sail , we be force to run off the land . when at last we make the cove , it be unsafe for the yacht to anchor , and so I be compel to send she on to Calvi . 
 it be nearly midnight on the 2d of October , when Petro and myself plod up the woode hill on which the old tower stand . weary and dispirit , though glow every now and then with the thought of all my darling , in vain I call myself a fool for fear where no fear be . when we reach the brow of the hill , my vague alarm be double . the rude oil - lamp that mark the entrance , why be they unlighted ? I have especially order that they should be kindle every night , and Lily have promise to see to it herself . no challenge from the watchman , no click of the musket hammer , even the vinea be not in its place . in vain we knock and knock at the old chesnut door ; no one answer , no one come to open . none of the loophole show a light ; the house be dark and silent as the ivy . wild with terror I run to the little side - door , whence first my Lily meet I . this too be lock , or fasten somehow ; and only the echo of my knock be hear . Petro and I catch up a great bough of ilex , which myself have lop last week , rush at the door with the butt , and break it in with one blow . shriek for Lily , Lily , I fly from room to room , tumble over the furniture , blunder at the doorway . no voice of wife , no cry of child , no answer of domestic ; all as silent as if ten fathom under water . 
 have dash through every room , I turn to rush off to the hamlet , when my foot strike something - something soft and yielding ; be it a sack or bolster ? I stoop to feel it ; it be Lily , lay out , stiff and cold Dead , my Lily dead ! oh , God can never mean it ; would he let I love she so ? 
 for all intent of actual life , for all that we be make for , for all the soul 's loan of this world , I die that very moment ; and yet a mad life burn within I , the flare of hope that will not die . how I force she clench hand open , bow her rigid arm around I , throw myself upon she , breathe between her lip and listen , tear her simple dress asunder and lay my cheek upon her heart ; feel not a single throb , flood her cold breast with tear , and lie insensible awhile . then , as if awake , feel that she be with I , but somehow not as usual ; call she all our name of love , and believe we be in heaven . but there stand Petro with a light , sobbing , and how his beard shake ! - what right have he in heaven ? would they let he in without shaving ? I rise to order he out ; when he restore my wit awhile by point with his finger . 
 " look , look , Signor ! she be not dead , I see her eyelid tremble . " 
 wide she open those glorious eye , look at I with no love in they , shudder , and close they again . 
 Mad with rapture , I catch she up , send Petro headlong lamp and all , and kiss she enough to kill she . she be not dead , my Lily , my pet of eternal age . there she fall tremble , flutter , nestle in my arm , her pale cheek on my breast , her white hand on my shoulder ; then frighten at her nest shrink back , and gaze with unutterable reproach , where love like the fall lamp be flicker : then clung to I once more , as if she ought to hate , but could not yet help love . she die the next morning . Clara , I can not   tell you any more now . 
 CHAPTER XV . 
 before my own and only love depart , she know , thank God , she know as well as I do , that I have never wrong her pure and true affection . but it be long before I learn what have so distressed she . though she appear quite sensible , and look at I , every now and then , with the same reproachful harrowing gaze , it seem to I age , it must have be hour , before she could frame her thought in word . in an agony of suspense for she , for our child , for our love , I could hardly repress my impatience even at her debility . many a time she open her trembling lip , but the word die on they . at last I catch her meaning from a few broken sentence . 
 " how could he do it ? how could he so betray she ? and his own Lily that love he so - no , she must not be Lily any more , she be only Fiordalisa Della Croce . how could he come and pretend to love she , and pretend to marry she , when all the while he have a young wife at home in England ? never would she have believe it but for the proof , the proof that hateful man have show she . how could he shame his own love so , and his child , and the aged father - there be no hope for she but to die - to die and never see he more ; and then perhaps he would be sorry , for he must care about she a little . " 
 then she burst into such a torrent of tear , and press both hand on her bound heart , and grow white with terror . then as the palpitation pass , she look at I and know I , and creep close to I , forget all the evil , - and seem to sleep awhile . of course I see what it be ; daze as I be and wild at her sorrow and danger , I slowly perceive what it be . the serpent - like foe have be there , and have hiss in her ear what he think to be true - that I have do she a dastard 's wrong ; have win her passionate maiden love , and defile she by a sham marriage , while my lawful wife be live . 
 when once I know my suppose offence , it do not take long to explain the murderer 's error , an error which have spring from my own deceit . but my child , where be my child , Lily ? 
 in her ecstatic joy , she could not think for the moment even of her child ; but press I to her tumultuous heart , as if I be all she want . then she begin to revile herself , for dare to believe any ill of her noble husband . 
 " and even if it have be true , which you know it never could be , dear , - I must have forgive you , sweetest darling , because you could not   have help it , you do love I so , do not   you ? " 
 this sweet womanly logic , you , Clara , may comprehend - but where be the child , my Lily ? 
 " oh , in bed I suppose , dear : let I get up , we must go and kiss the darling . when I first come in , I could not bear to go near they , poor pet ; but now - oh my heart , holy Madonna , my heart ! " 
 she leap up as if she be shoot , and a choke sound rise in her throat .. her fresh youth fight hard in the clutch of death . " oh save I , my own husband , save I . hold I tight ; I can not die yet . so young and so happy with you . it be go ; but the next pang be death . hold I so till it come again . God bless you , my own for ever . you will find I in heaven , will not   you ? you can never forget your own Lily . " 
 her large eye rest on mine , as they do when she first own her love ; and her soul seem try to spring into the breast of mine . close to I she clung , but with less and less of strength . her smooth , clear cheek be on mine , her exhausted heart on my wild one . I feel its last throb , as the death - pang come , and she try to kiss I to show that it be not violent . frantic , I open my lip , and receive the last breath of her . 
 the crush of its anguish her heart might have bear , but not the rebound of its joy . 
 her body , the fairest the sun ever see , be lay beside her father 's in the little churchyard at St. Katharine 's , with the toy baby on her breast ; her soul , the most loving and playful that ever the angel visit , be still in attendance upon I , and mourn until mine rejoin it . 
 you have hear my great but not my only distress . for more than three month , my reason forsook I utterly . I recognise no one , not even myself , but seek high and low for my Lily . at night I use to wander forth and search among the olive - tree , where we so often rove : sometimes the form I know so well would seem to flit before I , tempt I on from bole to bole , and stretch vain hand towards I . then as I seem to have overtake and bring to bay her coyness , with a faint shriek she would vanish into hazy air . probably I owe these vision to capricious memory , gleam upon old hexameter of the Eton clink . true from false I know not , neither care to know : everything I do seem to be do in sleep , with all the world around I go to sleep as well . one vague recollection I retain of go somewhere , to do something that make I creep with cold . this must have be the funeral of my lost one ; when the Corsicans , as I be tell , flee from my ghastly stare , and would only stand behind I . they be a superstitious race , and they fear the " evil eye . " 
 all the time I be in this state , faithful Petro wait on I , and watch I like a father . he send for his wife , old Marcantonia , who be fame for her knowledge of herb and her power over the witch , who now beyond all doubt have get I in possession . decoction manifold she give I at the turn of the moon , and hang I all over with amulet , till I ring like a peal of cracked bell . in spite of all these sovereign charm , Lepardo might at any time have murder I , if he have think I happy enough to deserve it . perhaps he be in some other land , make sure of my child 's life . 
 poor helpless darling , all that be leave I of my Lily , as yet I do not know that even they be take . Petro tell I afterwards that I have ask for they once or twice , in a vacant wondering manner , but have be quite content with some illusory answer . 
 it be my Lily , and no one else , who bring I back to conscious life . what I be about to tell may seem to you a feeble brain 's chimera ; and so it would appear to I , if relate by another . but though my body be exhaust by unsleepe sorrow , under whose strain the mental chord have yield , yet I assure you that what befell I do not flow from but sweep aside both these enervation . 
 it be the Corsican 's belief , that those whom he have deeply mourn , and desolately miss , be allow to hover near he in the silent night . then sometimes , when he be sleep , they will touch his lid and say , " weep no more , belove one : in all , except thy sorrow , we be bless as thou couldst wish . " or sometimes , if the parting be of still more tender sort ,   as between two lover , or a newly wed couple   in the depth of darkness when the lone survivor can not sleep for trouble , appear the lose one at the chamber door , hold it open , and call softly ; " Dearest , come ; for I as well be lonely . " have thrice implore , it wave its cerement like an angel 's wing , and await the answer . answer not , if you wish to live ; however the sweet voice thrill your heart , however that heart be break . but if you truly wish to die , and hope be quench in memory ; make answer to the well - know voice . within three day you will be dead , and flit beside the invoke shadow . 
 perhaps old Marcantonia have warn I of this appeal , and beg I to keep silence , which for my child 's sake I be bind to do . all I know be that one night towards the end of January , I lay awake as usual , think - if a mind distemper thus can think - of my own sweet Lily . all the evening I have seek she among the olive - tree , and at St. Katharine 's Church , and even on the sad sea - shore by the moaning of the wave . now the winter moon be high , and through the embrasured window , the far churchyard that hold my wife , and the silver sea beyond it , glimmer like the curtain of another world . sit up in the widow bed , with one hand on my ache forehead - for now I breathe perpetual headache - I call in question that old church of one gay wedding and two dark funeral . be there any such church at all ; be it not a dream of moonlight and the phantom love ? 
 even as I sit gaze now , so on many a moonlight night sit my Lily gaze with I , whispering of her father 's grave , and look for it in the shrouded distance . her little hand use to quiver in mine , as she declare she have find it ; and her dark eye have so wondrous a gift of sight , that I never would dare to deny , though I could not quite believe it . have she not in the happy day , when we roam on the beach together , wait for the yacht and pretend to seek shell , have she not then tell I the stripe and colour of the sailor ' cap , and even the name of the man on deck , when I could hardly see their figure ? 
 ah , could she tell my own name now , could she descry I from that shore which mock the range of telescope , and the high lens of thought ; be she permit one glimpse of he from whom in life she could hardly bear to withdraw those gentle eye ? answer I , my own , in life and death my own one ; tell I that you watch and love I , though it be but now and then , and not enough to break the by - law of the disembodied world . 
 calmly as I now repeat it , but in a low melodious tone , sweet than any mortal 's voice , a tone that dwelt I know not where , like the sighing of the night - wind , come this answer to I : 
 " true love , for our child 's sake , and mine who watch and love you still , quit this grief , the spirit 's grave . all your sorrow still be mine , and would you vex your darling , when you can not comfort she ? though you see I now no more , I be with you more than ever ; I be your image and your shadow . at every sigh of your , I shiver ; your smile be all my sunshine . let I feel some sunshine , sweetest ; you know how I use to love it , and as yet you have send I none . I shall look for some to - morrow . Lo I , for ever your , be smile on you now . " 
 and a golden light , rich than any sunbeam , ripple through the room . I know the soft gleam like the sunset on a harvest - field . it be my Lily 's smile . a glow of warmth be shed on I , and I fall at once into a deep and dreamless sleep . you , my child , who have never know such loss - pray God you never may - very likely you regard all this incident as a dream . be it so : if it be a dream , Lily 's angel bring it . 
 CHAPTER XVI . 
 the next day I be a different man . all my energy have return , and all my reasoning power ; but not , thank God , the rigour of my mind , the petty contempt of my fellow - man . nothing be more hard to strip than that coat of flinty closeness form upon Deucalion 's offcast in the petrify well of self . though I have do my utmost , and pray of late for help in do it , never have I quite scale off this accursed deposit . this it be that so estrange your warm nature , Clara ; a nature essentially like your father 's , but never allow free scope . you could not tell the reason , child never can ; but somehow it make you shiver to be in contact with I . 
 Petro and Marcantonia would have be astonish at my sudden change , but they have lately dose I with some narcotic herb , procure , by a special expedition , from the Monte Rotondo , and esteem a perfect stregomastix ; so of course the worthy pair expect my recovery . no long do they attempt to conceal from I the truth as to my poor infant , who have be carry off on the day of my return . what I learn of the great calamity , which then befell I , be this . 
 towards sunset , my dear wife , with her usual fondness , go forth to look for the little yacht return from the gulf of Porto . our darling Harry , then in his third year , be with she , and the young nurse from Muro . Lily sit upon the cliff , watch a sail far in the offing , probably our vessel . then as she turn towards the tower , a man from the shrubbery stand before she , and call she by her maiden name . she know her cousin Lepardo , and suppose that he be come to kill she . nevertheless she ask he proudly how he dare to insult she so , in the presence of her child and servant . he answer that it be her name , and she be entitle to no other . then he promise not to harm she , if she would send the maid away , for he have important thing to speak of . and thereupon he lay before her document and letter . 
 meanwhile the tower be surround by his comrade ; but they durst not enter , for the trusty fusileer keep the one approach up the steep hillside ; and his grandson , a brave boy , stand at the loop - hole with he . the maid , however , with her little charge , be allow to pass , and she join the two other woman in weak preparation for defence . the period of attack have be choose skilfully . so simple and patriarchal be the corsican mode of life , that very few servant be keep , even by man of the high station ; and those few be not servant in our sense of the word . it happen this night that the only two man employ upon the premise , beside the old fusileer , have be send into the town for thing wherewith to welcome I . 
 however , the faithful gunner , with his eye along the barrel , keep the foe at bay , and seem likely to keep they there , until the return of the man ; while his sturdy grandson split his red cheek at the warder 's conch . but they little know their enemy . Lepardo Della Croce be not to be baulk by an old man and a boy . at the narrow entrance a lady 's dress come flutter in the brisk north wind . poor Lily totter across the line of fire , her life she never think of ; what use to live after all that she have hear ? close behind she , and in the dusk invisible past her wind - toss drapery , steal her scoundrel cousin ; whom , like tree set in a row , or feather - edge board see lengthwise , a score of lithe and active sailor follow . no chance for the marksman ; like tile they overlap one another , and poor Lily , upright in her outraged pride , cover the stoop graduated file . french and English , Moorish and Maltese , a motley band as ever swore , they burst into a hearty laugh at the old gunner 's predicament , the moment they have pass his range . all within be at their mercy . true he keep the main gate still , and all the door be bar ; but gate and door be lubber 's hole for seaman such as they . up the ivy they clamber , along the chesnut branch , or the mere coigne of the granite , and into the house they pour at every loop - hole and window . one thing must be say in their favour - they do very little mischief . they be keep thoroughly under command , and a wave of their captain 's hand drive they anywhither . all he want be possession of my child , and of some valuable property which he claim in right of his father . 
 have secure both object , he order his man to depart , allow they only to carry what wine and provision they find . but the three domestic , and the ancient sentinel and his boy , be bind hand and foot , and conceal in a cave on the beach , to prevent any stir in the neighbouring hamlet . Poor Lily be leave where she fall , to recover or not , as might be . my own darling be not insult or touch ; the man be afraid , and Lepardo too proud to outrage one of his kin . moreover , his word be pledge ; and they say that he always keep it . soon after dark the robber set sail , and slip away down the coast , before that strong north wind which have so baffle I . but for I a letter be leave , full of triumph and contumely . it be address to " Valentine Vaughan , the Englishman ; " " Signor Valentine " be the title confer on I by the fusileer , and adopt by the neighbourhood . to my surprise that letter be write in English , and English as good as a foreigner ever indite : I can repeat it word for word : - 
 " SIR , - I be reluctant to obtrude good counsel , but with the obtuseness of your nation you be prone to the undervaluing of other . it be my privilege to amend this error , while meekly I revindicate my own neglect right . from I you have steal my bride and my good inheritance , and in a manner which the person unverse in human nature would be incline to characterise as dastardly and dissolute . furthermore , you have render the heiress of the noble house in Corsica a common Englishman 's adulteress . if I have hear this on the day of your mocking marriage , not the poor victim but you , you , would have be my direction . now I will punish you more gradually , and long , as you deserve . your unhappy adulteress know the perfidy of your treachery , and your two poor bastard shall take refuge with I . the inquiry with respect to my drown they to - night be dependent upon the star . but if I shall spare they , as I may , because they can not come between I and my property , I will teach they , when they be old enough , to despise and loathe your name . they shall know that in the stead of a father 's love they have only have a vagabond 's lust , and they shall know how you seduce and then slew their mother ; for death , in my humble opinion , appear in her face to - night . although she have betray I , I be regretful for she : but to you who have disgrace my name and plunder I , as a man of liberal and exalted view I grant a contemptuous forbearance ; so long , that be to say , as you remain unhappy , which the wicked ought to be . of one thing , however , I bid you to take admonishment . if I hear that you ever forget this episode of debauchery , and return to your english wife and property , no house , no castle that ever be edify , shall protect you from my dagger . remember the one thing , as your proverb tell , I be slow and sure . 
 lepardo DELLA CROCE . " 
 CHAPTER XVII . 
 instead of enrage or madden I , as the writer perhaps expect , this execrable letter do I a great deal of good . I determine to lower that insufferable arrogance ; and bring all my thought to bear upon one definite object , the recovery of my darling and the punishment of that murderer . I do not believe that he have destroy they , or be likely to do so ; for have not their mother 's spirit refer to they as live ? 
 without delay , my yacht be prepare for a lengthened cruise ; the tower commit to Marcantonia and the gray sentinel ; and with Petro for my skipper , I sail on the following day . alas , the three month now elapse during my delirium , have they not like the sea itself close across the track ? all the neighbour know be this , the felucca have pass Point Girolata , and have be see in the early morning , stand away due south . all the villager , and even the man from the mountain , throng the shore as I embark , and there invoke Madonna 's blessing on poor Signor Valentine , so basely rob of wife and child . 
 when we have round Girolata , we bear away due south , and in less than fifteen hour make the sardinian shore in the gulf of Asinara . here we coast along the curve , inquire at every likely place whether any such vessel have be sight as that which we be seek . but we could learn nothing of she until we be off the Gypsum Cape ; where some fisherman tell we , that at or about the time we speak of , a swift felucca , build and man exactly as we have describe , glide by they and bear up for the town of Alghero . we too bear up for Alghero , and soon discover that the roving vessel have undoubtedly be there : even Lepardo , the captain , be describe by the keen Sardinians . but she have only lain to for a few hour , and clear again for Cagliari . for Cagliari we make sail as hard as the stick could carry , and arrive there on the fourth day from Cape Girolata . 
 the pirate , if such they be , have offer their vessel for sale at Cagliari ; but , fail of a satisfactory price have sail away again , and after much trouble I find out that their destination be Valetta . to Valetta also we follow , feel like a new boy at school who be mystify by the expert - innocent of much Greek themselves - with a game which mean in English , ' send the fool on far . " 
 when at length we reach the maltese capital - where I be not sorry to hear once more my native tongue - we find the felucca snugly moor near the " Merchant 's yard , " and be refit as a pleasure - boat for a wealthy Englishman . this gentleman know a good deal about ship , but not quite enough . please with the graceful line and clean run of the felucca , he have give nearly twice her value for she ; as he soon perceive when the ship - carpenter set to work . he be in the vein to afford all possible information , be thoroughly furious with the condemnable pirate - as he call they , without the weakness of the composite verb - who have rob he so shamefully of his money . he tell I that my child have be ashore , and Harry be much admire and kiss in the Floriana . one thing the sailor do which would have surprise a man unacquainted with the Corsicans , or perhaps I should say the islander of the Mediterranean . they deck my little babe with flower and riband , and bear she in procession to the church of St. John of Jerusalem ; and there they have she baptize , for Lepardo have find out that she have never undergo the ceremony . I be anxious to see the record , but be not allow to do so ; therefore I do not know what the little darling 's name be , if she be still alive : but they tell I that the surname enter be not Vaughan , but Della Croce . it be say that the sailor have become very fond of she , the little creature be very sweet - temper and happy , and a pleasing novelty to they . very likely they name she after their own felucca . 
 the crew be now disperse , some to their home , and some on board ship which have sail , I be throw completely off the scent . all I could learn , at a house which they have frequent , be that Lepardo , the commander , have long ago leave the island . whither , or in what ship , he have sail , they could not or would not tell I : he have always plenty of money , they say , and he spend it like a prince . but Petro , who be a much well ferret than I , discover , or seem to have do so , that the kidnapper and murderer have take passage for Naples . my heart fall when I hear it ; almost as easily might I have track he in London . at Naples I have spend a month , and know the lie ingenuity , the laziness in all but lie , of its swarm thousand . however , the little yacht be again put under way , and , after a tedious passage , we see the queen of city . here , as I expect , the pursuit be baffle . 
 I will not weary you with my wandering , off more often than on the track , up and down the Mediterranean , and sometimes far inland . if I mark they on a map , however large the scale , you would have what child call a crinkly crankly puzzle , like Lancashire in Bradshaw . once , indeed , I rest at the ancient tower , near my Lily 's grave , which I always visit twice in every year . I have some vague idea , now in my old age , that though we vaughan det any display of feeling - except indeed at time when the heart be too big for the skin - we be in substance , without know it , a most romantic race . whether we be that , or not , be matter of small moment ; one thing be quite certain , we be strut well and stable . we be not quick of reception , but we be most retentive . never be there man of we who ever love a woman and cast she off through weariness ; never be there woman of our house who play the jilt , when once she have pass the pledge of love . and after all I have see of the world , and through my dark misfortune few man have see more , it be my set conclusion that strong tenacity be the foremost of all the virtue . my enemy have it , I freely own , and through all his wickedness it save he from be contemptible . 
 for a time , as I say before , I pause from my continual search , and abode in the old gray tower . that search now appear so hopeless , that I be half inclined to believe no well policy could be find than this . some day or other the robber would surely return and lay claim to the land of the Della Croce . at present he durst not do it , while under the ban of piracy and the suspicion of his uncle 's murder . moreover , I think it my duty to see to the welfare of my child 's property . under the deed - poll of the old Signor , his friend at Prato and myself be trustee and guardian . but I could not live there long : it be too painful for I to sit alone in the desolate room where my child ought to be toddle , or to wander through the shrubbery and among the untended flower , every one of they whisper " Lily . " formerly I have admire and love that peculiar stillness , that rich deep eloquent solitude , which mantle in bucolic gray the lawn and glade of Corsica . but when I so admire and love , I be a happy man , a man who have affection near he , and could warm himself when he please . now though I have no friend or friendship , neither care for any , solitude strike I to the bone , because it seem my destiny . 
 after strive for half a year to do my duty as a hermit Signor , I find myself , one dreary morning , finger my pistol gloomily , and fit a small bullet into my ear . my thumb catch in the guard of the Signor 's locket , and jerk it up my waistcoat . it be the same which the poor old man have press to his die lip . there be Lily 's hair and Harry 's , and a tiny wisp of down since add , belong to baby - name unknown . look at they and see how Lily 's bind they together and to I , I feel ashamed of my cowardly gloom , and resolve to quit myself like a man in my duty towards the three . I ride at once to Prato , and persuade Count Gaffori to come and live at the tower . like his old friend the Signor , he have only himself and his lovely daughter to think of ; but unlike Signor Dezio he have lose nearly all his paternal property , through political trouble . therefore it be for he no little comfort and advantage to be place at the head of a household again , and restore to some worldly importance . nevertheless , his sense of honour be so nice and exact , that I think I should never succeed in bring he to my view ; and indeed I must have fail but for his daughter 's assistance . a very sweet elegant girl she be , and she have be a great friend of my Lily 's . if I could ever have love again , I should have love that maiden : but the thing be impossible . 
 the old Count promise to come and settle at Veduta tower - which name , in light day , I have corrupt into " Vendetta " - and live there to assume the management of the estate , in trust for my lost infant , as soon as his arrangement could be make . I see nothing that need have delay he a day ; however , he declare that he must have a month to get ready , and he be plainly a man whom nature mean not to be push . so I employ the interval in have my dear old " Lilyflower " overhaul at Marseilles , copper , and thoroughly paint . I could not bear to alter our little love - boat , as my darling call it , even in outward appearance ; but like our love she have labour through many a temp ; unlike it , she need repair . however , I save from the painter 's brush our favourite quarter - deck bench , whereon through the moonlight watch my Lily seem still to recline . 
 and so my life for some year wander on , a worthless , unsettled , forlorn existence , only refresh at interval by return to the scene of past happiness . if I have really wrong Lepardo Della Croce , he could hardly have wish for a well revenge . but in truth I have never wrong he . even if I have never come near his betrothed , it be quite certain she would not have accept he . and he , by his own desertion , have leave she free to choose . 
 late in the autumn of 1812 , when I have abandon all hope of ever recover my little one , except by one of those eddy of Providence , which we man call accident , and in which I place my confidence to this hour , at that season , I say , I land at Gibraltar , be wind - bind in the strait . we be make for Lisbon , where I be to ship some english watch , gun , and fine cutlery for Ajaccio . what a loss of rank for the " Lilyflower , " to turn she into a trading smack ! well , I could not see it so ; and I be sure her late mistress , who with all her sweet romance be an excellent hand at a bargain , would have think it far more below my dignity for I to sponge on our child . there be plenty of money in hand at Veduta tower ; but have retire from stewardship , I do not feel myself justify in draw upon my child . therefore , and for the sake of the large acquaintance and great opportunity gain , I have renew my connection with the firm of Green , Vowler , and Green . somehow , I could not bear to revisit the shore of England ; otherwise I be sure that with the knowledge I now possess of the Mediterranean port , and a house of such standing and enterprise to back I , I should quickly have make my fortune . my vessel , moreover , be much too small for the fruit - trade , even if I could have lower she to an uncleanly freight ; but she be just the craft for valuable good in small compass . I know the Corsican fondness for arm and first - rate cutlery ; and the tool the poor Signor Dezio mean to astonish I with , certainly do astonish I by their wonderful badness . true , the material be good , but all the water of the Restonica will not convert a hammer into a handsaw . although hardware be not at all in his line of business , Peter Green most kindly undertake to send I a cargo of first - rate Sheffield and Birmingham good , by a return fruit - schooner . these , consign to his Lisbon agent , I could fetch away , as I please , or want they . have arrange with a shrewd merchant of Ajaccio to take my good wholesale , and save the dignity of all the Vogheni from haggle , I have already make six trip , and in spite of the most tyrannical douane perhaps in all the world , I as a Corsican , import good in a Corsican bottom , have clear very nearly three hundred per cent . on my outlay . we be now on our seventh voyage , to reship the last of the second english consignment , when a violent gale from the west meet we right in the tooth , and we be force to bear up for the anchorage . a first - rate sea - boat the " Lilyflower " be , although she have be build for racing , and for two or three year have beat all competitor , whenever there be wind enough for a cat to stand on the sheet . but one hot June day she get beat in a float match , when the light bung go fast , and her prig of a " noble owner " sell she in disgust , and build a thing that draw as much water as a nautilus . in she he be happily upset , and could hardly find a sheet of paper to hold on by . know some little about yacht , from my pool and reach experience , I buy the famous racing cutter at about a quarter her value ; and even in these , her olden day , she could exhibit her taffrail to the smart fruit - clipper - the name be then just invent - that ever race for the Monument . her register be fifty ton , but she carry eighty . 
 land at Gibraltar , I keep clear of my countryman , not that I dislike they , but because - well I can not tell why ; and stroll away to the spanish and moorish quarter . 
 it be a windy evening , and in front of a low refreshment house some sailor and spanish girl be dance . a squabble arise among they ; something I think it be about a young girl 's dress . knife be draw , and two man be stab in less than the time I be speak . I just save the life of one , just save it by half an inch . a fine - look Spaniard lie under a Moor , who have trip he up in their quick way . the point of the knife have flash through the Spaniard 's shirt and his flesh be cut , before the swing of my stick - upwards luckily - have jerk the Moor off his body . if I have strike downward , or a millionth part of a second later , the blade would have stand in the heart . but I know those fellow by this time . the Moor lie senseless from the quick upper - cut on his temple , and the knife be quiver where the impulse have fail it . 
 now if Petro and I hold deliberate choice - " proairesis " Oxford call it - not to be turn into knife - sheath , our only chance of develop into action that undeniable process of " nous , " be to be find in the policy , vulgarly call " cut and run . " at a shrill signal , from ship and from shore , the Moors come swarm silently and swiftly . their yellow slipper and coffee - colour leg seem set upon spring by excitement . some of the Spaniards stand bravely by we , and with their aid we hurry the wound man into our boat , and push off just in time . unlike the corsican peasant , our pursuer carry no fire - arm , and before they could get any , we be at safe distance . 
 have send for an english surgeon , we keep the poor sailor on board the yacht , until he be quite out of danger . we Britons be not , as a general rule , an over - grateful race ; we hate to be under an obligation , and too often illustrate the great philosopher 's saying , that the doer feel more good will than the receiver of a kindness . moreover , the Spaniards , in the neighbourhood of the Rock , could hardly be expect to love we , even if we be accustom , which it be needless to say we be not , to treat they with decent courtesy . therefore I be surprised at the deep and warm gratitude of this wound man . a thing that enhance his debt to I - for life , in my opinion , be very little to owe - be that he love a young girl , the one over whom they have quarrel , and he be about to marry she . 
 discover who I be , for he know nothing of I at first , he see that he could be of no little service to I . the only obstacle be a solemn oath ; but from this , he believe , he could soon obtain release . with an Englishman 's honest and honourable repugnance to any breach of faith , I be long reluctant to encourage this absolution . but the thought of my helpless child , rob of their inheritance , and , still bad , of a father 's love , and dependant on the caprice of a superstitious villain , this , and the recollection of my desolate wrong , overpower all scruple . and be it not a wise course , and more truly Christian , to port the helm than to cross the bow of another man 's religion , at any rate so long as it be Christian also , though frog in a pensioner 's coat ? 
 be duly absolve - for which he would not allow I to pay - the spanish sailor tell I all he know . he have be Lepardo 's mate , on many a smuggling run , and in many an act of piracy off the coast of Barbary . but he have never like his captain , no one ever do ; though all the crew admire he as the clever man in the world . after the felucca be sell and her crew disperse , the mate have follow for a while the fortune of Lepardo . he tell I thing about he which I know not how to believe . however , I will not repeat they , because they do not seem to bear upon my story . the name of my little girl he could not remember , for he be not at the christening , and she be always call the baby . be a good - natured man he take kindly to the child , and tell I anecdote of they which bring the tear to my eye . 
 after two or three month spend at Naples , they all leave suddenly for Palermo , on account , as the mate believe , of my unexpected arrival ; and here he lose sight of his commander , for tired by this time of an idle life , and see no chance of any more roving adventure , he accept a berth in a brig bind for the Piraus , and now after many shift and change be first mate of a fruit vessel sailing from Zante to London . the most important part to I of all his communication be that , on their previous voyage , they have carry to England Lepardo Della Croce and my two dear child . that murderer and kidnapper have take the lead in some conspiracy against the government of the two Sicilies , and through the treachery of an accomplice have be oblige to fly for his life . disguise himself he contrive to reach Gibraltar , and take refuge on english ground . he be now very poor and in great distress , but still clung to the child , of whom he appear to be fond , and who believe he to be their father . the " Duo brachione " touch there , as usual , for supply , Lepardo meet his old mate ashore ; and beg for a passage to England . they take he to London , and there of course lose sight of he . he be greatly alter , the mate say , from the lepardo of old . morose and reserve he have always be ; but now misfortune have cover he with a skin - deep philosophy . but his eye contract and sparkle as of yore , whenever my name be mention ; and the mate know what his intention be , in case he should find I a happy man . the simple mate be still more surprised at the alteration in my child ; as pretty a pair , he say , as ever he set eye on . but they be keep most jealously from the notice of the crew , and even from their ancient friend 's attention ; they be never allow to be on the deck , except when the berth be be clean . they seem to fear their reputed father , a great deal more than they love he . 
 upon hear this last particular I seize the mate by the hand , and feel something rise in my throat : I be so delighted to learn that the pirate have not succeed in carry nature by boarding . the next day I leave Petro to see to the hardware business - to which we be bind by charter - while I set sail in the " Duo Brachiones " for the arm of my darling little one . 
 CHAPTER XVIII . 
 they put I in the very hammock where that murderer of all my happiness have sleep , and no wonder that I could find no rest there . soon as I know the reason , I be allow to change , and creep into the little berth where my innocent pet have lie in each other 's arm . here I sleep much well than a king , for I even fancy that it smell of Lily . if little Lily , as she shall be call , whatever the rogue have christen she , if my little beauty - for that I be sure she must be - ever come to light , when I be in my grave , remember one thing , Clara , you will find her breath and general fragrance just as her mother 's be . such thing be hereditary , especially among woman . 
 after a long and stormy passage , and a fortnight spend in repair at Bordeaux , we pass the familiar Essex marsh by night , and be off the Custom House by the last day of the year . when that tedious work be over - talk as we please of the douane , our own be as bad as most of they - feel quite out of my latitude , and not a bit like an Englishman , I betook myself to a tavern near London Bridge . there everything seem new , and I could not walk the street without yaw into the wrong tide . but one old London custom hold its ground with time . paper a week and a fortnight old still stray about in the coffee - room . be tell that the journal of that day be " in hand , " as they always be , I take up a weekly paper of some ten day back to yawn over it till supper time . it be too late for I to think of disturb Peter Green by a sudden arrival , and so I have order a bed at this hotel . 
 the weekly gazette in my hand be one of those which use the shear with diligence and method . under the head " Provincial News , " I find the following paragraph : - 
 " SEASONABLE BENEVOLENCE . - we understand that in these time of severe and unmerited pressure upon the agricultural interest - the true back - bone of old England - the head of one of our most ancient and respected county family have announce his intention of remit to all his tenantry no less than twenty per cent . upon their rental . he have also bespeak a lavish and most princely repast - shall we say dinner - to be provide on Christmas eve for every man , woman , and child upon his large domain . when we announce that mine host of the Elephant be to be major domo , and our respected townsman George Jenkins , who purchase as our reader be aware the gold medal ox at Smithfield , be to cater for the occasion , need we say anything more ? at the risk of gratuitous insult to the intelligence of the county , we must subjoin that the honour gentleman to whom we allude be Henry Valentine Vaughan , Esquire , of Vaughan Park . be not such a man , the representative of time - honour sentiment , and who to a distinguished degree add the experience of continental travel , be not such a man , we ask , a thousand time fitter to express in the Senate the opinion and wish of this great county , than the scion , we have almost say spawn , of the Manchester mushroom , whom a Castle that shall be nameless be attempt to foist on the county ? we pause for a reply . - Gloucester Argus . " 
 my dear brother 's distinguished degree be that of B.A. after a narrow escape from pluck . Clara , do not   look offend . your father have very good ability , but spend most of his Oxford time in pigeon match at the Weirs , and expedition to Bagley wood , which later in life he would have look upon as felonious . 
 this paltry puff would never have be reprint by a London journal of eminence and influence , but for the suggestion at the end , which happen just to hit the sentiment of the more exalted editor . now this weekly paper be sure to circulate among refugee from the continent , by reason of its well - know antipathy towards they ; and there happen to be in this very number a violent tirade against our Government for display what we delight to call the mighty Agis of England . I see the danger at once , and my heart turn sick within I . my gay and harmless brother in the midst of his Christmas rejoicing , and a stealthy murderer creep perhaps at that very moment towards he . 
 but even if it be so , be there not some chance of Lepardo discover his mistake , when in the neighbourhood where the Vaughans be so well know ? yes , some chance there be , but very little . bind upon such an errand he would not dare to show himself , or to make any inquiry , even if they seem needful . and the mention by that cursed gossip of what he call " continental travel " - your father 's wedding tour - would banish all doubt of identity , have any be entertain . even suppose that cold - blooded fiend should meet my poor brother , face to face , in the open daylight , it be not likely that he would be undeceive . Lepardo and I have meet only once , and then in hot encounter . my brother be like I in figure , in face , and in voice ; and though I be somewhat tall and much dark of complexion , the former difference would not attract attention , unless we stand side by side ; the latter would of course be attribute to the effect of climate . from the gamekeeper 's evidence , I be now inclined to believe that Lepardo , while lurk in the low coppice , among the holly bush , must have cast his evil eye on your poor father 's face , and convince himself that he behold his enemy . 
 flurry and frighten , I look at the date of the paper . it be twelve day old . possibly I might yet be in time , for most likely the murderer would set out on foot , accord to corsican practice , with the travel - stone bind on his knee . even if he have travel in modern fashion , he would probably lurk and lie in ambush about the house , endure hunger and cold and privation , until his moment come . could I leave for Gloucester that night ? no , the last train would have start , before I could get to Paddington . so I resolve to go by the morning express , which would take I to Gloucester by middle day . 
 after a sleepless night , I be up betime in the morning , and go through the form of breakfast while the cab be send for . presently a waiter come in with the morning paper , the paper of New year's - day , 1843 . what I see and what my feeling be , you , my poor child , can too well imagine . that day I could not bear to go . it be cowardly of I , and perhaps unmanly ; but I could not face your mother 's grief and the desolate household . therefore I persuade myself that I have discharge my duty , by visit all the London police station , and leave the good description I could give of Lepardo . the following day I leave London , and arrive , as perhaps you remember , long after dark , and during a heavy fall of snow . there at the very threshold I begin amiss with you , for I outrage your childish pride by mistake you for the housekeeper 's daughter . with a well - bear child 's high self - esteem , and make no allowance for the dim light , you believe it to be a sham intend to mortify you ; and it poison your heart towards I . but you be wholly mistaken . my mind be full of your mother and of the terrible blow to she ; to you , whom I have never see , and scarcely even hear of , I never give a thought ; except the mistaken one that you be not old enough to be sensible of your loss . little do I imagine what a fount of resolute will , and deep feeling , find a vent in the kick and scream of the large - eyed minnikin , that would not be order away . 
 you be entitle , Clara , to know all that I have do towards the discovery of your father 's assassin , and all that I can tell to aid your own pursuit . the hair find in your mother 's grasp be beyond a doubt Lepardo 's ; that lay upon your father 's bosom be , of course , my Lily 's . it be to show that her suppose seduction have be expiate . the one thing that most surprise I be that the murderer leave no token , no symbol of himself . in a Vendetta murder they almost always do , as a mark of triumph and a gage to the victim 's family . hence I believe that Signor Dezio be not kill in Vendetta , but by his nephew for gain . how Lepardo get into the house I have no idea , or rather I have none , until you tell I of the secret passage , and Mrs. Daldy 's entrance . till then I always think that he have clamber up , as he do at Veduta tower . but unless there be a traitor in the household , he must have be there more than once , to have know so well your father 's sleep room . 
 it would have be waste of time for I to concern myself about the county police . that body of well - conduct navvy - Lepardo would have outwit they , when he be five year old . neither do I meddle with the coroner and his jury , but leave they to their own device and indigenous intellect . these display themselves in much puzzle - head cross - questioning , sagacious look , and nod , and wink of acute reservation . it be , as most often it be , a bulldog after a hare . Lepardo might safely have be in the midst of they , ask for a chair , and make suggestion . as " amicus curia . " 
 but with the London police it be somewhat different . they show some little acuman , but their fundamental error be this - they pride themselves on their intelligence . no man of any real depth ever do such a thing as this . he know very well that whatever he be , there be half a million more so ; that the age of exceptional intellect expire , at least in this country , with Mr. Edmund Burke , and be not likely to rise from the dead . now we be all pretty much good useful clod on a level : education , like all good husbandry , tend to pulverisation ; and if the collective produce be great , let we be at once thankful and humble . 
 the London police , be proud of their intelligence , declare that there could be no doubt about their catch the criminal . they laugh at my belief that he might walk through the midst of they , while they would touch their hat to he , and beg he to look after his handkerchief . at one time , I think , they be really on his track , and I go to London , and stay there , and do my good to help they . but they be all too late ; Lepardo , if he it be , have leave for Paris the week before . to Paris I follow , but find no trace of he there . then I go on to Corsica , think it likely that he would return to his old piratical way . moreover , I want to see how my child 's estate be manage , and to revisit St. Katharine 's . 
 all be calm and peaceful . Lily 's grave and her father 's be blend in one rich herbage . there all the bloom of my life be droop , like the yellow mountain - rose , whence if a single flower be pluck , all the other blossom fall . 
 Count Gaffori receive I kindly . his daughter be married and have two child , who play where Lily 's boy and girl should by right be play . I could not bear it , and come away , have nothing now to care for . wherever I go the world seem much of a muchness to I ; and to my own misfortune the blood of my brother be add . I find the " Lilyflower " still under worthy Petro , and return in she to England , and she still be mine . Petro would not come ; he be too true a Corsican to leave the beloved island now his hair be grey . so I set he up at Calvi with a vessel of his own , and now and then I receive a letter from good Marcantonia . they have promise to watch for the reappearance of our fearful enemy ; and Petro have swear to shoot he , if ever he get a chance . 
 after my return to England , I set to work with all my energy to improve this property . in this , if in nothing else , I have thoroughly succeed . much opposition I have to encounter ; for the tenant regard I as a mere interloper , and their heart be with you and your mother . when I call they together to - morrow , as I intend to do , abandon all my right , title , and interest , and declare you their Signora , it be my firm belief that they will hardly think I worth curse before they worship you . this old retainership be a thing to be proud and yet ashamed of . it be a folly that make one glory in be a fool . why , after you leave for Devonshire   much , as you know , against my will , I could not ride out without be insult , and even the boy call I " Jonathan Wild . " but this be due , in some measure , to your father 's gay geniality , and hearty good - will to all man , contrast with my satiric and moody reserve . neither be your youth , and sex , and helplessness , lose upon that chivalrous being - if he only know his chivalry - the sturdy English yeoman . 
 why do I let you go ? well , I believe it be one of the many mistake of my life ; but I have a number of reason , though personal dislike of you be not , as you think , one of they . no , my child , I have never dislike you ; not even on the night when you come and denounce I , with the dagger in your hand . I must indeed have be bad than I be , if I could have nourish ill - will against a young thing , whom I have make an orphan . by some instinct , you know from the first that the deed be mine , although I be not the doer . I would have love you , if you would have let I , my heart yearn so over child . but of my reason for let you go , the chief perhaps - set aside that I could not stop you - be this consideration . for year I have long , and crave in my heart of heart , to tell your mother all , and obtain her gentle forgiveness . but any allusion - no matter how veil and mantle - to the story of her loss throw she , as you know well , into a most peculiar state , wherein all the power of mind and body seem to be quite suspend . with a man 's usual roughness of prescription for the more delicate sex , I believe firmly that total change of living , and air , and place , and habit , would relax this wonderful closure , secure my forgiveness , and re - establish her health . the shock I receive at her death be almost as terrible as when my brother die . when I stand beside you at her grave , I be come with the full intention of tell you all my story , and beg you to return with I , and live once more in your father 's house . but your behaviour to I be so cold and contemptuous , that I forget my crush debt to you ; and humiliation become , for the moment , impossible . I mean , however , to have write to you that evening , before you should leave the village ; but   as you now be aware   that very evening , I be smite helpless . partially recover , after month of illness , I be deeply distressed to find that you have leave your good friend in Devonshire , and be go , my informant could not say whither . neither have I learn your whereabouts up to the time of my last illness , when I be make inquiry , of which your enemy reap the benefit . for the rest , you know that I never mean to rob you of your inheritance , though bigote nonsense enable I . to - morrow , please God , I will put it out of my power to do so . Mrs. Daldy 's motive you have long since perceive . fail my child , and the attainted Lepardo , her son be the heir to all the land of the Della Croce . she have hold I much in her power , by her knowledge of part of my history . Henry 's baptismal entry , as well as that of my marriage , be in the packet she stole . one word more , my darling - and from an old man , who have wander and suffer much , you will not think it impertinent . leave your revenge to God . in his way - which we call wonderful , because the step be unseen - he will accomplish it for you , as righteousness demand . any interference of ours be a worm - cast in his avenue . though I be stricken and die , he , if so please he , will bring I my child before I die , that I may bless he , and tell my Lily . " 
 I fall upon the old man 's neck - old he be , though not in year - and as I weep I kiss he . how could I have wrong he so , and how could I keep myself from love one so long unhappy ? if sorrow be the sponge of sin , his fault be wipe away . 
 CLARA VAUGHAN 
 BOOK V. 
 CHAPTER I. 
 at this time and place , I , Clara Vaughan , leap from the pillion of my Uncle 's pensive mule , and be upon the curb - stone of my own strange life again . how I wander with he through the olive grove of Corsica , how I weep for his love Lily , that ancient signor , and the steal babe ; and how , beyond the vomito of word , I loathe that fiend who have injure whom or what most I know not , unless it be his own soul , if he have any , and for God 's sake I hope he have - all this , though I be too weak of language , will , perhaps , be understand . 
 to myself I would hardly confess the interest I could not discard in the pure and constant love of that impassioned pair ; for what have I any long to do with Pyramus and Thisbe ? no more of love for I . you will not see I droop , and fret , and turn to a mossy green . no nonsense of that sort for I : I have a loop at either side entitle self - respect , which will keep my skirt from draggle . neither will I rush into the opposite extreme , pronounce all love a bubble because my own have burst , take to low - neck dress , and admire cat more than baby . no ; I be only eighteen , not yet eighteen and a half ; I have love with all my heart , and a free true heart it be , albeit a hot and haughty one ; if it be despise , outraged , and make nothing of , though I can never transfer , I will not turn it sour . the world be every whit as fair , child be quite as pretty , flower have as rich a scent , and goodness as pure a charm , as if that silly maiden Clara have not leap before she look . and yet how I wish that I could only think so . 
 before I go on with my tale , I must recur to one or two little matter , that everything may be as clear as it lie in my power to make it . for although I be but a " female , " as Inspector Cutting observe , I be do my good to make everything as clear as if tell by a male . 
 in the first place then , when my Uncle have recover from the exertion of tell his tale , I acquaint he with my discovery of the letter upon the bed - hanging . they confirm his account of the fearful Vendetta usage , and explain the point which have be to he most mysterious . 
 secondly , as to the anonymous letter which have lead I first to London ; like the detective policeman , he now attach but little importance to it . he have do his good , at the time , to trace the writer and follow the clue , if there be any . but he have meet with no success . his reason for pass it on to I , be that he hop to create some diversion of my thought , some break in the cloud of my sorrow . 
 next , to show the full meaning of Mrs. Daldy 's manoeuvre . through her connexion - which she have carefully cultivate , when it begin to seem worth her while - with her husband 's kindre near Genoa , she have learn some portion of my poor Uncle 's history ; for , as he himself observe , the islander be much addict to gossip , as indeed all islander be , and continental too for that matter , especially in hot climate . now there be no lack of intercourse between the Balagna and Genoa . of course our chasten hypocrite make the most of her knowledge in a hundred way , and by her sham sympathy and pretend aid - for up to the time of his illness the desolate father still seek and seek - she even secure some little influence over her brother - in - law . how often be it so : though we know people to be false , we do not believe , when our heart be concern , that they be so false to we . moreover , when she find he shatter in body and mind by paralysis , she commence an active bombardment , pull out the tompion from every gun of mock religion . but , as in her treatment of I , she display , in spite of all her experience and trial , a sad ignorance of unregenerate human nature . my Uncle be not the man , palsied or no , to be terrify by a Calvinist : and he know too much of her early day , and certain doing at Baden , to identify she at present with the angel that stand in the sun . and this prison - eyed mole make another mistake . not content with one good gallery , she must need work two run , side by side , in a very mealy soil . the result be of course that they run into one , and she have to dig her way out . if she have work , heart and soul , for my Uncle 's money only , which he rightly regard as his own , and at his own disposal , I believe she might have get most of it . at any rate , under the will which I catch she carry off , she be to take half of the large sum which he have lay by ; I mean if his child do not come to light , and prove their legitimacy . but twenty - five thousand pound would be nothing to her dear son , who have inherit his father 's extravagance , or to herself , who love high play . therefore , believe I out of the field , she begin to plot for the Vaughan estate as well , and furthermore for the magnificent property in Corsica . of the Vaughan estate she have no chance - albeit she have the impudence to propose a compromise with I - of Veduta tower she have some prospect , if the right heir , the poor child , should never appear , or establish their claim , and if she could procure the outlawry of Lepardo . 
 believe my Uncle to be die by inch , she make a bold stroke for possession of the most important document ; and , but for Giudice and I , no doubt she would have succeed . but she have dash far out of her depth , and have little chance now of reach the coveted land . I hope she feel that everything be order for her good . 
 another point which seem to require some explanation , be the discovery by the assassin of the secret entrance , an access quite unknown to the family , the servant , or any other person , except , at a later time , Mrs. Daldy . the house , as I say before , be build upon the site and partly embody the fabric of a still more ancient structure . probably these narrow stair , now enclose in the basement of the eastern wall , have save many a ripe priest from reel , in the time of the Plantagenets . they lead , I think , from the ancient chapel , long since destroy , to the chaplain 's room , and perhaps have be reopen secretly during the great rebellion , when the Vaughans be in hot trouble . Beatrice Vaughan , the cavalier 's child , who be now suppose to begin her ghost walk at the eastern window , glide probably down this staircase , when , as the legend relate , she escape mysteriously from the house , in her father 's absence , rouse the tenant , and surprise the Roundhead garrison in their bed . the house be soon retake , and Beatrice , in her youthful beauty , give up to the brutal soldier . she snap a pistol at the puritan officer , and fly like a bird along this corridor . at the end , while try perhaps to draw the old oak slide - though nothing be say of this - she be catch by the gloating fanatic , and stab herself on the spot rather than yield to dishonour . the poor maiden 's tomb be in the church , not far from the chancel arch , with some line of quaint Latin upon it . her lover , Sir William Desborough , slit that puritan officer 's nose and cut off both his ear . I wonder that he let he off so lightly ; but perhaps it be all he be worth . Major Cecil Vaughan marry again , and the direct line be re - establish . 
 the chapel well , as it be call , dark and overhang with ivy , be a spring of limpid icy crystal , span by and form a deep alcove in the ancient chapel wall , which , partly for its sake , and partly as a buttress for the east end of the house , have be leave still stand . this old well have long time be disuse , hiding , as it do , in a wild and neglect corner out of sight from the terrace walk ; and the gardener , who find the pump less troublesome , have condemn the water as too cold for their plant . the mouth , with its tangled veil of ivy and periwinkle , be also mask by a pile of the chapel ruin , now dignified with the name of a rockwork . some step of jagged stone lead through the low black archway to the crouch water , which be so clear that it seem to doubt which be itself and which be stone . 
 this peaceful , cold , unruffled well , form the antechamber to the murderer 's passage . for on the right - hand side , not to be see in the darkness , and the sublustrous confusion , by any common eye , be a small niche and footing - place not a yard above the water . it need some nerve and vigour to spring from the low stepping - stone sideway to this scarcely visible ledge . none , of the few whose eye be good enough to espy it , would be tempt to hazard the leap , unless they know or suspect that the facing would yield to the foot , that it be in fact a small door purposely colour and joint like the slimy green of the masonry . in this well the murderer must have lurk ; and he might have do so from one year 's end to another . there with the craft of his devilish race - my Uncle may admire they , but not I - and with their wonderful power of sight , he must have find this entrance , and rejoice in his hellish heart . 
 as for Mrs. Daldy , she find it out at the other end , most likely . unless my memory fail I , I speak long ago of some board which sound hollow to the ring of my childish knuckle . these be in the skirting - if that be the proper name for it - under the centre of the great oriel window . the oak slide , when press from below , run in a groove with but little noise , and without much force be use : but it require some strength to move they on the side of the corridor . it be the sound of these slide board which have first draw Judy 's notice : but as they be in deep shadow , I neither perceive the opening , nor give he the opportunity . that woman would never have dream of the thing , if she have not surprise I one day when I be pry about there ; she must have return alone , and be , as we have see , a superior cabinet - maker , discover the secret which baffle I . as I do not want Judy to catch cold by watch there any long , I have this horrible passage wall up at either end , and build across in the middle . 
 have thus make good my arrear , I be at liberty to proceed . when my Uncle have pause from his many sorrow , which he do with a mellow dignity not yet understand by I ; and when I , in the fervour of youth , have offer much comfort kindly receive , but far well let alone , I ask he for one thing only : - the most minute and accurate description he could give of that Lepardo Della Croce . his answer be as follow : - 
 " my dear , I have see he once only , and that more than twenty year ago , and in an interview of some excitement " - I should think so indeed , when one try to kill the other - " but I will describe he to the good of my recollection . he be rather a tall man , at least of about my own height , but more lightly build than myself . his hand and foot be remarkably small and elegant . his face be of the true italian type , a keen oval with a straight nose , and plenty of width between the eye , which be large and very dark . his forehead be not massive , but well - form , and much whiter than the rest of his face . the expression of his countenance be that of shrewdness and versatility , with a quickness eager to save both you and himself from the trouble of complete your sentence . but all this be common enough . one thing I see , or fancy , which be not quite so common . as I deal he that blow with my fist , my eye for one flash meet his , and his leap towards one another , as if he have a strong cast in they . before that , and afterwards too , there be no appearance of any distortion : if there be any at that moment , it arise from the start of terror or fury jerk the muscle awry . his voice be flexible and persuasive , and soft as a serpent - charmer 's . I think he must be a most arrogant man ; profoundly convinced of his own ability , but seldom care to vindicate they . just the man to get on in the world , if he be only what be call respectable . just the man to break a woman 's heart , and crush the spirit of a meek and humble child . ah , I would forgive he his sin against I , though not his wrong towards you , if I could only learn that he have be kind to my child . " 
 this description dwelt on my mind for day and day of thinking . it do not altogether apply to the man whom I have observe so closely at the meeting of the conspirator . that man be of middle height , and though his face be oval , there be scarcely the average width between the eye . and he do not seem to I like an arrogant man , cold except when excite ; but rather of a hasty , impassioned nature , sure to do its utmost in trifle . could it be that I have watch and hat the wrong man ? it might be so ; and it be not unlikely that Mr. Cutting himself know not which be the guilty one . like most of the London policeman - my Uncle have teach I this - he be too proud of his sagacity to be in truth very sagacious . experience he have , and all that ; but he would not have do in Paris . the real depth , that go below , and yet allow for the depth of another , must be in the nature , can rarely exist in a small one , and in a large one be seldom work but for theoretical purpose . therefore shallow man overreach in daily life , and fancy they have blind those who know they thoroughly , and know themselves as well . 
 so far as my experience go , large - natured man abhor cunne so much , that they fear to work the depth of their own intelligence , because it seem akin to it . so they be cheat every day , as a strong man yield to the push of a child ; and the fool who cheat they chuckle in the idea that they have do it by fine sagacity , and without the victim 's knowledge . 
 CHAPTER II . 
 at my earn entreaty , the idea of assemble the tenant especially be allow to drop , and I be to be induct at the Midsummer dinner , which be very near at hand . a deed have be prepare by the London solicitor , recite the fact and assure all the estate to I , as my father 's proper heiress . my Uncle also desire to settle upon I all the personal property , except a sum of 10,000 l. , which he would reserve for his child , to enable they , if ever they should be find , to establish their claim in Corsica : then if the son obtain his right , his sister be to have the money with all expenditure make good by he . but I would not hear of it . it would have make I a rogue . by his skill and economy , my Uncle , during the nine year of his management , have save more than 50,000 l.   from the proceed of the estate . but he have add at least an equal amount to the value of the land , by carry out most judiciously the improvement begin by my father ; and the whole be now consider the well - manage estate in Gloucestershire . 
 therefore , when he abandon his legal right , in the most honourable manner , it would have be horribly shabby and unlike a Vaughan , to hold he accountable for the back rent . I beg he to leave the whole of it for the benefit of his poor child , request only , and unnecessarily , that the hypocrite might not have sixpence . another thing I entreat , that he would prolong his guardianship , and stewardship , if his health allow it , until I should be of age , that be to say , for two year and a half . see how earnestly I desire it , he undertake to do so , though he make the promise with a melancholy smile , add that he hop his child would be find ere then , if he be to see they at all . 
 when the rent - dinner be over , and the glass have be replace , my Uncle , who have not be there as usual , lead I into the great old hall . feeble as he be , he enter with a grace and courtesy not always to be discover in the mien of prince . the supper - as the farmer call it - have not begin till six o'clock ; and now the evening sunshine glance through the western window , and between the bunch of stone grape into the narrow doorway , steal in from the Vinery with sandal of leafy pattern . the hall be deck with rose , no other flower but rose ; yet who could want any other , when every know rise be there ? even the bright yellow blossom of the Corsican rock - rise , a plant so sensitive that to steal one flower be to kill all the rest . from time out of mind , some feudal custom of tenure by the rose have be hand down in our family . 
 all the guest rise as we pass , which make I rather nervous , albeit I know every one of they from my childhood up . then my Uncle , lean on I , speak a few word from the step , plain and simple word without flourish or pretence . what he say be know long since , and have be thoroughly discuss in every house of the village . he finish by set I in the black oak chair of state - which he have never use - and present I with a rose ; then he turn round and propose my health . when I take the rose , an exquisite crested moss , kiss it and place it in my bosom , accord to the usage , such a shout arise , such an English hurrah , that it must have echo to the other bank of the distant Severn . at first I be quite frightened , then I burst into tear as I think of he whose chair I sit in , whose memory still be echo in that mighty shout . it be not only love of right , or sympathy with a helpless girl , that move those honest bosom , but the remembrance of he who have be so pleasant to they , humble , kind and just , in one word , a gentleman . 
 but as they come up , one by one , and beg to take my hand , and wish I joy and long life with all their heart , I find that I be right in one thing ; I know they well than my Uncle do . instead of be rude or cold to he , as he expect , they almost overwhelm he with praise and admiration . but all this I must not dwell on , for my story hurry hence , and its path be not through rose . 
 Annie Franks , who still be with we , and do not mean to go until she have finish all the Froissart novel , and such a dear good girl she be , that we hop they would last for ever , Annie Franks bring I next day two letter of aspect strange to " good society . " one I know at a glance to be from Tossil 's Barton , though the flourish be amazing , and the lead - pencil line rub out . the other , a work of far less ambition and industry , be an utter stranger ; so of course I take it first . nevertheless , I will treat of it last , because it open the stormy era . 
 Dear Sally 's gossip be not to be serve up whole . even if it be interesting to other as to I , my space permit no dalliance with farm - yard , no idyls of Timothy Badcock , nay , nor even the stern iambic of Ebenezer Dawe . only to be just and clear , I may not slur it all . the direction be remarkable . the farmer be always afraid of not be duly explicit , for he believe that letter be deliver throughout England as in the parish of Trentisoe ; where all , except those for the parson and Tossil 's Barton farm , be set upside down in the window at Pewter Will 's , the most public - house in the place . the idea be ingenious , and , I believe , original - have be suggest by the Queen 's boy , whose head Mrs. Huxtable punch . it be that no one could read the name upside down , except the owner of the name and therefore of the letter . sound or not , I can not say , have have no experience ; but there be this to be say for it , that no one would try the puzzle who do not expect a letter , unless indeed he be of precocious genius , and from that Trentisoe be quite safe . 
 upon the present " papper - scrawl , " after a long description of I , patronymical , local , and personal , the follow injunction and menace be add , " not be stick top I turve I on no account in no public house . she be in her own house now again , thank God and dang they as turn she out I say , so mind you carr it there . a deal of money there be in it , and no fear of Joe because he know it , and there live a man in Gloucestershire know I well by the name of Thomas Henwood . good look sharp I say . I be up to every one of you . John Huxtable his name , no mark this time . God save the queen . " 
 so the farmer have actually learn to write , although as yet to a strictly limited extent . of course he have not write any of the above except his name ; but that be his , and do he credit , though it nearly describe a circle . 
 after the warm congratulation and return the five - pound note , which I have send for interest , with an indignant inquiry from father whether I take he for a Jew , and after several anecdote and some history of butter sell at Ilfracombe market , Sally proceed thus : 
 " now what do you think , Miss Clara dear ? no you never would guess as long as you live - father be go to London town , and I , and Jack , and Beany Dawe . none of we have sleep two grunt of a pig , ever since it be make up , only father , and he always sleep without turn . now mind if I tell you all about it , you must not tell again , Miss Clara , because there be ever so much money upon it , and we do hear they have put it on some London paper and no business of theirs . two great gentlefolk , the great of any about these part , have be and make up a bet for my father to wrestle along with a great big chap as they call the North Country champion . seem as some great northern lord be boast in London one dinner - time , Speaker 's dinner they call it because there be a deaf and dumb dinner next day , this here great lord be tell up as how Sam Richardson be the strong man in the world . so our Sir Arthur spake up for Devonshire , and lay he a quart - pot full of sovereign as he would find a well man in the West country . and so I do not   know the right of it , nor father nor mother either , but it be make up atwixt they that Farmer Huxtable , that be my father , Miss , should try this great North country chap at the time of the great Xabition - you never show I the way to spell it , Miss , so I go by the light of nature , as you use to say , Miss - and should take good of three fall for 200 l.   a side . that will be 400 l.   for we , when father get it , and all his expense pay , and they say the other folk will not   allow no kicking , so he must be a soft - shelled chap ; but father feel no call to hurt he , if so be he can help it . mother do not   want father to go , but he say he be bind for the honour of old Devonshire , or maybe they will take a man not good enough to make a standard . 
 and please , Miss , when we bring home the money , I be to go to Miss Bowden 's , in Boutport Street , and our Jack to be put to a day - school not more than six mile away , and then I hope he know himself , and look high than that minx of a Tabby Badcock . what do you think , Miss Clara , you would never believe it I know , but only a week ago last Tuesday I come sudden round the corner , and catch she a kissing of our Jack in the shed there by the shoot . and after all you teach she , Miss ! Jack he run away , as red as mangawazzle , but that brazen slut , there she stand with her leg out , as innocent as a picture . never a word I say , but with no more to do I put her head in the calf ' stommick as we make the cheese with , in a bucket handy . it would have do you good to see she Miss , she do cry so hard , and she smell of it for a week , and it cure our Jack , up to Sunday anyhow . mother come out at the noise , but her see that she deserve it , and the runnet be no account , except for the pig , because it be go by . I hope she know her manner now and her spear in life with her sheep 's eye , and not come try to catch any of my family . 
 well , Miss Clara please , father want mother to go ; but no , say she , " with all they " - she ought to have say " they " Miss , now have not   she ought ? - " with all they young pig , and the brown cow expect every day , and Suke no head at all , and all the chiller and little Clara " - she call her " Clara " now , Miss , - " why farmer what be think of ? " then father rub the nose of he , you know the way he do it , Miss , and he say , " I must have some one . London be such a wicked place . " Mother look up very sharp at that , and say quite peart , " take your daughter , farmer Huxtable , if you want to be keep respectable . " so I be to go Miss ; and go I would not   without Jack and leave he along of that sly cat Tabby , and she get sweet again now ; besides I want he to choose a knife I promise he , same as he see to Coom one time , if he would not   let Tabby kiss he with seven blade and a corkscrew , and I will give eighteen penny for it , that I will . and Beany Dawe must go to show we the way about , and see as they do not   cheat we , because his father be once to London town , and tell he a power about it . 
 if you please , Miss Clara , father be put in training as they call it in these part , all the same as a horse . he run up and down Breakneck hill , with the good bed on his back , nine time every day , and he do not   drink no cider , no nor beer , nor gin and water , and mother hardly know he , he be come so clear in the skin ; but he say his hand shake still from the time I teach he to write , and please , Miss , what do you think of the way he be go to sign this ? I can not   get he to put his thumb right , no nor his middle finger , and he stick his elbow out every bit as bad as Tabby , and he say he like the pot - hook over the fire well , but for all that I believe I shall make a scholard of he , particular when he give up wrestling , which he have swear to do if he throw this Cumberland chap , and stick to his Bible and Prayer - book . 
 please , Miss , not to be offend , but excuse we ask if you like to see the great wrestling . Father say no , it would not be fitty , and that be the bad of be a gentlefolk ; but mother say what harm , and she be sure the farmer do it twice as well with you there , and you shall have the good seat in the place next to the two judge , and such a pretty handkerchief they send down all spot the same as a Guernsey cow , how the people in church do stare at I , and you shall have two of the good , Miss , but I be afraid it be make too bold ; but you never see any wrestling , Miss , and I be sure you would enjoy it so . it take place in the copandhagen field , next Saturday week . do come , Miss Clara dear , it will do you so much good , and you see father , and I , and Jack , and Beany Dawe . " 
 I need recount no more of poor Sally 's soft persuasion . the other letter be of a different vein : - 
 " HONOURED Miss , - Balak and I after a deal of trouble and labour night and day and throw up our vacation have at last succeed in find you know who . personal interview will oblige , early inconvenience . no more at present not be safe on paper , from your most obedient servant and suitor 
 BALAAM and balak - you know who . - 
 Poscrip . - Balak say a sharp young lady quite sure to know what be right , but for fear of accident please a little of the ready will oblige , large family both of we have and it do take a deal of beer more than our proper vacation no one would guess unless they be to try and bad beer too a deal of it . for self and partner . - BALAAM . " 
 CHAPTER III . 
 when my Uncle see that letter , he declare that he would go to London with I . no power on earth should prevent he . not even his self - willed Clara . it be not revenge he want : even though it be for his innocent brother , whose wrong he could not pardon . no , if the small - minded wretch who have spend his life in destroy a fellow - creature 's , if that contemptible miscreant lie at his foot to - morrow , he would not plant foot upon he ; but forgive he heartily , if he have the grace to desire it . but for his child , - for they he must go to London . only let he see they once before he die . no torpid limb for he . who say he be old - and he only forty - seven ? 
 one thing seem rather strange to I . he long , yearned I should say , to look upon his little Lily even more than on the child he know , his son , his first - bear Harry . " why , Clara , " he use to say , ' she be nearly as old as you , and you be a full - grow girl . on the 21st of this month " - it be now July - ' she will be eighteen ; I can hardly believe it . I wonder what she be like . most likely she take after her lovely mother . no doubt of it , I should say . do not   you think so , Clara ? " 
 " of course , Uncle , " I would reply , know nothing at all about it , " of course she do . how I should like to see she . " 
 perhaps fifty time a day , he would ask for my opinion , and I would deliver it firmly , perhaps in the very same word and without a shade of misgiving ; and though of no value whatever , it seem to comfort he every time . but the prolonged excitement , and the stress of imagination exert on Lily junior , tell upon he rapidly in his worn and weak condition . long for his company , assistance , and advice , I wait from day to day , even at the risk of leave Balaam and Balak without good beer . all this time , my imagination be busy with weak surmise , faint suspicion , and tangle recollection . 
 at last , I could delay no long . Tuesday be the late day I could consent to wait for , and on the Monday my Uncle be more nervous and weak than ever . it be too plain that he must not attempt the journey , and that the long suspense be impair his feeble health . so for once I show some decision - which seem to have fail I of late - without tell he any more about it , I get everything ready , and appear at his bedroom door , only to say " good bye . " Annie Franks , who be go with I , for a short visit to her father , hang back in some amazement , doubt whether she have any right to be there , and drag off her leg by the coil of my strong will . my poor Uncle seem quite take aback ; but as it could not be help , he speedily make up his mind to it . " the carriage be at the door ; " which announcement to english mind preclude all further argument . 
 " good bye , Uncle dear , " I cry , as cheerily as I could , " I shall be back by the end of the week and bring your Lily with I . give I a good kiss for she , and now another for myself . " 
 he be sit up in the bed , with a Cashmere dressing - gown on , and pore over some relic of olden time . 
 " good bye , my darling , and do not   be long away . they have rob I enough already . " 
 after give Judy the strict order , I hurry off in fear and hope , doubtful whether I ought to go . Annie linger and give he a kiss , for she be very fond of he . he whisper something about I , which I do not stop to hear , for I want to leave he in good spirit . 
 after a rapid journey , I see dear Annie safe in the arm of her father and mother , and find Mrs. Shelfer at home , and in capital spirit , all the bird ,   c. well , and no distress in the house . Charley be do wonder , wonder , my good friend , stick to his work , yes , yes , and not inside the public house for the good part of the week . leastway so he say , and it would not do to contradict he . and she really do believe there be only three bill over - due ! 
 my little room be snug and quiet , and the dust not more than half an inch thick . Mrs. Shelfer use to say that dust furniture be the bad thing in the world to wear it out . accord to her theory , the dust exclude the air , especially from the joint , and prevent the fly - blow coming . however , I make she come up and furbish , while I go out to post a letter for Messrs. Balaam and Balak , request they to visit I in the morning . 
 when thing be set to right a little , and air , which Mrs. Shelfer hat , flow in from either balcony , I buy a fine crab and some Sally Lunns , and beg for the pleasure of my landlady 's company at tea . this she gladly give I , for the little woman love nothing well than suck the hairy leg of a crab . but she be so overcome by the rumour of my wealth , that she even fear to eject the piece in her ordinary manner , and the front rail of her chair be like the beam of a balance . infinitely rather would I be poor myself , than have people ceremonious to I because I be not poor ; and to tell the honest truth , I believe there be a vein of very low blood in I , which blush at the sense of rich and position . why should I have every luxury , that be if I choose to have it , while man and woman of a thousand time my mind , and soul , and heart , spend their precious life in earn the value of their coffin ? 
 this thought have weary many a mind of pure aerial flight , compare whereto my weak departure be but the hop of a flea ; so I lose the imago , but catch the larva , upon the nettle , practice . Mrs. Shelfer be soon at ease ; and we talk of the price of cat 's meat , and how dear sausage be , and laugh - myself with sorrow - over the bygone day , when dripping play the role of butter , and Judy would not take a bone because he think I want it . 
 then we talk over the news . Miss Idols have be there , bless her sweet face , yes , ever so many time , to look for letter , or to hear tiding of I . but she be not one bit like herself . she never tease the poor little woman now ; the poor little woman wish very much she would . oh , I should hardly know she . she do not know which bird it be that have the wooden leg , and have forget the difference between a meal - worm and a lob . and she do not care which way she rub the ear of the marmoset . Mrs. Shelfer believe , but for the world it must not be tell again , that Isola be deeply in love , unrequited love , perhaps one of the weteranarian gent . they do say they have some stuff as would lead a girl like a horse . but whatever it be , Mrs. Shelfer only know that she could not get at the right of it . girl have grow so cunning now - a - day , what with the great supernatural exhibition , and the hat they have take to wear flat on the top of their head , not at all what they use to be when she and Charley be young . then a young woman be not afraid of show what her neck be like ; now she tuck it in cotton wool like a canary 's egg . and what be they the well , sly minx ? she see enough of it in the Square garden , and they show their little sister ' leg for pattern of their own , oh fie ! " 
 " come , Mrs. Shelfer , no scandal , if you please . what news of your Uncle John ? " 
 " ah , Miss , you must ask the shark , and the lobster , and the big sea - serpent . they do say , down at Wapping , that the ship be cast away among the cannibal island , and the people eat a policeman , and he upon his promotion . what a pity , what a pity ! and his coat four and sixpence a yard , ready shrunk ! but they native be outrageous . " 
 " Nonsense , Patty , I do not   believe a word of it . sailor be dreadful story - teller , ever since the day of Sindbad . have any one besides Miss Isola , Mrs. Elton , or any one , be here to ask for I ? " 
 " no , Miss , Mr. Conrad never come after the day you serve he so dreadful ; and Miss Idols say he go back and spoil 300 l.   worth of work ; but that great lady with the red plush breech , and the pink silk stocking , and the baker 's shop in their hair , she be here twice last week , and leave a letter for you . and Balaam be here several time , and Balak along of he ; but I bang the door on they both , now I hear they be out of the business , and a nice young man set up who do not   bother about the gun . " 
 " Lady Cranberry 's letter may lie there , and go back the next time Ann Maples come . but the bailiff I must see . if they come to - morrow , let they in immediately . and how be all my friend at the Mews ? " 
 her reply would fill a chapter , so I will not enter upon it , but go to bed and miss the sound of dear Judy 's tail at the door . in the first course of my dream , Mr. Shelfer pass on his bedward road , have politely take his shoe off at the bottom of the stair ; in do which he make at least three time the noise his shodden foot would have inflict . 
 in the morning I take my old walk round the Square , and then sit down and try to be patient until the bailiff should come . of course I do not mean to go to my darling Isola , nor even to let she know that I be so near at hand , although my heart be burn to see her sweet face again . I even keep away from the window , though I want to watch for the bailiff , and strictly order Mrs. Shelfer not to tell she , if she should call , a word about my be there . however , it be all in vain . Mr. Shelfer go out after breakfast to his play - work in the Square , and the smell of his pipe invade my little room . I think he must have leave the front door open ; at any rate I hear , all of a sudden , a quick patter of run foot , and such a crying and sobbing , and Mrs. Shelfer hurry out to meet it . 
 " you can not , Miss , you can not   indeed - not for a thousand pound . the room be let , I tell you , and you can not   go up . oh dear , oh dear , whatever be I to do ? " 
 " Patty , I will go up . I do not   care who be there . my heart be break , and I will die on my darling 's bed . if you stand there , I will push you . out of the way , I tell you . " and up fly Idols , in a perfect mess of tear . what could I do but fly to meet she , and hug my only pet ? what with her passion of grief , and sudden joy , at see I , she faint away in my arm . I get she somehow to the sofa , and kiss she into her sens again . when she come to herself , and feel sure it be not a dream , she nestle into my bosom , as if I have be her husband , and steal long glance at I to see whether I be offend . her pretty cloak lie on the floor , and her hat beneath the table . for a long time she sob and tremble so that she could not say a word , while I keep on whisper such vain word as these : 
 " never mind , my pet . there , you have cry enough . tell your own dear Clara who have dare to vex you . " 
 to see that sweet child 's misery , I feel in such a rage , I could have box her enemy 's ear . but I never think that it be more than a child 's vexation . at last , after drink a tumblerful of water , and give room to her palpitating heart , she contrive to tell I her trouble . 
 " why , dear , you know my pappy - pappy I use to call he - he be not my papa at all , he say himself he be not ; and that be not the bad of it , for I could do well enough without he , he be always so dreadfully cross , and do not   care for I one bit . I could do without he very well , if I have a proper papa , or if my father be dead and have love I before he die ; but now I have no father at all , and never have any in the world ; I be only an outcast , an abandon - oh , Clara , will you promise to forgive I , and love I all the same ? " 
 " to be sure I will , my dearest . I be sure , you have do no harm . and even if you have be lead astray - " 
 she look at I with quick pride flash through her abasement , and she take her arm off my shoulder . 
 " no , you have quite mistake I . do you think I would sit here and kiss you , if I be a wicked girl ? but who be I to be indignant at anything now ? he tell I - be you sure the door be shut ? - he tell I , with a sneer , that I be a base - bear child , and he use a bad word than that . " 
 she fall away from I , her cheek all crimson with shame , and her long eyelash droop heavily on they . I catch she to my heart : poor wrong one , be she a whit less pure ? I seem to love she the well , for her great misfortune . of course , I have guess it long ago , from what her brother tell I . 
 " and who be your father , my pretty ? any father must be a fool who would not be proud of you . " 
 " oh , Clara , the bad of it be that I have not the least idea . but from something that hard man say , I believe he be an Englishman . I think I could have get everything from he , he be so beside himself ; but when he tell I that dreadful thing , and say that my father have lie to my mother and ruin she , I feel so sick that I could not speak , till he turn I out of the house , and strike I as I go . " 
 " what ? " 
 " yes , he turn I out of the house , and give I the blow of disgrace , and say I should never look on his face again . he have win his revenge - I can not tell what he mean , for I never harm he - and now I might follow my mother , and take to - I can not   repeat it , but it be bad than death . no fear of my starving , he say , with this poor face of mine . and so I be go to Conny , dear Conny ; I think he know it all long ago , but could not bear to tell I . and I sit on some step in a lonely place , for I do not know how to walk , and I pray to see you and die : then old Cora come after I , and even she be cry , and she give I all her money , and a morsel of the true cross , and tell I to come here first , for Conny be out of town , and she would come to see I at dark ; and perhaps the Professor would take I back when his rage be over . do you think I would ever go ? and after what he tell I to do ! " 
 such depth of loathing and scorn in those gentle violet eye , and her playful face for the moment so haughtily wild and implacable - Clara Vaughan , in her stately rancour , seem an iceberg by a volcano . 
 I see that it be the moment for learn all that she know ; and the time for scruple be past . 
 " Isola , tell I all you have hear , about this dastard bully ? " 
 " I know very little ; he have take good care of that . I only know that he do most horrible thing to unfortunate cat and dog . it make I shudder to touch he at one time . but he give that up I believe . but there be some dark and fearful mystery , which my brother have find out ; that be if he be my brother . how can I tell even that ? whatever the discovery be , it make such a change in he , that he care for nothing afterwards , until he see you , Clara . I be not very sharp , you know , though I have learn so much , that perhaps you think I be . " 
 " my darling , I never think such a thing for a moment . " 
 " oh , I be very glad . at any rate I like to talk as if I be clever . and some people say I be . but , clever or stupid , I be almost certain that Conny find out only half the secret ; and then on the day when he come of age , that man tell he the rest , either for his own purpose , or holy Madonna know why . " 
 " when be your brother of age ? " 
 " last Christmas Eve . do not   you remember what I tell you at the school of design that day ? " 
 " and when be your birthday , Isola ? " 
 " I be sure I do not   know , but somewhere about Midsummer . they never tell Conny when his be , but he know it somehow . come , he be clever now , Clara , though you do not   think I be . be not   he now ? tell the truth . " 
 " I be think of far more important matter than your rude brother 's ability . whence do you come to England and when ? " 
 this be quite a shot in the dark . but I have long suspect that they be of southern race . 
 " I be sure I do not   know . I be quite a child at the time , and the subject have be interdict ; but I think we come from Italy , and at least ten year ago . " 
 " and your brother speak Italian more readily than English . can you tell I anything more ? " 
 " nothing . only I know that old Cora be a Corsican : she boast of it every night , when she come to see I in bed , although she have be forbid . but what do she care - she ask - for this dirty little english island ? and she sit by my bed , and sing drone song , which I hardly understand ; but she say they be beautiful nanna . " 
 how my heart be beat , at every simple sentence . none of this have I hear before , because she durst not tell it . 
 " any other question , Donna ? " she be recover her spirit , as girl always do by talk . " why , my darling , you ought to have a wig . you beat all the senior sophist . " 
 " yes . now come and kiss I . kiss I for a pledge that you will never leave I . I be rich again now : you can not   tell how rich I be , and nothing to do with my money , and nobody likely to share it . if you be my own sister , I could not love you more ; and most likely I should not love you a quarter as much . and my Uncle long to see you so . you shall come and live with I , and we will be two old maid together . now promise , darling , promise . kiss I , and seal the bargain . " 
 " Clara , I would rather be your servant than the queen of the world . only promise first that you will never scold I . I can not bear be scold . I never use to be ; and it will turn all my hair gray . " 
 " I will promise never to scold you , unless you run away . " 
 she sweep back her beautiful hair , throw her arm round my neck , look in my eye with a well - spring of love , and kiss I . oh , traitorous Clara , it be not the kiss - deeply as I love she - but the evidence I want . I know that with her ardent nature she would breathe her soul upon I . the exquisite fragrance of her breath be like the wind steal over violet . I have notice it often before . my last weak doubt be scatter ; yet I play with she and myself , one sweet moment long . 
 " Darling , what scent do you use ? what be it you wash your tooth with ? " 
 " nothing but water , Clara ; what make you ask in that way ? " 
 " and the perfume in your hair - what be it ? oh , you little Rimmel ! " 
 " nothing at all , Donna . I never use anything scented . not even Eau de Cologne . I hate all the stuff they sell . " 
 " how very odd ! why , I could have declare that your lip and your hair be sprinkle with extract of violet . " 
 " oh , now I know what you mean . I never perceive it myself , but number of people have fancy that I use artificial perfume . but that man - oh , what shall I call he ? and only this morning I call he ' pappy ' - he always account for everything , you know ; and he say it be here - herod - I can not   say it now , the long english word , but I could at college - no matter , it mean something in the family . my mother , he say , be so well known to possess it , that she have an italian name among the servant for it ; though her real name be quite a different flower . Clara , why do you look at I so ? and what be you cry for ? " 
 " because , my own darling dear , I have not love you for nothing . you be my own flesh and blood . you be my own cousin , I tell you , my dear Uncle 's daughter ; and your name be Lily Vaughan . " 
 she draw her arm from I , and leap up from the sofa ; she be so amazed and frightened . she look at I most sadly , believe that I be mad ; then she faint again , and fall back into my arm . 
 when I have bring her round , and prop she up with a pillow - for cushion be very scarce - the strain of the mind be over , my brain begin to whirl so that I could neither think nor act . for a long time I could not have enough of kiss and hug idol . I play with her hair , as if I have be her lover ; and then pat and caress she , as if she have be my baby . and have I no thought of another , who ought to be do all this to I ? yes , I fear that it lie in the depth of my heart , strong than maid 's love of maiden , or even than my delight at the joy come to my Uncle . 
 then I hat myself for my selfishness , and catch up my Lily and rub she , and make her understand thing . I fling a decanter of water over both she and myself , which save we from hysteric . 
 poor little thing ! she be not like I . Strong Passion be a stranger to she , and she fall before his blow . I have fight with he so long , that I meet he like a prize - fighter , and counter at every stroke . up run Mrs. Shelfer , in the height and crest of the wave , when backwards or forwards , cry or laugh , hang on a puff of wind . she come with a commonplace motive ; she think we be play at cricket with her beloved stick . her arrival make a diversion , though it have no other effect , for I walk the little thing out , and lock the door behind she . 
 then I get my darling new cousin into my arm , and kiss she , and march she about the room , and make she show her Vaughan instep . excuse the petty nonsense - what woman be quite free from it ? - but for many generation our foot have be arch and point : of course it do not matter ; still I be glad that her be of the true Vaughan pattern . then , as she so hat all the stuff they sell , I shower over her an entire bottle of the very good Eau de Cologne . it be a bit of bullying ; but all girl of high spirit be bully . and it make her eye water so dreadfully , that she cry as hard as I do . 
 CHAPTER IV . 
 it must be own that my evidence at present be very shadowy . yet to myself I seem slow of hand for not have grasp it before . to the mind there be nothing conclusive , to the heart all be irresistible . I have not set down a quarter of the thought that now dawn upon I ; and it would be waste of time to recount they , when actual proof be forthcoming . and poor Idols give I small chance of think clearly , in the turbulent flood of her question . 
 " and be you quite sure , quite certain , Clara darling , that I have a lawful father , one who be not ashamed of I , and be not ashamed of my mother ! and why do he never come for I ? and do you think he will love I ? and be dear Conrad my own brother ? I do not   seem to understand half that you have tell I . " 
 at length I kneel down , and thank God - rather late in the day , I must own - for his wonderful guidance to I . while do so , and remembering , as I always do then , my mother - reveal in sudden light I see the justice of God 's providence . long as I have grope and grope , with red revenge my lead star , no breath of love or mercy cheer the abrupt step of a fatalist , so long have he vouchsafe to send I check and warning , more than guidance . by loss of wealth and dear friend , by blindness and desertion , and the crush blow to maiden 's pride when her heart be fling back in her face , by sad hour of watch and weep over the bed of sickness , by the history of another 's wrong - bad than my own , and yet forgive - by all these mean , and perhaps no less by the growth of the mind , and wide view of life , the spirit , once so indomitable , have learn to bow to its maker . stoop thus it see the path , which stiff - neck pride could not descry . 
 not first and sole , as it would have be two year since , but side by side with soft thought , come the strong belief that now God have reveal to I the man who slay my father . and what humiliation to all my boasted destiny ! I have grasp the hand that do the deed , smile to the eye that glare upon it , laugh at the sally of the mind that shape it . enough of this ; ere it go too hard with christian feeling . my bosom heave , my throat swell , and my eye flash as of old . 
 before I have time to resolve what next to do   for Isola would not let I think , we have another interruption . that girl have a most ill - regulated and illogical mind . and the fault be fundamental . if the lovely senior sophist have ever get her degree , and wear the gown of a Maiden of Arts , it could only have come by favour , after the manner of kissing . her enthymem be quick enough , and a great deal too quick I believe ; but as for their reduction or eduction into syllogism - we might as well expect she to make a telescope out of her boot - tag . and now at once she expect , and would not give I room for a word , that I should minutely detail in two sentence , with marginal annotation , and footnote , query , conjecture , and various reading , all incorporate into the text , everything that have ever , anywhere , or by any mean , befall she " genuine father . " not be thucydidean enough to omit the key - word in the sentence , and mash ten thought into one verb , I could not meet the emergency ; and my dear cousin lose her patience , which be always a very small parcel . 
 " at any rate , Clara , tell I one thing clearly . be you quite certain that Conny and I be not - not - " 
 " not base - bear , " I say - why be mawkish in Oscan - English , when Saxon be to be have ? - " no , my darling , you be as lawful as I , your cousin Clara . we Vaughans be a passionate race , but we never make wreck of woman , and scoundrel of ourselves . that we leave for Corsicans , and people bring up to lie . " 
 the sneer be most unjust , and dreadfully unkind , but far too natural for I , so long pen in , to resist it . I see that I have grieve my pet , so I beg her pardon , and revile myself , till all be right again . then suddenly she leap up and cry , with her hand upon her bound heart - every look and gesture must have be like her mother 's . 
 " let I go now , Clara . what be I think of ? let I start at once . and you say my own father be very ill . he will die without see I . on with your thing , while I run to the cab - stand . I have money enough for both . " 
 she wrench at the door - handle in her hurry , forget that I have lock it ; rich colour leap into her cheek , and her feature and form seem to dance , like a flickering flame , with excitement . no wonder her mother have love , and be love , with such power of passion . 
 " idol , take it easily , or I will not   let you go at all . I rather fancy , we must have some evidence , before my Uncle own a little chit pick up in London . he be a clever and cautious man , and will expect something more convincing than your beautiful eye and sweet breath . do you expect , you impetuous jumper , that he will know you by instinct ? " 
 poor little thing , how her face fall , and how the rose fade out of it ! that look of hers go to my heart ; but I know what the mother have die of , and fear lest her image and picture should perish in the same manner . so I say again : 
 " do you suppose , my dear , that your father would know you by instinct ? " 
 " well , perhaps I do , Clara ; if I think about it at all . I be sure I should know he so . " 
 at this moment , two heavy knock , like a postman 's , but not so quick , sound through the house . I know what they mean , one be Balaam , the other be Balak . Isola clung to I , and turn pale ; she think it be some one pursue she . I tell she hastily whom I expect , and send she to Mrs. Shelfer 's room . my heart beat high , when with many a scrape and bow , the worthy but not ornamental pair sidle heavily into the room . 
 to my greeting they answer I never a word ; but Balaam stand solemnly at the end of the little table , and beckon to his partner to fasten the door . this be do with some pantomime , which mean " by your leave , if you please , Miss , " the two man , who look none the lean for their arduous exertion , stand side by side before I . tired of this nonsense I exclaim impatiently , 
 " be quick , if you please ; what be it you have find out ? " 
 Balaam wink at Balak , and receive a ponderous nod , begin to digest it leisurely . 
 " have you bring I to London for nothing ? what do you mean by all this mummery ? I shall ring the bell in a moment , and have you both show out . " 
 Balaam 's tongue revolve in his mouth , but burst not the bond of speech , and he try to look straight at both window , - till my hand be on the bell - pull . 
 " Balak , I tell you so . Lor , how much well it be for you to take my advice , than for I to take yourn ! Balak say , Miss , as we come along , the young lady would be sure to know what be right , and turn up handsome afore she ask we nothing . now , say I , that be not   the carakter of my experience , the woman most always want - " 
 " here , quick , how much do you want , before I know what you have to tell ? " 
 here a long interchange of signal take place , and even whisper behind a hat . 
 " well , Miss , I say ten , and that quite enough till you have time to judge . but Balak say nothing under twenty , consider all the beer , and some of it country brewer ' - " 
 " your advice be well than Balak 's ; I agree with you on that point ; and I will take it in preference . here be ten pound . " he look rather take aback , but could not well get out of it . Balak smile grimly at he . 
 " if what you tell I prove really valuable , I will give you a cheque for another ninety ere long , and the residue hereafter : but not another farthing , if you keep I in this suspense . do I look likely to cheat people of your class ? " 
 " no , Miss , we hop not ; nor of any other class , I dare say . still there be so many rogue in the world - " 
 " you have take my money ; speak on . " 
 what they tell I at wearisome length , and with puzzle divergence , and quantity of self - praise , need not occupy many line . they have trace the Jelly - corse , as they call Della Croce , from Somers Town to Lisson Grove , where they stay but a very short time , Lepardo Della Croce , under some fictitious name , give lesson in French , spanish , and italian , at school in Portland Town and St. John 's Wood . but he only seem to play with his work , though he never break any engagement to which he really pledge himself . he be always reserve and silent , accept no invitation , and gather his real subsistence by night at chess - club and billiard - room , where his skill be unequalle . his only friend be italian refugee , his only diversion the vivisection of animal . it must have be about this time that he see the newspaper paragraph , and do what he do to I . then he change his name again , and live awhile in Kensington ; he have be in London year before , and seem to know it well . here a nobleman , whom he have teach some new device at billiard , take he up and introduce he to a high class of pupil , and obtain he some back - door palace appointment . he dub himself " Professor , " and start as Dr. Ross . but still he miss the excitement and change of his once adventurous life , and several time he break loose , and leave his household , for week and month together . then the two lovely child , whom all admire but none be allow to notice , be attend wherever they go , by a dark - browed italian woman . suddenly they all leave Kensington , and go to live at Ball 's Pond ; the reason be some threaten exposure of the Professor 's cat - skin propensity . his love of vivisection have become the master - passion , and he would gratify it at all hazard . there be to some nature a strange fascination in the horrible cruelty perpetrate under the name of science . through its influence he even relax his strict reserve a little , and form the acquaintance of a gentleman connect with the college at Camden Town ; to which suburb after a while he remove , because he find it impossible to pursue his inhuman research under his own roof comfortably . here , by mean of his new ally , who could not help admire his infinitely superior skill , he be appoint lecturer at several school for young lady , where smattering of science be deal in . and now he be highly respect by people who do not know he , and idolise by young lady too clever to care for pet parson . of course he become conceited ; for his nature be but a shallow one , and his cunning , though sharp and poisonous , have no solid barb at the end . so he sneer , and grimace , and snigger , and before an ignorant audience make learn man stammer and stutter , amazed at his bold assumption , and too honest and large of mind to suspect they , at short notice . 
 but the skill of his hand be genuine , and his power of sight most wonderful . I have since be tell - though I do not believe it possible - that he once withdraw and bottle nearly half the lung of a dog , tubercular after distemper , while the poor sufferer still gasp on , and try to lick his face . oh that I be a man ! how can I hear such thing and not swear ? all animal , except one , hat he by instinct . the only one , not sagacious enough to know he , be his fellow - man . man , or at any rate woman , think he a handsome , lively , playful , and brilliant being . and yet , upon the honour of a lady I declare - let those who know nothing of honour despise it as an after - thought - that when he first enter my room , in his graceful and elegant way , there run through I such a shudder as first turn the leaf towards autumn , such a chill of the spinal marrow as make the aura of epilepsy . 
 Darling Judy hat he from every bristle of his body , not only through instinct , but for certain excellent reason . the monster 's most intimate friend be a gallant polish patriot , who have sacrifice all for his country , and live here in dignified poverty . this gentleman and his wife could only afford one luxury ; and that , by deny themselves many a little comfort . they have the fine dog in London , one who have save his master 's life from the squat - nosed son of the Czar . this glorious fellow , of maltese family , be the father of my Giudice - whom in his puppy day the polish exile give to Conrad and pretty girl Isola . Slowski , now an ancient dog , have a wen behind his shoulder , which grow and grow until the Professor could scarcely keep his hand from it . but he know that any operation , in so severe a case , be nearly sure to kill a dog so old and weather - beat . the owner too know this , and would not have it meddle with . Lepardo Della Croce swear at last that he would taste no food until he have trace the root of that wen . Judy , then a pretty pup , gambol into the room and see his poor papa - but I will not describe what a dog can not even bear to think of . poor Slowski die that night , and the Pole knock down the survive brute , who shoot he next day upon Hampstead Heath . however , the gentleman slowly recover ; but during his illness the frenzied wife overstep the bound of honour - accord to their idea ; she take advantage of Cora , in the absence of Lepardo , and learn some of his previous crime , by practise on the poor woman 's superstition . then she find , through the firm of Green , Vowler , and Green , that my Uncle be still alive , trace out the history of the atrocious deed , and write the letter which have bring I to London . soon afterwards , when her husband recover , she be sorry for what she have do , and open her lip on the subject no more ; at least in this country , which they soon forsook for America . 
 in this brief epitome , I have tell , for the purpose of save trouble , a great deal more than I learn at the time , a great deal more than Balaam and Balak would have find out in a twelvemonth . but it make no difference : for my conclusion and action be just the same as they would have be , if I have know all the above . " and so you see , Miss " - be Balaam 's peroration - " we have have a downy cove to deal with , for all his furious temper . Lor now , I never believe any Bobby would have discover he ; but we have way , Miss , what with the carpet and the sofys , and always know the good pump at the bar , gentleman of our profession have way that no Peeler would ever dream of . and now , Miss , the ink be on the table , and both of we wish you joy - do not   you say so , Balak ? - if you only think we have earn that cheque for 90 l. , and the rest , please God , when the gentleman feel Jack Ketch . " 
 " you shall have the money soon , if not now . for I believe you have deserve it . but I must trouble you first to write down briefly what you have tell I , and to sign it in full . it be not for myself . I remember every word . it be for the satisfaction of a gentleman who can not see you . " 
 Balaam and Balak look very blank , and declare it would take they a week to write out half they have tell I . this objection I soon remove , by offer to make an abstract of it , which I could do from memory , and then let they read and sign it . by this time they be both afflict with thirst , which I send they away to quench , while I draw up a rough deposition . but first I call darle Idols , and tell she that now I have evidence which would satisfy even a sceptical father . 
 " and surely , my pet , you yourself must have something ; some relic , or token , to help we . " 
 " no , cousin Clara , I can not   think of anything , except this little charm , which have be round my neck for year , and which I have show you before : but I fear it be not uncommon . he take it away from I once , but I manage to steal it back again . " 
 the charm be a piece of chalcedony , grind into some resemblance which I could not recognise then , and very highly polished . she say it have be her brother Conrad 's , and he have give it to she ; hear which I cease to examine it . 
 presently the bailiff return , in very high spirit indeed , and ready to sign almost anything . but I take good care to inform they that , however hard they have labour , I have make the discovery before they ; which they say be permiscuous , and not to be think nothing of . all the form be quickly despatch , I find a few minute to think what be next to be do . 
 it be too late in my journey for dalliance and embarrassment with the heavy luggage of motif , and the bandbox of reflection , when we be past the last station , and fly to our terminus : enough that I resolve to take poor little Isola home at once to the house at Vaughan St. Mary , and the arm of her longing father , that he might see she before he die . I hop he might live for year , but I fear he might die to - morrow ; so hang over every one 's mind that fatal third stroke of paralysis . her own entreaty and coaxing tell much upon my resolution ; if none could resist she when happy , who could withstand her distress ? so Balaam and Balak be order most strictly to watch that demon 's abode , and at any risk give he in charge if he make attempt at departure . to ensure due vigilance , I reclaim the 90 l.   cheque , and give one payable three day afterwards . they grumble and do not like it ; but in the course of all my rough usage , I have learn one great maxim - never trust , beyond the length of a cork , any man who be slave to the bottle . 
 CHAPTER V. 
 Eager as Isola be to see her true father at last , she press I strongly to call at her brother 's lodging on our way to Paddington , and take he with we if possible ; or at any rate learn where he be , and how long he would be absent . but I refuse to do anything of the kind . though not half so proud as of old , I could not quite stoop to that . " you know , dear , " she continue , " Conny will think it unfair of I to get such a start of he with the real good papa ; and it would be so much nice to have he there to help . and I be terribly frightened , though of course you can not   understand it . " 
 " Isola , no more nonsense . for your sake , and my poor Uncle 's , I would do anything honest and proper : but neither can I travel with your brother Conrad , nor can I go near his lodging . I be not quite reduce to that , however I be trample on . " 
 " but , darling , they need not see you . and you know he have make some wonderful mistake . " 
 of course I know it , and tell myself so fifty time in a minute ; but it be a likely thing that I would tell his sister so . 
 " he have , indeed , a very grave mistake , if he ever think I will forgive he . no mistake ever make by man can be plead for what he have do . even if he believe , by some excess of absurdity , that my father have murder his , instead of his murder mine   which be much near the mark , would even that justify his rudeness , low rudeness , and personal violence to a lady ? what he do I never tell you ; and he , I should hope , be too much ashamed to speak of it : why he actually push I ; thrust I , Clara Vaughan , away from he , till I almost fall on the floor ! " 
 " oh , Donna , how your eye flash ! and you call I excitable ! let I put your hair back . there now , give I a kiss . I be so sorry for Conny . he love you with all his heart , and you look as if you could kill he . but no doubt the new good papa will put every thing to right . " 
 " will he indeed ? let we go and see . " 
 we get to Paddington just in time to catch the two o'clock train , have telegraph first to my Uncle that I be come to take his advice , before do anything more . this be true , so far as it go , and as much of the truth as I then dare to administer . this message be send , not for the sake of find the carriage at Gloucester , but in order to break the suddenness of our arrival . through all my joy I dread what be to come , and know not how to manage it . idol talk fast enough all the way down the line . as yet she have see scarcely anything of our quiet , rich english scenery ; and although the great Western exhibit it rather flatly , some part there be , below Swindon , which fill the mind with content . but our mind could not be so fill , be full of excitement already . near Stroud poor Idols be in the great ecstasy , and expect I to know the owner of every pretty meadow . 
 but after we enter my Uncle 's carriage - or mine , I suppose , it should now be call - dear Isola fall away into the deep silence . she store her wonder inwardly , nor show the sweet depth of her eye , until she spring out at the foot of the old stone step , tread by so many hundred of her ancestor . then she look up at the long gray house , with the dusk of July around it , and bat of three variety flit about the gable ; and I see beneath her dark eye - lash the tremulous light of a tear . 
 after lead my sweet new cousin - whom everybody star at , and who fear to look at the pavement - to my own snug quarter , I leave she there under kind Mrs. Fletcher 's charge , and run to my Uncle 's favourite room . already my breath be short , and my heart up and down with excitement , and I have but the presence of mind to know that I be sure to make a mistake of it . I see a great change in he , even since the Monday ; but he be the first to speak . 
 " my dear child , kiss I again . you be nearly as tall as I be , since my upright way have depart . from the moment you go away , I have do nothing but miss you , every hour and every minute ; and last night I sleep never a single wink . let we give it up , my darling . God have send you to I to make up for both daughter and son . " 
 " well , Uncle , that be all very fine , but I doubt it strongly . " I be force to be flippant a little , for fear of break down . " it be my firm belief that proud Clara will still have to wash at the pump . " 
 he know what I mean ; it be an old tale , in our neighbourhood , of a nobleman 's second wife who would not allow her step - child even the use of a yellow basin . 
 " what ! do you mean to say " - and he begin to tremble exceedingly - " that you have find any trace , any clue even , to my poor darling ? " 
 " yes , thank God , I have . oh , Uncle , I be so glad ! " and I throw myself into his arm : his head fall heavily on my shoulder , and I feel that I have be too sudden . he could not speak , but fetch one long sob . I part his white hair , and look at he as if in surprise at his hastiness . 
 " Dear Uncle , we must not be certain yet . I mean that I have find something , or fancy I have find something , which - which - I mean if properly follow up - may lead in time - but you know how sanguine I be . " 
 " Clara , you be play with I . it be a mistake to do so . I can not bear it , child . but the sudden shock I can bear . let I know all at once . be they alive or dead ? " 
 " alive , I think , dear Uncle ; and I hope to find they soon , if you will calmly advise I . " 
 " you have find they . no more fencing . I know it by your eye . all the truth this moment , unless you wish to kill I . " 
 he stand up as if to seize I , for I have withdraw from his grasp , but his poor leg would not carry he ; so I be oblige to seize he instead . he fall sideways on a chair , and vainly try to speak ; but his eye never falter from mine . 
 " Dearest Uncle , I tell you the truth . of course I can not be certain yet , and it will not   do to make a mistake ; and so I want more evidence . " 
 " I want no more . only let I see they . " he speak very slowly , and the muscle of his face twitch at every word . 
 " now , keep your mind calm and clear , to help I , my dear Uncle ; for I know not what to do . have you anything , any token at all , of their beloved mother ? " 
 my object be to divert his mind , for I see the approach of coma , and now tremble more than he do . 
 with a feeble smile at the folly of my question , after such a love as his , he answer in great exhaustion , 
 " take the key from my neck . you know the large black box in - in - " 
 here his chin fall on his breast , and he could not lift the key , but his eye still shine with intelligence , and follow I everywhere . ribbon and all I take the key , and ring the bell for Jane , the most careful and kind of nurse . I order she , in a whisper , to give my Uncle a glass of very strong brandy and water , if she could get he to swallow it ; and away I run upstairs , hop to relieve he . then suddenly it strike I that I have no right to open that box , without the presence of a competent witness . I know at once what box it be , from the constant anxiety my poor Uncle have show about it . who have such right to be my witness as his darling daughter ? so back I fly to my own room , and drag the bewildered Isola down the broad corridor . the poor little thing be frightened so that she could hardly breathe . I have no especial object in open that old box , at that particular moment , much as I have often long to know what its content be . my presence of mind be lose , and all I could think of be , that I might find something there to break that awful suspension of life , so likely to end in death . 
 the box be in a panel closet by the head of my Uncle 's bed . when I hand idol the light to hold , she take it as if in a dream ; her cheek be as white and transparent as the wax , and she hold the candle so that a hot flake splash on my neck . the lock of the long box turn most easily , and the hinge move without creak : most likely it have be pore over every day , for many year . the lid be arch and hollow , with strap of fade web inside it . 
 in beautiful order , so fair that I hardly dare to touch they , lie the clothe and trinket , the letter and little relic , the glove and pocket - handkerchief , the fairy slipper , the wedding - dress , the coquettish veil , and saucy hat of the dead . I be not over sensitive , thank God , or I should not be live now ; but the sight of those thing upset I more than any distress of my own . the small parcel of silver paper , screw at the end and pin in the middle , the pin put stupidly as man always put they , the light gay dress make for some sweet figure , fold with such care , and yet quite out of the plait , and label with the date when last the dear one wear they , even a wither fern - wreath and a sprig of shrivel myrtle - I could not thrust my commonplace hand into these holy treasure ; if I could I should never deserve to be myself so remember . but one thing strike I , as thought profane always strike we crookedly ; if the poor lady could have be weep to life again , how much well would she have find all her thing arrange , than she have ever keep they ! that be to say if she resemble she wonder and cry daughter , who kneel down and want to kiss every article in the box . her little white hand be as busy as mouse among they ; and long - draw sob be tumble with interjection . 
 " now , my dear idol , you must not disturb these thing . your father will be so vexed . " 
 would he though ? - say I to myself - not if he know whose hand it be that do it . she pay no attention to I . 
 " now just put back that silver knife , with the bit of peach - skin upon it : and leave the stone as it be . " 
 to my surprise she begin to suck the stone , which her mother perhaps have suck , eighteen year ago . inside the paper be write , " Knife and peach - stone find in my Lily 's pocket . the stone be mean for I to set . I will plant it , when I have find her child . E.V. , January , 1834 . " 
 " now , you foolish child , you be really too bad . " and with that I give she a little push . in her heedless way , she fall almost into the box , and her light form lie amongst her mother 's dress . a sudden thought flash across I . 
 " Isola , off with that nasty dark frock ! " 
 " Nasty , indeed , Clara ! why you say this morning how very pretty it be . " 
 " what have that to do with it ? pull it off , or I will tear it . now , out with the other arm . " 
 in a moment or two , I have all her beauty gleam in white before I ; and carefully take from the box a frock of pale blue silk , I lift it over her head , and draw her dimpled arm through the sleeve ; then I fix it in front with the turquoise button , and buckle the slender zone . her blue eye look on in amazement , like violet at a snow - storm . then I lead she to the mirror , and proud as we both have always be of her beauty , the same thought strike we now . I see it in the mirror , by the toss of her point chin and the coy bend of her neck : she see it there as clearly , by the flash of my tear - bright eye . neither of we have ever see that lovely of all girl look half so lovely before . the glow of pride and beauty 's glory mantle in her cheek ; and her eye be softly beam down the avenue of lash , from clear depth of azure . I never see such eye as she have , among all our english beauty . some perhaps be as fine of colour , and as liquid , though not so lustrous : but the exquisite arch of the upper lid , and the rich short fringe of the low , cast a tremulous light and shade , which dull Anglo - saxon feel not . like moonbeam play through a mantled bridge . 
 the dress fit she exactly . it have be make for a slender , buoyant figure , as graceful and pure as a snow - wreath , yet full of warm motion and richness . indeed , I must confess , that , although correct enough for the time and clime of the owner , it show too much of the lift snow for our conception of maidenhood : so I draw a gauzy scarf - perhaps a true fazoletto - over the velvet slope of the shoulder , and imprison it in the valley . this be nicely arrange , I hang her chalcedony charm from her neck , and fasten it to her waist - band . then I catch up her cluster hair , nearly as thick and long as my own , after the corsican fashion , snoode it close in ripple with a pink and white - striped mandile , and tell she to love herself in the glass , while I run off to the hot - house for a truss of Stephanotis . this , with a glossy sprig of Gardenia leave to back it , I fasten cleverly into the clear mandile , on the curve of her elegant head , and my darling be complete . then I kiss her sweet lip , and admire she , more than she admire herself . 
 " Clara , it do not matter how much trouble you take ; you can not   make I look a quarter so well as you do . " 
 " not quite so tall , my darling , nor anything like so naughty ; but a thousand time more lovely . " 
 " well , I wish I could think so . I be always long to change with you . " 
 " do not   talk nonsense , my pretty ; if I be a man I should die for you . now I glory in you as a Vaughan . come along . " 
 I lead she through the gallery and to the door of her father 's room , before she have time to think . she do not know but what I be take she back to my own room , along another passage . at the sick man 's door I leave she , while I go in to see how much might be safely venture . 
 my Uncle be lean back in his deep reclining chair , with his weak eye fix most eagerly on the door . in vain he strove to hide his disappointment , and to look at I with gratitude . the wandering mind too plainly hop for something dearer than a brother 's child . 
 dismiss Jane through the other room , that she might not encounter Isola , I sit down to examine he . the brandy and water have rally his vital power , but make he hot and feverish . he kiss my hand to atone for some sharp and impatient expression , and I see that the moment be favourable . 
 " Uncle dear , what will you say to I ? I have bring you another new visitor , the lovely girl in London . you know she well by name . you have often long to see my sweet darling Isola . and she want to see you so much . only you must promise I one thing honourably . be gay and sprightly with she ; she be timid in this old house . " 
 " my dear , I can not   see she to - night . you do not   mean that of course . give she my good apology . you say she be very sweet - temper ; I be sure she will excuse I . " 
 " if she would , I will not . nor would you excuse she , if you know whom she resemble . " 
 " what do you mean ? have you lock my box again ? " 
 " yes , and here be the key . I find a portrait of a lady " - I have not show this to my cousin - " very like beautiful Isola . " 
 he begin to tremble again , so I think the quick the well . place the lamp - shade so that a dim light fall on the door , I run out to fetch his daughter . 
 " now , do not   be a baby , Isola . remember how ill he be . keep as much in the shadow as possible ; and if he should guess who you be , pretend not to care a bit for he . " 
 " I will try my very good , Clara . but I do not   think I can do that . " 
 she shake so much that I be oblige to support she , as she have support I that evening when first we meet . Stiffly I bring she in , and begin to introduce she , hold she back all the time . 
 " Uncle Edgar , this be my dear friend , of whom you have hear so often , Miss Isola " - Ross I could not say . " why , Uncle - why , Idols , darling - " 
 it be all in vain ; I might as well have spar my device . from the moment she cross the threshold , his eye have be leap towards she . the paralysed man bound forward , as if with galvanic life . his daughter meet he as wildly . " my Lily , my Lily , " be all he could sob , " my own Lily come from the grave ! " with a father 's strength he clasp she , and her dark lock be shower with silver . as for tear - but I leave they together when I have see both safe on the sofa . 
 CHAPTER VI . 
 to our surprise and delight , the genuine Papa , instead of be bad the next day , look more like himself than he have do at any time since the fever . but in spite of add importance , and the sense of parental dignity , he sit hand in hand with his beautiful daughter by the hour together , play with her cheek and hair , as little girl do with dolly . and all the time he be talk to she about her darling mother , and make she answer he in Italian , and make she kiss he every other minute ; and find out a thousand time , as a novelty every time , that she be the very image and model of her mother , and yet he be not sure that her smile be quite so sweet ; then to make up for depreciation he need must kiss she again , and say , yes , he think it be , though it be quite impossible for any other to be so - and thus they go on , till I think there never would be an end of it ; albeit I do my utmost to keep away from they both . 
 know that I be in their way , and feel rather out of spirit , I go my old accustomed round of place , sacred in my memory to a certain father and mother of my own . how long I weep at their simple graf , how I kneel to their God and mine , thank he from my desolate heart for the light now shed upon I , and how I pray that they might both be look down on I now and crave heavenly guidance for I through the peril yet to come - these , and the rest of my doing there , can not well be tell except to the ear of orphan . the cloud of an overcast existence seem to be open rapidly , and though they could never disclose my sun and moon again , some happiness it be to know even how those have set . and more than all , the foul aspersion upon my father 's memory , which all the while I scorn it so , have lie heavily on my thought , this be now prove liar 's spittle , and my sweet darling father have offend not even a villain . a thousand time I implore his pardon for the splash have ever descend upon the hem of my garment , though shake off straight - way with loathing . 
 in the midst of my dreamy thought , and while I sit between the two low headstone , upon the very spot where I hope my own head may lie , the tremulous beauty of the Golden Thuja , which I have plant there , be push aside too carelessly , and something far more beautiful plant itself in front . it be my cousin Lily . I have be strictly forbid ever to call she " Isola , " or even " idol , " again , as savour of the evil one . Lily Vaughan be beam with young delight and happiness : the fresh west country air , sweet from the tropic gulf - stream , have crown the April of her cheek with a June of rose . 
 " oh , Donna , I be so glad I have find you at last . what make you run away from I and my Papa ? I have lose my way all over the world . what a lovely world it be , Donna ! " 
 " do not   call I that name here . do you not see where you stand ? " 
 she glance at the headstone engrave with initial and date , and at once understand it all . for a long time she be silent , a long time I mean for she ; and her soft eye glisten at once with awe and pity . at last , she creep close to I , look at the ground , and whisper with a deep sigh : 
 " how you must hate I , Clara . " 
 " hate you , my darling ! what for ? " 
 " oh , because I have get such a dear papa , and you have none at all . and much bad than that , because - because - oh , I do not   know how to tell you . " 
 " tell I all you mean . let there be no misunderstanding between we . " 
 " because my mother and my father seem somehow to have kill - though I be sure they would rather have kill themselves - your poor papa and mamma . " and she lean on my mother 's headstone , and sob till I fear for her heart . 
 I put my arm around her waist , draw she towards I , and sit on my father 's grave , with his niece upon my lap . 
 " Dearest , I could not be the child of those who sleep beneath we , if it be in my nature now to feel as you imagine . year ago , I might have do so ; though I hope not even then . orphan as I be and helpless , already I perceive that I have not live for nothing . my father , I believe , my mother , I be sure , would have lay down life with pleasure to see I lead from wayward childhood even to what I be . oh , Lily , you can not   think how they love I . " and at the tender memory , come tear , the voice of silence . 
 Lily say not a word , but gather and plait a wreath of flower , wherewith , as in a nuptial tie , she bind the white headstone together - anything so as not to disturb I just then . even that trifle , a graceful idea bear of her southern origin , even that for the moment touch I deeply . time there be when our soul seem to have take hot bath in the spring of memory , and every pore of they be open . 
 " Darling Lily , come - how proud they would have be of you - come and kiss I in this presence , and promise that , whatever happen , none shall ever thrust cold hand between your heart and mine . that we will bear , and trust , and love ; nor , if a shadow steal between we , blink it till the substance follow , but be frank and open - the very breath of friendship - and when doubt begin to grow , for the devil be sure to sow it , have it pluck away at once , each by the other 's hand . kiss I , dear ; your weakness be that you be not so outspoken as I be . never let I vex you , without know it . " 
 the innocent creature kiss I , and promise solemnly . 
 " oh , Clara , " she cry , " how on earth do you find it out ? sometimes you have vex I dreadfully , for you do not   care much what you say ; but I always think it be my fault , and I never tell you of it . but it never make I love you a single bit the less . " 
 " yes , it do for the moment , though you may soon have forgive it . but a love which be always undergo forgiveness , be like glass steep in water , you may cut it in two with a pair of common scissor . " 
 " well , I should like to see the scissor that would cut I away from you . I will have a great piece off your hair , Clara , if you talk such nonsense . now come ; my father want you . " 
 " have you tell he ? " 
 " yes , everything about dear Conny and you ; and he say you be a noble girl , but uncommonly thick - headed about your own concern , though as quick as lightning for other . now , I will not   have you look so pale ; let we run and get some colour . see , I will get first to that tree . " 
 " will you indeed ? " I win the race by a yard , and be glad that the exercise make excuse for the quick rise of my bosom . after all that have happen , I would not have her imagine that I still care for her brother . like a girl all over , she say not another word , determine that I should begin it . 
 " let we walk fast , Lily , if my Uncle wish to see I . " 
 " no , there be plenty of time . it will do he good to sleep a little . " 
 " oh , then it be nothing important . I rather fear that it might be . " 
 " do not   be at all afraid , darling . he want to show you how nicely he make the Chalcedony Spalla that use to be round my neck . he make it for my mother , in remembrance of something . " 
 " oh , nothing more than that . I think you speak of something - at least you seem to imply - " 
 " nothing that you need blush about , nor stammer either , proud Donna . you know you prove to I yesterday , when we be in the cab , that you do not care for Conny any more than you do for a flake of London soot , which happen to come in at the window , and fall upon your glove . and you be kind enough to compare he to that individual smut . " 
 " oh , Judy , Judy , " I cry , as the dog come bound to meet we - " darling Judy , you love Clara , if nobody else have sense enough . " 
 and half an hour ago , Lily and I in dramatic language , vow eternal affection ! 
 " oh , Clara , darle Clara , do not   you know that I be in fun ? I think you be so clever . and now to see you sob over that great muff of a dog ! Judy , I hate you , get out of the way " - the judicious would not stir - " take your great hulking paw from cousin Clara 's neck . there then , make the most of that ! oh , I have hurt my hand so , and he be only wag his tail . but I be so delighted , my own pet , that you love poor Conny still . " 
 " and pray , who say I do ? " 
 " nobody , only I . all dear Papa say be this , that there be a great mistake , and he soon perceive what it be ; and I ask he to take my opinion about it , because I be a senior sophist . and he pretend not to know what a senior sophist be . and I tell he it be my degree , not from that man , you know , but fairly earn at the College ; though they do have the impudence to say that the Professors be go to pluck I , until I give they a smile . " 
 " true enough , no doubt . but I know all that long ago . what more do my Uncle say ? " 
 " that he would tell you his opinion , but he would rather not talk about it to I . and he could not bear I to go out , for fear I should be steal again . and I do believe he have have I watch all the way . here I come , Pappy ; large as life you see , and three time as natural . " 
 " yes , my own treasure , three time as natural to I , as my life have be without you . but wheel I indoor , young maiden . no other man in the world have such a pair of horse . I want to talk to Clara , in my own room alone . lily , go to Mrs. Fletcher , I can not   have you rove about so . " lily obey he instantly . 
 " wait one minute , Uncle dear ; I want to go and fetch something . " 
 I run to my own room , and find the deed of gift , which have not be return to the lawyer . this I take to his study and place it in his hand . 
 " what be the matter , Clara ? have you turn conveyancer , and detect some informality ? " 
 " no , dear Uncle . but I want you to cancel this . I can not allow you so to rob your child . " 
 I will not say what he call I in his surprise and delight . it seem to I quite uncalled for ; I have only do what my conscience tell I be just . but as for accept my offer - he would not hear of it twice . " darling , it would be wrong . it would be downright robbery ; and no plea whatever for it , on the score of paternal duty . you be the proper heir , the child of the eld son , the true representative of our ancient family . all the rest be a quibble and quirk , of which , even without your countless benefit , I never intend to take advantage . and my child be , by the mother 's side , of a family old even than our - so far as that nonsense go - and be heir to wealth compare to which - if it only be rightly work - these Vaughan estate be nothing . all I ask you be to do a thing which I be sure you would do without ask - to assist they , if what I have leave they be spend before they prove their claim . here be a letter to Count Gaffori ; that excellent man be still alive ; and here be the certificate , and my own brief deposition , which I have beg a neighbouring magistrate to come to - day and attest ; here be my Lily 's Spalla , and perhaps other relic be in my son 's possession . lastly , here be two more letter , one to my old friend Peter Green , who have now much influence in that part of Corsica , the other to James McGregor , once my messmate at Lincoln 's Inn , now an acute and rise Counsel , and a lead authority upon municipal law . take all these , my darling , if you will so far oblige I ; for I fear my lovely daughter - be not   she lovely , Clara ? " 
 " the lovely girl in all the world ; and what be far more important , the sweetest , and the good . " 
 " yes , if you have search the kingdom , you could not have bring I such another love . but ah ! you should have see her mother ! however , I fear the sweet pet be a little careless and random , as her father use to be . at any rate , I prefer entrust this great budget to your brave and honest hand ; at least until my son come here to claim it . the deposition you shall have , when attest . " 
 " but , Uncle , surely you have well keep it all yourself . no fear of Mrs. Daldy now . " 
 " no , my darling ; but these thing must not be bury with I . " 
 there be something in his eye which make I start with terror . but he smile so sweetly that my terror flee . 
 " and now , my child , about yourself . though you have find I another daughter , I look upon you as the eld ; and I venture to speak to you , as a father would . be it as my Lily tell I ? be it true - God grant it may be - that you love my son , my Lily 's son , Henry Conrad ? why do not   you answer I , darling ? tell the truth like a real Vaughan . surely you be not ashamed of he . " and he lay his hand on my head . my tear fall fast ; and my heart be in a temp . 
 " yes , Uncle , " at last I answer , frighten for his suspense , and look he full in the face , " yes , Uncle , I do - I mean at least I do - love he very much at one time . " 
 " with all your heart , as we Vaughans love ; with all your heart , poor darling ? " 
 " yes , Uncle , " I sob , in bitter humiliation ; " none of my heart be leave I . " 
 " thank God ! what bl news for his mother ! my Harry be the happy fellow alive . " 
 " but , Uncle , he do not think so , he - he - do not   perceive his blessedness . " a flash of my old self - irony come even through my anguish . 
 " oh , I have hear all that . but surely you know the absurd mistake he make . " 
 " indeed , I can not guess it . be it my place to do that ? " 
 " of course it be ; when you be in the light , and he be all in the dark . whom do that kidnapper believe himself to have murder ? " 
 " you , Uncle , of course . " 
 " and whose child then do he suppose you to be ; if he hear of your existence , as he be sure to have do ? " 
 " merciful God , I see it all ! and how bitterly I have wrong he , my own noble Conrad ! " 
 my poor weak Uncle have to manage I , all by himself , in my terrible hysteric . frighten as he be , for he never before have to deal in that way with a nature resemble mine , he would not even ring for help , lest I should betray my secret to other ear than his own . when at last I come to myself , he kiss I tenderly , and say : 
 " my poor dear child , remember - when you may be glad to think of it - that whether I see my noble boy or not , I shall die now in perfect happiness . noble he must be , or Clara could not love he . it would have be the pet scheme of my heart , if I could have have a voice in it . and here it be do without I ! how often have I long and yearn that he could only see you , as you wait day and night by my pestilential bed , that he could only know the tale of your trouble and devotion . at my death , the generation so visit from heaven expire ; and you three darling start anew , with all thing in your favour . now mind that the good old Signor 's direction be comply with , and that Harry , if he live here , abandon the corsican property to his sister Lily . promise I this , my Clara . " 
 " of course I will , dear Uncle - I mean , so far as my influence go . and he will then be bind to do so under the deed - poll , if I understand you aright . but perhaps he have quite forget I now . " 
 " of course he think himself bind to avoid you . but I have write to set he right , and to bring he as soon as possible . and now about - about that horrible - " 
 " ah , yes . if I have the right , I would even let he go . my feeling have change from fierce hatred to utter contempt . and surely his vengeance be satisfied now . " 
 " no , Clara . it will flame more wildly than ever the moment he learn his mistake , and my final triumph over he . have he any idea where our Lily be ? " 
 " as yet , he can have none . if old Cora go to Albert Street last evening , she would learn nothing from Mrs. Shelfer , I take care of that , except that Lily have be there , and be go again . the old woman do not speak English enough to attempt to cross - examine . she love poor Lily , I know , but will be satisfied with the belief that the child have go to her brother 's . and as for that monster , even if he relent , he will be too proud to inquire . " 
 " what have my poor child do , that the brute turn she out , and strike she ? " 
 " nothing , I believe , beyond defend her brother Conrad , as she always do . I suppose I may call he ' Conrad , ' Uncle ? " 
 " yes , my dear , it be his true name , choose by his mother . where be you go so hastily ? " 
 " to London at once . for your sake , Uncle dear , I must not think of spar he . I must have he in custody to - night . I would have avoid it , if I could for a thousand reason ; but there be no alternative . " 
 " yes there be . in two day I shall be beyond his reach . do not   ask I what I mean . to - day be Thursday . promise only to let he go free till Saturday . " 
 " I will . but I must go to London . I can not rest quiet here . " 
 my Uncle 's face brighten beautifully . and he take my hand in his . 
 " I know what you mean , my darling . you intend to discover my Harry , for fear of any mishap . I will let you go , dear ; though the house seem empty without you , its truthful and graceful mistress . but you must not go alone . it be not right for a beautiful girl , however self - possess and dignified , especially one of your station , to rove about unattended . " 
 " only one man ever insult I , Uncle , I mean in a serious way , and he never do it again . " 
 " it do not matter . the example be bad , and all man be not gentleman . Mrs. Fletcher shall go with you , and our pretty Lily keep house . but I have an especial reason , and a most powerful one , for wish that you should be here . do not   go till to - morrow , my darling ; I be so well to - day , and I must see you once at your own table , with my daughter and I for your guest . " 
 " oh , Uncle , I hope so a thousand time . I will stop till the morning , if you have set your heart upon it . " 
 " I have indeed . you may go in the morning by the first train , and be back to - morrow night . will you promise ? " 
 though I could not understand his motive , and he be pleased to conceal it , I promise all he ask . then I tell he all the story of Conrad and the accident , how he save my mother 's life and mine , with the courage and skill of a true - bear mountaineer . my Uncle be move to tear , not only at the gallantry of his son , but also by the joy of discover that all the obligation lay not upon one side . I also weep at find that Lily have never hear of it . Conrad 's lofty nature scorn to narrate its own achievement . when , after that adventure , he discover who we be , he avoid we because he believe that his father have slay mine . it be not till a later date , when he become of age - as the Corsicans reckon manhood     - that lepardo Della Croce tell he all he know of his history , dwelt on the foul shame work to the Della Croce by his bigamist father , and try in vain to force on he the awful oath of Vendetta . the youth have too much english blood in his heart to accept the black inheritance . Thenceforth he could not bear the sight of the man who have kill , as they both suppose , his father , although , in his wrath for his mother 's wrong and his own , he would not resent the deed . what marvel then that he spurn I , and be madden with himself , at find that he , the illegitimate , be in love with I , his legitimate sister ? but now , we be only half - cousin , and nature have never mislead we . 
     i.e. the age of twenty . 
 all that evening , my Uncle be in the most glorious spirit , and I be not sure that Lily and I be very far behind he . he play we all sort of boyish trick , and we make reprisal with girlish one , till Lily 's joyous laughter rang halfway clown the corridor . I have dress she with especial care , and she do look such a love ! but it be all too sudden , and far too sweet to last . my Uncle indeed seem quite beside himself , more gladsome than nature allow we to be with impunity . then the vein dry all of a sudden , and the mind flow the opposite way . he make his beautiful daughter , who , though not much of a sophist , have a soul that thrill to music , he make she play the soft Corsican air , that seem to weep as they breathe , and which she have learn from old Cora . he know they all ; how well he know they , his face turn from the light betray . the depth of melodious sadness , the touch of some nervine chord , which know not its own existence , and start to be know and appreciate , as might an unconscious poet , and more than all the trembling spread of the feeler of the heart , these be the proof of nature 's presence in music or in poetry . 
 then he beg I to play some of the sweet and simple melody of Wales . these he declare , and I have already perceive it , these be bear of the self - same spirit , though not so highly intensify , as the corsican romance . 
 finally , he tell we many a move tale of his Lily ; tale a man be loth to tell to those with whom he expect to live . how she be love , and how she seem to love everybody , and pretty answer she make to those who praise her beauty , and more than word or kiss , the love thing she do , the elegance of self - denial , and the innocence of merit . 
 that night , that memorable night , we stay up more than two hour over his proper time for go to bed . he seem so sad to part , that I could not bear to hurry he . one thing he tell I which I be glad to hear . 
 " Clara , darling , I have take a liberty with your house . this afternoon , I write by the London post , for Annie Franks to come back again to - morrow , if she will , as an especial favour to I . " 
 I be rather surprised ; but answer he warmly , and in all truth : 
 " Dear Uncle , you know that I love she ; and I can not see too much of the few whom I really love . " 
 then , as I be to start at six o'clock in the morning , he wish I " good bye , " in a solemn manner , which seem to I quite uncalled for . he draw my young face to his own , so mark by sorrow and illness , look into my eye as if I be to remember something , then hold I in his trembling embrace , and kiss I long and fondly . 
 " God in heaven bless you , darling , for all you have do to I and mine . " 
 " mine , you should say , dear Uncle . I count they now my own . " 
 his daughter take he away , with her white arm throw around he . for now she sleep in the closet next to his room , where I have so long be quarter . 
 CHAPTER VII . 
 in the early morning , I be off for London , take Mrs. Fletcher with I , much against my will , because she seem to cumber I both in thought and action . between the door and the avenue , I look from the open carriage - I hate to be shut up in summer - at the dear old house . Lily have get up to breakfast with I , in spite of my prohibition ; and she be go with we as far as the lodge , to have a nice walk back . to my great surprise I see my poor Uncle , stand at his open window , wrap in a dressing - gown . he kiss his hand and wave I his last farewell . I leap on the seat to reply , and then scold he with my glove . half in play and half in sorrow , he mock my lively gesture , and the morning breeze lift his silver hair , as he waft I the last kiss . I tell Lily to scold he well , with my very good love , and she ask I in the most ladylike manner , if I see any green in her eye . the girl have pick up a great deal of slang among the fair collegian . Mrs. Fletcher look sadly shocked ; so I say , to reassure she : " you know , Mrs. Fletcher , we must make allowance for young lady who come from college . " 
 " to be sure , Miss Vaughan , to be sure we must , " she reply with her most sagacious air : and at Gloucester she whisper to the coachman , " John , the villain that steal Miss Lily send she to Oxford , in a young gentleman 's clothe , and she take a very high degree : but do not   say a word about it . " " not by any mean , ma'am , " answer John , with a grin . nevertheless , it find its way over the house , and the result be that all the girl come to Lily about their sweetheart . 
 I mention this trifling incident only to show how little I think that I then see the last of my Uncle . 
 at Paddington we meet Annie Franks take her ticket for Gloucester , and look most bright and blooming , with a grand pocket in her cloak , make to hold a three - volume novel . I have only time for a few word with she , in which I commend my Uncle to her especial attention , as she have ten time my cousin 's experience . then I go with she to the down - platform , and see she get into the carriage , and give she the last of my sandwich , while a cruel guard make she turn out her new pocket , insist that she must have a little dog conceal there . I laugh at the poor little dear , as crimson with mortification she show before all the gentleman the triple fluted bulk , and the guard read out , more in amazement than rudeness , " Sir Ingomar of the Red Hand ; or , the Knight of St. Valentine , and the Paynim Lady . " the gentleman be gentleman , and try very hard not to smile ; but the way the guard scratch his head be a great deal too much for they . " Dog 's ear , anyhow , " cry he , try to escape with a joke . I draw she out of the carriage , with tear in her soft gray eye , and put she into another , where Sir Ingomar be unknown , and might spur on at pleasure . then the smile return to her shy and innocent face , and she put her head to the window , and whisper gently to I : 
 " any strawberry leave , dear ? " 
 " I should think so , Annie . the good of they all , the British Queens , be just come in . and such a crop of grape ! " 
 Annie 's conception of perfect bliss be to sit upon a shady bank , " the breeze just fan her delicate cheek , " with a cabbage - leaf full of strawberry by she , and a cut - and - thrust novel upon her lap . off she go with a lovely smile , foresee all these delight . 
 from Paddington we drive straightway to the lodging of Conrad Vaughan . as we jolt along the new - road , which always have more hole in it than any other street in London , I lose my wit in a tumult of thick tempestuous thought . what would Conny say to see I , I the haughty Clara , come all impatiently even in quest of he ? would it not have be far well , far more like an english maiden , to wait , and wait , and wear the soul out , rather than to run the risk of mis - interpretation ? true , it be for his father 's sake , to save he from deadly peril , and to make his happiness complete ; but might not all have be do by messenger , as well as by I in person ? so at least might fancy those who do not know our enemy . bad of all , and cloudiest think , that fill the eye every time it come , - would he love I still ? would not the strong revulsion , that must have tear he in two , when he dash his hand on his forehead , and forget even man 's forbearance , would not , must not this have snap all the delicate root of love ? I could not tell . of man 's heart I know nothing ; but I feel that with I , a woman , such a horrible thing would create only longing to make amend . 
 " Mrs. Fletcher , how be my hair ? " 
 " Lovely , my pretty child " - she always call I so from habit when no one else be present - " you look your very good ; and I would like to see they that could - talk to I of Lilies indeed , when our Miss Clara - " 
 " no smut on my nose , Mrs. Fletcher , I hope ? I never feel sure , in London . you do not   know London , you see . " 
 " no , my pretty , as clean as a whistle , and as clear as the voice of a May - bird , every atom of you . there be no such complexion nowhere out of Gloshire or in it : and its all along of the brimstone and treacle I give you , when you be small . talk to I of lily - why I see three great butter spot , as big as the point of a needle , and I know by the make of her boot that her little toe turn over ; and what be more than that - " 
 " Mrs. Fletcher , I will not   hear a word of it . as to her little toe , I can most solemnly declare that you be wrong altogether ; for I have see her naked foot , and a lovelier one never be - " 
 " take yours out of the way , Miss. but - " 
 " but - here we be ; and you have make my cheek quite red ! I shall be ashamed to be see . " 
 however , it do not matter ; for there be no one there to see I . Conrad be go to Paris ; he have quit London quite suddenly , and there be a letter leave for his sister , which the girl forget to post , till she think it be too late . and he say very likely he should go on to Italy ; and they be not to keep the room , if they have a chance of let they , only to put away the thing he have leave , in the cupboard . so I take the letter , direct " Miss Isola Ross , " but I do not dare to open it , much as I long to do so . have enclose it in a new envelope , and post it in the near letter - box , with a heavy heart I re - enter the cab , and go on to Mrs. Shelfer 's . 
 Mrs. Shelfer be of course surprised to see I so soon again . nevertheless she be all kindness and hospitality , as usual . the residue of her little debt have be long ago release , and now I pay full rent , for I could easily afford it . in answer to my eager inquiry as to what have occur since Wednesday , the little woman say shortly : 
 " nothing at all , Miss , of any account , I thank you . only Charley throw double size , three time run , and win - " 
 " I do not   mean that , Mrs. Shelfer ; I mean , what have happen for I ? " 
 " nothing , Miss Vaughan ; no , nothing to concern a great lady like you : only such a queer lot come , and they seem to be friend of your . they be not   go from here more than half an hour ago . " 
 " tell I all about they . " 
 " they come and ring the bell , as modest as could be ; and when I go to the door , say they , ' if you please , where be Miss Clara , ma'am ? ' ' Miss Clara ! ' say I , ' a set of dressed up trollop like you , come and ask for Miss Clara ! she would Miss Clara you , pretty quick time , I doubt , if she be only here . ' ' we humbly hop no offence , ma'am , ' say the great big man , the big man as ever I see without pay , ' only we have come up from the country , ma'am . ' ' up from the country ! ' say I , ' need not   tell I that , my good giant ; any fool can see that . and if you take my advice , you will clap your hat on , and go down again , and thank God for it . ' you see , Miss , he have get his hat off , and he stand out of door , on the shady side of the street ! so what I say seem to stop he altogether , and he look as if he want to think about it ; and I be just a slapping the door in their face , when the other man , the queer guy I ever see , a hanging in his clothe like a skiver in a dish - clout , he look full in my face as grave as a heretic parson , and stretch out his skinny arm , and keep time with one foot , while he say or sing , 
 " ' Ma'am , we be here now in this Lunnon town , 
 and it bain't   likely as we be go down , 
 till we see every mortal thing as there be for to see , 
 and take all the change out in a thorough - go spree . ' 
 
 then the big man laugh and clap he on the back ; and the little one wink both his eye , and look to see what I think of it . then when he see I laugh , he make I such a coorous bow , that what with his - what do they call the plaister , Miss ? " 
 " Diachylon , perhaps you mean , Mrs. Shelfer ? " 
 " ah , that be the word . what with his strange diaculum , and his dancing altitude , I declare I be a most a go to invite they in : but I recollect , no , no : if Charley get along of such Reginalds as these , I may stand at the bed - room door and whistle for a week . there be nothing Charley love so much as a downright Reginald . " 
 poor simple - minded woman ; how little she perceive that she of all the number be by far the most original ! and , like most of those who be truly so , she would have take the imputation as an outrageous insult . only the sham original glory in be think queer . 
 " well , Mrs. Shelfer , I want to hear the end of it . " 
 " just what I say , Miss. yes , yes , no time to spare , and the pudding boiling . so I say , quite sharp , ' what name , my good sir , and will you leave a message ? Miss Vaughan be out of town . ' ' wull , ' say he , just as I tell you , Miss , ' ony plase you say , ma'am , as Jan Uxtable , and Beany Dawe , and the two beggest of the chiller have do theirselve the honour of come to lave their dooty . ' then the little girl look up and she flash her ribbon and say , ' Mr. Huxtable , if you please , ma'am , and Mr. Ebenezer Dawe , and Miss Huxtable , and Master John , have call . ' ' had not   you well write it down , Miss ? ' say I , as innocent as possible . ' do you suppose I can not   then ? ' say she , with such a spitting out of her eye , and she swing a new parry sole . ' just give I a sheet of papper , if you keep such a thing in the house . ' ' plase to excuse the little wanch , ma'am , ' say the big man , quite humble , ' we can not   hardly make head nor tail of she , since she come to this here Lunnon . if I have only know it I would have have her mother along of I , that I would ee fai , and the coo be her own midwaife . but ony plase you say Jan Uxtable come if they count it dacent hereaway . Threescore acre and five , ma'am , without reckon the Cleeve , and no man have a call , to my mind , to christen himself " Mister " on less than a hundred acre , in Lunnon or out of it . ' ' very well , sir , ' I say , for I take to the big man somehow , ' I will deliver your message . Miss Vaughan only go from here of middle day on Wednesday . ' ' and tell she please , if she do come back , ' say spirity Miss Parrysole , with the tear in her great blue eye , ' that Sally Huxtable leave she very good love and duty , and hope so much Miss Clara will come to see the great wrestling to - morrow , twelve o'clock , and be early . and they be bet now two to one on the other man , ma'am . but he have no chance , no more than Tim Badcock with father . ' ' I be much afeare , ma'am , ' say the deep - voice man , as soft as any bell , ' I be afeare our Sally will be begger by a lanyard nor ever her daddy or her mammy be . but likely it be all for the good . ' and with that all four of they crook their leg to I most polite , and go on round the corner ; and after they go a score of boy , that seem to follow they everywhere . the boy know all about it , and so do I at last , that it be the great champion wrestling , that be to be to - morrow . Charley have be mad about it go on now two month . and can you please to tell he , Miss , which way to lay his money ? " 
 " to be sure , I can . let he take every offer of two to one against the Devonshire champion ; and if he lose I will make it good to he , upon condition that he give you everything he win . now please to let I have a cup of strong tea . " 
 have thus get rid of my most talkative friend , and Mrs. Fletcher have start off to buy something , I have time to think a little . 
 it be nearly two o'clock on the Friday afternoon . nothing more could be do at present towards recover Conrad , for he have not even leave at his lodging any Continental address . possibly his place of sojourn might be reveal in the letter to his sister , post by my hand : but it be far more likely that he himself know not , at the time of writing , where he should find quarter . I must have be beside myself with worry and disappointment , when I drop that letter into her Majesty 's box ; for if I return , as have be arrange , by the express at five o'clock , several hour would be save in the delivery of its tiding . and , as yet , I little dream where I should be at five P.M. 
 in that little room , whose wall be more relieved than decorate by certain daub of mine , which even in my narrow strait I could not bear to part with , because an indulgent critic have find merit in they - a discovery require much acuman - here I now sit , gaze fondly , dream hazily , yearn strongly for the day go by , yet only three month old , when I have not a crust or dress till I earn it by my labour . how that pinch enlarge my heart , God only know , not i. ah , then I be a happy girl , though I never guess it . how proudly I walk down the Square , with my black straw bonnet on - which Idols call the Dowdy , - and my dark plaid shawl around I , the plainest of the plain , yet not prepared to confess myself so quotidian as my dress . who could tell , in those happy day , who might come , or round what corner , and who could say whether of the twain would look the more accidental ? and then the doubt - shall I look or not , well perhaps be intent on the fire - plug , and make he come round again ? 
 but now . ah I , they have heap up rich for I , and who shall come to enjoy they ? 
 just as I be warm to this subject , gush along in a fine vein of that compassion which alone of soft emotion we find it no duty to wrestle with , I mean of course self - pity - in come Mrs. Fletcher , suddenly , and in anger . 
 " well , Miss Clara , " she exclaim , throw down her parcel , ' so this be London , be it ? " 
 " to be sure , Mrs. Fletcher . what objection have you to make to it ? " 
 " no objection , Miss , only this , that if ever I see a set of countrifie folk , the Londoners be they . why the commonest of our kitchen - maid would be ashamed to talk so broad , and to dress so contemptuous . and here I go half a mile to buy boot , real London - make ; and tree all along by the side of the road , and pot on the shelf of the window . I never , if Gloucester do not   look much more like a town . " 
 as Mrs. Fletcher do not tell a story with the herodotean vivacity of Tim Badcock , I will render her fact in my own unpretending version , premise only that she have take the farmer and Sally for specimen of the true Cockney ; a bit of saltatory reasoning of which she have not hear   and perhaps never will hear   the last . while then the worthy housekeeper be drive a slow but shrewd bargain , in a smart shop by the Broadway , take the boot to the sunshine , to pick clever hole in the stitching , she observe a diminutive boy , of the genuine shoe - black order , encamp in a bight or back - eddy of pavement , just at the side of the door . this little fellow be uniformed , or rather multi - colour , in gold , and red , and green . his cap be scarlet , and edge with gold twist ; his tunic red , and his apron of very bright green baize . on his cap , and on one shoulder , appear his number , 32 , in figure of brass , an inch and a half in length . strap on his back he carry an oblong block of wood , like a great club - foot , and nearly as large as himself . this he deposit , with elaborate fuss , on the curb of the inner pavement , which terrace some inch above the true thoroughfare . a black - jar hang at one end of his block ; from a drawer below he pull out three well - wear brush , and begin to hiss and to work away , in double quick time , with both hand , at some boot project towards he on the delicate foot of fancy . as he grow warm at his work , with one sharp eye all the while look out for a genial passenger , there slowly come straggle towards he a bevy quite fresh from Arcadia . first , in treble importance walk , impressively roll and leer around , Hermes , Pan , and the owl of Pallas , combine in one Ebenezer Dawe . his eye , never too co - operative , rove away upon either side , in quest of intelligence , which they receive with a blink that mean , " Pooh , do not   I know it ? " with occasional jerk of his lank right arm , he be drag along , like a saw through a knot , the sturdy , tight - button , and close - pronged form of our little Jack . Jack be array in a black wide - awake , with blue ribbon , and a bran - new suit of broad - furrow corduroy , make of night by his mother and Suke , and turn out with countless pocket , each have three broad button , to foil the London thief . in one of these pocket , the trouser one I do believe , in spite of all Sally have teach he , he be now chink , to the creak of the corduroys , his last - abide halfpence , and lag heavily on the poet 's arm , he cast fond glance at a pile of glorious peg - top . stick her toe into little Jack 's heel , to kick anybody that dare to steal he , come my little Sally , all fire , and wonder , and self - assertion , tow her mighty father along , like a grasshopper lead an ox . at time she strove to drag he towards the finery of the window , and pay very little heed to his placid protestation . " walk fitty , my dear ; walk as you ought to do , my dear . oh fai ! oh fai ! whatever wull they lunnoner think of Davonsheer , if they zee you agooin on laike this here ? there , dang that Beany Dawe ; bl if I baint a toornin Poüt too . Coomth of larnin to wraite , I reckon . " the farmer 's pocket be cram with circular , handbill , and puff of every description , which he receive from all who offer , and be save they all for his wife . 
 " clean your boot , my gentleman , " cry a little shrill voice ; " clean both your boot for a halfpenny . never say die , Sir ; polish them bright till the cat at home will not   know they . three - farding - worth of blacking , and a penny in skill and labour , and all for the laughable sum of one half - penny . pure satisfaction guarantee , or the whole of the money return . up with your foot , my gentleman ! " 
 the farmer pull up suddenly , for fear of walk over he , as the boy , despise Beany Dawe , have dash in between Jack and Sally , and dance before Mr. Huxtable . his brush be whisk about , like bumble - bee roughly disturb , and already menace the drab of the Sunday fustian gaiter . 
 " Zober now , " cry the farmer , who could not believe that he be address , have never dream , in his most ambitious moment   if any such he have , of ever be call a gentleman , " zober now , wull'e . where bee'st gooin to , thou little hosebird ; be they your lunnon - town manner ? Lat alo - un , I zay ; lat alo - un now , wull ' e ? " - as the boy get more and more tentative - " Heart alaive , can not e zee , they be my Zunday gaiter ? oh , if my missus wor here ! and ' e bain't   more nor naine year old ! wull , wull , where ever do ' e goo to schoüll ? " 
 " Hinstitooshun 66 . no child or female admit . up with your foot , old bloke ! do the young uns and tootor half - price . just two minute to spare , till the Dook of Cambridge 's turn . great Exhibition polish , and all to encourage the fine art . " 
 the good farmer be lose beyond hope , in the multitude of subject press all of a pulp on his slow understanding ; nevertheless , he have presence of mind to feel first for his watch and his money , and then for the good pocket - handkerchief stitch into the crown of his hat ; meanwhile the boy get hold of one foot , and begin to turn up his gaiter . then Sally and little Jack rush to the rescue , and Jack punch the boy in the face , while Beany Dawe look on with a grin of broad experience . but in spite of all aid , the farmer begin to collapse before his mosquito enemy ; when luckily three giant life - guard   for a crowd be now collect   open their mouth , like the end of a monkey - fur muff , in a round and loud guffaw , with a very coarse sneer at poor Sally . the farmer look at they in much amazement ; then his perplexity go like a cloud , and his face shine with something to do , as he give Sally his hat to hold . till now all the mocker have be too small for he anyhow to fall foul of . Ere the echo of laughter be over , the three dandy Lifeguards lie on their back in the mud , with their strip leg erect in the air , like the rod of a railway surveyor . the crowd fall back headlong , as if from a plunge horse , then laugh at the fallen and with the conqueror . even the boy be humility multiply into servility . 
 " Wutt be up to , arl on ' e ? " ask the farmer , replace his hat ; " cas'n none on ' e lat a pacible chap alo - un ? and wutt will they chiller think as coom here to get example ? why , Beany , if we have know this , we would have bring Bill constable with we , ees fai . now ' e do not   know nothing about it " - he remonstrate with the admire multitude - " one o ' they dree worn't   throw handsome laike , ony dree pin , I tull ' e. but us'll do it over again , if he claimeth it . can not   do nothing vitty , zin I lave my missus at home . but she wadn't   coom , God know . " these last two remark be address to himself , but the crowd have full benefit of they . " worn't   ' e ax of lave , two or dree minute agone , little chap with the brisk there , to tend my butt , and tuk it amost wiout ax ? Us be bind laike to stap here now till we zee if they ' lisher man feel up for any moor plai . do as ' e plase , little chap , zoon as Sally hath toorne my good gaiter up , if she bain't   too grand in Lunnon . " 
 with bright ribbon flutter and finery flap about she , poor Sally kneel down in a moment to work at the muddy fustian : but her father would not allow it , he have only wish to try she ; so he catch she up with one hand , and kiss she , and I think , from what Mrs. Fletcher say , he must have give her sixpence at least . 
 it be needless to say that , although the boy work with both hand in the most conscientious manner , the farmer 's boot defy he . Neats'-foot oil , and tallow , and beeswax hold their own against Day and Martin . " Coom , little chap , " say Mr. Huxtable , kindly , " thee hast dooe thy very good , but our Zuke will have the laugh of thee . tache thee perhaps it wull to be zoberer next taime , and not be quite so peart to do a dale more nor thee can do . but thee hast use more ink than ai wud over two copy . here be a groat for the Exhibition polish . " 
 in this little episode , as will be manifest , Sally have help I more than Mrs. Fletcher . but now , to return to my narrative . 
 almost directly after the housekeeper leave I , Patty come trot in with a large white breakfast - cup full of most powerful tea . I can not help think that the little woman put some brandy in it , or allow Mrs. Fletcher , who trust much in that cordial , to do so ; but they stoutly deny the charge , and declare that there be only a pinch of gunpowder . whatever it be , be parch with thirst , I swallow without taste it , and the effect upon my jade brain be immediate and amazing . all self - pity be go ; and self - admiration , and haughty courage succeed . be I , Clara Vaughan , who have grope and grub for year to find the hole of a blast snake , and have now get my hand upon it , be I to start back and turn pale at his hiss , and say , " God speed you and polish your skin . give I your slough for a keepsake ? " would I not rather seize the incarnate devil , trample his spine , and make his tongue sputter in dust ? in a moment my cloak and hat be on again ; I scarcely look at the glass , but feel the hot flush on my cheek , as I lightly skip down the stair , and silently leave the house . what to do next I know not , nor ask , but fly headlong before the impulse , to lift and confront - as be my nature - the danger that lie before I . as I glide along , I be conscious of one thing , the people in the street turn in surprise to watch I . as if by instinct , I hurry straight to Lucas Street , my courage mount high and high as I near the accursed threshold . Balaam and Balak stand at the bar of a tavern which command a view of the street , but be much too busy with beer to see I pass so swiftly . loudly I ring the bell of No . 37 ; the figure be bright on the door , and look narrowly , I perceive the old no . 19 , more by the line than the colour . 
 Old Cora come as usual ; but start at see I , and turn as pale as death . 
 " be your master within ? " I could not use his false name . 
 " yes , Meesa , but you not see he now . " 
 " dare you to disobey our Lady 's heart ? " and I hold my gordit before she . she cower with one knee on the mat and kiss it ; then lead I into the presence of Lepardo Della Croce . 
 CHAPTER VIII . 
 it be a dark and gloomy room , with three high , narrow window . Cora depart hastily , frighten at what she have do . in a recess at the farth end , before a chest of black bog - oak , sit the man I seek . the crown moment of my life be come . all rehearsal go for nothing : the strong feeling of my heart be scorn , cold , unfathomable scorn . to show myself well , I take off my hat , and advance in my haughty manner . 
 as he turn his head , I see that his mood be black than the oak before he . some dark memorial perhaps be there ; hastily and heavily he fling down the lid , as I walk with even step towards he . 
 " ah ! Miss Valence ! the young lady that paint . I fear that you be lose to London ; for now - a - day the pursuit of the fine art require either genius , or fashion , at any rate the latter most , to be at all remunerative . may I show you the way to the drawing - room ? I have not often the honour of receive visitor here . but I think you know how entirely I be the slave of young lady , Miss Valence . " and he hold out his delicate hand . 
 " Lepardo Della Croce , my name be not valence . I be Clara Vaughan , the only child of he whom in his sleep you murder . " 
 he turn not pale , but livid . his jaunty nonsense be go in a moment . he quail from my dark eye , and fall upon a chair . for one minute there he crouch , and dare not meet my gaze ; every fibre of his flesh be quiver . it be not shame that cow he , but the prostration of amazement . 
 suddenly he leap upright , and meet I eye to eye . then I see that his pupil turn towards each other , as my uncle have describe . I neither speak , nor allow my gaze to falter . every nerve and cord of my frame be tense , and rigid , and root . to he I must have seem the embodiment of revenge . 
 at last he speak , very slowly , and in word that tremble . 
 " you have no right to judge I by your english notion . you do not understand I . " 
 " I judge you not at all . God shall judge and smite you . in cold blood you murder a man who never wrong you . " 
 " what ! " he burst forth in a blaze of triumph , " no wrong to steal my lovely bride , and my noble inheritance , to debauch the pure blood of Corsica by a prostitute wedding ; no wrong to strike I senseless ! even your nation of policeman would call this rather initiative . " 
 " the man you steal upon in his sleep have never see or hear of you , have never be in Corsica . " 
 " what ? " his tooth strike together like fire - tong badly joint , and he could not part they . 
 " it be true . I regret to inform you that you must go to hell for nothing . you could not even murder the right man . " 
 " tell I . " 
 " like a coward as you be , you crawl , and lurk , and lie ; you spend what little mind you have in secure a baby 's blow , you crouch among old clothe and bed - tick , and behind the housemaid 's flask ; and you go away exult in your bloody soul , over what ? the wrong man 's murder . " 
 " can it be ? " 
 " not only this , but you enrich and bring into high position the man you mean to kill . he become the lord of his half - brother 's land , and now be wealthy and happy , and the child you stole will help he to laugh at your Vendetta . " 
 " wait a little . " 
 " cat and small dog you can carve alive , when a woman have strap they down for you , and the poor thing be try to lick you . but as for midnight murder , however sound your victim sleep , you have not nerve enough . you quake and quiver so that you know not a dark man from a fair . clever , do not   you think ? particularly for a Professor . " 
 I see that my contempt be curl round he like a knout ; so I give he a little more of it . 
 " of course we could not expect you to meet your foe like a man . even be you a worthy sample of your sneaking race , you never could do that . too wholesome memory of the english blow between your quail eye . I be pleased to see you fumble clumsily for your dagger . who know but what you be fool enough even to have some self - respect ? " 
 a black tint dart beneath his skin , as if his heart be a cuttle - fish . have I take my eye from he , he would have stab I . he fall back against the oak chest . my madness grow with my triumph . 
 " no . you dare not do it , because I be not asleep . come , I will give you every chance , Lepardo Della Croce . if you be brave enough to shoot a white - haired man at dinner , surely you have the courage to stab a young girl on the sofa . here I lie . I will not move . and I defy you to do it . " 
 quietly I lay and watch he ; but as if he be scarcely worth it . he could not take his eye from mine . he be like a rat before a snake . and all the while , his hand be work on the cross haft of a poniard . 
 " what more can I do to encourage you ? would you like the curtain to skulk behind ? " 
 and I throw the window - hanging over the foot of the sofa , but so that I hold he still in view . calm as I be , I must have be mad to play with my life so contemptuously . presently I rise , put back my hair and turn away , as in weariness . 
 " I fear your appetite be cloy with the writhing of cat and dog . or have murder no relish for you , unless it be in cold blood ? but there , I be tired of you : you have so little variety . we will send you back to Corsica , and write ' Rimbecco ' on you . " 
 he spring at I madly , gnash his tooth , and whirl his stiletto . I face he just in time , with both hand by my side . have I raise they , or show the least sign of fear , my life would have follow my father 's then and there . 
 " yes , " I say , while he pause , with the weapon not a yard from I , " a spirited attempt , consider what you be . but waste of time and trouble . however , I have hit the word which seem to suit your view . allow I to repeat the agreeable term , ' Rimbecco . ' " 
 I see in his eye the flash which show the momentum give , but his arm fall powerless . he look even humbly at I . 
 " Clara Vaughan - " 
 " be kind enough to address I properly . " 
 " Miss Vaughan , you must have some powerful reason for wish to be rid of life . " he try to look piercingly at I . 
 " you be quite mistaken . it be nothing more than contempt of an abject coward and murderer . " 
 " to you I will make no attempt to justify myself . you could not understand I . your way of thought be wholly different . " 
 " I beg leave to hope so . do not   come near I , if you please . " 
 " if I have injure you in ignorance , I will do my good to make amend . what course do you propose ? " 
 " to let you go free , in pity for your abject nature and cowardice . we scorn you too much for anything else . " 
 this seem to amaze he more than all before . it be plain that he could not believe I . a long silence ensue . look at the wily wretch , I begin unwittingly to compare , or rather to contrast his noble victim with he . I think of the deep affliction and misery work by his despicable revenge . I think of his brutal cruelty to the poor creature God have give we ; and a rancour like his own begin to move in my troubled heart . it have be there all the while , no doubt , but a large pressure have still it . watch I intently , he see the change in my countenance , and as cold disdain grow flush with anger , my power over he depart . but he do not let I perceive it . I be sure that I might have go whither and when I please , and he would have fear to follow I , if I have only regard he to the end with no other emotion than scorn . 
 " be I to understand , " he say at last , " that you intend to do nothing to I ? " 
 " it be not worth our while to hang you . for such a crime any other punishment would be an outrage and a jest . you slew a good and a gentle man ; one as brave as you be cowardly . by the same blow you destroy his wife , who linger for a few year , pin till she die . both of these be dear to God . he will avenge they in his good time . only one thing we shall insist on , that you leave this country immediately , and under a solemn oath never to return to it . one good point you have , I be tell - fidelity to your word . " 
 " and if I refuse , what then ? " 
 " then you die a murderer 's death . we have evidence you little dream of . " 
 he have now recover his presence of mind , and his scoff manner ; and all his plan be form . 
 " what a brave young lady you be to come here all alone , and entertain so low an opinion of the poor Professor . " 
 " the very reason why I scorn precaution . " a deep gleam shoot through the darkness of his eye . 
 " you must indeed despise I , to come here without tell any one ! " 
 " of course . but I do not mean to come , till my father 's spirit lead I . " 
 with a shudder he glance all round the room . Lily be not mistaken when she call he superstitious . then he try to sneer it off . 
 " and do the good Papa , dear to God , undertake to escort you back ? " see that I disdain to answer , he continue thus : " you have display much graceful and highly - become scorn . I , in turn , will exhibit some little contempt of you . you be pleased to say , if my memory serve I , that you have some wonderful evidence . I will furnish you with more , and perhaps what you little dream of . approach , and examine this box . " 
 he raise the lid of the oaken chest , and prop it with a staple . quite throw off my guard for the moment , I begin to devour the content with my eye . not many thing be in it ; but all of they be remarkable . to I they look like theatrical property , or material for disguise . some of they be fade and tarnish ; some be set with a silver cross . my gaze be rivette on a pair of boot , fix in a ledge with horse - shoe bay ; on the sole of one I perceive a cross of metal inlay ; I draw near to see it more closely , when something fall over my head . all down I , and round I , and twist behind in a tight tourniquet , before I could guess what it be . I be not weak , for a girl ; but I could no more lift my arm than a swathe mummy can . neither could I kick , although as a child I have be famous for that accomplishment ; if I lift either foot , I must tumble head - foremost into the box , which be large enough for I to live in . Scream I could , and do , in spite of all my valour , not only from fright , but from pain , for my chest be dreadfully tighten ; but before I could scream more than twice , a cloth be pass over my mouth , and knot behind my neck . so there I stand , a helpless prisoner , in the recess at the end of the oaken ark . a low laugh thrill in my ear , but the hand on my spine relax not ; I turn my neck by a violent effort and meet the demon 's eye . 
 " very pretty you look , young lady , very pretty indeed . I must have a kiss before I have do with you , in spite of all indignation . there be a dress resemble this among the Tartar tribe . do I hurt your proud , straight nose ? if so , accept most humble apology . I would not injure it for the world ; it do express so much scorn . take care , my child , your eyelash be come through the worsted . " 
 yes . ignoble confession ! I , for whose disdain the world have be too small , be prisone and helpless in an " anti - macassar , " like a fly in a paper cage - trap . the sofa , on which I have lie so grandly defy my enemy , be cover with a stout worst net , long and very strong : this he have double end to end , and fling over my haughty head . I have not patience to recount his paltry , banter jeer . Contempt be a tool I be use to grasp by the handle only . be it enough to say that , without release I , he ring the bell for Cora , whose greedy eye glisten when she see my gordit loose from my bosom , and tangle in the net . her master allow she to disengage , and , for the time at least , appropriate it . in return for this , she be , at his pleasure , to stab I if he should order it . by his direction , she tie my ankle together , while he lash my arm anew , and tighten the muffler over my bleed lip . I close my eye , and pray ; then I make up my mind to die , as many a Vaughan have do , at the hand of a brutal enemy . my last thought be of Conrad , and then my sens forsook I . 
 CHAPTER IX . 
 I have a faint recollection of feel myself swung , and jolt down a number of stair , and of a cold breeze strike on my face . and doubtless they carry I down ; for the room in which I have find my enemy be two floor above the cellarage . when I come to myself , I have no idea where in the world I be . the air be heavy with a most powerful and oppressive smell , a reek and taint as of death and corruption . it make I faint , and I think I must have go off again . lift my head at last , I begin to look languidly around . the table , or working - bench , on which I lay , be near the centre of a long and narrow room , gloomy and cold , even in the dog - day , floor with moss - green stone , and far below the ground - level . those flag - stone , I suppose , be bed immediately upon the tough blue London clay , that most unconquerable stratum , sullen , damp , and barren . I could only see two window in the long low room , both upon the same side , horizontally fix , and several foot from the floor . heavy iron bar , perpendicularly set , cross they at narrow interval , as if it have be the condemn cell in a prison . one of these window be already darken with a truss of straw , and sack over it , place outside the glass ; as be do in Corsica , during Vendetta siege . the technical term be " inceppar le fenestre . " through the other window   which look up a slide or scoop of brickwork , like a malt - shovel , to the flabby garden behind the house , I see an arm , the colour and shape of an american herring , very active with a hammer . 
 I know that arm at once . stick out at the joint , like the spur of a pear - tree , welt and wire with muscle between they , like the drumstick of a turkey , but flat as if plait of hide , no friend of mine could claim it , except the Corsican Cora . deliberately she drive the nail , like a gardener train a tree , pay undue attention to her skinny knuckle ; then she lift the sack , stoop down and look in , grimly reconnoitre I . by the slanting light I see what a horrible place I lay in . around and under I , on the furrowed timber , be dull plum - colour blotch , where the slowly trickle blood of many an unlucky dog and cat have curdle ; even if there be not any shed from nobler vein . reach in a back - handed way towards the jagged margin , I grasp a cold hard cylinder . it be an iron hold - fast , like , but large than the instrument to be see in every carpenter 's bench , which work in a collared hole , and have a claw for clutch . under it , no doubt , many a poor live victim have quiver and sob in vain . at my head be two square slide , fit with strap of stout unyielding web . near they be a rasped iron plane work along a metal bed or groove , with a solid t piece , and a winch to adjust it . 
 as with morbid observation I survey these fiendish device , and many other which I can not stop to tell of , I who love almost every creature make by our own maker , especially those to whom we be lend as Gods , my flesh , I say , begin to creep , and my blood to curdle , as if the dissect knife be already in my diaphragm . surely those who in full manhood torture his innocent creature - poor thing that can not plead or weep , but worship the foot that kick they - surely these , if any , we may without presumption say that he who make will judge . four brief line by a modern poet , too well know for I to quote they , express a grand and simple truth , seldom deny , more seldom feel . 
 but here be I , lay out in this fearful place , perhaps myself a subject for vivisection . no , I be not strapped ; even my foot be free . off the grouted and grimy table I roll with all possible speed , the table where even strong Judy must have lain still as a skeleton . of skeleton there be plenty range around the wall , and other hideous thing which I can not bear to think of . one be a monstrous crocodile , with scale like a shed fir - cone , all reflexed and dry , and ringent lip of leather , and tooth that seem to look the wrong way , like a daisy - rake over - work . another be some pull - out beast , that never could hit his own joint again - plesiosauri , deinosauri , marsupial , proboscidian - I be sure I can not tell , have never be at college . I only know that at every one of they I shudder , and shrug my shoulder , and wish that he smell rather nice . then there be number of thing always go up and down , in stuff like clarify syrup , accord to the change of temperature , just as leech do in a pickle - bottle . snake as well , and other reptile streak like stick of peppermint , and centipede , and Rio wrigglers , call I think La Croya . it be enough in that vault - like room , which feel like the scooping of an August iceberg ; it be more than enough to strike a chill to the marrow , as of one who sleep in a bed newly bring from the cellar . but the bad and most horrible thing of all be the core and nucleus of the smell that might be feel , the half - dissect body of a porpoise , lean on a dozen stout cross - pole . it be enough to make the blood of a dog run cold . 
 overpower by sight and smell , and the fear of mingle with they , I huddle away in a corner , and try in vain to take my eye from the only sign of life yet leave , the motion of Cora 's club - like arm . the poor old woman enjoy my interest in her work , and when she have finish , she make I a mock salaam , and kiss the pixie 's heart . then , with a grin , she drop the rough hanging , and leave I in ghastly twilight . 
 as the sack fall over the window - frame , I lose all presence of mind , all honest indignation , everything but a coward horror , and the shrinking of life from death . with all the strength of my chest and throat , I cast forth , as a cannon discharge , one long , volleyed , agonising shriek . as it ring among the skeleton , and rattle their tissue - less joint , a small square grating in the upper panel of the heavy door swing back , and in the opening appear the face of Lepardo Della Croce . he lift his hat with a pleasant air , and address I with a smile , 
 " ah ! now , this I call a pity , a great pity , indeed , Miss Vaughan ; but that I always fear the imputation of pedantry , I should call it a bathos . you can hardly be aware that since you make that dreadful noise , you have fall in my opinion from a Porcia , or an Arria , to a common maid Marian . Fie , fie , it be too disappointing . it sap one 's candid faith in the nobility of human nature . but , as I can no long appeal to your courage or spirit , I must , it appear , address myself to your reason ; if , as I be fain to hope , your nerve have not impair it . be assure , then , once for all , that it be a vulgar error to exert your sweet voice in so high a key . my little dissect theatre , though not so perfect as I could wish , particularly in ventilation , be nevertheless so secured from erroneous plebeian sympathy , that all the cat in London might squall away their fabulous nine life without affect the tea and muffin of the excellent old lady who live on either side of we . that noble tabby , on the third shelf right , be a household god at No . 39 , until he have the honour of attract my attention . breathe not a word about he , if you ever come out . twice a day , I send to inquire , with my kind compliment , whether poor Miss Jenkinson have recover her darling cat . meanwhile , by inanition scientifically graduate , I succeed in absorb his adipose deposit , and find he one of the kind subject I have have the pleasure of manipulating . be not alarmed , Miss Vaughan ; I have no intention of starve you ; neither , if you behave with courtesy , will I even dissect you . I only mention these little fact to convince you of our pleasing retirement . the ceiling of your room be six foot below the level of the street , the wall be three foot thick and felt , and the brick set all as header , which make a great difference in conduct power . the window , as perhaps you have already observe , be seclude from vulgar eye , and command a very partial view of our own little Eden . moreover , if by exert your nobly - develop chest , to an extent which for your sake I affectionately deprecate , you even succeed at last in produce an undulation - do you remember my lecture upon the conflict theory of sound ? - or a vibration in the tympanum of a neighbour , I fear you would be regard - it shock I greatly to think of it - as a cat of rare vocal power , unduly agitated by my feeble pursuit of science . therefore , let I conclude my friendly counsel in the language of all your theatre - ah ! you have no drama now in this country , such poverty of invention - but in the word , which I regret to say , appear from six to a dozen time in every british trugody , Miss Vaughan , ' be calm . ' " 
 through all this brutal sneering , I stand resolutely with my back turn to he . perhaps he think that I would stoop to supplication . I could have bite my tongue off for that contemptible shriek ; it be such a triumph to he . 
 " ah ! sulky , I fear ; young lady sulky with the poor Professor , who try to develop her mind . Fie , fie , very small and ungrateful , and not half so grand a study as the attitude of contempt . what a pity poor Conrad be not present an hour ago ! how he might have enrich his little book of schemata . several most magnificent pose . but I fear the poor fellow have take his last chip . a sad thing , be it not ? why , how you start , Miss Vaughan ! oh , you can show your face at last ! and how pale ! well , if eye could only kill - " 
 " what be it - I mean be good enough just to go away . " 
 " to be sure I will . I have a little matter on hand which must not be delay ; to leave my carte de visite upon the right man , this time . I can not sufficiently thank you for your invaluable information . be that snug little entrance practicable still ? very hospitable people they use to be at Vaughan Park . fare you well , young lady ; I will not keep you in any unnecessary suspense . after my return , I shall arrange for your release ; if it can be make compatible with my safety . you will have plenty of food , and much time for meditation . let your thought of I be liberal and kindly . I never injure any one , when I can avoid it . I only regret that the air you breathe will impair , for the while , your rose . but what an opportunity of analyse the gas ! carbonic acid predominant . do you gratify I by bear in mind a lecture , at which you be very attentive , on Malaria and Miasma ? " 
 taunt to the last , and sneer even at himself , as man of the black dye of wickedness be very apt to do , he close the grating carefully , and I hear the ring of the metal cross on the rough stone step . he have the boot of vengeance on ; his errand be stealthy and cold - blooded murder ; I , who have never harm he , he be abandon perhaps to death , certainly to madness - and yet to his own idea , all he be do be right . 
 Frantic at the horror around I , and still more so at those impend through my own rash folly , I tear and scratch at the solid door , and fling myself against it , till my nail be break , and my finger bleed , and all my body palpitate with impotent mad fury . in weariness at last and shame at this wild outburst , I sit upon the floor , for I could not touch the operator 's stool , and try to collect my thought . be there any possibility of save my poor Uncle ? it must now be nearly four o'clock on the Friday afternoon , or at least I so compute it . the beautiful watch give I by my Uncle have stop through my reckless violence , and the breaking of the glass . the hand , as I could barely perceive , stand at a quarter to four . the express - train , by which Mrs. Fletcher and I be to have return , would leave Paddington at five P.M. and reach Gloucester soon after eight . Lepardo Della Croce would catch it easily , and perhaps would accomplish his foul design that night . my only hope of prevent he lie in his own tenacity of usage . from my Uncle 's account , I know , that on their cursed Vendetta enterprise , a certain pilgrimage on foot be , in many family , regard as a matter of honour . this usage owe its origin perhaps to some faint trace of mercy , some wish to afford the evil passion one more chance of relent to the milder reflection of weariness , and the influence of the air . be that as it may , I believe that the custom be hereditary in the Della Croce family ; and if so , the enemy would finish his journey on foot , quit the train some distance on this side of Gloucester . therefore if I could contrive to escape in the course of the night , I might yet be in time . 
 all the rest of the daylight , such as it be , I spend in examining , inch by inch , every part of the loathsome chamber , which be now my dungeon . by this time all my patience , habitual more than natural , have return , and all my really inborn determination and hope . surely I have be every bit as badly off before , and have struggle through quite as hopeless a difficulty . if arduous courage and tough perseverance be of any avail , those four wall should not hold I , though they might be three foot thick . so stop both my nostril with cotton - wool from a speciman   for the smell be most insufferable , and pin up my dress , I set to work in earnest . first , I examine the window : there be nothing to hope from they ; I could never loosen a bar , and even if I could , I should only escape from one prison to another , for the garden behind the house be surround with high dead wall . fireplace there be none ; the door have already baffle I ; could I dig through the party wall , and into the adjoining house ? most likely it be all a falsehood and boast about the thickness , intend perhaps to discourage I from attempt the easy way . and in so damp a place , the mortar probably would be soft . 
 so , after search and groping , ever so long , to find , if possible , one loose brick to begin with , I draw from my pocket a knife , of which I be very proud , " because my father have give it I ; and I look at it wistfully in the dusk , because I fear so to break it . nothing but the thought that life itself be at stake would ever have induce I to use that beloved knife for work so very unsuitable . 
 it be a knife of strong but by no mean elegant make , short in the handle , and squarer in the joint , than the rise generation of knife . very likely Sheffield of the present day would laugh at it ; but like most who laugh , it could not produce the fellow . my father himself have own it for nearly thirty year , and have treat it with the high respect which an honest knife deserve . from this due regard his daughter have not derogate , and the knife be now as good as when it leave the maker 's hand . it have never be hone in utter ignorance of proper plane and angle , as nearly all knife be , and by none so often as the professional knife - grinder . I never dare to meddle with it , except on a very mild razor - strap ; and all it be allow to do be to mend my pen - I , Clara Vaughan , hate steel paper - stabber - and sometimes to cut my pencil . 
 now , this true and worshipful knife be to cut brick and mortar ! in my natural affection for it , I hesitate and tremble , and know what be to come it close upon my finger . oh , ruthless Atta Navia ! trusty knife , fall to ! 
 meanwhile old Cora show at the heavy grating her countenance demiss ; to all my eager adjuration , promise , and prayer , she answer not a word , but grimly smile , like an ancient bird , beyond the reach of chaff . she hand I in a pint of milk , and a loaf of the variety term in London a " twopenny brick . " a red herring on the toasting - fork , drip with its own unction , be hastily show , and then withdraw , and the gordit appear in its stead ; which be do , the experienced dame wink , and regard I deeply . this mean , " surrender your legal right in Our Lady 's heart , without which I shall have no luck , and I will give you this beautiful fish , hard - roed , and do to a nicety . " ah no , sweet Cora , a good red herring be not to be despise ; but who could eat in a reeking hole like this ? once I go , for Judy 's sake , be rash and light of step , into the back premise of a highly respectable butcher . Woe be I , what I see and smell there be Muscat grape compare to this . 
 when Cora have depart , after hand I in a pillow and a blanket of the true work - house texture , and cross herself with a strange expression , meaning , as I interpret , " now keep alive if possible till breakfast time , young woman , " I sit I down upon the floor at one end of the room , and begin my labour . first . I put on a pair of tan - leather glove ; for small as my vanity be , I do not like my hand to look altogether like a hodman 's . then I remove a strip of the feel with which the wall be cover . it be nearly dark , but I could easily feel the joint between the brick . the mortar be not very good , but my work be render doubly difficult by the brick be all set cross - wise to the line of the wall ; this , I suppose , be what he mean when he describe they as " header . " by reason of this arrangement , I have to dig and dig for hour , before I could loosen a single brick ; and work all in the dark as I be , I fear every moment to break the stick - blade of my knife . the finger of my glove be very soon wear away , and even the palm where the heel of the knife be chafing ; nor be it long before my skin be full of weal , and raspy , like the knob I have see inside the leg of a horse . at last , to my wonderful delight , one brick begin to tremble . in another half - hour , I ease it out most carefully , kiss my trusty blade , now wear almost to a skewer , and with stiff and aching muscle , and the trophy brick upon my lap , fall off into as sound a sleep as ever I be bl with . 
 CHAPTER X. 
 when I awake , the summer dawn be steal faintly through the barricade window . oh ! how I long for one draught of air , even as London import it ! my head be burn and my eye distend from the tainted stuff around I , and my hand , and arm , and even shoulder be stiff from over exertion . languidly regard the brick I have work so hard for , and commiserate much the plight of my tender hand , I feel inclined to give it up , till I think of all at stake . my poor Uncle in deadly peril through my desperate folly ; Conrad too , as that murderer imply , in a critical position . my own life also - it might be a week before the monster return ; and I feel sure that I could not live more than three day in that corruption . the oppression be so horrible , especially when I stand up , that I resolve at all hazard to break one of the window . I have try to do so the night before , but they be beyond my reach , and I have no stick , for I durst not touch the pole that prop the unlucky porpoise . now , I have a good missile , and after two or three vain attempt from the closeness of the bar , I hurl the brick - bat through the glass ; and , as it raise the sack a little , I obtain more light , as well as a breath of air . the taint upon the glass , the reek of the deadly gas , even clear away for a short distance round the fracture . 
 Cora be fast asleep no doubt , and the crash of the glass do not disturb she ; so I fall to again , and work very hard till breakfast time . if I could only get out by noon , in time for the two o'clock train ! when I expect my jailor , I hide away under the porpoise the seven brick I have remove since daylight - for I could work much fast as the aperture increase - and then I fasten my blanket over the hole . after drink the milk with some relish - eat I could not in that pestilential den - I return to my labour , and prepare to attack the second course in the thickness of the wall . by this time I have contrive , with the help of a brick , to extract the hold - fast from the bench , which I could not do the night before ; and very useful I find it , both as a hammer and lever . so with rise hope , I resume . 
 oh , cruel disappointment ! the second course be bed in cement hard than the brick themselves . most likely they have form the outside of the wall , until Lepardo add the nine - inch lining of header . I be utterly dismayed ; and now my beloved knife , which have stand like a hero - martyr all its grind indignity , break off short at the haft , and leave I helpless and hopeless . and I be get on so well , and so proud of all I have do . there be nothing for it but a storm of cry . it serve I right for ill - treat my dear father 's knife so shockingly . 
 I cry for at least a quarter of an hour , before it occur to I what a great baby I be . then , with the tear in my swollen eye , and sob that make my net - press bosom sore , I begin to grope and peer again along the side of my prison . there be more light now than have hitherto enter , since Cora drop the curtain . this be partly owe to the position of the sun , and partly to the interposition of the brick . just opposite that window , on a shelf where lie an old Penguin look very bilious , I spy the corner of a little box , half cover with tow and moth - eat feather . snatch it eagerly , I find it to be a match - box . but alas , how light ! with tremble finger I pull it open , for it be one of those that slide . there be three , and only three , fine stout lucifer match , with the precious blue still on they . but even if they should prove dry enough to kindle , what good would they be to I ? 
 " all the good in the world , " say hope , look towards the door , " if you have show sense enough , Clara , to fall to at that door , before your knife be break , you might have cut through it by this time . now you can not , that be certain ; but why should not   you burn it down ? " 
 at any rate , I would try ; that be , if my match would only strike fire . I have feel last night a piece of candle on the floor near the crocodile . this I soon lay hand upon ; and now for operation . no fear of old Cora smell the smoke , for she spend all the forenoon , as I know well , in a little chapel she have establish quite at the top of the house ; and this be the festival of St. Bottle - imp , she would be twice as devout as usual . as for suffocate myself , that I must take the chance of . much well to die of curl wood smoke than of these crawl odour . 
 to give the wood , which be hard and solid , every inclination to burn , I channel it first in a fan from the bottom with my little pen - blade . then I cut off the low half of my precious candle , and smear the tallow in the shallow groove I have make . this be do , I break , with as little noise as possible , some other pane of glass , to admit the air to my fire , procure all the wool and tow that I could reach , and a pile of paper , and steep they , though it sicken I to do it , in the rank oil from some of the specimen . 
 all this be ready at hand , I prepare , with a beat heart , to try the match , on which the whole depend . I have take the precaution of slip they just inside my frock , hop that the warmth of my body might serve to dry they a little . the first , as I rub it on the sandpaper , flash for a moment , but do not kindle ; the second just kindle with a sputter , but do not ignite its stick : the third - I be so nervous that I durst not attempt it then ; but tremble as I look at it . I would not even breathe for fear of damp the phosphorus . perhaps three life depend on the behaviour of that match . in desperation at last I strike boldly ! a broad blue flame leap upon the air , and in a moment my candle be light . in the hollow of my hand I carry it round the room , to search for anything likely to be of service to I . oh ! grand discovery - behind a great tabby cat , I find a bottle contain nearly a pint of naphtha , use , I suppose , for singe some of the hair off . now I need not fear , but what I could burn the door down ; the only thing to fear be that I should burn myself as well , use the naphtha very cautiously , keep most of it as a last resource . 
 then commend the result to God , I set my candle carefully at the foot of the door , just below the spot where all my little groove converge . at once the flame run up they , the naphtha kindle angrily with a spatter and a hiss . the blue light show in livid ghastliness all the horror of the chamber . the naphtha be burn in a moment , it seem to go off like gunpowder ; from a prudent distance I throw more upon it , and soon I have the delight of see a steady flame establish . the lump of tallow be burn now , and the wood begin to smoulder . several time I think that I must be choke by the smoke , till it go in a cloud to the window , and stream away under the sack . 
 as the fire grow and grow , and require no more feeding , I lay on my face , to get all the air possible , at the further end of the room , where my loose mortar be scatter . I could feel my heart thump heavily on the pavement , and my breath be short and short , as much from fear as from smoke . if once I become insensible , or even if I retain my sens but fail to extinguish the fire , nothing more would ever be know or hear of Clara Vaughan ; there would be nothing even to hold an inquest upon . I must burn ignobly , in the fat of that dreadful porpoise , and with the crocodile , and all those grinning beast , so awful in the firelight , make face at I ! surely it must be time , high time to put it out ; that be to say if I could . once let the flame gather head on the other side of the door , and with my scanty mean I never could hope to quench it . 
 at last , I become so frightened , that I hardly let it burn long enough . it be flare beautifully , and lick deeply and deep   with ductile wreathe tongue and jet like a pushing crocus , the channel prepare to tempt it ; and now the black wood be redden , and a strong heat be give out , and the blaze begin to roar ; when I cast on the centre suddenly my doubled blanket , and prop it there with the pillow . after a few vain effort , the flame , deprive of air , expire in gray smoke ; then I remove the scorch blanket , and let the smouldering proceed . 
 the charring go on nicely for perhaps a quarter of an hour , and the smell make I think of bonfire and roast potato ; and I gouge away with the claw of the holdfast , until I see that , by a vigorous onset , a large piece might be detach ; so I step back and run at it with a mighty kick , and with a shower of dust and spark , a great triangle fly out before my " military heel . " 
 at the risk of set myself on fire , though gather in the small possible compass for a girl rather full in the chest , I squeeze through the hole in the door , and meet face to face old Cora . 
 she could not speak , but fall back upon the step , and roll in fit of terror . I think her black eye would have leap from their socket ; they come out like hat - pegs japanned . press as I be for time , I could not leave she so . I run up to the pump - trough for water , and put out the fire first , and then poor Cora 's hysteric . 
 I can not repeat her exclamation , to our ear they be so impious ; but the mild of they be these , as render weakly into English . 
 " Holy Madonna , most sacred mother , take back your blessed heart . take it back , for the sake of the God that love you , take it back , and trample on the wicked stomach of she who dare to steal it . you have come through the fire of hell to fetch it , mother of the beloved one , lo I hold it out to you . " 
 I gladly receive my poor gordit , and leave the old lady , as there be now no danger , to recover her wit at leisure ; for I have not a moment to spare . 
 as I enter Mrs. Shelfer 's door , the church clock at the top of the Square be strike twelve . by the two o'clock train I must go , or I might as well have stop in my dungeon . though the smoke have purify I a little , I still feel conscious of a nasty clinging smell ; but it would have surprise I , if there have be time , when the little woman cry , 
 " Lor bless my soul , Miss Vaughan , where ever have you be ? why , Mr. Chumps the butcher - " 
 " the bath in one moment , and all the water in the house . and as I throw my thing out , burn they in the garden . " 
 in twenty minute I be reclad from head to foot , and as sweet as any girl in Gloucestershire ; my eye be bright with energy , and my dripping hair in billow , like a rapid under the pine - tree . I have no time to tell Mrs. Shelfer , who be off her leg with excitement , one word of what have happen , or what I be go to do ; but fling on myself another hat and cloak , then her old bonnet and little green shawl on she , drag she out of the house , and lock the door behind we ; for Mrs. Fletcher , after wait and wonder long about I , be go to consult Ann Maples . if Mrs. Shelfer 's good bonnet be twenty - two year old , her second - good must have be forty - four ; at any rate it appear coeval with herself . 
 Patty trot along at my side , wonder what would come next . her thin little lip be work , and her face be like a kaleidoscope of expression ; but whenever I glance toward she , she cast her eye up , with a scared weird look , as if she be watch a ghost through a skylight , and trudge still fast , and mutter , " yes , yes , Miss Vaughan . quite right , my good friend ; not a moment to lose . " 
 " and pray , Mrs. Shelfer , where do you suppose we be go ? " 
 " oh , I know well enough " - with her eye like cork draw by distance - " I know it all the time . yes , yes . let I alone for that . Patty Shelfer be not   bear yesterday . why only Tuesday be a week - " 
 " if you guess right , I will tell you . " 
 " why go to Charley , Miss Vaughan , to be sure . go for Charley 's opinion . and very wise of you too ; and what a most every one do ; particular when he have money . but how you know he be there - " 
 " where ? " 
 " at the great wrestling match to be sure . and he want to take I ; a thing he be not   offer to do fifteen year next oyster - day . no , no , say I , with Miss Vaughan away , and most likely among they resurrectioner - " 
 here she cast at I a glance , like a flash of lightning , to see if the hit have tell . in a moment I understand all that I have not care to ask about ; why she tremble and shrink from my hand , why she fear to look at I , and fix her eye away so . she believe that I have be burke , and that what she see walk beside be my spirit come to claim burial . I could not stop to disprove it , any more than I could stop to laugh . 
 " and his grandfather be a sexton , Miss ; and our Charley himself a first - rate hand at the spade . " 
 " Mrs. Shelfer , we be close to the place . now , listen to what I say . it be not your husband I want , but Farmer Huxtable , whom you see at the door . nothing but a question of life and death would bring I among this rabble . no doubt there be many respectable man , but it be no place for a lady . the farmer himself know that , and have never dare to ask I ; though his wife and daughter , in ignorance , have . it be half - past twelve exactly ; in a quarter of an hour at the utmost , I must speak to , and what be more , carry off the Devonshire competitor . your husband be here , and on the Committee , you tell I . I expect you to manage it . go in at once and find he . stop , here be plenty of money . " 
 in her supreme astonishment , she even dare to look at I . but she fear to take the money , although her eye glisten at it , for I offer more gold than silver . 
 " come back to I at once ; I shall not move from here . mind , if the farmer lose the match through I , I will pay all , and give the money for another . " 
 for once the little woman obey I , without discussion . she push through a canvass door into the vast marquee , or whatever it ought to be call , and be admit readily on give her husband 's name . I hang back , but with a sense of the urgency of my case , which turn my shame into pride . many eye be on I already of lounger and outsider . in two or three minute poor Patty come back , bring Mr. Shelfer himself , who ever since his ducking have show I the rose and pink of respect . he even go the length now of remove his pipe from his mouth . 
 " very sorry indeed , Miss Vaughan , very sorry , you know . but we darrn't   interrupt the man now . our life would not   be worth it , and they would kill both the umpire and the referee too you know . why it be fall for fall , only think of that , Miss Vaughan , it be fall for fall ! " and the perspiration stand upon his forehead , and he want to run back . 
 " what do you mean ? " in spite of my hurry , I feel deeply interested . how could I help it , love the farmer so ? 
 " why , the Great Northern win the first throw by a bit of foul play , a foul stroke altogether , and no back at all , say I , and my eye be pretty good ; however , the umpire give it , and you should see John Huxtable 's face , the colour of a scythe - stone ; he know it be unfair you know . and you should see he go in again for the second fall . ' I could ha dooe it , ' I hear he say , ' I could ha dooe it aisy , only I wudn't   try Abraham , and I wun't   nother if can help it now . ' none of we know what he mean , but in he go again , Miss , and three time he throw Sam Richardson clean over his shoulder , and one as fair a back as ever be in sawdust . but the umpire would not   give it , till just now he turn he over straight for'ard , just the same as a sod in a spade , and they could not   get out of that . and now they be just in for the finishing bout , and if you want he , your only way be to come . may be , he will try Abraham , when he see you . ah they have   catch . " 
 a shout inside proclaim some crisis ; Mr. Shelfer , in his excitement , actually pull I in without know it . once there , I could not go back ; and the scene be a grand and thrill one . 
 in the centre of a rope arena , hedge by countless face , all rigid , flushed , and strain with suspense , stand two mighty form ; the strong man in England and perhaps in all the world . a loose sack , or jerkin , of the tough canvass , throw back clear of the throat , half - sleeve , and open in front , show the bole of the pollard neck , the solid brawn of the chest , and the cord of the outstretched arm . stout fustian breech , belt at waist , and strap at knee , case their vast limb so exactly , yet so easily , that every curve be thew , and every wrinkle sinew . thin white stocking , flake with sawdust and look rather wet , roll and stand out , like the loop of a mace , with the rampant muscle of the huge calf , and the bulge of the broad foreleg . 
 as the shout proclaim , they have catch or clutch ; a thing which be do with much fencing and feint , each foining to get the good grasp . where I go , or what happen to I , I never notice at all , so absorb at once I become in this rare and noble probation of glorious strength , train skill , and emulous manhood . 
 round and round the ring they go , as in musical measure , hold each other at arm ' length , pace warily and in distance , skilfully poise to throw the weight for either attack or defence . each with his left hand clutch the jerkin of the other , between the neck and shoulder , each keep his right arm lightly bent , and the palm like a butterfly quivering . neither dare to move his eye from the pupil of the other ; for though they be not build alike , each know the strength of his fellow . the Northern Champion be at least three inch tall than the Son of Devon , quite as broad in the shoulder and large of limb , but not so thick - set and close - joint , not quite so stanch in the loin and quarter . but he be long in the reach , and make the most of that advantage . on his breast he bear the mark of a hug as hard as a bear 's ; and his face , though a fine and manly one , look rather savage and spiteful . 
 the farmer be smile pleasantly , an honest but anxious smile . for the first time he have meet with a man of almost his own power ; and on a turn of the heel depend at least four hundred pound , and what be more than four million to he , the fame of the county that nurse he . above they hang the champion 's belt , not of the west or north , but of England and of the world . 
 suddenly , ere I could see how they do it , they have close in the crown struggle . breast to breast , and thigh to thigh , they tug , and strain , and pant . nothing though I know of the matter , I see that the north - man have win the good hold , and as his huge arm enwrap my friend , a tremble go through my own frame . the man of the North and their backer see it , and a loud hurrah peal forth ; deep silence ensue , and every eye be intent . though giant arm be round he and Titan leg inlocke , never a foot he budge . John Huxtable stand like a buttress . he try not to throw the other ; place as he be , he durst not ; but he make up his mind to stand , and stand he do with a vengeance . in vain the giant jerk and twisted , lever , heave , and labour , till his very eyeball strain ; all the result be rope and bunch in the wide - spread Devonshire calf , and a tightening of the clench that threaten to crush the northern rib . as well might a coil snake expect to uproot an oak . 
 as this exertion of grand stability last and outlasted , shout arise and ring alike from friend and foe , from north , and west , and east ; even I could not help clap my feeble hand . but the trial be nearly over . the assailant 's strength be ebb ; I could hear he gasp for breath under the fearful pressure . by great address he have win that hold , and make sure of victory from it , it have never fail before ; but to use a devonshire word , the farmer be too ' stuggy . " now , the latter watch his time , and his motive power wax as the other 's wan . at length he lift he bodily off his leg , and cast he flat on his back . a flat and perfectly level cast , as ever pancake crackle at . thunder of applause break forth , and scarcely could I keep quiet . 
 with amazement the farmer espy I as he be bow on all side , and amid the tumult and uproar that shake the canvass like a lark 's wing , he run across the ring full speed . then he stop short , remember his laboured and unpresentable plight , and he would have blush , if he have not be as red as fire already . none of such nonsense for I . I call he by name , take his hand , and with all my heart congratulate . 
 " but , farmer , I want you immediately , on a matter of life and death . " Beany Dawe and the child come , but I only stop to kiss Sally , and motion they all away . " if you remember your promise to I , get ready for a journey in a moment , and run all the way to my lodging . we must leave London , at two o'clock , to save my Uncle 's life . " 
 Mr. Huxtable look astounded , and his understanding , unlike his leg , for the moment be carry away . meanwhile up come Sally again , catch hold of my hand , and silently implore for some little notice , if only of her costume , violet , indigo , blue , green , yellow , orange and red . I could only kiss she again . 
 " oh do come , farmer Huxtable , do come at once , I entreat you ; or I must go alone and helpless . " 
 " that you shall not , my dearie , dang Jan Uxtable for a girt lout . " 
 " please , sir , I be send to tell you that the umpire give it no fall , and you must play again . " 
 the man look abase by his errand ; even he know well . in my hurry I have pay no attention to the ominous hissing and hoot around a knot of man on the bench at the end . 
 the farmer 's face I shall never forget ; as he slowly gather the truth , it become majestic with honest indignation . a strong man 's wrath at deceit and foul play sit upon it , like a king on his throne . 
 " for the chiller - " he stammer at last - " ony for the poor chiller 's sake - else I would never stand it , dange if I wud , Miss Clara ; it make a man feel like a rogue and a cheat himself . " 
 then , with all the power of his mighty voice he shout , so that every fold of the canvass shake , and every heart thrill fearfully : 
 " Men of Lunnon , if man you be , no chap can have fair play with you . it be all along of your swindle bet about thing you do not   know nothing of . you offer I five hunder pound , afore ever here I come , to sell my back to the Northman . a good honest man he be , and the good cross - buttock as ever I meet with ; but a set of rogue and coward that be what you be ; and no sport can live with you . as for your danged belt , I wun't   have it , no tino , it wud be a disgrace to the family ; it shall not   never go along side the Devonshire and Cornwall leather . but I will throw your man over again , and any six of you to once as plase . " 
 then , thorough gentleman as he be , he apologize to I for his honest anger , and for have draw all eye upon I , as there I stand at his side . 
 " but never fear about the time , Miss Clara , I will not   kape you two minute . I will give he Abraham 's staylace this time . they have a drive I to it , as we have not   a moment to spare . " 
 proudly he step into the ring again , and again the North Country giant , look rather ashamed , confront he . no fencing or feint this time ; but the Devonshire wrestler , appeal thus to the public , 
 " now look here , lunnoner , wull e , and zee if this here be a back , " rush straight at his antagonist , grapple he in some peculiar manner , seem to get round his back , and then spin he up over his own left shoulder , in such a way that he twirl in the air and come down dead on his spine . dead indeed he appear to be , and a dozen surgeon come forward , in the midst of a horrible silence , and some be prepare to bleed he , when the farmer move they aside ; he know that the poor man be only stun by concussion of the spine . awhile he kneel over he sadly , with the tear in his own brave eye : 
 " I wudn't   have do it , lad ; indade and indade I wudn't , ony they force I to it ; and you do not   say nought agin they . it be all fair enough , but it do hoort so tarble . that there trick be invent by a well man nor I be , and it be karle ' Abraham Cann 's staylace . ' I will show e how to do it , if ever we mat again . now tak the belt , man , tak it - " he leap up , and tear it down , with very little respect , " I resign it over to you ; zimth they arl want you to have it and you be a well man nor deserve it . and I will never wrastle no more ; Jan Uxtable 's time be over . give we your hond , old chap . we two never mate again , unless you come down our wai , and us han't   get a man to bate e , now I be off the play . there be dacent zider and bakkon to Tossil 's Barton Farm . give we your hond like a man , there be no ill will atween we , for this here little skumdoover . " perhaps he mean skirmish and manoeuvre , all in one . Sam Richardson , slowly recover , put out his great hand , all white and clammy , and John Huxtable take it tenderly , amid such uproarious cheering , that I expect the tent on our head . even Shelfer 's sharp eye have a drop of moisture in they . as for Beany Dawe , he fling to the wind all dithyrambic gravity , and chant and dance incoherently , Cassandra and Chorus in one ; while Sally Huxtable blot all her rainbow in heavy drop . 
 hundred of pipe be smash , even the Stoic Shelfer 's , in the rush to get at the farmer ; but he part the crowd right and leave , as I might part willow - spray , and come at once to I . whether by his aid , or by the sympathy of the multitude , I be sure I can not tell , but I find myself in a cab , with Sally at my side , and Mrs. Shelfer on the box , and the farmer 's face at the window . 
 " twenty minute , Miss , I will be there , raddy to go where you plase . it bain't   quite one o'clock yet . I must put myself dacent like , avore I can go with you , Miss ; and git the money for the sake of they poor chiller , if so be they lunnoner be honest enough to pai . Jan Uxtable never come to Lunnon town no more . " 
 with thousand of people hurrae , we set off full gallop for Albert Street . 
 CHAPTER XI . 
 at the door we find Mrs. Fletcher just return from Lady Cranberry 's , and eager to say a great deal which could not now be listen to . have prove the speed of our horse , I beg the cabman to wait for a quarter of an hour , and then take we to Paddington at any fare he please , so long as he drive full gallop . this suit his view very nicely , and know Mr. Shelfer , as every one in London do - so at least I be force to believe - he fain would have keep I ten minute of the fifteen , to tell of Charley 's knowingness , how he have keep it all dark as could be , you see , Miss , and have win three hundred and twenty - five pound , without reckon the odd money , Miss - 
 " reckon it then , Mr. Cabman , " and I run upstairs full speed , after tell Mrs. Shelfer the sum , lest she should be cheat . 
 in five minute I be ready , and come out of my bedroom into the sitting - room , with my hat in one hand , and a little bag in the other ; and there , instead of Mrs. Fletcher , I find , whom ? - Conrad ! 
 very pale and ill he look , so unlike himself that I be shocked , and instead of leap to he , fall upon a chair . he mistake I , and approach very slowly , but with his dear old smile : how my heart beat , how I long to be in his arm ; but they look too weak to hold I . 
 " oh , Miss Vaughan , I know everything . will you ever forgive I ? " 
 " never , my own darling , while you call I that . forgive you indeed ! can I ever forgive myself , for the evil I have think of you ? how very ill you look ! come and let I kiss you well . " 
 but instead of my do that , he have to do it for I ; for I be quite beat at last , and faint away in his arm . by this folly five minute be lose ; and I have so much to say to he , and more to think of than twenty such head could hold . but he seem to think that it must be all right , so long as he have I there . 
 " oh , Conny , " I say through my tear at last , " my own pet Conny , come with I . your father be in such danger . " 
 " life of my heart , I will follow you by the very next train . this one I can not go by . " 
 I could wait for no explanation , and he seem inclined to give none . perhaps this be the reason that he spend all the time in kiss I ; which , much as I enjoy it , would have do quite as well at leisure . be that as it may , there be no time to talk about it ; he say it do his lip good , and I believe it do , they be so pale at first , and now so fine a red . suddenly in the midst of it , a great voice be hear from the passage : 
 " why now , what ever be we to do with the chiller ? " 
 out I run , with my hair down as usual , and a great flush in my cheek , but I do not let any one see I . 
 " leave they here , to be sure , leave they here , Mr. Huxtable . they shall have my room ; and in all London they would not find such a hostess as Mrs. Shelfer . " 
 there be no time to consider it . the throat of hurry be large , and gulp almost any suggestion . away we go full gallop ; the farmer be on the box , - how the driver find room I can not   say , - Mrs. Fletcher and I inside , all consult she watch every minute . across the Regent 's Park , scatter the tame wild duck , past Marylebone Church , and the Yorkshire Stingo , and Edgware Road - we save it by just two minute . although I have take his ticket , the farmer would not come with we , but go in a second - class carriage . 
 " they blue featherbed trim with pig 's tail , be too good for the like of I , Miss Clara ; and I should be afeare all the wai that the Missus be rating of I for my leg - room . I pay parlour price come up , and go in the kitchen waggon , because it zim'd only fair , as I take such a dale of room . " 
 I know that none ever could turn he from what he consider just , and therefore allow he to ride where he please . but a dozen time I think we should have lose he on the way ; for at every station , where the train stop , he make a point of come to our window , which he have mark with a piece of chalk , and " humbly ax our pardon , but be we all right and no fire ? he could not   think what they want , not he , with tempt God Almighty fast . " not fast enough for I , I tell he every time ; whereupon he put on his hat with a sigh , and say he suppose I be bear to it . and yet all the time he seem to consider that he be protect I somehow , and once he call I his dearie , to the great surprise of the other passenger , and the horror of Mrs. Fletcher ; see which he repent hastily , and " Miss Vaughan'd " I three time in a sentence , with a hot flush on his forehead . at Swindon , where we change carriage , he pull out very mysteriously from an inner breast - pocket a little sack tie with whipcord , and in which , I do believe , the simple soul have deposit all his hard - earn prize - money . then he lead we to the counter , proud to show that he have be there before , and earnestly beg for the honour of treat we to a drop of somewhat . his countenance fall so on my refusal , that I be fain to cancel it , and to drink at his expense a glass of iced sherry and water ; while Mrs. Fletcher , with much persuasion and simpering , and for the sake of her poor inside , that have be so long her enemy , venture on a " wee wee thimbleful of Cognac . " the farmer himself , much abash at the splendour around he , which he tell I , in a whisper , beat Pewter Will 's out and out , and even the " Fortescue arm , " would not call for anything , until I insist upon it ; be hard press he ask at last , hop no offence of the lady , for a pint of second cider . the young woman turn up her nose , but I soon make she turn it down again , and fetch he , as the near thing , a bottle of sparkle perry . 
 as always happen , when one be in a great hurry , the train be an hour behind its time , and the set sun be cast gold upon the old cathedral - to my mind one of the light and grand building in England , though the farmer prefer that squat and heavy Norman thing at Exeter - when we glide smoothly and swiftly into the Gloucester Station . I fully intend to have send an electric message from London , not for the sake of the carriage , which matter nothing , but to warn my dear uncle ; at Paddington , however , we find no time to do it , and so stupid I be that I never once think of telegraph from Swindon . to make up by over alacrity , in a case of far less importance , I go to the office at Gloucester , and send this message to Tiverton , then the near station to Exmoor - " Farmer have win , and get the money . Clara Vaughan to Mrs. Huxtable . " the amazement of the farmer , I can not stop to describe . 
 no time be lose by do this , for I have order a pair of horse , and they be be put to . then , stimulate the driver , we dash off for Vaughan St. Mary . anxious as I be , and wretche at the thought of what we might find , so exhausted be my frame by the thaumatrope of the last six - and - thirty hour , that I fall fast asleep , and wake not until we come to the lodge . Old Whitehead come out , hat in hand , and whisper something into Mrs. Fletcher 's ear . that good old lady have be worry I dreadfully about her jam , for the weather be so hot , she be sure all the fruit would be over ,   c. , none of which could I listen to now . as Whitehead speak , I see through my half - open lash that she start violently ; but she would not tell I what it be , and I do not want to intrude on secret that might be between they . the farmer also divert attention by call from the box , as we wound into the avenue , " dear heart alaive ; this bate all the sojer as ever I see , Miss Clara , or even the melisher to Coom . why , arl thiccy treese must a grow so a puppose , just over again one another , and arl of a bigness too . wull , wull ! Coachman , be ever you to Davonsheer ? " 
 I do believe those man of Devon see nothing they admire , without think at once of their county . 
 at the front door , the butler meet we , which surprise I rather , as be below his dignity . he be a trusty old servant , who have be under Thomas Henwood , and have come back to his place since the general turn - out of the household . now he look very grave and sad , and instead of lead I on , draw I aside in the hall . it be get dark , and the fire in the west be die . great plume of asparagus - shame it be to cut they - wave under the ancient mantel - piece . 
 " bad news it be , Miss Clara " - they all seem to call I that - " very bad news indeed , Miss. but I hope you be prepare for it . " 
 " what do you mean ? " 
 " why , have not   you hear about poor master 's death ? " 
 " dead , my dear uncle dead ! do you mean to say " - I could not finish the sentence . 
 " no , Miss , only to - day , and not as you think ; no fit at all , nor paralyatic stroke . he go off quiet as a lamb , as near as could be three o'clock . he be very poorly before ; but he have a deal to do , and would not give in on no account . he be sit by himself in the study after breakfast , and at last he ring the bell , and tell they to send I up . when I go in , he be bolt upright in his chair , with a beautiful smile on his face , but so pale , white I ought to say , Miss , and so weak he could hardly move . ' John , ' he say , ' yes , Sir , ' say I ; ' John , ' he say again , ' you be a most respectable man , and I can trust you with anything in the world , John . take this letter for Miss Vaughan , and put it with your own hand into her own , directly the moment she come back . I be rather uneasy about the poor girl , ' he say , as it be to himself . ' which Miss Vaughan , Sir ? ' say I. ' your mistress , John . can not   you see what be write on it ? and now help I upstairs ; and if ever I speak to you harshly , John Hoxton , I ask your pardon for it . you will find as I have not   forget you . ' and with that I help he upstairs , Miss , and I have almost to carry he ; and then he say , ' help I to bed , John . I would like to die in my bed , and it will save some trouble . and let I look out of the window ; what a lovely day it be , it remind I quite of the South . so I set he up in the bed , Miss , handy altogether , and beautiful , and he could see two lark on the lawn , and he ask I what they be . then he say , ' thank you , John , you have do it wonderful well , and I hope they will not   speak evil of I round this place , after I be go . I have try to do my duty , John , as between man and man : though I would be soft with they , if I have my time over again . now send my daughter to I , though I wish I have see my son , John . but I ought to be very thankful , and what be more , I be . all of you like Miss Lily , unless they tell I story , John . ' ' Sir , ' say I , ' we wusship she , though not like our own Miss Vaughan . ' " 
 ah , John Hoxton , do you say that to he , I wonder , or interpolate , ex post facto ? 
 " so he look very pleased at that , Miss , and he say again , ' John , let all that love she know that she be the live image of her mother . now go and send she quickly ; but John , take care not to frighten my little darling . ' so I go and find Miss Lily get along with the Shetland pony and give it bit of clover , and I send she up and Jane too , for I be dreadfully frightened , and you away , Miss , at the time . and what come afterwards I can not   tell , only no luncheon go up , and there be order not to ring the bell for the servant ' dinner ; and I hear poor Miss Lily cry terrible all along the corridor , and I do hear say that his last word be , and he try to raise his arm toward the window , ' blessed be God , I can see my own Lily , ' but she warn't   that side of the bed , Miss ; so he must have make some mistake . " 
 " no . he mean her mother . where be my cousin now ? " 
 " in your own room , Miss , lie down , they tell I . she do take on so awful , Jane think she would have die . but at last she bring she round a little , and persuade she to lie down . she call for you , Miss , every time she come to herself . " 
 I go straightway to the poor little dear , without even stop to read the letter place in my hand . the room in which she lie be dark ; for Jane , who be watch in my little parlour , whisper to I that the poor child could not bear the lamp - light , her eye be so weak and sore . 
 at first Lily do not know I ; and it go to my heart , after all my own great sorrow , to hear the sad low moaning . she lie on my own little bed , with her pale face turn to the wall , her thick hair all over her shoulder , and both hand press to her heart . Annie Franks have be many time to ask for she , but Lily would not let she come in . bend over I lay my cheek on Lily 's , and softly whisper her name . at last she know I , and take my hand , and turn her sweet lip to kiss I . then she sob and cry most bitterly ; but I see that it do she good . by and by she say , with her finger among my hair : 
 " oh , Clara , be not   it hard to find he at last , and love he so , and only for three day , and then , and then - " 
 " and then , my pet , to let he go where his heart have be nearly twenty year . would you be so selfish as to rob your mother of he ? and to go so happy . I be sure he have . come with I and see . " 
 " oh no , oh no . I can not . " and her lovely young form tremble , at the thought of visit death . 
 " yes , you can , if you only try , and I be sure that he would wish it . that you and I should kneel hand in hand and bless he , as other shall kneel some day by we . what , Lily afraid of her father ! then I have no fear of my Uncle . " 
 God know that I speak so , not from harshness , only in the hope to do she good . 
 " if you really think he would wish it , dear - " 
 " yes . it be a duty I owe he . he would be disappoint in I , if I fail . " 
 " oh , how he long to see you once more , dear Clara , but he feel that you be safe , and he say you would come to see he , though he could not see you . he talk of you quite to the last ; you and darle Conny . " 
 " Conny will be here to - night . " 
 " no ! oh I be so glad ! " and a bright flash of joy shine forth from the eye that be red with weeping . something cold push quietly in between we , and then give a sniff and a sigh . it be darle Judy 's nose . he have learn in the low region , where he always dwell in my absence , that Miss Clara be come home ; and know my name as well as his own , he have set off at once in quest of I . after offer I his good love and respect , with the tip of his tongue , as he always do , he look from one to the other of we , with his eyebrow raise in surprise , and the deep sorrow and sympathy in his beautiful soft - brown pupil . I declare it make we cry more than ever . 
 " oh , Clara , " sob Lily at length , " he do howl so last night . do you think he could have know it ? " 
 his eye drop , as she be tell I . they always do , when he think he have be a bad dog . 
 " now go down , Judy ; good little Judy , go to Mrs. Fletcher . a great friend of mine be with she . " 
 away he trot obediently , and his tail recover its flourish before he have get to the corner . 
 " now , darling , let we go there , " say the poor child , tremble again . " I would go anywhere with you . " 
 Hand in hand we walk into my Uncle 's chamber . young as I be , and still thoughtless in many way , twice before now have I gaze on the solemn face of death ; but never , not even in my mother 's holy countenance , see I such perfect peace and bliss as dwelt in and seem to smile from my dear Uncle 's lineament . the life , in youth puff here and there by every captious breeze of pride , in its prime becalm awhile on the halycon deep of love , then tempest - toss through the lonely dark , and shatter of late by blow from God , that life whose flaw of misanthropy and waste of high ability have be redeem , ennoble even , by a pure and perfect love - now it have bid farewell to all below the cloud , calmly , happily , good of all - in faith . 
 we kneel beside the bed and pray - Lily as a Catholic , Clara as a Protestant - that we , and all we love , might have so bl an end . then we both sit peacefully , with a happy awe upon we , in the dark recess behind the velvet curtain . two wax candle be burn on the table towards the door , and by their light the face we love , look not wan , but glorious , as with a silver glory . 
 clasp each the other 's waist , and kiss away each other 's tranquil tear , how long we sit there I know not , neither what high flutter thought , thought or angel , which be they - stealthily a door be open , not the door of heaven , not even the main door of the room we sit in , but a narrow side - door . through it creep , with crawl caution , he whom most of all man I now despise and pity . Lily do not hear his entrance , neither do she see he ; but my eye and ear be keen from many a call of danger . stun for a while by the heavy blow , that meet I on my return , I have forget all about he ; I mean , at least , all about his present design . I have indeed tell the farmer , for it be only fair to do so , my object in bring he down ; and how I rely on his wonderful strength and courage , have then no other to help I ; but since I get home , and hear the sad tiding , it seem a mere thing for contempt . not even Lepardo Della Croce could catch a depart spirit . so , and in the landslip of the mind , sap by its own , and slide swiftly into another 's sorrow , I have not even order that the house should be watch at all ; I have not even post Giudice , who have a vendetta of his own , anywhere on guard . 
 with a stiletto still conceal , all but the handle on which the light fall , he approach the bed , wriggle along and crouch , as a cat or leopard would . then he rise and stand upright at the side of the bed , not our side but the other , and glare upon his intended victim 's face . I push Lily back behind the curtain as if with the weight of my bosom , while I watch the whole . never in all my tempestuous life , of all the horrible thing I have see , and hear , and shudder at , see I anything so awful , so utterly beyond not only description , but conception , as that disdainful , arrogant face , when the truth burst on he . not the body only , but the mind and soul - if God have curse he with one - be smite back all of a lump , as if he have leap from a train at full speed into a firing cannon 's mouth . before he have time to recover , I advance and face he . all dress in white I be , with my black hair below my waist , for I have throw off my travel frock , and take what first come to hand . they tell I I look well in white , it show my hair and eye so . 
 he believe that it be a spirit , the Vendetta spirit of the other side ; and he cower from I . I be the first to speak . " Lepardo Della Croce , it be the rebuke of heaven . dust upon ash ; such be man 's revenge . I have nurse , but scorn it now . go in peace , and pray the Almighty that he be not like you . stop ; I will show you forth . you have a vindictive foe here , who would tear you to atom . " 
 I lead the way , tremble at every corner lest we should meet Giudice ; for I know he would not obey I , if he once catch sight of this hat one . after stand silently , unable to take his eye from the placid face of the dead , Lepardo begin to follow I , walk as if in a dream . meet none , I lead he forth along the corridor , down the end staircase , and out on the eastern terrace . there I wave he off , and point to the dark refuge of the shrubbery , beyond the mineral spring . the moonlight sleep upon the black water narrowly thread the grass . over our head droop the ivy , the creeper of oblivion . the murderer turn and look at I ; hitherto he have glide along with his head down , as in bewilderment . oh that he have say one word of sorrow or repentance ! he speak not at all ; but shudder , as the ivy rustle above we . his face be pale as the moonlight . do he see in I something high than the spirit of Vendetta ? 
 I point again to the tree , and urge he away from the house . he have two strong enemy there ; a minute might make all the difference . break as if from a spell , he wave his italian cap , and his lithe strong figure be lose among the Portugal laurel . for a minute I stand there , wonder ; then slowly go round the house - corner , and gaze at the grey stone mullion of the room which have be my father 's . 
 I be still in the anguish of doubt and misgive - what right have an ignorant girl like I to play judge and jury , or more , to absolve and release a crime against all humanity ? - when a mighty form stand beside I , and Giudice , all bristle and fire , dash forth from the door in the gable . with command and entreaty I call he , but he hear I not , neither look at I ; but scour the ground like a shadow , quarter it as a pointer do , only he carry his nose down . 
 " dang my slow bone , " say the farmer , " but I will have he yet , Miss. I seed he go , I will soon find he . " 
 " no , no . I will not   have he stop . he shall go free , and repent . " 
 " by your lave , Miss , it can not   be . a man as have do what he have , we have no right to play buff with . never before do I go again your will , Miss ; but ax your pardon , I must now . look , the girt dog know well . " 
 as the dog find the track and give tongue , the farmer rush from I and follow he , dash headlong into the shrubbery , after leap the mineral spring , at the very spot where the footprint have be . Judy and Farmer Huxtable be fast friend already ; for that dog always make up his mind in a moment on the question of like and dislike . 
 for a time I be so horror - strike , that no power of motion be leave . I know that the farmer be quite unarmed , he carry not even a stick . even with the great dog to help he , what could he do against fire - arm , which lepardo be sure to have ? what should I say to his wife and child , what should I say to myself , if John Huxtable fall a victim to that wily and desperate criminal ? 
 resolve to be present , if possible , I rush down the narrow path which lead to the little park - gate , where probably they would pass . I be right : they have pass , and fling it wide open . breathless I look around , for hence several track diverge . no live thing could I see or hear , but the beating of my heart , which seem to be in my throat , and the hooting of an owl from the hollow elm at the corner . I fling myself down on the dewy grass , and strain my eye in vain ; until by some silver birch - tree on which the moonlight be glance , I see first a gliding figure that look like a deer in the distance , then a tall man run rapidly . away I make by a short cut for the " witch ' grave , " as the end of the lake be call , for I know that the path they be on lead thither . quite out of breath I be , for I have run more than half a mile , when I come full upon a scene , which would have rob I of breath if I have any . at the end of a little dingle , under a willow - tree , and within a few foot of the water , stand Lepardo Della Croce , bring to bay at last . a few yard from he , Giudice be struggle furiously to escape the farmer 's grasp ; perhaps no other hand in England could have hold he . his eye kindle in the moonlight , like the red star of a rocket , and a deep roar of baffle rage come from the surge of his chest , as he champ his monstrous fang , and volley all the spring of his loin . the farmer lean backward to hold he , and stay himself by a tree - stump . 
 " sharp now , surrender , wull e , man . in the name of of the Quane and the Lord Chafe Justice , and the High Shariff of Devon , I tell e surrender - dang this here dog - surrender , and I ' ont hoort e ; and I ' ont let the girt dog . " 
 Lepardo answer calmly , in a voice that make my blood cold : 
 " do you value your life ? if so , stand out of my way . I have death here for you , and five other dog . " 
 I see the barrel of a large revolver , with a stream of light upon it . he hold it steadily as a tobacco - pipe . I be glad he own some courage . for my life , I could not stir . all the breath in my body be go . 
 " dear heart alaive . Thiccy man must be a fule , " say the farmer quite contemplatively . " do not   e know who I be ? do e reckon they peppermint twistesse can hurt Jan Uxtable ? I seed ever so many in a smarl shop window to Lunnon . Surrender now wull e , thou shalt have fair traial to Hexeter , as a Davonshire man have take e , and a dale more nor e desarve . sharp now : I be afeare of the girt dog get loose . dang you dog . Ston up a bit . " and the farmer approach he coolly , trail the dog along ; as if what the murderer hold in his hand be a stick of spanish liquorice . 
 " Fool , if you pass that stump , your great carcase shall lie on it . " 
 " fire away , " say the farmer , " I know you be a coward , and I be glad it be so . now mind , if so be you shut , I let the dog go , honour braight , because e dunno what fair play be . but if e harken to rason , I will give e one chance more . I will tie up the dog with my brace to thiccy tree - aller wear cart rope I do - and I will tak e Quane 's prisoner , with my left hond , and t'other never out of my breech pocket ; look e , zee , laike thiccy . " 
 and the farmer bury his right hand in his capacious trowsery . the Corsican seem astonish . 
 " fool - hardy clown , worthy son of a bull - head country , stop at the stump - then , take that . " 
 out blaze the pistol with a loud ring , and I see that the farmer be strike . he let go the dog , and leap up ; his right hand fall on Lepardo 's temple , and seem to crush the skull in , - another shot at the same instant and down fall the farmer heavily . " Great God , " I scream , and leap forward . but Giudice be loose to avenge he , though I could swear that it be on a corpse . corpse or living body , over and over it roll , with the dog 's fang in its throat . I hear a gurgle , a tearing , and grind , and then a loud splash in the water . the dog , and the murderer , both of man and dog , sink in the lake together . twenty foot out from the shore rise above water one moment , draw ghastly white in the moonbeam , the last view see till the judgment - day of the face of Lepardo Della Croce . 
 almost drown himself - for he would not release his father 's murderer , while a gasp be in he - stagger at last to the shore my noble and true dog Giudice . he fall down awhile , to recover his breath , then shake himself gratefully , totter to I , where I kneel at the farmer 's side , and wag his tail for approval . the water from his chest and stomach drip on the farmer 's upturned face , and for a moment revive he . 
 " no belt , no tino lad , I ' ont tak ' it . Zimth laike a ticket for chat . I dunno as I would tak ' the mony , if it warn't   for the poor chiller , naine chiller now , and anither a - coomin . must not   drink no more beer , but beany shall have his'n . " and his head fall back on my lap , and I feel sure that he be dead . how I scream and shriek , till I lay beside he , with Judy lick my face , none can tell but the gamekeeper , who have hear the shot , and come hurry . 
 of this low end of the lake they happen to be most jealous ; for a brood of pintail duck , very rare I believe in England , have be hatch here this summer , and no one be allow to go near they . poor Judy keep all the man aloof , till I be able to speak to he . then I perceive that he as well be bleed , wound perhaps by the poniard as he leap on his enemy 's breast . it have enter just under the shoulder , and narrowly miss the heart . 
 they take we at once towards the house , carry the farmer and Judy on the wooden floodgate of the stream call the " Witches ' brook , " which here fall into the lake . as we enter the avenue , be oblige to take the broad way , though much further round , we hear a carriage come . it be the one I have send for Conrad , with a hurried note to break the sad news of his father 's death . he have be detain in London by a challenge he find from Lepardo ; which be of course a stratagem to keep he out of the way . how delighted I be to see his calm brave face again , as he leap down , and take my tottering form in his arm . in a minute he understand everything , and know what be good to be do . he would not allow they to place the poor farmer in the carriage , as they foolishly want to do ; but lay the rude litter down , examine the wound by the lamplight , and bind they up most cleverly with the appliance of the moment . 
 " oh , Conrad , will he die ? " 
 " no , my darling , I hope not ; but he must if they have let he bleed so much long . " 
 " I never hear that you be a surgeon , Conny . " 
 " could I call myself a sculptor , without have study anatomy ? my dearest one , how you tremble ! go home in the carriage , and give direction for we . a room downstairs , with a wide doorway , and plenty of air . I will stay with they , and see that they bear he gently . poor Judy may go with you . " 
 thus Conrad see for the first time the hearth and home of his ancestor , with his father lie dead there , and his avenger carry helpless . but I meet he at the door . do that comfort you just a little , my darling ? 
 CHAPTER XII . 
 the lake be drag that night , and all the follow day , in spite of the gamekeeper 's strong remonstrance for the sake of the tender pintail . but nothing whatever be find , except the italian cap . the " Witches ' grave , " invisible I be glad to say from the house , be more than forty foot deep , when the water be at its low . three or four year afterwards young William Hiatt catch a monstrous pike in the lake , and send he , with our permission , to be stuff at Gloucester . like the famous fish of Samos , this pike have swallow a ring , which be send to Conrad by the Gloucester gun - maker . it be Lepardo 's seal - ring , the cross of the family engrave on a bloodstone , with L.D.C. below it . 
 whether the midnight stabber die by the blow of an english fist , or suffer vivisection through a dog 's vendetta - an institution more excusable and dignified than man 's - be know to he , and he alone , who hold the scale of retribution , and laugh in scorn as well as wrath at our attempt to swing they . for be we not therein ourselves ; and how shall the good and strong of we carry the thing he be carry in ? right glad I be , and ever shall be , that I move not in the awful scene , which close my father 's tragedy . 
 through Conrad 's skill and presence of mind , the dear farmer 's life be save . we send to Gloucester immediately for the clever surgeon there ; and he own that he could not have fix the ligature well , though he do what Conny durst not attempt , he extract the murderer 's bullet . it be the first shot that do all the mischief , be aim deliberately at the large and tender heart . thank to the waving of the willow - tree , for Lepardo be a know marksman , it have miss by about two inch . the second shot , fire quite close and wildly , have groove the left temple , and stricken the farmer senseless . 
 for six week now our dear friend , whose patience amaze all but I , be keep from his Devonshire home . to London I send at once for the two child and Mr. Dawe , and would have send to Devon as well , for kind and good Mrs. Huxtable , but her husband would not hear of it . by Ann Maples , who have leave Lady Cranberry ' shockingly , " on hear from Mrs. Fletcher that I would take she again , he send to his wife " kind love and good duty , and for goodness ' sake , stop at home now . no call to make a fule of yourself , and the farm go to rack and ruin . there be fuss enough 'bout I already , and never I brag no more , when a pill like thiccy upsot I . but Miss Clara , God bless her bootiful eye , she nurse I , just as if she wor my own darter , with the apron on as you give she . and you should see the kitchen , Honor , you love a kitchen so ; they be a bilin and roastin arl day , and they be vorce to swape the chimbley three time in a vortnight " - the rest of this glorious message , about three page long , I be " vorced " to suppress ; I only hope Ann Maples remember a quarter of it . 
 but his wonderful Miss Clara do not nurse he long . hear from the surgeon that all the danger be over by the end of the following week - so strong be the constitution - Conrad , Lily , and I set sail for Corsica on our melancholy errand . in that letter , which seem to come to I from the grave , my poor Uncle after express his joy and deep gratitude at so happy a close to his life , continue thus : - 
 " yes , my dear child , the close of my wasted and weary life . you may be surprised and perplex at what I be about to tell you ; but you be not one of those low - minded one , who condemn as superstition all beyond their philosophy . the very night after you bring I my new Lily , a sweet thing just like her mother , I lay for some hour awake , broad awake as I be now . I be think of my two Lilies , the lovely and love creature . I be not in the least excited , but calm , reflective , and happy . soon after the clock strike two , at the time when our life burn low , I hear a soft voice , sweet as the music of heaven , call I by name three time . of course I know whose it be : too often that voice have murmur upon my bosom , for I not to know it now . not rashly , but with a mind long since resolve , I answer : ' sweetest mine ' - her own artless and young endearment - ' Sweetest mine , no long will I keep you lonely . ' no answer come in word ; but the light , the golden light of my own love 's smile , as I have see it in Corsica , when she come from the grave to comfort I . and now , as after that visit , I fall into deep and perfect rest , such rest as come but rarely until the sleep of all . no wonder you and Lily think I so strong next day . in the morning I know and rejoice in my quick departure . this cold obstruction be to be cast aside , this palsied frame to release the wing soul . on the third day I be to find and dwell with my Lily for ever . so on the first day I enjoy the harmless pleasure of life , and could not bear you to leave I , because that would have turn they to pain . the second day I get through all the business that still remain , refresh its dryness often with my sweet child 's society . on this , the third , I write to you , and be , through the grace of God , as calm and content , nay more content than if I be go to bed . 
 " beloved daughter both , and my dear son as well , I implore you not to grieve painfully for I . too well I know the weight of excessive sorrow , and how it oppress the lost one , even more than the loser . since the parting be so brief , the reunion so eternal , why make the interval long and dreary by count every footstep ? 
 alas , it be easy to talk and think so , but very hard to feel it . time demand his walk with sorrow , and will not have his arm dispense with . then think of my happiness , darling , and how your own will increase it . 
 only one more request , which after ciceronian sentiment - which Cicero could not practise - you be all too young not to wonder at . if you , my three child , can manage it , without any heavy expense , or much trouble to yourself , it be my last wish as regard the body , that it should lie by the side of my wife 's . the name of the little church , St. Katharine 's on the Cliff , can scarcely have escape my Clara 's excellent memory . Lily lie beside her father , in the right - hand corner towards the sea . each of they have a cross of the Signor 's alabaster , make from my own design . Lily 's be enough for I : put my name with her . " 
 not only do we look upon his last fond wish as sacred , but we accomplish it in the manner that be likely to please he most . we put his own " Lilyflower , " the little love - boat as they call it , into commission again , engage a good captain and crew , and take old Cora with we , set sail from Gloucester for the Mediterranean . Poor Cora be now all devotion to Conrad and Lily , ever since she have find that they be lawful blood and direct heir of the Della Croce . the more recent part of the family story she have know only from her master 's version , and have set little store by the child as bear the stamp of disgrace ; though she could not help love sweet Lily . now , by her evidence , couple with my dear Uncle 's deposition , his relic , and document , and my own testimony , confirm by Balaam and Balak , we establish very easily the birth and the claim of my Uncle Edgar 's child ; and the old Count Gaffori , most venerable of signor , would have keep we a month at least to go through all his account . he be entreat to retain his position as the guardian of our Lily . 
 so far as our recent sorrow permit enjoyment of scenery , we be all enchant with the Balagna . at the funeral of " Signor Valentine , " whose name be still remember and love , nearly all the commune be present ; and many a dignified matron shed tear , who have smile as a graceful girl , and strown flower , at his wedding . they be burn with curiosity to see our beautiful Lily , for the tender tale have move they , as southern nature be move ; and many of they have love and glory in her mother . 
 but in spite of all this desire , not a pry glance fall on she , as she bow in the hooded robe , and weep to the mournful vocero . foremost of all stand old Petro and Marcantonia , who have find out and kiss with sob of delight their beloved master 's daughter . for my part , I love the Corsicans ; there be something so noble and simple about the man , so graceful , warm - hearte , and lady - like in the woman ; and in a very short time I could understand more than half they say . the black Vendetta , they tell I , be die out among they , and in a few year would be but a wonder of the past . God in his mercy grant it . 
 there must have be something surely in my Uncle Edgar 's nature , which win the southern heart , as my father win british affection . such thing I can not explain , or account for . I only know and feel they . 
 we be all back at Vaughan St. Mary before the end of August , and find the farmer , the two chiller , and Beany Dawe as happy as if they be bear and rear there . Old Cora be leave at Veduta Tower ; and have obtain Mr. Dawe 's permission I present she once and for all with the whole treasure of the gordit . she intend , however , to bequeath it to I in her will . soon afterwards Conrad give she a more substantial blessing ; for he sell the thing leave in Lucas Street , under letter of administration , as be the next of kin . all the proceed he hand over to Cora , except one - tenth , which he present to the Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to animal . as many of the specimen , iguanodon , and other monster , fetched price as hard to explain away as themselves , poor Cora be amply provide for : all which of course she attribute to the holy Madonna 's heart . and now at last I understand how 19 , Grove Street have become No . 37 , Lucas Street . the change of number I have already explain ; the change of name be on this wise : - the builder , a rise man , who have buy the old part of the street , and build thereto the new one , have a son , a fine undergraduate , well skilled in the boat than in the book of Oxford . read hard one day , after his third pluck , this young man discover that lucus be the Latin for grove . he smite his hand on his forehead , and a great idea present itself . have there not be both nymph and philosopher of the grove ? the street that be his inheritance should be distinguish by nomenclature from the thousand grove of London , wherein the nightingale pipeth not , neither - but I be get poetical , and do not   understand the Gradus . enough , that he write at once and earnestly to his father , forget the vivid description , which be now grow stale , of his pluck - a result secure , as the Winchester gentleman tell I , by learn too solid to carry - but beg that his Oxford career might at least be commemorate in and by the street that pay his bill there . " Lucus " he write plainly enough , and in very large letter , but the father read it " Lucks . " no , say the mother , she be sure Alexander never mean such a low thing as that , it be " Lucas " of course ; why the Lucases be her own cousin , and Rosa such a nice girl , she see how it be , that she do , and Alexander might have do bad . and so it be paint most bravely " Lucas Street , " and the builder be not   go to make a fool of himself , when Alexander protest . 
 when John Huxtable set off for home , just in time to see to his harvest , which be always late round Exmoor , I kiss he - ay , Conny , you see it - and thrust , during his amazement , something far down into his mighty pocket , which something he be not upon any account to look at until he get home . it be a deed , prepare by our solicitor , present he with the fee simple of Tossil 's Barton farm . true , I be not of age , but I sign it as if I have be , and Conny and I again sign it , when we pay our first visit there . perhaps , in strict law , it bind not my interest even now ; but if ever any one claim " by , from , through , under , or in trust for " I , forget the Vaughan honour and dare to dream of that farm , I will be at he as sure as a ghost ; and I trust before that time come , the farmer will have sound title by immemorial year of possession . he be now a prosperous man ; and have never find it necessary to give up his beer , as he threaten Young John , who be just like his father , cleave fast to Tabby Badcock , now a bloom maiden ; but my Sally have more than balanced that imminent loss of caste , by fix the eye and transfix the heart of George Tamlin , the son of our principal tenant , and himself of Devonshire origin . the young lady come to and fro every six week , and be to be marry from our house , when her father consider she " zober enough . " Beany Dawe , who do not like work , still live at Tossil 's Barton , and be in receipt of a pension of sixpence a day from Government , as a bard at last appreciate . 
 as for I , Clara Vaughan , on the very day after that which release I from my teen   count forward , as we do , till we count recede year , to wit on the 31st of December , 1851 , I do not change my name , but write it in the old church register , half an inch below a well and firm hand . there be no fuss or frippery ; no four clergyman and ten bridesmaid simper at one another . our good vicar represent the one class , dear Lily and Annie Franks the other . my godfather , newly disclose for the purpose , give I away very gracefully , and young Peter Green help Conrad . Lily Vaughan look so exquisite , so deliciously lovely , that nobody in the whole world - now Conny , hold your tongue , I never fish for compliment , do not   degrade yourself so for a kiss , of course I know all my perfection , but how can I care about they , when you say they belong to you ? - Lily Vaughan , I say once more , be such a sunrise of loveliness , that young Peter Green , just new from his Oxford honour , collapse , and fall over the railing , and wedge his head in the " piscina , " or whatever those nice young gentleman , who see the duty of wear strait waistcoat , be pleased to denominate it . 
 ah , Little Distaff Lane , most unconnubial title , ah firm of Green , Vowler , and Green , your Hercules hold the distaff , and hold it , alas , in his heart ! from that shock he never recover , until we have at Vaughan Park a really merry wedding ; and I , ah I , I could not dance just then , but I shower rose upon they , for the shadow of death be past . old Mr. Green , - nay , nay , not fifty yet , by our Lady , - Mr. Peter Green the elder , come down here for the occasion , and I hardly ever take such a fancy to any man before . he seem to know almost everything , not by the skin , as Dr. Ross seem to hold thing , but by the marrow and fibrine of their alimentary part . and withal such a perfect gentleman : he keep in the horn of his knowledge , instead of exalt they , and make we wish for hay on they , while toss in headlong ignorance . 
 Scant as I be of space , I must tell how he behave , when his son reveal his attachment . 
 " be it a lady , Peter ? " " I should rather think she be , father . " " do you love she with all your heart ? " " of course I do , every bit . I be tough , but I know I shall die , unless - " " that will do , my son . you have my full consent , and your mother 's be sure to follow . most likely you get it beforehand . you young fellow be so deep . let I kiss your forehead , my boy , although I be not dramatic . " 
 have behave so nobly , for this boy be his only hope , he deserve to find , as he do , that if he have search the world he could not have hit upon any other so desirable for his son , as the daughter of his old friend . the only mistake he have make be that he so adore she , he can not bear she to be in Corsica ; though the trade they conduct be worth at least fifty thousand a year . when Lily fall in love , I tell she that it be because she have an eye for the olive ; and olive enough the darling have , I trow , and olive branch too . the eld be call Clara . " Clara Green ! " I do not   like the sound altogether ; but the substance be something beautiful , and the fresh of all Spring verdure . nevertheless , my Clara be an inch large round the calf , and I think her eyelash be long . her hair weigh more , that be certain . we compare they very often ; for they live only half the year at Veduta Tower . in the summer heat they be here , and the child between they , my own every bit as bad , leave dear Annie Elton   Annie Franks of old , uncommonly few British Queens . it be all Mr. Shelfer 's fault . what be the use of a gardener , if he allow dessert all the day long ? 
 every autumn we go to Corsica to help at the olive harvest , and rarely we enjoy it . the Old Veduta Tower be like a nest in the ivy , chirrup with young voice ; and the happy sleep of the two who love so well be dream , if dream it can or care to do , of the fair flower in Europe , scatter there by little soft hand . Conny be wild every time about the Rogliano and Luri ; and if Peter Green listen to he - which every one do , except I - he will introduce , very slowly of course , those fine - body yet aerial wine to the noble british public , that love not even intoxication , unless it be adulterate . 
 oh , queer Mrs. Shelfer , oh Balaam and Balak , shall I pretermit your annal ? the two Sheriff 's officer , have secure their reward , set up therewith a public - house call the " Posse - Comitatus , " which soon become the head quarter of all who be agent or patient in the machinery of levy . as at such time all people drink and pay more than double , the public - house have already a Queensbench - ful of good - will . 
 Poor Mrs. Shelfer and Charley do not invest the 325 l.   altogether judiciously : at least , it go mainly to purchase " eternal gratitude , " whose time do not begin to run till the purchaser 's be over . but Patty , I be glad to say , have still that 30 l.   a year of her own , leave to she in the fund by good and grateful Miss Minto . " can not   touch it , my good friend , not the Queen , the Lord Mayor , and all the royal family . government give their bond for it , on parchment make of their skin , and the ink come out of their gall . " be this as it may , what be much more to the purpose be that Mr. Shelfer can not touch it . and now I have pride in announce , for I never expect such glory , that all the cat and bird , squirrel , mouse , and monkey , live , like the happy family , in our northern lodge , where Patty be most useful and happy as the Queen of the poultry . in a word , they keep the gate , not of their enemy , but of old and grateful friend . I expect to see at least a lead article in the " Times , " when Mr. Shelfer leave the metropolis ; but they let he go very easily for the sake of the discount market . they give he only two - and - twenty dinner ; but when he first come to Vaughan Park , how he want country air ! now he attend to the wall - tree , and the avenue , and I hope find harmony there . at any rate , he never break it by any undue exertion . nevertheless , his very long pipe be of some account with the green fly , which have be very bad on our peach , ever since they repeal the corn law . Mr. Shelfer , accordingly , be compel to spend half his time in smoke they . " wonderful nice they do taste , Miss Clara ; you would be quite surprised , you know . wonderful good , Miss , and werry high - flavour you know , when they begin to fry . " 
 " come , come , Mr. Shelfer , I fear you cultivate they for their flavour . there be ten time as many of they , I see , as of peach on the tree . and you charge I every week five shilling for tobacco . " 
 " to be sure , Miss Clara . show a fine constitooshun , you know . and dreadful hard work it be to have to smoke so much , you know . and then the sun will come on the wall , and only a quart of beer allow all the afternoon . and sometimes they make I go for it myself , you know ! indeed they do , Miss , they have such cheek here in Gloucestershire ! " 
 Patty bring all her stick of course , in spite of the twenty - five bill of sale , which by this time have grow upon they . one whole roomful be pack in the duplicate inventory . the law on this subject she contemplate from a peculiar point of view . 
 " Lor , Miss , I never grudge them . they do cost a bit at the time ; but see how safe they make they . if it be not   for they I should be frighten out of my wit of thief , down here where the tree and all the green grocery be , bad than the Regency Park . bless I , I never should have go out of door , Miss , if you have not   pull I . and to see the flower here all a - grow with their head up as bootiful as a bonnet . pray , my good friend , be that what they be make for , if I may be so bold ? " 
 " no , Patty , not for bonnet . they be make for the bee and the butterfly , and for we to enjoy they , while they enjoy themselves . " 
 " well , I never . pray , Miss , do I tell you Uncle John 's come home , and they only eat a piece of his shoulder for they find his belt be tenderer ; and he put the glazing on it the same as they wear on their hat , and three cork pin to hold it , and he find it werry convenient , it save so much rheumatism : and he will be here next week to convict the man that make his wife swallow the tea - pot . dear , dear , what thing they do do in the country . not a bit like Christians . and so , Miss Clara , the old man will not   drop off after all ; and Uncle John a - come , how nice it would have be . " 
 the old man be poor Whitehead , whose lodge Mrs. Shelfer covet , as it be large and lively than her own . 
 " no , Mrs. Shelfer , I think he will get over it . surely you would not wish to hurry he . " 
 " to be sure , my good friend ; no , no : let he have his time , I say . but he would have have it long ago , if he have any reason in he . what good can he do now , hold on with his eyebrow ? please God to let he go in peace ; and so much happy for we all . " 
 when Uncle John appear , he scold I for my want of intelligence on the night when I be blind . of the four man in that room , the one whom I have notice least be the very one whom he have mean I especially to observe . at least , so he say ; but I fully believe , and do not scruple to tell he , that he have discover little beyond the information and description give at the time by Mr. Edgar Vaughan . these he have disinter from the archive of Bow Street and Whitehall , and be then try to apply they . however , I forgive he freely ; inasmuch as , but for my blindness , even blind love would have know I as an objectionable being . 
 and now I come to a real grievance . when there be another Miss Clara - such a beauty ! I can not   tell you - and a little Harry , for whose sake this tale be tell - why will every one on these premise , even the under - gardener 's boy , persist in call I " Miss Clara ? " it make I stamp sometimes , and such a bad example that be for my child . dear I , if either of my duckling be to carry on as I do at their age , I would cut down immediately the large birch - tree on the property , and order a hogshead of salt . but , to return to that contumely - be it to be suspect that I be more forcible and pronounce , in the day of my trial and misery , than now when I be the happy of all the young mother of England ? " come , Conny , tell the truth now , do not   I keep you in order ? " 
 " my own delight , I should think you do . I be nearly as much afraid of you as I be of little Clary . clary ride on Judy now , and Harry on pup Sampiero , and come and see papa go chip , chip , chip ? " 
 " no , clary stop and see mamma go scratch , scratch , scratch , like Cooky at the pie - crust . clary love mamma to - day , and papa to - morrow . " 
 and the lovely dear jump on the stool , to pull the top of my pen . Harry pop out from under the table , and prepare himself for onset . my husband come and lift my hair , and throw his arm around I . it be all up now with writing . 
 " darling , I love all three of you , to - day , to - morrow , and for ever . only do not   pull I to piece . " 
 the END .