THE ROSARY 



 CHAPTER I 

 enter the duchess . 

 the peaceful stillness of an english summer afternoon brood over the park and garden at Overdene . a hush of move sunlight and lengthen shadow lie upon the lawn , and a promise of refresh coolness make the shade of the great cedar tree a place to be desire . 

 the old stone house , solid , substantial , and unadorned , suggest unlimited spaciousness and comfort within ; and be redeem from positive ugliness without , by the fine ivy , magnolia tree , and wistaria , of many year ' growth , climb its plain face , and now cover it with a mantle of soft green , large white bloom , and a cascade of purple blossom . 

 a terrace run the full length of the house , bound at one end by a large conservatory , at the other by an aviary . wide stone step , at interval , lead down from the terrace on to the soft springy turf of the lawn . beyond the wide park ; clump of old tree , haunt by shy brown deer ; and , through the tree , fitful gleam of the river , a narrow silver ribbon , wind gracefully in and out between long grass , buttercup , and cow - daisy . 

 the sun - dial point to four o'clock . 

 the bird be have their hour of silence . not a trill sound from among the softly move leaf , not a chirp , not a twitter . the stillness seem almost oppressive . the one brilliant spot of colour in the landscape be a large scarlet macaw , asleep on his stand under the cedar . 

 at last come the sound of an opening door . a quaint old figure step out on to the terrace , walk its entire length to the right , and disappear into the rose - garden . the Duchess of Meldrum have go to cut her rose . 

 she wear an ancient straw hat , of the early - victorian shape know as " mushroom , " tie with black ribbon beneath she portly chin ; a loose brown holland coat ; a very short tweed skirt , and Engadine " goutie . " she have on some very old gauntlet glove , and carry a wooden basket and a huge pair of scissor . 

 a wag have once remark that if you meet her Grace of Meldrum return from garden or feed her poultry , and be in a charitable frame of mind , you would very likely give her sixpence . but , after you have thus draw her attention to yourself and she look at you , Sir Walter Raleigh 's cloak would not be in it ! your one possible course would be to collapse into the mud , and let the ducal " goutie " trample on you . this the duchess would do with gusto ; then accept your apology with good nature ; and keep your sixpence , to show when she tell the story . 

 the duchess live alone ; that be to say , she have no desire for the perpetual companionship of any of her own kith and kin , nor for the constant smile and flattery of a pay companion . her pale daughter , whom she have systematically snub , have marry ; her handsome son , whom she have adore and spoil , have prematurely die , before the death , a few year since , of Thomas , fifth Duke of Meldrum . he have come to a sudden and , as the duchess often remark , very suitable end ; for , on his sixty - second birthday , clothe in all the splendour of his hunting scarlet , top hat , and buff corduroy breech , the mare he be mercilessly put at an impossible fence suddenly refuse , and Thomas , Duke of Meldrum , shoot into a field of turnip ; pitch upon his head , and speak no more . 

 this sudden cessation of his noisy and fiery life mean a complete transformation in the entourage of the duchess . Hitherto she have have to tolerate the boon companion , congenial to himself , with whom he choose to fill the house ; or to invite those of her own friend to whom she could explain Thomas , and who suffer Thomas gladly , out of friendship for she , and enjoyment of lovely Overdene . but even then the duchess have no pleasure in her party ; for , quaint rough diamond though she herself might appear , the bluest of blue blood run in her vein ; and , though her manner have the off - hand abruptness and disregard of other people 's feeling not unfrequently find in old lady of high rank , she be at heart a true gentlewoman , and could always be trust to say and do the right thing in moment of importance : the late duke 's language have be sulphurous and his manner Georgian ; and when he have be lay in the unwonted quiet of his ancestral vault ' so unlike he , poor dear , " as the duchess remark , " that it be quite a comfort to know he be not really there " her Grace look around she , and begin to realise the beauty and possibility of Overdene . 

 at first she content herself with gardening , make an aviary , and surround herself with all sort of queer bird and beast ; upon whom she lavish the affection which , of late year , have know no human outlet . 

 but after a while her natural inclination to hospitality , her humorous enjoyment of other people 's foible , and a quaint delight in parade her own , lead to constant succession of house - party at Overdene , which soon become know as a Liberty Hall of varied delight where you always meet the people you most want to meet , find every facility for enjoy your favourite pastime , be feed and house in perfect style , and spend some of the most ideal day of your summer , or cheery day of your winter , never dull , never bored , free to come and go as you please , and everything season everybody with the delightful ' sauce piquante " of never be quite sure what the duchess would do or say next . 

 she mentally arrange her party under three head " freak party , " " mere people party , " and " good party . " a " good party " be in progress on the lovely June day when the duchess , have enjoy an unusually long siesta , don what she call she " garden tog " and sally forth to cut rose . 

 as she tramp along the terrace and pass through the little iron gate lead to the rose - garden , Tommy , the scarlet macaw , open one eye and watch she ; give a loud kiss as she reach the gate and disappear from view , then laugh to himself and go to sleep again . 

 of all the many pet , Tommy be prime favourite . he represent the duchess 's one concession to morbid sentiment . after the demise of the duke she have find it so depressing to be invariably address with suave deference by every male voice she hear . if the butler could have snort , or the rector have rap out an uncomplimentary adjective , the duchess would have feel cheer . as it be , a fixed and settle melancholy lie upon her spirit until she see in a dealer 's list an advertisement of a prize macaw , warrant a grand talker , with a vocabulary of over five hundred word . 

 the duchess go immediately to town , pay a visit to the dealer , hear a few of the macaw 's word and the tone in which he say they , buy he on the spot , and take he down to Overdene . the first evening he sit crossly on the perch of his grand new stand , decline to say a single one of his five hundred word , though the duchess spend her evening in the hall , sit in every possible place ; first close to he ; then , away in a distant corner ; in an arm - chair place behind a screen ; read , with her back turn , feign not to notice he ; face he with concentrated attention . Tommy merely click his tongue at she every time she emerge from a hiding - place ; or , if the rather worried butler or nervous under - footman pass hurriedly through the hall , send shower of kiss after they , and then go into fit of ventriloquial laughter . the duchess , in despair , even try remind he in a whisper of the remark he have make in the shop ; but Tommy only wink at she and put his claw over his beak . still , she enjoy his flushed and scarlet appearance , and retire to rest hopeful and in no wise regret her bargain . 

 the next morning it become instantly evident to the house - maid who sweep the hall , the footman who sort the letter , and the butler who sound the breakfast gong , that a good night 's rest have restore to Tommy the full use of his vocabulary . and when the duchess come sail down the stair , ten minute after the gong have sound , and Tommy , flap his wing angrily , shriek at she : " now then , old girl ! come on ! " she go to breakfast in a more cheerful mood than she have know for month past . 




 CHAPTER II 

 introduce the HONOURABLE JANE 

 the only one of her relative who practically make her home with the duchess be her niece and former ward , the Honourable Jane Champion ; and this consist merely in the fact that the Honourable Jane be the one person who might invite herself to Overdene or Portland Place , arrive when she choose , stay as long as she please , and leave when it suit her convenience . on the death of her father , when her lonely girlhood in her Norfolk home come to an end , she would gladly have fill the place of a daughter to the duchess . but the duchess do not require a daughter ; and a daughter with pronounced view , plenty of back - bone of her own , a fine figure , and a plain face , would have seem to her Grace of Meldrum a peculiarly undesirable acquisition . so Jane be give to understand that she might come whenever she like , and stay as long as she like , but on the same footing as other people . this mean liberty to come and go as she please ; and no responsibility towards her aunt 's guest . the duchess prefer manage her own party in her oven way . 

 Jane Champion be now in her thirtieth year . she have once be describe , by one who see below the surface , as a perfectly beautiful woman in an absolutely plain shell ; and no man have as yet look beneath the shell , and see the woman in her perfection . she would have make earth heaven for a blind lover who , not have eye for the plainness of her face or the massiveness of her figure , might have draw nearer , and apprehend the wonder of she as a woman , experience the wealth of tenderness of which she be capable , the blessed comfort of the shelter of her love , the perfect comprehension of her sympathy , the marvellous joy of win and wed she . but as yet , no blind man with far - see vision have come her way ; and it always seem to be her lot to take a second place , on occasion when she would have fill the first to infinite perfection . 

 she have be bridesmaid at wedding where the charming bride , notwithstanding their superficial loveliness , possess few of the qualification for wifehood with which she be so richly endow . 

 she be godmother to her friend ' baby , she , whose motherhood would have be a thing for wonder and worship . 

 she have a glorious voice , but her face not match it , its existence be rarely suspect ; and as she accompany to perfection , she be usually in requisition to play for the singing of other . 

 in short , all her life long Jane have fill second place , and fill they very contentedly . she have never know what it be to be absolutely first with any one . her mother 's death have occur during her infancy , so that she have not even the most shadowy remembrance of that maternal love and tenderness which she use sometimes to try to imagine , although she have never experience it . 

 her mother 's maid , a faithful and devoted woman , dismiss soon after the death of her mistress , chance to be in the neighbourhood some twelve year later , call at the manor , in the hope of find some in the household who remember she . 

 after tea , Fraulein and Miss Jebb be out of the way , she be spirit up into the schoolroom to see Miss Jane , her heart full of memory of the ' sweet babe " upon whom she and her dear lady have lavish so much love and care . 

 she find await she a tall , plain girl with a frank , boyish manner and a rather disconcert way as she afterwards remark , of " take stock of a body the while one be a - talk , " which at first check the flow of good Sarah 's reminiscence , pour forth so freely in the housekeeper 's room below , and reduce she to look tearfully around the room , remark that she remember choose the bless wall - paper with her dear lady now go , whose joy have be so great when the dear babe first take notice and reach up for the rose . " and I can show you , miss , if you care to know it just which bunch of rose it be . " 

 but before Sarah 's visit be over , Jane have hear many undreame - of - thing ; amongst other , that her mother use to kiss her little hand , " ah , many a time she , do , miss ; call they little rose - petal , and cover they with kiss . " 

 the child , utterly unused to any demonstration of affection , look at her rather ungainly brown hand and laugh , simply because she be ashamed of the unwonted tightening at her throat and the queer stinging of tear beneath her eyelid . thus Sarah depart under the impression that Miss Jane have grow up into a rather a heartless young lady . but Fraulein and Jebbie never know why , from that day onward , the hand , of which they have so often have cause to complain , be keep scrupulously clean ; and on her birthday night , unashamed in the quiet darkness , the lonely little child kiss her own hand beneath the bedclothe , strive thus to reach the tenderness of her dead mother 's lip . 

 and in after year , when she become her own mistress , one of her first action be to advertise for Sarah Matthews and engage she as her own maid , at a salary which enable the good woman eventually to buy herself a comfortable annuity . 

 Jane see but little of her father , who have find it difficult to forgive she , firstly , for be a girl when he desire a son ; secondly , be a girl , for have inherit his plainness rather than her mother 's beauty . parent be apt to see no injustice in the fact that they be often annoy with their offspring for possess attribute , both of character and appearance , with which they themselves have endow they . 

 the hero of Jane 's childhood , the chum of her girlhood and the close friend of her mature year , be Deryck Brand , only son of the rector of the parish , and her senior by nearly ten year . but even in their friendship , close though it be , she have never feel herself first to he . as a medical student , at home during vacation , his mother and his profession take precedence in his mind of the lonely child , whose devotion please he and whose strong character and original mental development interest he . later on he marry a lovely girl , as unlike Jane as one woman could possibly be to another ; but still their friendship hold and deepen ; and now , when he be rapidly advance to the very front rank of his profession , her appreciation of his work , and sympathetic understanding of his aim and effort , mean more to he than even the signal mark of royal favour , of which he have lately be the recipient . 

 Jane Champion have no close friend amongst the woman of her set . her lonely girlhood have breed in she an absolute frankness towards herself and other people which make it difficult for she to understand or tolerate the little artificiality of society , or the trivial weakness of her own sex . woman to whom she have show special kindness and they be many maintain an attitude of grateful admiration in her presence , and of cowardly silence in her absence when she chance to be under discussion . 

 but of man friend she have many , especially among a set of young fellow just through college , of whom she make particular chum ; nice lad , who write to she of their college and mess - room scrape , as they would never have dream of do to their own mother . she know perfectly well that they call she " old Jane " and " pretty Jane " and " dear jane " amongst themselves , but she believe in the harmlessness of their fun and the genuineness of their affection , and give they a generous amount of her own in return . 

 Jane Champion happen just now to be pay one of her long visit to Overdene , and be play golf with a boy for whom she have long have a rod in pickle on this summer afternoon when the duchess go to cut bloom in her rose - garden . only , as Jane find out , you can not decorously lead up to a scolding if you be very keen on golf , and go golf with a person who be equally enthusiastic , and who all the way to the link explain exactly how he play every hole the last time he go round , and all the way back gloat over , in retrospection , the way you and he have play every hole this time . 

 so Jane consider her afternoon , didactically , a failure . but , in the smoking - room that night , young Cathcart explain the game all over again to a few choice spirit , and then remark : " Old Jane be superb ! fancy ! such a drive as that , and do number seven in three and not talk about it ! I have   jolly well make up my mind to send no more bouquet to Tou - Tou . hang it , boy ! you can not   see yourself at champagne supper with a dancing - woman , when you have   walk round the link , on a day like this , with the Honourable Jane . she drive like a rifle shoot , and when she loft , you would think the ball be a swallow ; and beat I three hole up and never mention it . by Jove , a fellow want to have a clean bill when he shake hand with she ! " 




 CHAPTER III 

 the surprise PACKET 

 the sun - dial point to half past four o'clock . the hour of silence appear to be over . the bird commence twitter ; and a cuckoo , in an adjacent wood , sound his note at interval . 

 the house awake to sudden life . there be an opening and shutting of door . two footman , in the mulberry and silver of the Meldrum livery , hurry down from the terrace , carry fold tea - table , with which they supplement those of rustic oak stand permanently under the cedar . one , promptly return to the house ; while the other remain behind , spread snowy cloth over each table . 


 the macaw awoke , stretch his wing and flap they twice , then sidle up and down his perch , concentrate his attention upon the footman . 

 " mind ! " he exclaim suddenly , in the butler 's voice , as a cloth , fling on too hurriedly , flutter to the grass . 

 " hold your jaw ! " say the young footman irritably , flick the bird with the table - cloth , and then glance furtively at the rose - garden . 

 " Tommy want a gooseberry ! " shriek the macaw , dodge the table - cloth and hanging , head downward , from his perch . 

 " do not   you wish you may get it ? " say the footman viciously . 

 " give it he , somebody , " remark Tommy , in the duchess 's voice . 

 the footman start , and look over his shoulder ; then hurriedly tell Tommy just what he think of he , and where he wish he ; cuff he soundly , and return to the house , follow by peal of laughter , mingle with exhortation and imprecation from the angry bird , who dance up and down on his perch until his enemy have vanish from view . 

 a few minute later the table be spread with the large variety of eatable consider necessary at an english afternoon tea ; the massive silver urn and teapot gleam on the buffet - table , behind which the old butler preside ; muffin , crumpet , cake , and every kind of sandwich supplement the dainty little roll slice of white and brown bread - and - butter , while heap - up bowl of freshly gather strawberry lend a touch of colour to the artistic effect of white and silver . when all be ready , the butler raise his hand and sound an old chinese gong hang in the cedar tree . before the penetrate boom have die away , voice be hear in the distance from all over the ground . 

 up from the river , down from the tennis court , out from house and garden , come the duchess 's guest , rejoice in the refreshing prospect of tea , hurry to the welcome shade of the cedar ; charming woman in white , carefully guard their complexion beneath shady hat and picturesque parasol ; delightful girl , who have long ago sacrifice complexion to comfort , and now walk across the lawn bareheade , swing their racket and discuss the last hard - fight set ; man in flannel , sunburned and handsome , join in the talk and laughter ; praise their partner , while remain unobtrusively silent as to their own achievement . 

 they make a picturesque group as they gather under the tree , subside with immense satisfaction into the low wicker chair , or on to the soft turf , and help themselves to what they please . when all be supply with tea , coffee , or iced drink , to their liking , conversation flow again . 

 " so the duchess 's concert come off to - night , " remark some one . " I wish to goodness they would hang this tree with chinese lantern and , have it out here . it be too hot to face a crowded function indoor . " 

 " oh , that be all right , " say Garth Dalmain , " I be stage - manager , you know ; and I can promise you that all the long window opening on to the terrace shall stand wide . so no one need be in the concert - room , who prefer to stop outside . there will be a row of lounge chair place on the terrace near the window . you will not   see much ; but you will hear , perfectly . " 

 " ah , but half the fun be in see , " exclaim one of the tennis girl . " People who have remain on the terrace will miss all the point of it afterwards when the dear duchess show we how everybody do it . I do not   care how hot it be . book I a seat in the front row ! " 

 " who be the surprise packet to - night ? " ask Lady Ingleby , who have arrive since luncheon . 

 " Velma , " say Mary Strathern . " she be come for the week - end , and delightful it will be to have she . no one but the duchess could have work it , and no place but Overdene would have tempt she . she will sing only one song at the concert ; but she be sure to break forth later on , and give we plenty . we will persuade Jane to drift to the piano accidentally and play over , just by chance , the open bar of some of Velma 's good thing , and we shall soon hear the magic voice . she never can resist a perfectly play accompaniment . " 

 " why call Madame Velma the ` surprise packet ' ? " ask a girl , to whom the Overdene " good party " be a new experience . 

 " that , my dear , " reply Lady Ingleby , " be a little joke of the duchess 's . this concert be arrange for the amusement of her house party , and for the gratification and glorification of local celebrity . the whole neighbourhood be invite . none of you be ask to perform , but local celebrity be . in fact they furnish the entire programme , to their own delight , the satisfaction of their friend and relative , and our entertainment , particularly afterwards when the duchess take we through every item , with original note , comment , and impersonation . oh , Dal ! do you remember when she tuck a sheet of white writing - paper into her tea - gown for a dog collar , and take off the high - church curate nervously sing a comic song ? then at the very end , you see and really some of it be quite good for amateur she trot out Velma , or some equally perfect artiste , to show they how it really can be do ; and suddenly the place be full of music , and a great hush fall on the audience , and the poor complacent amateur realise that the noise they have be make be , after all , not music ; and they go dumbly home . but they have forget all about it by the following year ; or a fresh contingent of willing performer step into the breach . the duchess 's little joke always come off . " 

 " the Honourable Jane do not approve of it , " say young Ronald Ingram ; " therefore she be generally give marching order and depart to her next visit before the event . but no one can accompany Madame Velma so perfectly , so this time she be command to stay . but I doubt if the ' surprise packet ' will come off with quite such a shock as usual , and I be certain the fun will not   be so good afterwards . the Honourable Jane have be know to jump on the duchess for that sort of thing . she be safe to get the bad of it at the time , but it have a restrain effect afterwards . " 

 " I think Miss Champion be quite right , " say a bright - faced american girl , bravely , hold a gold spoon poise for a moment over the strawberry ice - cream with which Garth Dalmain have supply she . 

 " in my country we should call it real mean to laugh , at people who have be our guest and perform in our house . " 

 " in your country , my dear , " say Myra Ingleby , " you have no duchess . " 

 " well , we supply you with quite a good few , " reply the american girl calmly , and go on with her ice . 

 a general laugh follow ; and the late anglo - american match come up for discussion . 

 " where be the Honourable Jane ? " inquire someone presently . 

 " golf with Billy , " say Ronald Ingram . " ah , here they come . " 

 Jane 's tall figure be see , walk along the terrace , accompany by Billy Cathcart , talk eagerly . they put their club away in the low hall ; then come down the lawn together to the tea - table . 

 Jane wear a tailor - make coat and skirt of grey tweed , a blue and white cambric shirt , starched linen collar and cuff , a silk tie , and a soft feel hat with a few black quill in it . she walk with the freedom of movement and swing of limb which indicate great strength and a body well under control . her appearance be extraordinarily unlike that of all the pretty and graceful woman group beneath the cedar tree . and yet it be in no sense masculine or , to use a more appropriate word , mannish ; for everything strong be masculine ; but a woman who ape an appearance of strength which she do not possess , be mannish ; rather be it so truly feminine that she could afford to adopt a severe simplicity of attire , which suit admirably the decide plainness of her feature , and the almost massive proportion of her figure . 

 she step into the circle beneath the cedar , and take one of the half - dozen place immediately vacate by the man , with the complete absence of self - consciousness which always characterise she . 

 " what do you go round in , Miss Champion ? " inquire one of the man . 

 " my ordinary clothe , " reply Jane ; quote Punch , and evade the question . 

 but Billy burst out : " she go round in " 

 " oh , be quiet , Billy , " interpose Jane . " you and I be practically the only golf maniacs present . Most of these dear people be even ignorant as to who ' bogie ' be , or why we should be so proud of beat he . where be my aunt ? poor Simmons be toddle all over the place when we go in to put away our club , search for she with a telegram . " 

 " why do not   you open it ? " ask Myra . 

 " because my aunt never allow her telegram to be open . she love shock ; and there be always the possibility of a telegram contain startling news . she say it completely spoil it if some one else know it first , and break it to she gently . " 

 " here come the duchess , " say Garth Dalmain , who be sit where he could see the little gate into the rose - garden . 

 " do not mention the telegram , " caution Jane . " it would not please she that I should even know of its arrival . it would be a shame to take any of the bloom off the unexpected delight of a wire on this hot day , when nothing unusual seem likely to happen . " 

 they turn and look towards the duchess as she bustle across the lawn ; this quaint old figure , who have call they together ; who own the lovely place where they be spend such delightful day ; and whose odd whimsicality have be so freely discuss while they drink her tea and feast off her strawberry . the man rise as she approach , but not quite so spontaneously as they have do for her niece . 

 the duchess carry a large wooden basket fill to overflow with exquisite rose . every bloom be perfect , and each have be cut at exactly the right moment . 




 CHAPTER IV 

 JANE volunteer 

 the duchess plump down her basket in the middle of the strawberry table . 

 " there , good people ! " she say , rather breathlessly . " help yourselves , and let I see you all wear rose to - night . and the concert - room be to be a bower of rose . we will call it ' LA FETE DES ROSES . ' ... no , thank you , Ronnie . that tea have be make half an hour at least , and you ought to love I too well to press it upon I . besides , I never take tea . I have a whiskey and soda when I wake from my nap , and that sustain I until dinner . oh yes , my dear Myra , I know I come to your interesting meeting , and sign that excellent pledge ' POUR ENCOURAGER LES AUTRES ' ; but I drive straight to my doctor when I leave your house , and he give I a certificate to say I must take something when I need it ; and I always need it when I wake from my nap .... really , Dal , it be positively wicked for any man , off the stage , to look as picturesque as you do , in that pale violet shirt , and dark violet tie , and those white flannel . if I be your grandmother I should send you in to take they off . if you turn the head of old dowager such as I be , what chance have all these chicken ? ... Hush , Tommy ! that be a very naughty word ! and you need not be jealous of Dal . I admire you still more . Dal , will you paint my scarlet macaw ? " 

 the young artist , whose portrait in that year 's Academy have create much interest in the artistic world , and whose violet shirt have just be so severely censure , lie back in his lounge - chair , with his arm behind his head and a gleam of amusement in his bright brown eye . 

 " no , dear Duchess , " he say . " I beg respectfully to decline the commission , Tommy would require a Landseer to do full justice to his attitude and expression . besides , it would be demoralise to an innocent and well - bring - up youth , such as you know I to be , to spend long hour in Tommy 's society , listen to the remark that sweet bird would make while I paint he . but I will tell you what I will do . I will paint you , dear Duchess , only not in that hat ! ever since I be quite a small boy , a straw hat with black ribbon tie under the chin have make I feel ill . if I yield to my natural impulse now , I should hide my face in Miss Champion 's lap , and kick and scream until you take it off . I will paint you in the black velvet gown you wear last night , with the Medici collar ; and the jolly arrangement of lace and diamond on your head . and in your hand you shall hold an antique crystal mirror , mount in silver . " 

 the artist half close his eye , and as he describe his picture in a voice full of music and mystery , an attentive hush fall upon the gay group around he . when Garth Dalmain describe his picture , people see they . when they walk into the Academy or the New Gallery the follow year , they would say : " ah , there it be ! just as we see it that day , before a stroke of it be on the canvas . " 

 " in your left hand , you shall hold the mirror , but you shall not be look into it ; because you never look into mirror , dear Duchess , except to see whether the scolding you be give your maid , as she stand behind you , be make she cry ; and whether that be why she be be so clumsy in her manipulation of pin and thing . if it be , you promptly promise she a day off , to go and see her old mother ; and pay her journey there and back . if it be not , you scold she some more . be I the maid , I should always cry , large tear warrant to show in the glass ; only I should not sniff , because sniffing be so intensely aggravating ; and I should be most frightfully careful that my tear do not run down your neck . " 

 " Dal , you ridiculous child ! " say the duchess . " leave off talk about my maid , and my neck , and your crocodile tear , and finish describe the portrait . what do I do , with the mirror ? " 

 " you do not look into it , " continue Garth Dalmain , meditatively ; " because we know that be a thing you never do . even when you put on that hat , and tie those ribbon Miss Champion , I wish you would hold my hand in a bow under your chin , you do not   consult the mirror . but you shall sit with it in your left hand , your elbow rest on an eastern table of black ebony inlay with mother - of - pearl . you will turn it from you , so that it reflect something exactly in front of you in the imaginary foreground . you will be look at this unseen object with an expression of sublime affection . and in the mirror I will paint a vivid , brilliant , complete reflection , minute , but perfect in every detail , of your scarlet macaw on his perch . we will call it ' reflection , ' because one must always give a silly up - to - date title to picture , and just now one nondescript word be the fashion , unless you feel it needful to attract to yourself the eye of the public , in the catalogue , by call your picture twenty line of Tennyson . but when the portrait go down to posterity as a famous picture , it will figure in the catalogue of the National Gallery as ' the Duchess , the Mirror , and the Macaw . ' " 

 " Bravo ! " say the duchess , delight . " you shall paint it , Dal , in time for next year 's Academy , and we will all go and see it . " 

 and he do . and they all go . and when they see it they say : " ah , of course ! there it be ; just as we see it under the cedar at Overdene . " 

 " here come Simmons with something on a salver , " exclaim the duchess . " how that man waddle ! why can not   somebody teach he to step out ? jane ! you march across this lawn like a grenadier . can not   you explain to Simmons how it be do ? ... well ? what be it ? ha ! a telegram . now what horrible thing can have happen ? who would like to guess ? I hope it be not merely some idiot who have miss a train . " 

 amid a breathless and highly satisfactory silence , the duchess tear open the orange envelope . 

 apparently the shock be of a thorough , though not enjoyable , kind ; for the duchess , at all time highly colour , become purple as she read , and absolutely inarticulate with indignation . Jane rise quietly , look over her aunt 's shoulder , read the long message , and return to her seat . 

 " creature ! " exclaim the duchess , at last . " oh , creature ! this come of ask they as friend . and I have a lovely string of pearl for she , worth far more than she would have be offer , professionally , for one song . and to fail at the last minute ! oh , CREATURE ! " 

 " dear aunt , " say Jane , " if poor Madame Velma have a sudden attack of laryngitis , she could not possibly sing a note , even have the Queen command she . her telegram be full of regret . " 

 " do not   argue , Jane ! " exclaim the duchess , crossly . " and do not   drag in the Queen , who have nothing to do with my concert or Velma 's throat . I do abominate irrelevance , and you know it ! why must she have she what do you call it , just when she be come to sing here ? in my young day people never have these new - fangle complaint . I have no patience with all this appendicitis and what not cut people open at every possible excuse . in my young day we call it a good old - fashioned stomach - ache , and give they Turkey rhubarb ! " 

 Myra Ingleby hide her face behind her garden hat ; and Garth Dalmain whisper to jane : " I do abominate irrelevance , and you know it ! " but Jane shake her head at he , and refuse to smile . 

 " Tommy want a gooseberry ! " shout the macaw , have apparently notice the mention of rhubarb . 

 " oh , give it he , somebody ! " say the worried duchess . 

 " dear aunt , " say Jane , " there be no gooseberry . " 

 " do not   argue , girl ! " cry the duchess , furiously ; and Garth , delight , shake his head at Jane . " when he say ' gooseberry , ' he mean anything green , as you very well know ! " 

 half a dozen people hasten to Tommy with lettuce , water - cress , and cucumber sandwich ; and Garth pick one blade of grass , and hand it to Jane ; with an air of anxious solicitude ; but Jane ignore it . 

 " no answer , Simmons , " say the duchess . " why do not   you go ? ... oh , how that man waddle ! teach he to walk , somebody ! now the question be , what be to be do ? here be half the county come to hear Velma , by my invitation ; and Velma in London pretend to have appendicitis no , I mean the other thing . oh , ' drat the woman ! ' as that clever bird would say . " 

 " hold your jaw ! " shout Tommy . the duchess smile , and consent to sit down . 

 " but , dear Duchess , " suggest Garth in his most soothing voice , " the county do not know Madame Velma be to be here . it be a profound secret . you be to trot she out at the end . Lady Ingleby call she your ' surprise packet . ' " 

 Myra come out from behind her garden hat , and the duchess nod at her approvingly . 

 " quite true , " she say . " that be the lovely part of it . oh , creature ! " 

 " but , dear Duchess , " pursue Garth persuasively , " if the county do not know , the county will not be disappoint . they be come to listen to one another , and to hear themselves , and to enjoy your claret - cup and ice . all this they will do , and go away delighted , say how cleverly the dear duchess , discover and exploit local talent . " 

 " ah , ha ! " say the duchess , with a gleam in the hawk eye , and a raising of the hooked nose - which Mrs. Parker Bangs of Chicago , who have meet the duchess once or twice , describe as " genuine plantagenet " " but they will go away wise in their own conceit , and satisfied with their own mediocre performance . my idea be to let they do it , and then show they how it should be do . " 

 " but Aunt ' Gina , " say Jane , gently ; ' surely you forget that most of these people have be to town and hear plenty of good music , Madame Velma herself most likely , and all the great singer . they know they can not sing like a prima donna ; but they do their anxious good , because you ask they . I can not see that they require an object lesson . " 

 " Jane , " say the duchess , " for the third time this afternoon I must request you not to argue . " 

 " Miss Champion , " say Garth Dalmain , " if I be your grandmamma , I should send you to bed . " 

 " what be to be do ? " reiterate the duchess . " she be to sing the ROSARY . I have set my heart on it . the whole decoration of the room be plan to suit that song festoon of white rose ; and a great red - cross at the back of the platform , make entirely of crimson rambler . jane ! " 

 " yes , aunt . " 

 " oh , do not   say ' yes , aunt , ' in that senseless way ! can not   you make some suggestion ? " 

 " Drat the woman ! " exclaim Tommy , suddenly . 

 " Hark to that sweet bird ! " cry the duchess , her good humour fully restore . " give he a strawberry , somebody . now , Jane , what do you suggest ? " 

 Jane Champion be seat with her broad back half turn to her aunt , one knee cross over the other , her large , capable hand clasp round it . she loose her hand , turn slowly round , and look into the keen eye peer at she from under the mushroom hat . as she read the half - resentful , half - appeal demand in they , a slow smile dawn in her own . she wait a moment to make sure of the duchess 's meaning , then say quietly : " I will sing the rosary for you , in Velma 's place , to - night , if you really wish it , aunt . " 

 have the gathering under the tree be a party of " mere people , " it would have gasp . have it be a " freak party , " it would have be loud - voice in its expression of surprise . be a " good party , " it give no outward sign ; but a sense of blank astonishment , purely mental , be in the air . the duchess herself be the only person present who have hear Jane Champion sing . 

 " have you the song ? " ask her Grace of Meldrum , rise , and pick up her telegram and empty basket . 

 " I have , " say Jane . " I spend a few hour with Madame Blanche when I be in town last month ; and she , who so rarely admire these modern song , be immensely take with it . she sing it , and allow I to accompany she . we spend nearly an hour over it . I obtain a copy afterwards . " 

 " good , " say the duchess . " then I count on you . now I must send a sympathetic telegram to that poor dear Velma , who will be fret at have to fail we . so ' au revoir , ' good people . remember , we dine punctually at eight o'clock . music be suppose to begin at nine . Ronnie , be a kind boy , and carry Tommy into the hall for I . he will screech so fearfully if he see I walk away without he . he be so very loving , dear bird ! " 

 Silence under the cedar . 

 Most people be watch young Ronald , hold the stand as much at arm 's length as possible ; while Tommy , keep his balance wonderfully , sidle up close to he , evidently make confidential remark into Ronnie 's terrified ear . the duchess walk on before , quite satisfied with the new turn event have take . 

 one or two people be watch Jane . 

 " it be very brave of you , " say Myra Ingleby , at length . " I would offer to play your accompaniment , dear ; but I can only manage Au clair de la lune , and three blind mouse , with one finger . " 

 " and I would offer to play your accompaniment , dear , " say Garth Dalmain , " if you be go to sing Lassen 's Allerseelen , for I play that quite beautifully with ten finger ! it be an education only to hear the way I bring out the tolling of the cemetery chapel bell right through the song . the poor thing with the bunch of purple heather can never get away from it . even in the grand crescendo , appassionata , fortissimo , when they discover that ' in death 's dark valley this be Holy Day , ' I give then no holiday from that bell . I do not   know what it do ' once in May . ' it toll all the time , with madden persistence , in my accompaniment . but I have see the Rosary , and I dare not face those chord . to begin with , you start in every know flat ; and before you have go far you have gather unto yourself handfuls of known and unknown sharp , to which you cling , not dare to let they go , lest they should be want again the next moment . alas , no ! when it be a question of accompany the Rosary , I must say , as the old farmer at the tenant ' dinner the other day say to the duchess when she press upon he a third helping of pudding : ' Madam , I CANNOT ! ' " 

 " do not   be silly , Dal , " say Jane . " you could accompany the Rosary perfectly , if I want it do . but , as it happen , I prefer accompany myself . " 

 " ah , " say Lady Ingleby , sympathetically , " I quite understand that . it would be such a relief all the time to know that if thing seem go wrong , you could stop the other part , and give yourself the note . " 

 the only two real musician present glance at each other , and a gleam of amusement pass between they . 

 " it certainly would be useful , if necessary , " say Jane . 

 " I would ' stop the other part ' and ' give you the note , ' " say Garth , demurely . 

 " I be sure you would , " say Jane . " you be always so very kind . but I prefer to keep the matter in my own hand . " 

 " you realise the difficulty of make the voice carry in a place of that size unless you can stand and face the audience ? " Garth Dalmain speak anxiously . Jane be a special friend of his , and he have a man 's dislike of the idea of his chum fail in anything , publicly . 

 the same quiet smile dawn in Jane 's eye and pass to her lip as when she have realise that her aunt mean she to volunteer in Velma 's place . she glance around . Most of the party have wander off in two and three , some to the house , other back to the river . she and Dal and Myra be practically alone . her calm eye be full of quiet amusement as she steadfastly meet the anxious look in Garth 's , and answer his question . 

 " yes , I know . but the acoustic property of the room be very perfect , and I have learn to throw my voice . perhaps you may not know in fact , how should you know ? but I have have the immense privilege of study with Madame Marchesi in Paris , and of keep up to the mark since by an occasional delightful hour with she no less gifted daughter in London . so I ought to know all there be to know about the management of a voice , if I have at all adequately avail myself of such golden opportunity . " 

 these quiet word be greek to Myra , convey no more to her mind than if Jane have say : " I have be learn Tonic sol - fa . " in fact , not quite so much , see that Lady Ingleby have herself once try to master the Tonic sol - fa system in order to instruct her man and maid in part - singing . it be at a time when she own a distinctly musical household . the second footman possess a fine barytone . the butler could " do a little bass , " which be to say that , while the other part soar to high region , he could stay on the bottom note if carefully place there , and tell to remain . the head housemaid sing what she call ' second " ; in other word , she follow along , slightly behind the treble as regard time , and a major third below they as regard pitch . the housekeeper , a large , dark person with a fringe on her upper lip , unshaven and unashame , produce a really remarkable effect by sing the air an octave below the treble . unfortunately Lady Ingleby be apt to confuse she with the butler . Myra herself be the first to admit that she have not " much ear " ; but it be decidedly try , at a moment when she dare not remove her eye from the accompaniment of Good King Wenceslas , to have call out : " stay where you be , Jenkins ! " and then find it be Mrs. Jarvis who have be travel upwards . but when a new footman , engage by Lord Ingleby with no reference to his musical gift , chance to possess a fine throaty tenor , Myra feel she really have material with which great thing might be accomplish , and decide herself to learn the Tonic sol - fa system . she easily master mi , re , do , and so , fa , fa , mi , because these represent the opening line of three blind mouse , always a musical landmark to Myra . but when it come to the fugue - like intricacy in the theme of " they all run after the farmer 's wife , " Lady Ingleby be lose without the word to cling to , and give up the Tonic sol - fa system in despair . 

 so the name of the great teacher of singing of this age do not convey much to Myra 's mind . but Garth Dalmain sit up . 

 " I say ! no wonder you take it coolly . why , Velma herself be a pupil of the great madame . " 

 " that be how it happen that I know she rather well , " say Jane . " I be here to - day because I be to have play her accompaniment . " 

 " I see , " say Garth . " and now you have to do both . ' Land 's sake ! ' as Mrs. Parker Bangs say when you explain who be who at a Marlborough House garden party . but you prefer play other people 's accompaniment , to sing yourself , do not   you ? " 

 Jane 's slow smile dawn again . 

 " I prefer singing , " she say , " but accompanying be more useful . " 

 " of course it be , " say Garth . " heap of people can sing a little , but very few can accompany properly . " 

 " Jane , " say Myra , her grey eye look out lazily from under their long black lash , " if you have have singing lesson , and know some song , why have not   the duchess turn you on to sing to we before this ? " 

 " for a sad reason , " Jane reply . " you know she only son die eight year ago ? he be such a handsome , talented fellow . he and I inherit our love of music from our grandfather . my cousin get into a musical set at college , study with enthusiasm , and want to take it up professionally . he have promise , one Christmas vacation , to sing at a charity concert in town , and go out , when only just recover from influenza , to fulfil this engagement . he have a relapse , double pneumonia set in , and he die in five day from heart failure . my poor aunt be frantic with grief ; and since then any mention of my love of music make she very bitter . I , too , want to take it up professionally , but she put her foot down heavily . I scarcely ever venture to sing or play here . " 

 " why not elsewhere ? " ask Garth Dalmain . " we have stay about at the same house , and I have not the faint idea you sing . " 

 " I do not know , " say Jane slowly . " but music mean so much to I . it be a sort of holy of holy in the tabernacle of one 's inner being . and it be not easy to lift the veil . " 

 " the veil will be lift to - night , " say Myra Ingleby . 

 " yes , " agree Jane , smile a little ruefully , " I suppose it will . " 

 " and we shall pass in , " say Garth Dalmain . 




 CHAPTER v 

 confidences 

 the shadow silently lengthen on the lawn . 

 the home - come rook circle and caw around the tall elm tree . 

 the sun - dial point to six o'clock . 

 Myra Ingleby rise and stand with the slanting ray of the sun full in her eye , her arm stretch over her head . the artist note every graceful line of her willowy figure . 

 " ah , bah ! " she yawn . " it be so perfect out here , and I must go in to my maid . Jane , be advise in time . do not ever begin facial massage . you become a slave to it , and it take up hour of your day . look at I . " 

 they be both look already . Myra be worth look at . 

 " for ordinary dressing purpose , I need not have go in until seven ; and now I must lose this last , perfect hour . " 

 " what happen ? " ask Jane . " I know nothing of the process . " 

 " I can not   go into detail , " reply Lady Ingleby , " but you know how sweet I have look all day ? well , if I do not go to my maid now , I should look less sweet by the end of dinner , and at the close of the evening I should appear ten year old . " 

 " you would always look sweet , " say Jane , with frank sincerity ; " and why mind look the age you be ? " 

 " my dear , ' a man be as old as he feel ; a woman be as old as she look , ' " quote Myra . 

 " I feel just seven , " say Garth . 

 " and you look seventeen , " laugh Myra . 

 " and I be twenty - seven , " retort Garth ; ' so the duchess should not call I ' a ridiculous child . ' and , dear lady , if curtail this mysterious process be go to make you one whit less lovely to - night , I do beseech you to hasten to your maid , or you will spoil my whole evening . I shall burst into tear at dinner , and the duchess hat scene , as you very well know ! " 

 Lady Ingleby flap he with her garden hat as she pass . 

 " be quiet , you ridiculous child ! " she say . " you have no business to listen to what I be say to Jane . you shall paint I this autumn . and after that I will give up facial massage , and go abroad , and come back quite old . " 

 she fling this last threat over her shoulder as she trail away across the lawn . 

 " how lovely she be ! " comment Garth , gaze after she . " how much of that be true , do you suppose , Miss Champion ? " 

 " I have not the slight idea , " reply Jane . " I be completely ignorant on the subject of facial massage . " 

 " not much , I should think , " continue Garth , " or she would not have tell we . " 


 " ah , you be wrong there , " reply Jane , quickly . " Myra be extraordinarily honest , and always incline to be frank about herself and her foible . she have a curious upbringing . she be one of a large family , and be always consider the black sheep , not so much by her brother and sister , as by her mother . nothing she be , or say , or do , be ever right . when Lord Ingleby meet she , and I suppose see her incipient possibility , she be a tall , gawky girl , with lovely eye , a sweet , sensitive mouth , and a what - on - earth - be - I - go - to - do - next expression on her face . he be twenty year her senior , but fall most determinedly in love with she and , though her mother press upon he all her other daughter in turn , he would have Myra or nobody . when he propose to she it be impossible at first to make she understand what he mean . his meaning dawn on she at length , and he be not keep wait long for her answer . I have often hear he tease she about it . she look at he with an adorable smile , her eye brim over with tear , and say : ' why , of course . I will marry you GRATEFULLY , and I think it be perfectly sweet of you to like I . but what a blow for mamma ! ' they be marry with as little delay as possible , and he take she off to Paris , Italy , and Egypt , have six month abroad , and bring she back this ! I be stay with they once , and her mother be also there . we be sit in the morning room , no man , just half a dozen woman , and her mother begin find fault about something , and say : ' have not Lord Ingleby often tell you of it ? ' Myra look up in her sweet , lazy way and answer : ' dear mamma , I know it must seem strange to you , but , do you know , my husband think everything I do perfect . ' ' your husband be a fool ! ' snap her mother . ' from your point of view , dear mamma , ' say Myra , sweetly . " 

 " old curmudgeon ! " remark Garth . " why be people of that sort allow to be call ' mother ' ? we , who have have tender , perfect mother , would like to make it law that the other kind should always be call ' she - parent , ' or ' female progenitor , ' or any other descriptive title , but not profane the sacred name of mother ! " 

 Jane be silent . she know the beautiful story of Garth 's boyhood with his widow mother . she know his passionate adoration of her sainted memory . she like he well when she get a glimpse beneath the surface , and do not wish to check his mood by remind he that she herself have never even lisp that name . 

 Garth rise from his chair and stretch his slim figure in the slanting sun - ray , much as Myra have do . Jane look at he . as be often the case with plain people , great physical beauty appeal to she strongly . she only allow to that appeal its right proportion in her estimation of her friend . Garth Dalmain by no mean come first among her particular chum . he be old than most of they , and yet in some way young than any , and his remarkable youthfulness of manner and exuberance of spirit sometimes make he appear foolish to Jane , whose sense of humour be of a more sedate kind . but of the absolute perfection of his outward appearance , there be no question ; and Jane look at he now , much as his own mother might have look , with honest admiration in her kind eye . 

 Garth , notwithstanding the pale violet shirt and dark violet tie , be quite unconscious of his own appearance ; and , dazzle by the golden sunlight , be also unconscious of Jane 's look . 

 " oh , I say , Miss Champion ! " he cry , boyishly . " be not   it nice that they have all go in ? I have be want a good jaw with you . really , when we all get together we do drivel sometimes , to keep the ball roll . it be like pat up air - ball ; and very often they burst , and one realise that an empty , shrivel little skin be all that be leave after most conversation . do you ever buy air - ball at Brighton ? do you remember the wild excitement of see the man come along the parade , with a huge bunch of they blue , green , red , white , and yellow , all shin in the sun ? and one use to wonder how he ever contrive to pick they all up I do not   know how ! and what would happen if he put they all down . I always know exactly which one I want , and it be generally on a very inside string and take a long time to disentangle . and how madden it be if the grown - up grow tired of waiting , and walk on with the penny . only I would rather have have none , than not have the one on which I have fix my heart . would not   you ? " 

 " I never buy air - ball at Brighton , " reply Jane , without enthusiasm . Garth be feel seven again , and Jane be feel bored . 

 for once he seem conscious of this . he take his coat from the back of the chair where he have hang it , and put it on . 

 " come along , Miss Champion , " he say ; " I be so tired of do nothing . let we go down to the river and find a boat or two . dinner be not until eight o'clock , and I be certain you can dress , even for the role of Velma , in half an hour . I have know you do it in ten minute , at a pinch . there be ample time for I to row you within sight of the minster , and we can talk as we go . ah , fancy ! the grey old minster with this sunset behind it , and a field of cowslip in the foreground ! " 

 but Jane do not rise . 

 " my dear Dal , " she say , " you would not feel much enthusiasm for the minster or the sunset , after you have pull my twelve stone odd up the river . you would drop exhausted among the cowslip . surely you might know by now that I be not the sort of person to be tell off to sit in the stern of a tiny skiff and steer . if I be in a boat , I like to row ; and if I row , I prefer rowing stroke . but I do not want to row now , because I have be play golf the whole afternoon . and you know perfectly well it would be no pleasure to you to have to gaze at I all the way up and all the way down the river ; know all the time , that I be mentally criticise your stroke and mark the careless way you feather . " 


 Garth sit down , lie back in his chair , with his arm behind his sleek dark head , and look at she with his soft shin eye , just as he have look at the duchess . 

 " how cross you be , old chap , " he say , gently . " what be the matter ? " 

 Jane laugh and hold out her hand . " oh , you dear boy ! I think you have the sweetest temper in the world . I will not   be cross any more . the truth be , I hate the duchess 's concert , and I do not   like be the duchess 's ' surprise - packet . ' " 

 " I see , " say Garth , sympathetically . " but , that be so , why do you offer ? " 

 " ah , I have to , " say Jane . " poor old dear ! she so rarely ask I anything , and her eye besought . do not   you know how one long to have something to do for some one who belong to one ? I would black her boot if she wish it . but it be so hard to stay here , week after week , and be keep at arm 's length . this one thing she ask of I , and her proud old eye plead . could I refuse ? " 

 Garth be all sympathy . " no , dear , " he say thoughtfully ; " of course you could not . and do not   bother over that silly joke about the ' surprise packet . ' you see , you will not   be that . I have no doubt you sing vastly well than most of they , but they will not realise it . it take a Velma to make such people as these sit up . they will think the ROSARY a pretty song , and give you a mild clap , and there the thing will end . so do not   worry . " 

 Jane sit and consider this . then : " Dal , " she say , " I do hate sing before that sort of audience . it be like give they your soul to look at , and you do not   want they to see it . it seem indecent . to my mind , music be the most revealing thing in the world . I shiver when I think of that song , and yet I dare not   do less than my good . when the moment come , I shall live in the song , and forget the audience . let I tell you a lesson I once have from Madame Blanche . I be sing Bemberg 's CHANT HINDOU , the passionate prayer of an indian woman to Brahma . I begin : ' BRAHMA ! DIEU DES croyant , ' and sing it as I might have sing ' DO , RE , MI . ' Brahma be nothing to I . ' stop ! ' cry Madame Blanche in her most imperious manner . ' ah , vous Anglais ! what be you do ? BRAHMA , c'est un Dieu ! he may not be your God . he may not be MY God . but he be somebody 's God . he be the God of the song . ecoutez ! ' and she lift her head and sing : ' Brahma ! Dieu des croyant ! Maitre des cite sainte ! ' with her beautiful brow illumine , and a passion of religious fervour which thrill one 's soul . it be a lesson I never forget . I can honestly say I have never sing a song tamely , since . " 

 " fine ! " say Garth Dalmain . " I like enthusiasm in every branch of art . I never care to paint a portrait , unless I adore the woman I be paint . " 

 Jane smile . the conversation be turn exactly the way she have hop eventually to lead it . 

 " Dal , dear , " she say , " you adore so many in turn , that we old friend , who have your real interest at heart , fear you will never adore to any definite purpose . " 

 Garth laugh . " oh bother ! " he say . " be you like all the rest ? do you also think adoration and admiration must necessarily mean marriage . I should have expect you to take a saner and more masculine view . " 

 " my dear boy , " say Jane , " your friend have decide that you need a wife . you be alone in the world . you have a lovely home . you be in a fair way to be spoil by all the silly woman who run after you . of course we be perfectly aware that your wife must have every incomparable beauty under the sun unite in her own exquisite person . but each new divinity you see and paint apparently fulfil , for the time be , this wondrous ideal ; and , perhaps , if you wed one , instead of paint she , she might continue permanently to fulfil it . " 

 Garth consider this in silence , his level brow knit . at last he say : " beauty be so much a thing of the surface . I see it , and admire it . I desire it , and paint it . when I have paint it , I have make it my own , and somehow I find I have do with it . all the time I be paint a woman , I be seek for her soul . I want to express it on my canvas ; and do you know , Miss Champion , I find that a lovely woman do not always have a lovely soul . " 

 Jane be silent . the last thing she wish to discuss be other woman 's soul . 

 " there be just one who seem to I perfect , " continue Garth . " I be to paint she this autumn . I believe I shall find her soul as exquisite as her body . " 

 " and she be ? " inquire Jane . 

 " Lady Brand . " 

 " Flower ! " exclaim Jane . " be you so take with Flower ? " 

 " ah , she be lovely , " say Garth , with reverent enthusiasm . " it positively be not right for any one to be so absolutely flawlessly lovely . it make I ache . do you know that feeling , Miss Champion , of perfect loveliness make you ache ? " 

 " no , I do not , " say Jane , shortly . " and I do not think other people 's wife ought to have that effect upon you . " 

 " my dear old chap , " exclaim Garth , astonish ; " it have nothing to do with wife or no wife . a wood of bluebell in morning sunshine would have precisely the same effect . I ache to paint she . when I have paint she and really do justice to that matchless loveliness as I see it , I shall feel all right . at present I have only paint she from memory ; but she be to sit to I in October . " 

 " from memory ? " question Jane . 

 " yes , I paint a great deal from memory . give I one look of a certain kind at a face , let I see it at a moment which let one penetrate beneath the surface , and I can paint that face from memory week after . lot of my good study have be do that way . ah , the delight of it ! beauty the worship of beauty be to I a religion . " 

 " rather a godless form of religion , " suggest Jane . 

 " ah no , " say Garth reverently . " all true beauty come from God , and lead back to God . ' every good gift and every perfect gift be from above , and cometh down from the Father of light . ' I once meet an old freak who say all sickness come from the devil . I never could believe that , for my mother be an invalid during the last year of her life , and I can testify that her sickness be a blessing to many , and bear to the glory of God . but I be , convince all true beauty be god - give , and that be why the worship of beauty be to I a religion . nothing bad be ever truly beautiful ; nothing good be ever really ugly . " 

 Jane smile as she watch he , lie back in the golden sunlight , the very personification of manly beauty . the absolute lack of self - consciousness , either for himself or for she , which allow he to talk thus to the plain woman of his acquaintance , hold a vein of humour which divert Jane . it appeal to she more than buy coloured air - ball , or scream because the duchess wear a mushroom hat . 

 " then be plain people to be deny their share of goodness , Dal ? " she ask . 

 " Plainness be not ugliness , " reply Garth Dalmain simply . " I learn that when quite a small boy . my mother take I to hear a famous preacher . as he sit on the platform during the preliminary he seem to I quite the ugly man I have ever see . he remind I of a grotesque gorilla , and I dread the moment when he should rise up and face we and give out a text . it seem to I there ought to be bar between , and that we should want to throw nut and orange . but when he rise to speak , his face be transfigure . goodness and inspiration shine from it , make it as the face of an angel . I never again think he ugly . the beauty of his soul shine through , transfigure his body . child though I be , I could differentiate even then between ugliness and plainness . when he sit down at the close of his magnificent sermon , I no long think he a complicated form of chimpanzee . I remember the divine halo of his smile . of course his actual plainness of feature remain . it be not the sort of face one could have want to live with , or to have day after day opposite to one at table . but then one be not call to that sort of discipline , which would have be martyrdom to I . and he have always stand to my mind since as a proof of the truth that goodness be never ugly ; and that divine love and aspiration shin through the plainest feature may redeem they temporarily into beauty ; and , permanently , into a thing one love to remember . " 

 " I see , " say Jane . " it must have often help you to a right view to have realise that so long ago . but now let we return to the important question of the face which you be to have daily opposite you at table . it can not be Lady Brand 's , nor can it be Myra 's ; but , you know , Dal , a very lovely one be be suggest for the position . " 

 " no name , please , " say Garth , quickly . " I object to girl ' name be mention in this sort of conversation . " 

 " very well , dear boy . I understand and respect your objection . you have make she famous already by your impressionist portrait of she , and I hear you be to do a more elaborate picture ' in the fall . ' now , Dal , you know you admire she immensely . she be lovely , she be charming , she hail from the land whose woman , when they possess charm , unite with it a freshness and a piquancy which place they beyond compare . in some way you be so unique yourself that you ought to have a wife with a certain amount of originality . now , I hardly know how far the opinion of your friend would influence you in such a matter , but you may like to hear how fully they approve your very open allegiance to shall we say the beautiful ' Stars and Stripes ' ? " 

 Garth Dalmain take out his cigarette case , carefully select a cigarette , and sit with it between his finger in absorb contemplation . 

 " smoke , " say Jane . 

 " thank , " say Garth . he strike a match and very deliberately light his cigarette . as he fling away the vesta the breeze catch it and it fall on the lawn , flame brightly . Garth spring up and extinguish it , then draw his chair more exactly opposite to Jane 's and lie back , smoke meditatively , and watch the little ring he blow , mount into the cedar branch , expand , fade , and vanish . 

 Jane be watch he . the varied and characteristic way in which her friend light and smoke their cigarette always interest Jane . there be at least a dozen young man of whom she could have give the name upon hear a description of their method . also , she have learn from Deryck Brand the value of silence in an important conversation , and the art of not weaken a statement by a postscript . 

 at last Garth speak . 

 " I wonder why the smoke be that lovely pale blue as it curl up from the cigarette , and a greyish - white if one blow it out . " 

 Jane know it be because it have become impregnate with moisture , but she do not say so , have no desire to contribute her quota of pat to this air - ball , or to encourage the superficial working of his mind just then . she quietly await the response to her appeal to his deep nature which she feel certain would be forthcoming . presently it come . 

 " it be awfully good of you , Miss Champion , to take the trouble to think all this and to say it to I . may I prove my gratitude by explain for once where my difficulty lie ? I have scarcely define it to myself , and yet I believe I can express it to you . " another long silence . Garth smoke and ponder . 

 Jane wait . it be a very comprehending , very companionable silence . Garth find himself parody the last line of an old sixteenth - century song : 

 " then ever pray that heaven may send 
 such weed , such chair , and such a friend . " 
 either the cigarette , or the chair , or Jane , or perhaps all three combine be produce in he a sublime sense of calm , and rest , and well - being ; an uplifting of spirit which make all good thing seem well ; all difficult thing , easy ; and all ideal , possible . the silence , like the sunset , be golden ; but at last he break it . 

 " two woman the only two woman who have ever really be in my life form for I a standard below which I can not fall , one , my mother , a sacred and ideal memory ; the other , old Margery Graem , my childhood 's friend and nurse , now my housekeeper and general tender and mender . her faithful heart and constant remembrance help to keep I true to the ideal of that sweet presence which fade from beside I when I stand on the threshold of manhood . margery live at Castle Gleneesh . when I return home , the sight which first meet my eye as the hall door open be old Margery in her black satin apron , lawn kerchief , and lavender ribbon . I always feel seven then , and I always hug she . you , Miss Champion , do not   like I when I feel seven ; but Margery do . now , this be what I want you to realise . when I bring a bride to Gleneesh and present she to Margery , the kind old eye will try to see nothing but good ; the faithful old heart will yearn to love and serve . and yet I shall know she know the standard , just as I know it ; I shall know she remember the ideal of gentle , tender , christian womanhood , just as I remember it ; and I must not , I dare not , fall short . believe I , Miss Champion , more than once , when physical attraction have be strong , and I have be tempt in the worship of the outward loveliness to disregard or forget the essential , the thing which be unseen but eternal , then , all unconscious of exercise any such influence , old Margery 's clear eye look into mine , old Margery 's mittened hand seem to rest upon my coat sleeve , and the voice which have guide I from infancy , say , in gentle astonishment : ` be this your choice , Master Garthie , to fill my dear lady 's place ? ' no doubt , Miss Champion , it will seem almost absurd to you when you think of our set and our sentiment , and the way we racket round that I should sit here on the duchess 's lawn and confess that I have be hold back from propose marriage to the woman I have most admire , because of what would have be my old nurse 's opinion of they ! but you must remember her opinion be form by a memory , and that memory be the memory of my dead mother . moreover , Margery voice my good self , and express my own judgment when it be not blind by passion or warp by my worship of the beautiful . not that Margery would disapprove of loveliness ; in fact , she would approve of nothing else for I , I know very well . but her penetration rapidly go beneath the surface . accord to one of Paul 's sublime paradox , she look at the thing that be not see . it seem queer that I can tell you all this , Miss Champion , and really it be the first time I have actually formulate it in my own mind . but I think it so extremely friendly of you to have trouble to give I good advice in the matter . " 

 Garth Dalmain cease speaking , and the silence which follow suddenly assume alarming proportion , seem to Jane like a high fence which she be vainly try to scale . she find herself mentally rush hither and thither , seek a gate or any possible mean of egress . and still she be confront by the difficulty of reply adequately to the totally unexpected . and what add to her dumbness be the fact that she be infinitely touch by Garth 's confession ; and when Jane be deeply move speech always become difficult . that this young man adore by all the girl for his good look and delightful manner ; pursue for his extreme eligibility by mother and chaperon ; famous already in the world of art ; flattered , court , seek after in society should calmly admit that the only woman really leave in his life be his old nurse , and that her opinion and expectation hold he back from a worldly , or unwise marriage , touch Jane deeply , even while in her heart she smile at what their set would say could they realise the situation . it reveal Garth in a new light ; and suddenly Jane understand he , as she have not understand he before . 

 and yet the only reply she could bring herself to frame be : " I wish I know old Margery . " 

 Garth 's brown eye flash with pleasure . 

 " ah , I wish you do , " he say . " and I should like you to see Castle Gleneesh . you would enjoy the view from the terrace , sheer into the gorge , and away across the purple hill . and I think you would like the pine wood and the moor . I say , Miss Champion , why should not I get up a ' good party ' in September , and implore the duchess to come and chaperon it ? and then you could come , and any one else you would like ask . and and , perhaps we might ask the beautiful ' Stars and Stripes , ' and her aunt , Mrs. Parker Bangs of Chicago ; and then we should see what Margery think of she ! " 

 " delightful ! " say Jane . " I would come with pleasure . and really , Dal , I think that girl have a sweet nature . could you do well ? the exterior be perfect , and surely the soul be there . yes , ask we all , and see what happen . " 

 " I will , " cry Garth , delight . " and what will Margery think of Mrs. Parker Bangs ? " 

 " never mind , " say Jane decidedly . " when you marry the niece , the aunt go back to Chicago . " 

 " and I wish her people be not millionaire . " 

 " that can not   be help , " say Jane . " Americans be so charming , that we really must not mind their money . " 

 " I wish Miss Lister and her aunt be here , " remark Garth . " but they be to be at Lady Ingleby 's , where I be due next Tuesday . do you come on there , Miss Champion ? " 

 " I do , " reply Jane . " I go to the Brands for a few day on Tuesday , but I have promise Myra to turn up at Shenstone for the week - end . I like stay there . they be such a harmonious couple . " 

 " yes , " say Garth , " but no one could help be a harmonious couple , who have marry Lady Ingleby . " 

 " what grammar ! " laugh Jane . " but I know what you mean , and I be glad you think so highly of Myra . she be a dear ! only do make haste and paint she and get she off your mind , so as to be free for Pauline Lister . " 

 the sun - dial point to seven o'clock . the rook have circle round the elm and drop contentedly into their nest . 

 " let we go in , " say Jane , rise . " I be glad we have have this talk , " she add , as he walk beside she across the lawn . 

 " yes , " say Garth . " air - ball be not   in it ! it be a football this time good solid leather . and we each kick one goal , a tie , you know . for your advice go home to I , and I think my reply show you the true lie of thing ; eh , Miss Champion ? " 

 he be feel seven again ; but Jane see he now through old Margery 's glass , and it do not annoy she . 

 " yes , " she say , smile at he with her kind , true eye ; " we will consider it a tie , and surely it will prove a tie to our friendship . thank you , Dal , for all you have tell I . " 

 arrive in her room , Jane find she have half an hour to spare before dress . she take out her diary . her conversation with Garth Dalmain seem worth recording , particularly his story of the preacher whose beauty of soul redeem the ugliness of his body . she write it down verbatim . 

 then she ring for her maid , and dress for dinner , and the concert which should follow . 




 CHAPTER VI 

 the VEIL be lift 

 " MISS CHAMPION ! oh , here you be ! your turn next , please . the last item of the local programme be in course of performance , after which the duchess explain Velma 's laryngitis let we hope she will not call it ' appendicitis ' and then I usher you up . be you ready ? " 

 Garth Dalmain , as master of ceremony , have seek Jane Champion on the terrace , and stand before she in the soft light of the hang chinese lantern . the crimson rambler in his button - hole , and his red silk sock , which match it , lend an artistic touch of colour to the conventional black and white of his evening clothe . 

 Jane look up from the comfortable depth of her wicker chair ; then smile at his anxious face . 

 " I be ready , " she say , and rise , walk beside he . " have it go well ? " she ask . " be it a good audience ? " 

 " pack , " reply Garth , " and the duchess have enjoy herself . it have be funny than usual . but now come the event of the evening . I say , where be your score ? " 

 " thank , " say Jane . " I shall play it from memory . it obviate the bother of turn over . " 

 they pass into the concert - room and stand behind screen and a curtain , close to the half - dozen step lead , from the side , up on to the platform . 

 " oh , hark to the duchess ! " whisper Garth . " my niece , JANE CHAMPION , have KINDLY consent to step into the breach ' which mean that you will have to step up on to that platform in another half - minute . really it would be kind to you if she say less about Velma . but never mind ; they be prepared to like anything . there ! APPENDICITIS ! I tell you so . poor Madame Velma ! let we hope it will not   get into the local paper . oh , goodness ! she be go to enlarge on new - fangle disease . well , it give we a moment 's breathing space .... I say , Miss Champion , I be chaff this afternoon about sharp and flat . I can play that accompaniment for you if you like . no ? well , just as you think well . but remember , it take a lot of voice to make much effect in this concert - room , and the place be crowd . now the duchess have do . come on . mind the bottom step . hang it all ! how dark it be behind this curtain ! " 

 Garth give she his hand , and Jane mount the step and pass into view of the large audience assemble in the Overdene concert - room . her tall figure seem tall than usual as she walk alone across the rather high platform . she wear a black evening gown of soft material , with old lace at her bosom and one string of pearl round her neck . when she appear , the audience gaze at she and applaud doubtfully . Velma 's name on the programme have raise great expectation ; and here be Miss Champion , who certainly play very nicely , but be not suppose to be able to sing , volunteer to sing Velma 's song . a more kindly audience would have cheer she to the echo , voice its generous appreciation of her effort , and sanguine expectation of her success . this audience express its astonishment , in the dubiousness of its faint applause . 

 Jane smile at they good - naturedly ; sit down at the piano , a Bechstein grand ; glance at the festoon of white rose and the cross of crimson rambler ; then , without further preliminary , strike the opening chord and commence to sing . 

 the deep , perfect voice thrill through the room . 

 a sudden breathless hush fall upon the audience . 

 each syllable penetrate the silence , bear on a tone so tender and so amazingly sweet , that casual heart stand still and marvel at their own emotion ; and those who feel deeply already , respond with a yet deep thrill to the magic of that music . 

 " the hour I spend with thee , dear heart , 
  be as a string of pearl to I ; 
 I count they over , ev'ry one apart , 
  my rosary , my rosary . " 
 softly , thoughtfully , tenderly , the last two word be breathe into the silence , hold a world of reminiscence a large - hearted woman 's faithful remembrance of tender moment in the past . 

 the listening crowd hold its breath . this be not a song . this be the throbbing of a heart ; and it throb in tone of such sweetness , that tear start unbidden . 

 then the voice , which have render the opening line so quietly , rise in a rapid crescendo of quiver pain . 

 " each hour a pearl , each pearl a prayer , 
  to still a heart in absence wrung ; 
 I tell each bead unto the end , and there 
  a cross be hung ! " 
 the last four word be give with a sudden power and passion which electrify the assembly . in the pause which follow , could be hear the tension of feel produce . but in another moment the quiet voice fall soothingly , express a strength of endurance which would fail in no crisis , nor fear to face any depth of pain ; yet gather to itself a poignancy of sweetness , render rich by the discipline of suffering . 

 " o memory that bless and burn ! 
  o barren gain and bitter loss ! 
 I kiss each bead , and strive at last to learn 
  to kiss the cross ... to kiss the cross . " 
 only those who have hear Jane sing the rosary can possibly realise how she sing " I kiss EACH BEAD . " the linger retrospection in each word ; breathe out a love so womanly , so beautiful , so tender , that her identity be forget even by those in the audience who know she good in the magic of her rendering of the song . 

 the accompaniment , which open with a single chord , close with a single note . 

 Jane strike it softly , lingeringly ; then rise , turn from the piano , and be leave the platform , when a sudden burst of wild applause break from the audience . Jane hesitate , paused , look at her aunt 's guest as if almost surprised to find they there . then the slow smile dawn in her eye and pass to her lip . she stand in the centre of the platform for a moment , awkwardly , almost shyly ; then move on as man 's voice begin to shout " Encore ! ' core ! " and leave the platform by the side staircase . 

 but there , behind the scene , in the semi - darkness of screen and curtain , a fresh surprise await Jane , more startling than the enthusiastic tumult of her audience . 

 at the foot of the staircase stand Garth Dalmain . his face be absolutely colourless , and his eye shine out from it like burn star . he remain motionless until she step from the last stair and stand close to he . then with a sudden movement he catch she by the shoulder and turn she round . 

 " go back ! " he say , and the overmaster need quiver in his voice draw Jane 's eye to his in mute astonishment . " go back at once and sing it all over again , note for note , word for word , just as before . ah , do not   stand here wait ! go back now ! go back at once ! do not   you know that you must ? " 

 Jane look into those shin eye . something she see in they excuse the brusque command of his tone . without a word , she quietly mount the step and walk across the platform to the piano . People be still applaud , and redouble their demonstration of delight as she appear ; but Jane take her seat at the instrument without give they a thought . 

 she be experience a very curious and unusual sensation . never before in her whole life have she obey a peremptory command . in her childhood 's day , Fraulein and Miss Jebb soon find out that they could only obtain their desire by mean of carefully word request , or pathetic appeal to her good feeling and sense of right . an unreasonable order , or a reasonable one unexplained , promptly meet with a point - blank refusal . and this characteristic still obtain , though modify by time ; and even the duchess , as a rule , say " please " to Jane . 

 but now a young man with a white face and blaze eye have unceremoniously swing her round , order she up the stair , and command she to sing a song over again , note for note , word for word , and she be meekly go to obey . 

 as she take her seat , Jane suddenly make up her mind not to sing the Rosary again . she have many fine song in her repertoire . the audience expect another . why should she disappoint those expectation because of the imperious demand of a very highly excited boy ? 

 she commence the magnificent prelude to Handel 's " Where'er you walk , " but , as she play it , her sense of truth and justice intervene . she have not come back to sing again at the bidding of a highly excited boy , but of a deeply move man ; and his emotion be of no ordinary kind . that Garth Dalmain should have be so move as to forget even momentarily his punctilious courtesy of manner , be the high possible tribute to her art and to her song . while she play the Handel theme and play it so that a whole orchestra seem marshal upon the key - board under those strong , firm finger she suddenly realise , though scarcely understand it , the must of which Garth have speak , and make up her mind to yield to its necessity . so ; when the opening bar be end , instead of sing the grand song from Semele she pause for a moment ; strike once more the Rosary 's ; open chord ; and do as Garth have bid she to do . 

 " the hour I spend with thee , dear heart , 
  be as a string of pearl to I ; 
 I count they over , ev'ry one apart , 
  my rosary , my rosary . 
 " each hour a pearl , each pearl a prayer , 
  to still a heart in absence wrung ; 
 I tell each bead unto the end , and there 
  a cross be hung ! 
 " o memory that bless and burn ! 
  o barren gain and bitter loss ! 
 I kiss each bead , and strive at last to learn 
  to kiss the cross ... to kiss the cross . " 
 when Jane leave the platform , Garth be still stand motionless at the foot of the stair . his face be just as white as before , but his eye have lose that terrible look of unshed tear , which have send she back , at his bidding , without a word of question or remonstrance . a wonderful light now shine in they ; a light of adoration , which touch Jane 's heart because she have never before see anything quite like it . she smile as she come slowly down the step , and hold out both hand to he with an unconscious movement of gracious friendliness . Garth step close to the bottom of the staircase and take they in his , while she be still on the step above he . 

 for a moment he do not speak . then in a low voice , vibrant with emotion : " my God ! " he say , " oh , my God ! " 

 " hush , " say Jane ; " I never like to hear that name speak lightly , Dal . " 

 " speak lightly ! " he exclaim . " no speaking lightly would be possible for I to - night . ' every perfect gift be from above . ' when word fail I to speak of the gift , can you wonder if I apostrophise the Giver ? " 

 Jane look steadily into his shin eye , and a smile of pleasure illumine her own . " so you like my song ? " she say . 

 " Liked like your song ? " repeat Garth , a shade of perplexity cross his face . " I do not know whether I like your song . " 

 " then why this flattering demonstration ? " inquire Jane , laugh . 

 " because , " say Garth , very low , " you lift the veil , and I I pass within . " 

 he be still hold her hand in his ; and , as he speak the last two word , he turn they gently over and , bending , kiss each palm with an indescribably tender reverence ; then , loose they , stand on one side , and Jane go out on to the terrace alone . 




 CHAPTER VII 

 GARTH find his ROSARY 

 Jane spend but a very few minute in the drawing - room that evening . the fun in progress there be not to her taste , and the praise heap upon herself annoy she . also she want the quiet of her own room in order to think over that closing episode of the concert , which have take place between herself and Garth , behind the scene . she do not feel certain how to take it . she be conscious that it hold an element which she could not fathom , and Garth 's last act have awaken in herself feeling which she do not understand . she extremely dislike the way in which he have kiss her hand ; and yet he have put into the action such a passion of reverent worship that it give she a sense of consecration of be , as it be , set apart to minister always to the heart of man in that perfect gift of melody which should uplift and ennoble . she could not lose the sensation of the impress of his lip upon the palm of her hand . it be as if he have leave behind something tangible and abide . she catch herself look at they anxiously once or twice , and the third time this happen she determine to go to her room . 

 the duchess be at the piano , completely hide from view by nearly the whole of her house party , crowd round in fit of delighted laughter . Ronnie have just break through from the inmost circle to fetch an antimacassar ; and Billy , to dash to the writing - table for a sheet of note - paper . Jane know the note - paper mean a clerical dog collar , and she conclude something have be wear which resemble an antimacassar . 

 she turn rather wearily and move towards the door . quiet and unobserve though her retreat have be , Garth be at the door before she . she do not know how he get there ; for , as she turn to leave the room , she have see his sleek head close to Myra Ingleby 's on the further side of the duchess 's crowd . he open the door and Jane pass out . she feel equally desirous of say two thing to he , either : " how dare you behave in so unconventional a way ? " or : " tell I just what you want I to do , and I will do it . " 

 she say neither . 

 Garth follow she into the hall , light a candle , and throw the match at Tommy ; then hand she the silver candlestick . he be look absurdly happy . Jane feel annoyed with he for parade this gladness , which she have unwittingly cause and in which she have no share . also she feel she must break this intimate silence . it be say so much which ought not to be say , since it could not be speak . she take her candle rather aggressively and turn upon the second step . 

 " good - night , Dal , " she say . " and do you know that you be miss the curate ? " 

 he look up at she . his eye shine in the light of her candle . 

 " no , " he say . " I be neither miss nor miss . I be only wait in there until you go up . I shall not go back . I be go out into the park now to breathe in the refresh coolness of the night breeze . and I be go to stand under the oak and tell my bead . I do not know I have a rosary , until to - night , but I have I have ! " 

 " I should say you have a dozen , " remark Jane , dryly . 

 " then you would be wrong , " reply Garth . " I have just one . but it have many hour . I shall be able to call they all to mind when I get out there alone . I be go to ' count each pearl . ' " 

 " how about the cross ? " ask Jane . 

 " I have not reach that yet , " answer Garth . " there be no cross to my rosary . " 

 " I fear there be a cross to every true rosary , Dal , " say Jane gently , " and I also fear it will go hard with you when you find your . " 

 but Garth be confident and unafraid . 

 " when I find mine , " he say , " I hope I shall be able to " Involuntarily Jane look at her hand . he see the look and smile , though he have the grace to colour beneath his tan , " to face the cross , " he say . 

 Jane turn and begin to mount the stair ; but Garth arrest she with an eager question . 

 " just one moment , Miss Champion ! there be something I want to ask you . may I ? will you think I impertinent , presuming , inquisitive ? " 

 " I have no doubt I shall , " say Jane . " but I be think you all sort of unusual thing to - night ; so three adjective more or less will not matter much . you may ask . " 

 " Miss Champion , have you a rosary ? " 

 Jane look at he blankly ; then suddenly understand the drift of his question . 

 " my dear boy , NO ! " she say . " thank goodness , I have keep clear of ' memory that bless and burn . ' none of these thing enter into my rational and well - order life , and I have no wish that they should . " 

 " then , " deliberate Garth , " how come you to sing the rosary as if each line be your own experience ; each joy or pain a thing long pass , perhaps but your own ? " 

 " because , " explain Jane , " I always live in a song when I sing it . do I not tell you the lesson I learn over the CHANT HINDOU ? therefore I have a rosary undoubtedly when I be sing that song to - night . but , apart from that , in the sense you mean , no , thank goodness , I have none . " 

 Garth mount two step , bring his eye on a level with the candlestick . 

 " but if you care , " he say , speak very low , " that be how you would care ? that be as you would feel ? " 

 Jane consider . " yes , " she say , " if I care , I suppose I should care just so , and feel as I feel during those few minute . " 

 " then it be you in the song , although the circumstance be not yours ? " 

 " yes , I suppose so , " Jane reply , " if we can consider ourselves apart from our circumstance . but surely this be rather an unprofitable ' air - ball . ' Goodnight , ' Master Garthie ! ' " 

 " I say , Miss Champion ! just one thing more . will you sing for I to - morrow ? will you come to the music - room and sing all the lovely thing I want to hear ? and will you let I play a few of your accompaniment ? ah , promise you will come . and promise to sing whatever I ask , and I will not   bother you any more now . " 

 he stand look up at she , wait for her promise , with such adoration shin in his eye that Jane be startled and more than a little troubled . then suddenly it seem to she that she have find the key , and she hasten to explain it to herself and to he . 

 " oh , you dear boy ! " she say . " what an artist you be ! and how difficult it be for we commonplace , matter - of - fact people to understand the artistic temperament . here you go , almost turn my steady old head by your rapture over what seem to you perfection of sound which have reach you through the ear ; just as , again and again , you worship at the shrine of perfection of form , which reach you through the eye . I begin to understand how it be you turn the head of woman when you paint they . however , you be very delightful in your delight , and I want to go up to bed . so I promise to sing all you want and as much as you wish to - morrow . now keep your promise and do not   bother I any more to - night . do not   spend the whole night in the park , and try not to frighten the deer . no , I do not need any assistance with my candle , and I be quite used to go upstairs by myself , thank you . can not   you hear what personal and appropriate remark Tommy be make down there ? now do run away , Master Garthie , and count your pearl . and if you suddenly come upon a cross remember , the cross can , in all probability , be persuade to return to Chicago ! " 

 Jane be still smile as she enter her room and place her candlestick on the dressing - table . 

 Overdene be light solely by lamp and candle . the duchess refuse to modernise it by the installation of electric light . but candle abound , and Jane , who like a brilliant illumination , proceed to light both candle in the branch on either side of the dressing - table mirror , and in the sconce on the wall beside the mantelpiece , and in the tall silver candlestick upon the writing - table . then she seat herself in a comfortable arm - chair , reach for her writing - case , take out her diary and a fountain pen , and prepare to finish the day 's entry . she write , " SANG ' the ROSARY ' AT AUNT ' GINA 'S CONCERT in PLACE of velma , fail   LARYNGITIS , " and come to a full stop . 

 somehow the scene with Garth be difficult to record , and the sensation which still remain therefrom , absolutely unwritable . Jane sit and ponder the situation , content to allow the page to remain blank . 

 before she rise , lock her book , and prepare for rest , she have , to her own satisfaction , clearly explain the whole thing . Garth 's artistic temperament be the basis of the argument ; and , alas , the artistic temperament be not a very firm foundation , either for a theory , or for the fabric of a destiny . however , FAUTE DE MIEUX , Jane have to accept it as main factor in her mental adjustment , thus : this vibrant emotion in Garth , so strangely disturb to her own solid calm , be in no sense personal to herself , except in so far as her voice and musical gift be concern . just as the sight of paintable beauty craze he with delight , make he wild with alternate hope and despair until he obtain his wish and have his canvas and his sitter arrange to his liking ; so now , his passion for the beautiful have be awaken , this time through the medium , not of sight , but of sound . when she have give he his fill of song , and allow he to play some of her accompaniment , he would be content , and that disquieting look of adoration would pass from those beautiful brown eye . meanwhile it be pleasant to look forward to to - morrow , though it behoove she to remember that all this admiration have in it nothing personal to herself . he would have go into even great rapture over Madame Blanche , for instance , who have the same timbre of voice and method of singing , combine with a beauty of person which delight the eye the while her voice enchant the ear . certainly Garth must see and hear she , as music appear to mean so much to he . Jane begin plan this , and then her mind turn to Pauline Lister , the lovely american girl , whose name have be couple with Garth Dalmain 's all the season . Jane feel certain she be just the wife he need . her loveliness would content he , her shrewd common - sense and straightforward , practical way would counterbalance his somewhat erratic temperament , and her adaptability would enable she to suit herself to his surrounding , both in his northern home and amongst his large circle of friend down south . once marry , he would give up rave about Flower and Myra , and kiss people 's hand in that " absurd way , " Jane be go to say , but she be invariably truthful , even in her thought , and substitute " extraordinary " as the more correct adjective in that extraordinary way . 

 she sit forward in her chair with her elbow on her knee , and hold her large hand before she , palm upward , realise again the sensation of that moment . then she pull herself up sharply . " Jane Champion , do not   be a fool ! you would wrong that dear , beauty - love boy , more than you would wrong yourself , if you take he for one moment seriously . his homage to - night be no more personal to you than his appreciation of the excellent dinner be personal to Aunt Georgina 's chef . in his enjoyment of the production , the producer be include ; but that be all . be gratified at the success of your art , and do not spoil that success by any absurd sentimentality . now wash your very ungainly hand and go to bed . " thus Jane to herself . 

 and under the oak , with soft turf beneath his foot , stand Garth Dalmain , the shy deer sleep around unconscious of his presence ; the planet above , hang like lamp in the deep purple of the sky . and he , also , soliloquise . 

 " I have find she , " he say , in low tone of rapture , " the ideal woman , the crown of womanhood , the perfect mate for the spirit , soul , and body of the man who can win she . jane ! jane ! ah , how blind I have be ! to have know she for year , and yet not realise she to be this . but she lift the veil , and I pass in . ah grand , noble heart ! she will never be able to draw the veil again between her soul and mine . and she have no rosary . I thank God for that . no other man possess , or have ever possess , that which I desire more than I ever desire anything upon this earth , Jane 's love , Jane 's tenderness . ah , what will it mean ? ' I count each pearl . ' she will count they some day her pearl and mine . God spare we the cross . must there be a cross to every true rosary ? then God give I the heavy end , and may the mutual bearing of it bind we together . ah , those dear hand ! ah , those true steadfast eye ! ... jane ! jane ! surely it have always be Jane , though I do not know it , blind fool that I have be ! but one thing I know : whereas I be blind , now I see . and it will always be Jane from this night onward through time and - please God into eternity . " 

 the night breeze stir his thick dark hair , and his eye , as he raise they , shine in the starlight . 

 and Jane , almost asleep , be rouse by the tapping of her blind against the casement , and murmur " anything you wish , Garth , just tell I , and I will do it . " then awakening suddenly to the consciousness of what she have say , she sit up in the darkness and scold herself furiously . " oh , you middle - aged donkey ! you call yourself staid and sensible , and a little flattery from a boy of whom you be fond turn your head completely . come to your sens at once ; or leave Overdene by the first train in the morning . " 




 CHAPTER VIII 

 ADDED PEARLS 

 the day which follow be golden day to Jane . there be nothing to spoil the enjoyment of a very new and strangely sweet experience . 

 Garth 's manner the next morning hold none of the excitement or outward demonstration which have perplex and trouble she the evening before . he be very quiet , and seem to Jane old than she have ever know he . he have very few lapse into his seven - year - old mood , even with the duchess ; and when someone chaffingly ask he whether he be practise the correct deportment of a soon - to - be - marry man , 

 " yes , " say Garth quietly , " I be . " 

 " will she be at Shenstone ? " inquire Ronald ; for several of the duchess 's party be due at Lady Ingleby 's for the following week - end . 

 " yes , " say Garth , ' she will . " 

 " oh , lor ' ! " cry Billy , dramatically . " Prithee , Benedict , be we to take this seriously ? " 

 but Jane who , wrap in the morning paper , sit near where Garth be stand , come out from behind it to look up at he and say , so that only he hear it " oh , Dal , I be so glad ! do you make up your mind last night ? " 

 " yes , " say Garth , turn so that he speak to she alone , " last night . " 

 " do our talk in the afternoon have something to do with it ? " 

 " no , nothing whatever . " 

 " be it the ROSARY ? " 

 he hesitate ; then say , without look at she : " the revelation of the ROSARY ? yes . " 

 to Jane his mood of excitement be now fully explain , and she could give herself up freely to the enjoyment of this new phase in their friendship , for the hour of music together be a very real delight . Garth be more of a musician than she have know , and she enjoy his clean , masculine touch on the piano , unblurre by slur or pedal ; more delicate than her own , where delicacy be require . what her voice be to he during those wonderful hour he do not express in word , for after that first evening he put a firm restraint upon his speech . under the oak he have make up his mind to wait a week before speak , and he wait . 

 but the new and strangely sweet experience to Jane be that of be absolutely first to some one . in way know only to himself and to her Garth make she feel this . there be nothing for any one else to notice , and yet she know perfectly well that she never come into the room without his be instantly conscious that she be there ; that she never leave a room , without be at once miss by he . his attention be so unobtrusive and tactful that no one else realise they . they call forth no chaff from friend and no " hoity - toity ! what now ? " from the duchess . and yet his devotion seem always surround she . for the first time in her life Jane be make to feel herself first in the whole thought of another . it make he seem strangely her own . she take a pleasure and pride in all he say , and do , and be ; and in the hour they spend together in the music - room she learn to know he and to understand that enthusiastic beauty - love , irresponsible nature , as she have never understand it before . 

 the day be golden , and the parting at night be sweet , because it give an add zest to the pleasure of meeting in the morning . and yet during these golden day the thought of love , in the ordinary sense of the word , never enter Jane 's mind . her ignorance in this matter arise , not so much from inexperience , as from too large an experience of the travesty of the real thing ; an experience which hinder she from recognise love itself , now that love in its most ideal form be draw near . 

 Jane have not come through a dozen season without receive nearly a dozen proposal of marriage . an heiress , independent of parent and guardian , of good blood and lineage , a few proposal of a certain type be inevitable . middle - aged man become bald and grey ; tired of racket about town ; with beautiful old country place and an unfortunate lack of the wherewithal to keep they up propose to the Honourable Jane Champion in a business - like way , and the Honourable Jane look they up and down , and through and through , until they feel very cheap , and then quietly refuse they , in an equally business - like way . 

 two or three nice boy , whom she have pull out of scrape and set on their foot again after hopeless cropper , have think , in a wave of maudlin gratitude , how good it would be for a fellow always to have she at hand to keep he straight and tell he what he ought to do , do not   you know ? and er well , yes pay his debt , and be a sort of mother - who - doesn't   scold kind of person to he ; and have catch hold of her kind hand , and implore she to marry they . Jane have slap they if they venture to touch she , and recommend they not to be silly . 

 one solemn proposal she have have quite lately from the bachelor rector of a parish adjoin Overdene . he have often inflict wearisome conversation upon she ; and when he call , intend to put the momentous question , Jane , who be sit at her writing - table in the Overdene drawing - room , do not see any occasion to move from it . if the rector become too prosy , she could surreptitiously finish a few note . he sink into a deep arm - chair close to the writing - table , cross his somewhat bandy leg one over the other , make the tip of his finger meet with unctuous accuracy , and intone the open sentence of his proposition . jane , sharpen pencil and sort nib , apparently only catch the drift of what he be say , for when he have chant the phrase , " not alone from selfish motif , my dear Miss Champion ; but for the good of my parish ; for the welfare of my flock , for the advancement of the work of the church in our midst , " Jane open a despatch - box and draw out her cheque - book . 

 " I shall be delighted to subscribe , Mr. Bilberry , " she say . " be it for a font , a pulpit , new hymn - book , or what ? " 

 " my dear lady , " say the rector tremulously , " you misunderstand I . my desire be to lead you to the altar . " 

 " Dear Mr. Bilberry , " say Jane Champion , " that would be quite unnecessary . from any part of your church the fact that you need a new altar - cloth be absolutely patent to all comer . I will , with the great pleasure , give you a cheque for ten pound towards it . I have attend your church rather often lately because I enjoy a long , quiet walk by myself through the wood . and now I be sure you would like to see my aunt before you go . she be in the aviary , feed her foreign bird . if you go out by that window and pass along the terrace to your left , you will find the aviary and the duchess . I would suggest the advisability of not mention this conversation to my aunt . she do not approve of elaborate altar - cloth , and would scold we both , and insist on the money be spend in provide boot for the school child . no , please do not thank I . I be really glad of an opportunity of help on your excellent work in this neighbourhood . " 

 Jane wonder once or twice whether the cheque would be cash . she would have like to receive it back by post , tear in half ; with a few wrathful line of manly indignation . but when it return to she in due course from her banker , it be indorse P. BILBERRY , in a neat scholarly hand , without even a dash of indignation beneath it ; and she throw it into the waste - paper basket , with rather a bitter smile . 

 these be Jane 's experience of offer of marriage . she have never be love for her own sake ; she have never feel herself really first in the heart and life of another . and now , when the adore love of a man 's whole being be tenderly , cautiously begin to surround and envelop she , she do not recognise the reason of her happiness or of his devotion . she consider he the avow lover of another woman , with whose youth and loveliness she would not have dream of compete ; and she regard this closeness of intimacy between herself and Garth as a development of a friendship more beautiful than she have hitherto consider possible . 

 thus matter stand when Tuesday arrive and the Overdene party break up . Jane go to town to spend a couple of day with the Brands . Garth go straight to Shenstone , where he have be ask expressly to meet Miss Lister and her aunt , Mrs. Parker Bangs . Jane be due at shenstone on Friday for the week - end . 




 CHAPTER IX 

 LADY INGLEBY 'S HOUSE PARTY 

 as Jane take her seat and the train move out of the London terminus she lean back in her corner with a sigh of satisfaction . somehow these day in town have seem insufferably long . Jane review they thoughtfully , and seek the reason . they have be fill with interest and engagement ; and the very fact of be in town , as a rule , content she . why have she feel so restless and dissatisfied and lonely ? 

 from force of habit she have just stop at the railway book - stall for her usual pile of literature . her friend always say Jane could not go even the short journey without at least half a dozen paper . but now they lie unheeded on the seat in front of she . Jane be consider she Tuesday , Wednesday , and Thursday , and wonder why they have merely be weary step - stone to Friday . and here be Friday at last , and once in the train en route for Shenstone , she begin to feel happy and exhilarate . what have be the matter with these three day ? Flower have be charming ; Deryck , his own friendly , interesting self ; little Dicky , delightful ; and Baby Blossom , as sweet as only Baby Blossom could be . what be amiss ? 

 " I know , " say Jane . " of course ! why do I not realise it before ? I have too much music during those last day at Overdene ; and such music ! I have be suffer from a surfeit of music , and the miss of it have give I this blank feeling of loneliness . no doubt we shall have plenty at Myra 's , and Dal will be there to clamour for it if Myra fail to suggest it . " 

 with a happy little smile of pleasurable anticipation , Jane take up the spectator , and be soon absorb in an article on the south african problem . 

 Myra meet she at the station , drive pony tandem . a light cart be also there for the maid and baggage ; and , without lose a moment , Jane and her hostess be off along the country lane at a brisk trot . 

 the field and wood be an exquisite restful green in the afternoon sunshine . wild rose cluster in the hedge . the last load of hay be be cart in . there be an ecstasy in the song of the bird and a transporting sense of sweetness about all the sight and scent of the country , such as Jane have never experience so vividly before . she draw a deep breath and exclaim , almost involuntarily : " ah ! it be good to be here ! " 

 " you dear ! " say Lady Ingleby , twirl her whip and nod in gracious response to respectful salute from the hay - field . " it be a comfort to have you ! I always feel you be like the bass of a tune something so solid and satisfactory and beneath one in case of a crisis . I hate crisis . they be so tiring . as I say : why can not   thing always go on as they be ? they be as they be , and they be as they will be , if only people would not   bother . however , I be certain nothing could go far wrong when you be anywhere near . " 

 Myra flick the leader , who be inclined to ' sugar , " and they fly along between the high hedge , brush lightly against overhang mass of honeysuckle and wild clematis . Jane snatch a spray of the clematis , in pass . " ' Traveller 's joy , ' " she say , with that same quiet smile of glad anticipation , and put the white blossom in her buttonhole . 

 " well , " continue Lady Ingleby , " my house party be go on quite satisfactorily . oh , and , Jane , there seem no doubt about Dal . how pleased I shall be if it come off under my wing ! the american girl be simply exquisite , and so vivacious and charming . and Dal have quite give up be silly not that I ever think he silly , but I know you do and be very quiet and pensive ; really be it any one but he , one would almost say ' dull . ' and they roam about together in the most approved fashion . I try to get the aunt to make all her remark to I . I be so afraid of she put Dal off . he be so fastidious . I have promise Billy anything , up to the half of my kingdom , if he will sit at the foot of Mrs. Parker Bangs and listen to her wisdom , answer her question , and keep she away from Dal . Billy be be so abjectly devoted in his attention to Mrs. Parker Bangs that I begin to have fear lest he intend ask I to kiss he ; in which case I shall hand he over to you to chastise . you manage these boy so splendidly . I fully believe Dal will propose to Pauline Lister tonight . I can not   imagine why he do not   last night . there be a most perfect moon , and they go on the lake . what more could Dal want ? a lake , and a moon , and that lovely girl ! Billy take Mrs. Parker Bangs in a double canoe and nearly upset she through laugh so much at the thing she say about have to sit flat on the bottom . but he paddle she off to the opposite side of the lake from Dal and her niece , which be all we want . Mrs. Parker Bangs ask I afterwards whether Billy be a widower . now what do you suppose she mean by that ? " 

 " I have not   the faint idea , " say Jane . " but I be delighted to hear about Dal and Miss Lister . she be just the girl for he , and she will soon adapt herself to his way and need . besides , Dal must have flawles loveliness , and really he get it there . " 

 " he do indeed , " say Myra . " you should have see she last night , in white satin , with wild rose in her hair . I can not imagine why Dal do not rave . but perhaps it be a good sign that he should take thing more quietly . I suppose he be make up his mind . " 

 " no , " say Jane . " I believe he do that at Overdene . but it mean a lot to he . he take marriage very seriously . whom have you at Shenstone ? " 

 Lady Ingleby tell off a list of name . Jane know they all . 

 " Delightful ! " she say . " oh ! how glad I be to be here ! London have be so hot and so dull . I never think it hot or dull before . I feel a renegade . ah ! there be the lovely little church ! I want to hear the new organ . I be glad your nice parson remember I and let I have a share in it . have it two manual or three ? " 

 " half a dozen I think , " say Lady Ingleby , " and you work they up and down with your foot . but I judge it wise to leave they alone when I play for the child 's service one Sunday . you never know quite what will happen if you touch those mechanical affair . " 

 " do not   you mean the composition pedal ? " suggest Jane . 

 " I dare say I do , " say Myra placidly . " those thing underneath , like foot - rest , which startle you horribly if you accidentally kick they . " 

 Jane smile at the thought of how Garth would throw back his head and shout , if she tell he of this conversation . Lady Ingleby 's musical remark always amuse her friend . 

 they pass the village church on the green , ivy - clothe , picturesque , and , half a minute later , swerve in at the park gate . Myra see Jane glance at the gate - post they have just shave , and laugh . " a miss be as good as a mile , " she say , as they dash up the long drive between the elm , " as I tell dear mamma , when she expostulate wrathfully with I for what she call my ' furious driving ' the other day . by the way , Jane , dear mamma have be quite cordial lately . by the time I be seventy and she be ninety - eight I think she will begin to be almost fond of I . here we be . do notice Lawson . he be new , and such a nice man . he sing so well , and play the concertina a little , and teach in the Sunday - school , and speak really quite excellently at temperance meeting . he be extremely fond of mow the lawn , and my maid tell I he be study French with she . the only thing he seem really incapable of be , be an efficient butler ; which be so unfortunate , as I like he far too well ever to part with he . Michael say I have a perfectly fatal habit of like PEOPLE , and of encourage they to do the thing they do well and enjoy do , instead of the thing they be engage to do . I suppose I have ; but I do like my household to be happy . " 

 they alight , and Myra trail into the hall with a lazy grace which give no indication of the masterly way she have handle her pony , but rather suggest step from a comfortable seat in a barouche . Jane look with interest at the man - servant who come forward and deftly assist they . he have not quite the air of a butler but neither could she imagine he play a concertina or harangue a temperance meeting and he acquit himself quite creditably . 

 " oh , that be not Lawson , " explain Myra , as she lead the way upstairs . " I have forget . he have to go to the vicarage this afternoon to see the vicar about a ' service of song ' they be get up . that be Tom , but we call he ' Jephson ' in the house . he be one of Michael 's stud groom , but he be engage to one of the housemaid , and I find he so very much preferred be in the house , so I have arrange for he to understudy Lawson , and he be grow side whisker . I shall have to break it to Michael on his return from Norway . this way , Jane . we have put you in the Magnolia room . I know you would enjoy the view of the lake . oh , I forgot to tell you , a tennis tournament be in progress . I must hasten to the court . Tea will be go on there , under the chestnut . Dal and Ronnie be to play the final for the man 's single . it ought to be a fine match . it be to come on at about half - past four . do not   wait to do any changing . your maid and your luggage can not   be here just yet . " 

 " thank , " say Jane ; " I always travel in country clothe , and have do so to - day , as you see . I will just get rid of the railway dust , and follow you . " 

 ten minute later , guide by sound of cheering and laughter , Jane make her way through the shrubbery to the tennis lawn . the whole of Lady Ingleby 's house party be assemble there , form a picturesque group under the white and scarlet chestnut - tree . beyond , on the beautifully keep turf of the court , an exciting set be in progress . as she approach , Jane could distinguish Garth 's slim , agile figure , in white flannel and the violet shirt ; and young Ronnie , huge and powerful , trust to the terrific force of his cut and drive to counterbalance Garth 's keener eye and swifter turn of wrist . 

 it be a fine game . Garth have win the first set by six to four , and now the score stand at five to four in Ronnie 's favour ; but this game be Garth 's service , and he be almost certain to win it . the score would then be " game all . " 

 Jane walk along the line of garden chair to where she see a vacant one near Myra . she be greet with delight , but hurriedly , by the eager watcher of the game . 

 suddenly a howl go up . Garth have make two fault . 

 Jane find her chair , and turn her attention to the game . almost instantly shriek of astonishment and surprise again arise . Garth have serve into the net and over the line . game and set be Ronnie 's . 

 " one all , " remark Billy . " well ! I never see Dal do that before . however ; it give we the bliss of watch another set . they be splendidly match . dal be lightning , and Ronnie thunder . " 

 the player cross over , Garth rather white beneath his tan . he be beyond word vex with himself for fail in his service , at that critical juncture . not that he mind lose the set ; but it seem to he it must be patent to the whole crowd , that it be the sight , out of the tail of his eye , of a tall grey figure move quietly along the line of chair , which for a moment or two set earth and sky whirling , and make a confused blur of net and line . as a matter of fact , only one of the onlooker connect Garth 's loss of the game with Jane 's arrival , and she be the lovely girl , seat exactly opposite the net , with whom he exchange a smile and a word as he cross to the other side of the court . 

 the last set prove the most exciting of the three . nine hard - fought game , five to Garth , four to Ronnie . and now Ronnie be serve , and fight hard to make it game - all . over and over enthusiastic partisan of both shout " Deuce ! " and then when Garth have win the " vantage , " a slash over - hand service from Ronnie beat he , and it be " deuce " again . 

 " do not   it make one giddy ? " say Mrs. Parker Bangs to Billy , who recline on the sward at her foot . " I should say it have go on long enough . and they must both be want their tea . it would have be kind in Mr. Dalmain to have let that ball pass , anyway . " 

 " yes , would not   it ? " say Billy earnestly . " but you see , Dal be not naturally kind . now , if I have be play against Ronnie , I should have let those over - hand ball of his pass long ago . " 

 " I be sure you would , " say Mrs. Parker Bangs , approvingly ; while Jane lean over , at Myra 's request , and pinch Billy . 

 Slash go Ronnie 's racket . " deuce ! deuce ! " shout half a dozen voice . 

 " they should not   say that , " remark Mrs. Parker Bangs , " even if they be mad about it . " 

 Billy hug his knee , delightedly ; look up at she with an expression of seraphic innocence . 

 " no . be not   it sad ? " he murmur . " I never say naughty word when I play . I always say ' game love . ' it sound so much nice , I think . " 

 Jane pinch again , but Billy 's rapt gaze at Mrs. Parker Bangs continue . 

 " Billy , " say Myra sternly , " go into the hall and fetch my scarlet sunshade . yes , I dare say you will miss the finish , " she add in a stern whisper , as he lean over her chair , remonstrate ; " but you richly deserve it . " 

 " I have make up my mind what to ask , dear queen , " whisper Billy as he return , breathless , three minute later and lay the parasol in Lady Ingleby 's lap . " you promise I anything , up to the half of your kingdom . I will have the head of Mrs. Parker Bangs in a charger . " 

 " oh , shut up , Billy ! " exclaim Jane , " and get out of the light ! we miss that last stroke . what be the score ? " 

 once again it be Garth 's vantage , and once again Ronnie 's arm swing high for an untakable smasher . 

 " play up , Dal ! " cry a voice , amid the general hubbub . 

 Garth know that dear voice . he do not look in its direction , but he smile . the next moment his arm shoot out like a flash of lightning . the ball touch ground on Ronnie 's side of the net and shoot the length of the court without rise . Ronnie 's wild scoop at it be hopeless . game and set be Garth 's . 

 they walk off the ground together , their racket under their arm , the flush of a well - contest fight on their handsome face . it have be so near a thing that both could sense the thrill of victory . 

 Pauline Lister have be sit with Garth 's coat on her lap , and his watch and chain be in her keeping . he pause a moment to take they up and receive her congratulation ; then , slip on his coat , and pocket his watch , come straight to Jane . 

 " how do you do , Miss Champion ? " 

 his eye seek hers eagerly ; and the welcoming gladness he see in they fill he with certainty and content . he have miss she so unutterably during these day . Tuesday , Wednesday , and Thursday have just be weary step - stone to Friday . it seem incredible that one person 's absence could make so vast a difference . and yet how perfect that it should be so ; and that they should both realise it , now the day have come when he intend to tell she how desperately he want she always . yes , that they should both realise it for he feel certain Jane have also experience the blank . a thing so complete and overwhelming as the miss of she have be to he could not be one - side . and how well worth the experience of these lonely day if they have thereby learn something of what TOGETHER mean , now the word be to be speak which should insure forever no more such parting . 

 all this speed through Garth 's mind as he greet Jane with that most commonplace of english greeting , the everlasting question which never receive an answer . but from Garth , at that moment , it do not sound commonplace to Jane , and she answer it quite frankly and fully . she want above all thing to tell he exactly how she do ; to hear all about himself , and compare note on the happening of these three interminable day ; and to take up their close comradeship again , exactly where it have leave off . her hand go home to his with that firm completeness of clasp , which always make a hand shake with Jane such a satisfactory and really friendly thing . 

 " very fit , thank you , Dal , " she answer . " at least I be every moment improve in health and spirit , now I have arrive here at last . " 

 Garth stand his racket against the arm of her chair and deposit himself full length on the grass beside she , lean on his elbow . 

 " be anything wrong with London ? " he ask , rather low , not look up at she , but at the smart brown shoe , plant firmly on the grass so near his hand . " nothing be wrong with London , " reply Jane frankly ; " it be hot and dusty of course , but delightful as usual . something be wrong with I ; and you will be ashamed of I , Dal , if I confess what it be . " 

 Garth do not look up , but assiduously pick little blade of grass and lay they in a pattern on Jane 's shoe . this conversation would have be exactly to the point have they be alone . but be Jane really go to announce to the assemble company , in that dear , resonant , carry voice of her , the sweet secret of their miss of one another ? 

 " Liver ? " inquire Mrs. Parker Bangs suddenly . 

 " muffin ! " exclaim Billy instantly , and , rush for they , almost shoot they into her lap in the haste with which he hand they , stumble headlong over Garth 's leg at the same moment . 

 Jane star at Mrs. Parker Bangs and her muffin ; then look down at the top of Garth 's dark head , bent low over the grass . 

 " I be dull , " she say , " intolerably dull . and Dal always say ' only a dullard be dull . ' but I diagnose my dulness in the train just now and find it be largely his fault . do you hear , Dal ? " 

 Garth lift his head and look at she , realise in that moment that it be , after all , possible for a complete and overwhelming experience to be one - side . Jane 's calm grey eye be full of gay friendliness . 

 " it be your fault , my dear boy , " say Jane . 

 " how so ? " query Garth ; and though there be a deep flush on his sunburned face , his voice be quietly interrogative . 

 " because , during those last day at Overdene , you lead I on into a time of musical dissipation such as I have never know before , and I miss it to a degree which be positively alarming . I begin to fear for the balance of my well - order mind . " 

 " well , " say Myra , come out from behind her red parasol , " you and Dal can have orgy of music here if you want they . you will find a piano in the drawing - room and another in the hall , and a Bechstein grand in the billiard - room . that be where I hold the practice for the man and maid . I could not make up my mind which maker I really prefer , Erard , Broadwood , Collard , or Bechstein ; so by degree I collect one of each . and after all I think I play well upon the little cottage piano we have in the school - room at home . it stand in my boudoir now . I seem more accustomed to its note , or it lend itself well to my way of play . " 

 " thank you , Myra , " say Jane . " I fancy Dal and I will like the Bechstein . " 

 " and if you want something really exciting in the way of music , " continue Lady Ingleby , " you might attend some of the rehearsal for this ' service of song ' they be get up in aid of the organ deficit fund . I believe they be attempt great thing . " 

 " I would soon pay off the whole deficit , than go within a mile of a ' service of song , ' " say Jane emphatically . 

 " oh , no , " put in Garth quickly , note Myra 's look of disappointment . " it be so good for people to work off their own debt and earn the thing they need in their church . and ' service of song ' be delightful if well do , as I be sure this will be if Lady Ingleby 's people be in it . Lawson outline it to I this morning , and hum all the principal air . it be highly dramatic . Robinson Crusoe no , of course not ! what be the beggar 's name ? ' Uncle Tom 's Cabin ' ? yes , I know it be something black . Lawson be Uncle Tom , and the vicar 's small daughter be to be little Eva . Miss Champion , you will walk down with I to the very next rehearsal . " 

 " Shall I ? " say Jane , unconscious of how tender be the smile she give he ; conscious only that in her own heart be the remembrance of the evening at Overdene when she feel so inclined to say to he : " tell I just what you want I to do , and I will do it . " 

 " Pauline will just love to go with you , " say Mrs. Parker Bangs . " she dot on rural music . " 

 " Rubbish , aunt ! " say Miss Lister , who have slip into an empty chair near Myra . " I agree with Miss Champion about ' service of song , ' and I do not   care for any music but the good . " 

 Jane turn to she quickly , with a cordial smile and her most friendly manner . " ah , but you must come , " she say . " we will be victimise together . and perhaps Dal and Lawson will succeed in convert we to the cult of the ' service of song . ' and anyway it will be amusing to have Dal explain it to we . he will need the courage of his conviction . " 

 " talk of something ' really exciting in the way of music , ' " say Pauline Lister , " we have it on board when we come over . there be a nice friendly crowd on board the Arabic , and they arrange a concert for half - past eight on the Thursday evening . we be about two hundred mile off the coast of Ireland , and when we come up from dinner we have run into a dense fog . at eight o'clock they start blow the fog - horn every half - minute , and while the fog - horn be sound you could not   hear yourself speak . however , all the programme be print , and it be our last night on board , so they conclude to have the concert all the same . down we all troop into the saloon , and each item of that programme be punctuate by the stentorian BOO of the fog - horn every thirty second . you never hear anything so cute as the way it come in , right on time . a man with a deep bass voice sing ROCKED in the cradle of the DEEP , and each time he reach the refrain , ' and calm and peaceful be my sle - eep , ' BOO go the fog - horn , cast a certain amount of doubt on our expectation of peaceful sleep that night , anyway . then a man with a sweet tenor sing OFT in the STILLY NIGHT , and the fog - horn show we just how oft , namely , every thirty second . but the queer effect of all be when a girl have to play a piano - forte solo . it be something of Chopin 's , full of run and trill and little silvery note . she start all right ; but when she be half - way down the first page , BOO go the fog - horn , a long blast than usual . we see her finger fly , and the turning of the page , but not a note could we hear ; and when the old horn stop and we could hear the piano again , she have reach a place half - way down the second page , and we have not   hear what lead to it . my ! it be funny . that go on all through . she be a plucky girl to stick to it . we give she a good round of applause when she have finish , and the fog - horn join in and drown we . it be the queer concert experience I ever have . but we all enjoy it . only we do not   enjoy that noise keep right on until five o'clock next morning . " 

 Jane have turn in her chair , and listen with appreciative interest while the lovely american girl talk , watch , with real delight , her exquisite face and graceful gesture , and think how Dal must enjoy look at she when she talk with so much charm and animation . she glance down , try to see the admiration in his eye ; but his head be bent , and he be apparently absorb in the occupation of trace the broguing of her shoe with the long stalk of a chestnut leaf . for a moment she watch the slim brown hand , as carefully intent on this useless task , as if work on a canvas ; then she suddenly withdraw her foot , feel almost vex with he for his inattention and apparent indifference . 

 Garth sit up instantly . " it must have be awfully funny , " he say . " and how well you tell it . one could hear the fog - horn , and see the dismayed face of the performer . like an earthquake , a fog - horn be the sort of thing you do not   ever get use to . it sound bad every time . let us each tell the funniest thing we remember at a concert . I once hear a youth recite Tennyson 's Charge of the Light Brigade with much dramatic action . but he be extremely nervous , and get rather mixed . in describe the attitude of mind of the noble six hundred , he tell we impressively that it be " 

 " ' Theirs not to make reply ; 
 Theirs not to do or die ; 
 Theirs but to reason WHY . ' " 
 " the tone and action be all right , and I doubt whether many of the audience notice anything wrong with the word . " 

 " that remind I , " say Ronald Ingram , " of quite the funniest thing I ever hear . it be at a Thanksgiving service when some of our troop return from South Africa . the proceeding conclude by the singing of the National Anthem right through . you recollect how recently we have have to make the change of pronoun , and how difficult it be to remember not to shout : " 

 " ' send she victorious ' ? well , there be a fellow just behind I , with a tremendous voice , sing lustily , and take special pain to get the pronoun correct throughout . and when he reach the fourth line of the second verse he sing with loyal fervour . " 

 " ' confound his politic , 
  Frustrate his knavish trick ! ' " 
 " that would amuse the king , " say Lady Ingleby . " be you sure it be a fact , Ronnie ? " 

 " Positive ! I could tell you the church , and the day , and call a whole pewful of witness who be convulse by it . " 

 " well , I shall tell his Majesty at the next opportunity , and say you hear it . but how about the tennis ? what come next ? final for couple ? oh , yes ! Dal , you and Miss Lister play Colonel Loraine and Miss Vermount ; and I think you ought to win fairly easily . you two be so well match . jane , this will be worth watch . " 

 " I be sure it will , " say Jane warmly , look at the two , who have rise and stand together in the evening sunlight , examine their racket and discuss possible tactic , while await their opponent . they make such a radiantly beautiful couple ; it be as if nature have put she very well and loveliest into every detail of each . the only fault which could possibly have be find with the idea of they wed , be that her dark , slim beauty be so very much just a feminine edition of his , that they might easily have be take for brother and sister ; but this be not a fault which occur to Jane . her whole - hearted admiration of Pauline increase every time she look at she ; and now she have really see they together , she feel sure she have give wise advice to Garth , and rejoice to know he be take it . 

 later on , as they stroll back to the house together , she and Garth alone , Jane say , simply : " Dal , you will not mind if I ask ? be it settle yet ? " 

 " I mind nothing you ask , " Garth reply ; " only be more explicit . be what settle ? " 

 " be you and Miss Lister engage ? " 

 " no , " Garth answer . " what make you suppose we should be ? " 

 " you say at Overdene on Tuesday TUESDAY ! oh ! do not   it seem week ago ? you say we be to take you seriously . " 

 " it seem year ago , " say Garth ; " and I sincerely hope you will take I seriously . all the same I have not propose to Miss Lister ; and I be anxious for an undisturbed talk with you on the subject . Miss Champion , after dinner to - night , when all the game and amusement be in full swing , and we can escape unobserved , will you come out onto the terrace with I , where I shall be able to speak to you without fear of interruption ? the moonlight on the lake be worth see from the terrace . I spend an hour out there last night ah , no ; you be wrong for once I spend it alone , when the boat be over , and think of how to - night we might be talk there together . " 

 " certainly I will come , " say Jane ; " and you must feel free to tell I anything you wish , and promise to let I advise or help in any way I can . " 

 " I will tell you everything , " say Garth very low , " and you shall advise and help as only you can . " 

 Jane sit on her window - sill , enjoy the sunset and the exquisite view , and glad of a quiet half - hour before she need think of summon she maid . immediately below she run the terrace , wide and gravel , bound by a broad stone parapet , behind which be a drop of eight or ten foot to the old - fashioned garden , with quaint box - border flower - bed , wind walk , and stone fountain . beyond , a stretch of smooth lawn slop down to the lake , which now lay , a silver mirror , in the soft evening light . the stillness be so perfect ; the sense of peace , so all - pervading . Jane hold a book on her knee , but she be not read . she be look away to the distant wood beyond the lake ; then to the pearly sky above , fleck with rosy cloud and streak with gleam of gold ; and a sense of content , and gladness , and well - being , fill she . 

 presently she hear a light step on the gravel below and lean forward to see to whom it belong . Garth have come out of the smoking - room and walk briskly to and fro , once or twice . then he throw himself into a wicker seat just beneath her window , and sit there , smoke meditatively . the fragrance of his cigarette reach Jane , up among the magnolia blossom . " ' Zenith , ' Marcovitch , " she say to herself , and smile . " pack in jolly green box , twelve shilling a hundred ! I must remember in case I want to give he a Christmas present . by then it will be difficult to find anything which have not already be shower upon he . " 

 Garth fling away the end of his cigarette , and commence hum below his breath ; then gradually break into word and sing softly , in his sweet barytone : 

 " ' it be not mine to sing the stately grace , 
 the great soul beam in my lady 's face . ' " 
 the tone , though quiet , be so vibrant with passionate feeling , that Jane feel herself an eavesdropper . she hastily pick a large magnolia leaf and , lean out , let it fall upon his head . Garth start , and look up . " Hullo ! " he say . " you up there ? " 

 " yes , " say Jane , laugh down at he , and speak low lest other casement should be open , " I up here . you be serenade the wrong window , dear ' devout lover . ' " 

 " what a lot you know about it , " remark Garth , rather moodily . 

 " do not   I ? " whisper Jane . " but you must not mind , Master Garthie , because you know how truly I care . in old Margery 's absence , you must let I be mentor . " 

 Garth spring up and stand erect , look up at she , half - amuse , half - defiant . 

 " shall I climb the magnolia ? " he say . " I have heap to say to you which can not be shout to the whole front of the house . " 

 " certainly not , " reply Jane . " I do not   want any Romeos come in at my window . ' hoity - toity ! what next ? ' as Aunt ' Gina would say . run along and change your pinafore , Master Garthie . the ' heap of thing ' must keep until to - night , or we shall both be late for dinner . " 

 " all right , " say Garth , " all right . but you will come out here this evening , Miss Champion ? and you will give I as long as I want ? " 

 " I will come as soon as we can possibly escape , " reply Jane ; " and you can not be more anxious to tell I everything than I be to hear it . oh ! the scent of these magnolia ! and just look at the great white trumpet ! would you like one for your buttonhole ? " 

 he give she a wistful , whimsical little smile ; then turn and go indoor . 

 " why do I feel so inclined to tease he ? " muse Jane , as she move , from the window . " really it be I who have be silly this time ; and he , staid and sensible . Myra be quite right . he be take it very seriously . and how about she ? ah ! I hope she care enough , and in the right way . come in , Matthews ! and you can put out the gown I wear on the night of the concert at Overdene , and we must make haste . we have just twenty minute . what a lovely evening ! before you do anything else , come and see this sunset on the lake . ah ! it be good to be here ! " 




 CHAPTER X 

 the REVELATION 

 all the impatience in the world could not prevent dinner at Shenstone from be a long function , and two of the most popular people in the party could not easily escape afterwards unnoticed . so a distant clock in the village be strike ten , as Garth and Jane step out on to the terrace together . Garth catch up a rug in pass , and close the door of the low hall carefully behind he . 

 they be quite alone . it be the first time they have be really alone since these day apart , which have seem so long to both . 

 they walk silently , side by side , to the wide stone parapet overlook the old - fashioned garden . the silvery moonlight flood the whole scene with radiance . they could see the stiff box - border , the wind path , the queerly shape flower - bed , and , beyond , the lake , like a silver mirror , reflect the calm loveliness of the full moon . 

 Garth spread the rug on the coping , and Jane sit down . he stand beside she , one foot on the coping , his arm fold across his chest , his head erect . Jane have seat herself sideways , turn towards he , her back to an old stone lion mount guard upon the parapet ; but she turn her head still far , to look down upon the lake , and she think Garth be look in the same direction . 

 but Garth be look at Jane . 

 she wear the gown of soft trail black material she have wear at the Overdene concert , only she have not on the pearl or , indeed , any ornament save a cluster of crimson rambler rose . they nestle in the soft , creamy old lace which cover the bosom of her gown . there be a quiet strength and nobility about her attitude which thrill the soul of the man who stand watch she . all the adore love , the passion of worship , which fill his heart , rise to his eye and shine there . no need to conceal it now . his hour have come at last , and he have nothing to hide from the woman he love . 

 presently she turn , wonder why he do not begin his confidence about Pauline Lister . look up inquiringly , she meet his eye . 

 " Dal ! " cry Jane , and half rise from her seat . " oh , Dal , do not ! " 

 he gently press she back . " hush , dear , " he say . " I must tell you everything , and you have promise to listen , and to advise and help . ah , Jane , Jane ! I shall need your help . I want it so greatly , and not only your help , Jane but you you , yourself . ah , how I want you ! these three day have be one continual ache of loneliness , because you be not there ; and life begin to live and move again , when you return . and yet it have be so hard , wait all these hour to speak . I have so much to tell you , Jane , of all you be to I all you have become to I , since the night of the concert . ah , how can I express it ? I have never have any big thing in my life ; all have be more or less trivial on the surface . this need of you this want you be so huge . it dwarf all that go before ; it would overwhelm all that be to come , be it not that it will be the throne , the crown , the summit , of the future . oh , Jane ! I have admire so many woman . I have rave about they , sigh for they , paint they , and forget they . but I never love a woman before ; I never know what womanhood mean to a man , until I hear your voice thrill through the stillness ' I count each pearl . ' ah , beloved , I have learn to count pearl since then , precious hour in the past , long forget , now remember , and at last understood . ' each hour a pearl , each pearl a prayer , ' ay , a passionate plea that past and present may blend together into a perfect rosary , and that the future may hold no possibility of pain or parting . oh , Jane Jane ! shall I ever be able to make you understand all how much oh , JANE ! " 

 she be not sure just when he have come so near ; but he have drop on one knee in front of she , and , as he utter the last broken sentence , he pass both his arm around her waist and press his face into the soft lace at her bosom . a sudden quietness come over he . all struggle with explanation seem hush into the silence of complete comprehension an all - pervading , envelop silence . 

 Jane neither move nor speak . it be so strangely sweet to have he there this whirlwind of emotion come home to rest , in a great stillness , just above her quiet heart . suddenly she realise that the blank of the last three day have not be the miss of the music , but the miss of HIM ; and as she realise this , she unconsciously put her arm about he . sensation unknown to she before , awake and move within she , a heavenly sense of aloofness from the world , the loneliness of life all sweep away by this dear fact just he and she together . even as she think it , feel it , he lift his head , still hold she , and look into her face , say : " you and I together , my own my own . " 

 but those beautiful shin eye be more than Jane could bear . the sense of her plainness smite she , even in that moment ; and those adore eye seem light that reveal it . with no thought in her mind but to hide the outward part from he who have suddenly come so close to the shrine within , she quickly put both hand behind his head and press his face down again , into the lace at her bosom . but , to he , those dear firm hand hold he close , by that sudden movement , seem an acceptance of himself and of all he have to offer . for ten , twenty , thirty exquisite second , his soul throb in silence and rapture beyond word . then he break from the pressure of those restrain hand ; lift his head , and look into her face once more . 

 " my wife ! " he say . 

 into Jane 's honest face come a look of startled wonder ; then a deep flush , seem to draw all the blood , which have throb so strangely through her heart , into her cheek , make they burn , and her heart die within she . she disengage herself from his hold , rise , and stand look away to where the still water of the lake gleam silver in the moonlight . 

 Garth Dalmain stand beside she . he do not touch she , nor do he speak again . he feel sure he have win ; and his whole soul be fill with a gladness unspeakable . his spirit be content . the intense silence seem more expressive than word . any ordinary touch would have dim the sense of those moment when her hand have hold he to she . so he stand quite still and wait . 

 at last Jane speak . " do you mean that you wish to ask I to be to be that to you ? " 

 " yes , dear , " he answer , gently ; but in his voice vibrate the quiet of strong self - control . " at least I come out here intend to ask it of you . but I can not ask it now , belove . I can not   ask you to be what you be already . no promise , no ceremony , no giving or receiving of a ring , could make you more my wife than you have be just now in those wonderful moment . " 

 Jane slowly turn and look at he . she have never see anything so radiant as his face . but still those shin eye smote she like sword . she long to cover they with her hand ; or bid he look away over the wood and water , while he go on say these sweet thing to she . she put up one foot on the low parapet , lean her elbow on her knee , and shield her face with her hand . then she answer he , try to speak calmly . 

 " you have take I absolutely by surprise , Dal . I know you have be delightfully nice and attentive since the concert evening , and that our mutual understanding of music and pleasure in it , couple with an increase intimacy bring about by our confidential conversation under the cedar , have result in an unusually close and delightful friendship . I honestly admit it seem to have it have mean more to I than any friendship have ever mean . but that be partly owe to your temperament , Dal , which tend to make you always the most vivid spot in one 's mental landscape . but truly I think you want I out here in order to pour out confidence about Pauline Lister . everybody believe that her loveliness have effect your final capture , and truly , Dal , truly I think so , too . " Jane pause . 

 " well ? " say the quiet voice , with its deep undertone of gladness . " you know otherwise now . " 

 " dal you have so startle and astonish I . I can not give you an answer to - night . you must let I have until to - morrow to - morrow morning . " 

 " but , beloved , " he say tenderly , move a little nearer , " there be no more need for you to answer than I feel need to put a question . can not   you realise this ? question and answer be ask and give just now . oh , my dearest come back to I . sit down again . " 

 but Jane stand rigid . 

 " no , " she say . " I can not   allow you to take thing for grant in this way . you take I by surprise , and I lose my head utterly unpardonably , I admit . but , my dear boy , marriage be a serious thing . marriage be not a mere question of sentiment . it have to wear . it have to last . it must have a solid and dependable foundation , to stand the test and strain of daily life together . I know so many married couple intimately . I stay in their home , and act sponsor to their child ; with the result that I vow never to risk it myself . and now I have let you put this question , and you must not wonder if I ask for twelve hour to think it over . " 

 Garth take this silently . he sit down on the stone cop with his back to the lake and , lean backward , try to see her face ; but the hand completely screen it . he cross his knee and clasp both hand around they , rock slightly backward and forward for a minute while master the impulse to speak or act violently . he strove to compose his mind by fix it upon trivial detail which chance to catch his eye . his red sock show clearly in the moonlight against the white paving of the terrace , and look well with black patent - leather shoe . he resolve always to wear red silk sock in the evening , and wonder whether Jane would knit some for he . he count the window along the front of the house , note which be his and which be Jane 's , and how many come between . at last he know he could trust himself , and , lean back , speak very gently , his dark head almost touch the lace of her sleeve . 

 " Dearest tell I , do not   you feel just now " 

 " oh , hush ! " . cry Jane , almost harshly , " hush , Dal ! do not   talk about feeling with this question between we . marriage be fact , not feel . if you want to do really the good thing for we both , go straight indoor now and do not   speak to I again to - night . I hear you say you be go to try the organ in the church on the common at eleven o'clock to - morrow morning . well I will come there soon after half - past eleven and listen while you play ; and at noon you can send away the blower , and I will give you my answer . but now oh , go away , dear ; for truly I can not bear anymore . I must be leave alone . " 

 Garth loose the strong finger clasp so tightly round his knee . he slip the hand next to she along the stone cop , close to her foot . she feel he take hold of her gown with those deft , masterful finger . then he bend his dark head quickly , and whispering : " I kiss the cross , " with a gesture of infinite reverence and tenderness , which Jane never forget , he kiss the hem of her skirt . the next moment she be alone . 

 she listen while his footstep die away . she hear the door into the low hall open and close . then slowly she sit down just as she have sit when he kneel in front of she . now she be quite alone . the tension of these last hard moment relaxed . she press both hand over the lace at her bosom where that dear , beautiful , adore face have be hide . have she FELT , he ask . ah ! what have she not feel ? 

 tear never come easily to Jane . but to - night she have be call a name by which she have never think to be call ; and already her honest heart be tell she she would never be call by it again . and large silent tear overflow and fall upon her hand and upon the lace at her breast . for the wife and the mother in she have be waken and stir , and the deep of her nature break through the barrier of stern repression and almost masculine self - control , and refuse to be drive back without the womanly tribute of tear . 

 and around her foot lie the scatter petal of crush rambler rose . 

 presently she pass indoor . the upper hall be fill with merry group and resound with " good - night " as the woman mount the great staircase , pause to fle back final repartee , or to confirm plan for the morrow . 

 Garth Dalmain be stand at the foot of the staircase , hold in conversation by Pauline Lister and her aunt , who have turn on the fourth step . Jane see his slim , erect figure and glossy head the moment she enter the hall . his back be towards she , and though she advance and stand quite near , he give no sign of be aware of her presence . but the joyousness of his voice seem to make he hers again in this new sweet way . she alone know what have cause it , and unconsciously she put one hand over her bosom as she listen . 

 " sorry , dear lady , " Garth be say , " but to - morrow morning be impossible . I have an engagement in the village . yes really ! at eleven o'clock . " 

 " that sound so rural and pretty , Mr. Dalmain , " say Mrs. Parker Bangs . " why not take Pauline and I along ? we have see no dairy , and no dairy - maid , nor any of the thing in Adam Bede , since we come over . I would just love to step into Mrs. Poyser 's kitchen and see myself reflect in the warming - pan on the wall . " 

 " perhaps we would be DE TROP in the dairy , " murmur Miss Lister archly . 

 she look very lovely in her creamy - white satin gown , her small head hold regally , the brilliant charm of american womanhood radiate from she . she wear no jewel , save one string of perfectly match pearl ; but on Pauline Lister 's neck even pearl seem to sparkle . 

 all these scintillation , fling at Garth , pass over his sleek head and reach Jane where she linger in the background . she take in every detail . never have Miss Lister 's loveliness be more correctly appraise . 

 " but it happen , unfortunately , to be neither a dairy - maid nor a warming - pan , " say Garth . " my appointment be with a very grubby small boy , whose rural beauty consist in a shock of red hair and a whole pepper - pot of freckle . " 

 " Philanthropic ? " inquire Miss Lister . 

 " yes , at the rate of threepence an hour . " 

 " a caddy , of course , " cry both lady together . 

 " my ! what a mystery about a thing so simple ! " add Mrs. Parker Bangs . " now we have hear , Mr. Dalmain , that it be well worth the walk to the link to see you play . so you may expect we to arrive there , time to see you start around . " 

 Garth 's eye twinkle . Jane could hear the twinkle in his voice . " my dear lady , " he say , " you overestimate my play as , in your great kindness of heart , you overestimate many other thing connect with I . but I shall like to think of you at the golf link at eleven o'clock to - morrow morning . you might drive there , but the walk through the wood be too charming to miss . only remember , you cross the park and leave by the north gate , not the main entrance by which we go to the railway station . I would offer to escort you , but duty take I , at an early hour , in quite another direction . besides , when Miss Lister 's wish to see the link be know , so many people will discover golf to be the one possible way of spend to - morrow morning , that I should be but a unit in the crowd which will troop across the park to the north gate . it will be quite impossible for you to miss your way . " 

 Mrs. Parker Bangs be begin to explain elaborately that never , under any circumstance , could he be a unit , when her niece peremptorily interpose . 

 " that will do , aunt . do not   be silly . we be all unit , except when we make a crowd ; which be what we be do on this staircase at this present moment , so that Miss Champion have for some time be try ineffectually to pass we . do you golf to - morrow , Miss Champion ? " 

 Garth stand on one side , and Jane begin to mount the stair . he do not look at she , but it seem to Jane that his eye be on the hem of her gown as it trail past he . she pause beside Miss Lister . she know exactly how effectual a foil she make to the american girl 's white loveliness . she turn and face he . she wish he to look up and see they stand there together . she want the artist eye to take in the cruel contrast . she want the artist soul of he to realise it . she wait . 

 Garth 's eye be still on the hem of her gown , close to the left foot ; but he lift they slowly to the lace at her bosom , where her hand still lie . there they rest a moment , then drop again , without rise higher . 

 " yes , " say Mrs. Parker Bangs , " be you play around with Mr. Dalmain to - morrow forenoon , Miss Champion ? " 

 Jane suddenly flush crimson , and then be furious with herself for blushing , and hat the circumstance which make her feel and act so unlike her ordinary self . she hesitate during the long dreadful moment . how dare Garth behave in that way ? People would think there be something unusual about her gown . she feel a wild impulse to stoop and look at it herself to see whether his kiss have materialise and be hang like a star to the silken hem . then she force herself to calmness and answer rather brusquely : " I be not golf to - morrow ; but you could not do well than go to the link . good - night , Mrs. Parker Bangs . sleep well , Miss Lister . good - night , Dal . " 

 Garth be on the step below they , hand Pauline 's aunt a letter she have drop . 

 " good - night , Miss Champion , " he say , and for one instant his eye meet her , but he do not hold out his hand , or appear to see hers half extend . 

 the three woman mount the staircase together , then go different way . Miss Lister trail away down a passage to the right , her aunt trotting in her wake . 

 " there be be a tiff there , " say Mrs. Parker Bangs . 

 " poor thing ! " say Miss Lister softly . " I like she . she be a real good sort . I should have think she would have be more sensible than the rest of we . " 

 " a real plain sort , " say her aunt , ignore the last sentence . 

 " well , she do not   make her own face , " say Miss Lister generously . 

 " no , and she do not   pay other people to make it for she . she be what Sir Walter Scott call : ' nature in all its ruggedness . ' " 

 " dear aunt , " remark Miss Lister wearily , " I wish you would not   trouble to quote the english classic to I when we be alone . it be pure waste of breath , because you see I know you have read they all . here be my door . now come right in and make yourself comfy on that couch . I be go to sit in this palatial arm - chair opposite , and do a little very needful explaining . my ! how they fix one to the floor ! these ancestral castle be all right so far as they go , but they do not   know a thing about rocker . now I have a word or two to say about Miss Champion . she be a real good sort , and I like she . she be not a beauty ; but she have a fine figure , and she dress right . she have heap of money , and could have rare pearl than mine ; but she know well than to put pearl on that brown skin . I like a woman who know her limitation and be sensible over they . all the man adore she , not for what she look but for what she be , and , my word , aunt , that be what pay in the long run . that be what last . ten year hence the Honourable Jane will still be what she be , and I shall be try to look what I be not . as for Garth Dalmain , he have eye for all of we and a heart for none . his pretty speech and admire look do not   mean marriage , because he be a man with an ideal of womanhood and he can not   see himself marry below it . if the Sistine Madonna could step down off those cloud and hand the infant to the young woman on she left , he might marry she ; but even then he would be afraid he might see some one next day who do her hair more becomingly , or that her foot would not look so well on his persian rug as it do on that cloud . he will not   marry money , because he have plenty of it . and even if he have not , money make in candle would not appeal to he . he will not   marry beauty , because he think too much about it . he adore so many lovely face , that he be never sure for twenty - four hour which of they he admire most , bar the fact that , as in the case of fruit tree , the unattainable be usually the most desire . he will not   marry goodness virtue worth whatever you choose to call the sterling quality of character because in all these the Honourable Jane Champion be his ideal , and she be too sensible a woman to tie such an epicure to her plain face . besides , she consider herself his grandmother , and do not   require he to teach she to suck egg . but Garth Dalmain , poor boy , be so sublimely lack in self - consciousness that he never question whether he can win his ideal . he possess she already in his soul , and it will be a fearful smack in the face when she say ' no , ' as she assuredly will do , for reason aforesaid . these three day , while he have be play around with I , and you and other dear match - make old donkey have gambol about we , and make sure we be fall in love , he have be worship the ground she walk on , and count the hour until he should see her walk on it again . he enjoy be with I more than with the other girl , because I understand , and help he to work all conversation round to she , and he know , when she arrive here , I could be trust to develop sudden anxiety about you , or have important letter to write , if she come in sight . but that be all there will ever be between I and Garth Dalmain ; and if you have a really careful regard for my young affection you would drop your false set on the marble wash - stand , or devise some other equally false excuse for our immediate departure for town to - morrow . and now , dear , do not   stay to argue ; because I have say exactly all there be to say on the subject , and a little more . and try to toddle to bed without tell I of which cute character in Dickens I remind you , because I be cute than any of they , and if I stay in this tight frock another second I can not   answer for the consequence . Oui , Josephine , entrez ! good - night , dear aunt . happy dream ! " 

 but after her maid have leave she , Pauline switch off the electric light and , draw back the curtain , stand for a long while at her window , look out at the peaceful English scene bath in moonlight . at last she murmur softly , lean her beautiful head against the window frame : 

 " I state your case well , but you do not   quite deserve it , Dal . you ought to have let I know about Jane , week ago . anyway , it will stop the talk about you and I . and as for you , dear , you will go on sigh for the moon ; and when you find the moon be unattainable , you will not dream of seek solace in more earthly light not even poppa 's good sperm , " she add , with a wistful little smile , for Pauline 's fun sparkle in solitude as freely as in company , and as often at her own expense as at that of other people , and her brave american spirit would not admit , even to herself , a serious hurt . 

 meanwhile Jane have turn to the left and pass slowly to her room . Garth have not take her half - proffer hand , and she know perfectly well why . he would never again be content to clasp her hand in friendship . if she cut he off from the touch which mean absolute possession , she cut herself off from the contact of simple comradeship . Garth , to - night , be like a royal tiger who have taste blood . it seem a queer simile , as she think of he in his conventional evening clothe , correct in every line , well - groom , smart almost to a fault . but out on the terrace with he she have realise , for the first time , the primal element which go to the making of a man a forceful determine , rule man creation 's king . they echo of primeval forest . the roar of the lion be in they , the fierceness of the tiger ; the instinct of dominant possession , which say : " mine to have and hold , to fight for and enjoy ; and I slay all comer ! " she have feel it , and her own brave soul have understand it and respond to it , unafraid ; and be ready to mate with it , if only ah ! if only 

 but thing could never be again as they have be before . if she mean to starve her tiger , steel bar must be between they for evermore . none of those sentimental suggestion of attempt to be a sort of unsatisfactory cross between sister and friend would do for the man whose head she have unconsciously hold against her breast . Jane know this . he have keep himself magnificently in hand after she put he from she , but she know he be only give her breathing space . he still consider she his own , and his very certainty of the near future have give he that gentle patience in the present . but even now , while her answer pende , he would not take her hand in friendship . Jane close her door and lock it . she must face this problem of the future , with all else lock out except herself and he . ah ! if she could but lock herself out and think only of he and of his love , as beautiful , perfect gift lay at her foot , that she might draw they up into her empty arm and clasp they there for evermore . just for a little while she would do this . one hour of realisation be her right . afterwards she must bring herself into the problem , her possibility ; her limitation ; herself , in her relation to he in the future ; in the effect marriage with she would be likely to have upon he . what it might mean to she do not consciously enter into her calculation . Jane be self - conscious , with the intense self - consciousness of all reserved nature , but she be not selfish . 

 at first , then , she leave her room in darkness , and , grope her way to the curtain , draw they back , throw up the sash , and , draw a chair to the window , sit down , lean she elbow on the sill and her chin in her hand , and look down upon the terrace , still bath in moonlight . her window be almost opposite the place where she and Garth have talk . she could see the stone lion and the vase full of scarlet geranium . she could locate the exact spot where she be sit when he Memory awake , vibrant . 

 then Jane allow herself the most wonderful mental experience of her life . she be a woman of purpose and decision . she have say she have a right to that hour , and she take it to the full . in soul she meet her tiger and mat with he , unafraid . he have not ask whether she love he or not , and she do not need to ask herself . she surrender her proud liberty , and tenderly , humbly , wistfully , yet with all the strength of her strong nature , promise to love , honour , and obey he . she meet the adoration of his splendid eye without a tremor . she have lock her body out . she be alone with her soul ; and her soul be all - beautiful perfect for he . 

 the loneliness of year slip from she . life become rich and purposeful . he need she always , and she be always there and always able to meet his need . " be you content , my beloved ? " she ask over and over ; and Garth 's joyous voice , with the ring of perpetual youth in it , always answer : " perfectly content . " and Jane smile into the night , and in the depth of her calm eye dawn a knowledge hitherto unknown , and in her tender smile tremble , with unspeakable sweetness , an understanding of the secret of a woman 's true bliss . " he be mine and I be his . and because he be mine , my beloved be safe ; and because I be his , he be content . " 

 thus she give herself completely ; gather he into the shelter of her love ; and her generous heart expand to the greatness of the gift . then the mother in her awoke and realise how much of the maternal flow into the love of a true woman when she understand how largely the child - nature predominate in the man in love , and how the very strength of his need of she reduce to unaccustomed weakness the strong nature to which she have become essential . 

 Jane press her hand upon her breast . " Garth , " she whisper , " Garth , I understand . my own poor boy , it be so hard to you to be send away just then . but you have have all all you want , in those few wonderful moment , and nothing can rob you of that fact . and you have make I so your that , whatever the future bring for you and I , no other face will ever be hide here . it be your , and I be yours to - night , and henceforward , forever . " 

 Jane lean her forehead on the window - sill . the moonlight fall on the heavy coil of her brown hair . the scent of the magnolia bloom rise in fragrance around she . the song of a nightingale purl and thrill in an adjacent wood . the lonely year of the past , the perplexing moment of the present , the uncertain vista of the future , all roll away . she sail with Garth upon a golden ocean far remove from the shore of time . for love be eternal ; and the birth of love free the spirit from all limitation of the flesh . 

 a clock in the distant village strike midnight . the twelve stroke float up to Jane 's window across the moonlit park . time be once more . her freed spirit resume the burden of the body . 

 a new day have begin , the day upon which she have promise her answer to Garth . the next time that clock strike twelve she would be stand with he in the church , and her answer must be ready . 

 she turn from the window without close it , draw the curtain closely across , switch on the electric light over the writing - table , take off her evening gown , hang up bodice and skirt in the wardrobe , resolutely lock the door upon they . then she slip on a sage - green wrapper , which she have lately purchase at a bazaar because every one else flee from it , and the old lady whose handiwork it be seem so disappointed , and , draw a chair near the writing - table , take out her diary , unlock the heavy clasp , and begin to read . she turn the page slowly , pause here and there , until she come to those she seek . over they she ponder long , her head in her hand . they contain a very full account of her conversation with Garth on the afternoon of the day of the concert at Overdene ; and the line upon which she specially dwelt be these : " his face be transfigure .... goodness and inspiration shine from it , make it as the face of an angel .... I never think he ugly again . child though I be , I could differentiate even then between ugliness and plainness . I have associate his face ever since with the wondrous beauty of his soul . when he sit down , at the close of his address , I no long think he a complicated form of chimpanzee . I remember the divine halo of his smile . of course it be not the sort of face one could have want to live with , or to have day after day opposite one at table , but then one be not call to that sort of discipline , which would have be martyrdom to I . and he have always stand to my mind since as a proof of the truth that goodness be never ugly , and that divine love and aspiration , shin through the plainest feature , may redeem they , temporarily , into beauty ; and permanently , into a thing one love to remember . " 

 at first Jane read the entire passage . then her mind focusse itself upon one sentence : " of course it be not the sort of face one could have want to live with , or to have day after day opposite one at table , ... which would have be martyrdom to I . " 

 at length Jane arise , turn on all the light over the dressing - table , particularly two bright one on either side of the mirror , and , sit down before it , face herself honestly . 

 when the village clock strike one , Garth Dalmain stand at his window take a final look at the night which have mean so much to he . he remember , with an amused smile , how , to help himself to calmness , he have sit on the terrace and thought of his sock , and then have count the window between his and Jane 's . there be five of they . he know her window by the magnolia tree and the seat beneath it where he have chance to sit , not know she be above he . he lean far out and look towards it now . the curtain be draw , but there appear still to be a light behind they . even as he watch , it go out . 

 he look down at the terrace . he could see the stone lion and the vase of scarlet geranium . he could locate the exact spot where she be sit when he 

 then he drop upon his knee beside the window and look up into the starry sky . 

 Garth 's mother have live long enough to teach he the holy secret of her sweet patience and endurance . in moment of deep feeling , word from his mother 's Bible come to his lip more readily than expression of his own thought . now , look upward , he repeat softly and reverently : " ' every good gift and every perfect gift be from above , and cometh down from the Father of light , with whom be no variableness , neither shadow of turn . ' and oh , Father , " he add , " keep we in the light she and I. may there be in we , as there be in Thee , no variableness , neither shadow which be cast by turn . " 

 then he rise to his foot and look across once more to the stone lion and the broad cop . his soul sing within he , and he fold his arm across his chest . " my wife ! " he say . " oh ! my wife ! " 

 and , as the village clock strike one , Jane arrive at her decision . 

 slowly she rise , and turn off all the light ; then , grope her way to the bed , fall upon her knee beside it , and break into a passion of desperate , silent weeping . 




 CHAPTER XI 

 GARTH find the cross 

 the village church on the green be bath in sunshine as Jane emerge from the cool shade of the park . the clock proclaim the hour half - past eleven , and Jane do not hasten , know she be not expect until twelve . the window of the church be open , and the massive oaken door stand ajar . 

 Jane pause beneath the ivy - cover porch and stand listen . the tone of the organ reach she as from an immense distance , and yet with an all - pervade nearness . the sound be disassociate from hand and foot . the organ seem breathing , and its breath be music . 

 Jane push the heavy door far open , and even at that moment it occur to she that the freckled boy with a red head , and Garth 's slim proportion , have evidently pass easily through an aperture which refuse ingress to her more massive figure . she push the door far open , and go in . 

 instantly a stillness enter into her soul . the sense of unseen presence , often so strongly feel on enter an empty church alone , the impress leave upon old wall and rafter by the worship mind of century , hush the insistent beating of her own perplexity , and for a few moment she forget the errand which bring she there , and bow her head in unison with the worship of age . 

 Garth be play the " Veni , Creator Spiritus " to Attwood 's perfect setting ; and , as Jane walk noiselessly up to the chancel , he begin to sing the word of the second verse . he sing they softly , but his beautifully modulate barytone carry well , and every syllable reach she . 

 " enable with perpetual light 
 the dulness of our blind sight ; 
 anoint and cheer our soiled face 
 with the abundance of Thy grace ; 
 keep far our foe ; give peace at home ; 
 where Thou art Guide , no ill can come . " 
 then the organ swell into full power , peal out the theme of the last verse without its word , and allow those he have sing to repeat themselves over and over in Jane 's mind : " where Thou art Guide , no ill can come . " have she not pray for guidance ? then surely all would be well . 

 she pause at the entrance to the chancel . Garth have return to the second verse , and be sing again , to a waldflute accompaniment , " enable with perpetual light . " 

 Jane seat herself in one of the old oak stall and look around she . the brilliant sunshine from without enter through the stain - glass window , mellow into golden beam of soft amber light , with here and there a shaft of crimson . what a beautiful expression perpetual light ! as Garth sing it , each syllable seem to pierce the silence like a ray of pure sunlight . " the dulness of " Jane could just see the top of his dark head over the heavy brocade of the organ curtain . she dread the moment when he should turn , and those vivid eye should catch sight of her " our blind sight . " how would he take what she must say ? would she have strength to come through a long hard scene ? would he be tragically heart - break ? " anoint and cheer our soiled face " would he argue , and insist , and override her judgment ? " with the abundance of Thy grace " could she oppose his fierce strength , if he choose to exert it ? would they either of they come through so hard a time without wound each other terribly ? " keep far our foe ; give peace at home " oh ! what could she say ? what would he say ? how should she answer ? what reason could she give for her refusal which Garth would ever take as final ? " where Thou art Guide , no ill can come . " 

 and then , after a few soft , impromptu chord ; the theme change . 

 Jane 's heart stand still . Garth be play " the Rosary . " he do not sing it ; but the soft insistence of the organ pipe seem to press the word into the air , as no voice could have do . memory 's pearl , in all the purity of their gleam preciousness , be count one by one by the flute and dulciana ; and the sadder tone of the waldflute proclaim the finding of the cross . it all hold a new meaning for Jane , who look helplessly round , as if seek some way of escape from the sad sweetness of sound which fill the little church . 

 suddenly it cease . Garth stand up , turn , and see she . the glory of a great joy leap into his face . 

 " all right , Jimmy , " he say ; " that will do for this morning . and here be a bright sixpence , because you have manage the blowing so well . hullo ! it be a shilling ! never mind . you shall have it because it be such a glorious day . there never be such a day , Jimmy ; and I want you to be happy also . now run off quickly , and shut the church door behind you , my boy . " 

 ah ! how his voice , with its ring of buoyant gladness , shake her soul . 

 the red - headed boy , rather grubby , with a whole pepper - pot of freckle , but a beam face of pleasure , come out from behind the organ , clatter down a side aisle ; drop his shilling on the way and have to find it ; but at last go out , the heavy door close behind he with a resounding clang . 

 Garth have remain stand beside the organ , quite motionless , without look at Jane , and now that they be absolutely alone in the church , he still stand and wait a few moment . to Jane those moment seem day , week , year , an eternity . then he come out into the centre of the chancel , his head erect , his eye shin , his whole bearing that of a conqueror sure of his victory . he walk down to the quaintly carve oaken screen and , pass beneath it , stand at the step . then he sign to Jane to come and stand beside he . 

 " here , dearest , " he say ; " let it be here . " 

 Jane come to he , and for a moment they stand together , look up the chancel . it be dark than the rest of the church , be light only by three narrow stain - glass window , gem of colour and of significance . the centre window , immediately over the communion table , represent the Saviour of the world , die upon the cross . they gaze at it in reverent silence . then Garth turn to Jane . 

 " my beloved , " he say , " it be a sacred Presence and a sacred place . but no place could be too sacred for that which we have to say to each other , and the Holy Presence , in which we both believe , be here to bless and ratify it . I be wait for your answer . " 

 Jane clear her throat and put her tremble hand into the large pocket of her tweed coat . 

 " Dal , " she say ; " my answer be a question . how old be you ? " 

 she feel his start of intense surprise . she see the light of expectant joy fade from his face . but he reply , after only a momentary hesitation : " I think you know , dear . I be twenty - seven . " 

 " well , " say Jane slowly and deliberately , " I be thirty ; and I look thirty - five , and feel forty . you be twenty - seven , Dal , and you look nineteen , and often feel nine . I have be think it over , and you know I can not marry a mere boy . " 

 silence absolute . 

 in sheer terror Jane force herself to look at he . he be white to the lip . his face be very stern and calm a strange , stony calmness . there be not much youth in it just then . " anoint and cheer our soil face " the silent church seem to wail the word in bewildered agony . 

 at last he speak . " I have not think of myself , " he say slowly . " I can not explain how it come to pass , but I have not think of myself at all , since my mind have be full of you . therefore I have not realise how little there be in I that you could care for . I believe you have feel as I do , that we be just each other 's . " for a moment he put out his hand as if he would have touch she . then it drop heavily to his side . " you be quite right , " he say . " you could not marry any one whom you consider a mere boy . " 

 he turn from she and face up the chancel . for the space of a long silent minute he look at the window over the holy table , where hang the suffering Christ . then he bow his head . " I accept the cross , " he say , and , turning , walk quietly down the aisle . the church door open , close behind he with a heavy clang , and Jane be alone . 

 she stumble back to the seat she have leave , and fall upon her knee . 

 " o , my God , " she cry , ' send he back to I , oh , send he back ! ... oh , Garth ! it be I who be plain and unattractive and unworthy , not you . oh , Garth come back ! come back ! come back ! ... I will trust and not be afraid ... oh , my own Dear come back ! " 

 she listen , with strain ear . she wait , until every nerve of her body ache with suspense . she decide what she would say when the heavy door reopen and she see Garth stand in a shaft of sunlight . she try to remember the VENI , but the hollow clang of the door have silence even memory 's echo of that haunt music . so she wait silently , and as she wait the silence grow and seem to enclose she within cruel , relentless wall which open only to allow her glimpse into the vista of future lonely year . just once more she break that silence . " oh , darling , come back ! I will RISK IT , " she say . but no step draw near , and , kneel with her face bury in her clasp hand , Jane suddenly realise that Garth Dalmain have accept her decision as final and irrevocable , and would not return . 

 how long she kneel there after realise this , she never know . but at last comfort come to she . she feel she have do right . a few hour of present anguish be well than year of future disillusion . her own life would be sadly empty , and lose this newly find joy be cost she more than she have expect ; but she honestly believe ' she have do rightly towards he , and what do her own pain matter ? " thus comfort come to Jane . 

 at last she rise and pass out of the silent church into the breezy sunshine . 

 near the park gate a little knot of excited boy be prepare to fly a kite . Jimmy , the hero of the hour , the centre of attraction , prove to be the proud possessor of this new kite . Jimmy be find the day glorious indeed , and be be happy . " Happy ALSO , " Garth have say . and Jane 's eye fill with tear , as she remember the word and the tone in which it be speak . 

 " there go my poor boy 's shilling , " she say to herself sadly , as the kite mount and soar above the common ; " but , alas , where be his joy ? " 

 as she pass up the avenue a dog - cart be drive swiftly down it . Garth Dalmain drive it ; behind he a groom and a portmanteau . he lift his hat as he pass she , but look straight before he . in a moment he be go . have Jane want to stop he she could not have do so . but she do not want to stop he . she feel absolutely satisfied that she have do the right thing , and do it at great cost to herself than to he . he would eventually ah , perhaps before so very long find another to be to he all , and more than all , he have believe she could be . but she ? the dull ache at her bosom remind she of her own word the night before , whisper in the secret of her chamber to he who , alas , be not there to hear : " whatever the future bring for you and I , no other face will ever be hide here . " and , in this first hour of the come lonely year , she know they to be true . 

 in the hall she meet Pauline Lister . 

 " be that you , Miss Champion ? " say Pauline . " well now , have you hear of Mr. Dalmain ? he have have to go to town unexpectedly , on the 1.15 train ; and aunt have drop her false tooth on her marble wash - stand and must get to the dentist right away . so we go to town on the 2.30 . it be an uncertain world . it complicate one 's plan , when they have to depend on other people 's tooth . but I would soon break false tooth than true heart , any day . one can get the former mend , but I guess no one can mend the latter . we be lunch early in our room ; so I wish you good - by , Miss Champion . " 




 CHAPTER XII 

 the DOCTOR 'S PRESCRIPTION 

 the Honourable Jane Champion stand on the summit of the Great Pyramid and look around she . the four exhausted Arabs whose exertion , combine with her own activity , have place she there , drop in the picturesque attitude into which an arab fall by nature . they have hoist the Honourable Jane 's eleven stone ten from the bottom to the top in record time , and now lie around , proud of their achievement and sure of their " backsheesh . " 

 the whole thing have go as if by clock - work . two mahogany - colour , finely proportion fellow , in scanty white garment , spring with the ease of antelope to the top of a high step , turn to reach down eagerly and seize Jane 's upstretched hand . one remain behind , unseen but indispensable , to lend timely aid at exactly the right moment . then come the apparently impossible task for Jane , of place the sole of her foot on the edge of a stone four foot above the one upon which she be stand . it seem rather like step up on to the drawing - room mantelpiece . but encourage by cry of " Eiwa ! Eiwa ! " she do it ; when instantly a voice behind say , " Tyeb ! " two voice above shout , " Keteer ! " the grip on her hand tighten , the Arab behind hoist , and Jane have step up , with an ease which surprise herself . as a matter of fact , under those circumstance the impossible thing would have be not to have step up . 

 arab number four be water - carrier , and offer water from a gourd at interval ; and once , when Jane have to cry halt for a few minute ' breathing space , Schehati , handsome of all , and leader of the enterprise , offer to recite English Shakespeare - poetry . this prove to be : 

 " Jack - an - Jill 
 Went uppy hill , 
 to fetchy paily water ; 
 Jack fall down - an 
 break his crown - an 
 Jill come tumble after . " 
 Jane have laugh ; and Schehati , encourage by the success of his attempt to edify and amuse , use line of the immortal nursery epic as signal for united action during the remainder of the climb . therefore Jane mount one step to the fact that Jack fall down , and scale the next to information as to the serious nature of his injury , and at the third , Schehati , bend over , confidentially mention in her ear , while Ali shove behind , that " Jill come tumble after . " 

 the familiar word , hear under such novel circumstance , take on fresh meaning . Jane commence speculating as to whether the downfall of Jack need necessarily have cause so complete a loss of self - control and equilibrium on the part of Jill . would she not have prove her devotion well by bring the mutual pail safely to the bottom of the hill , and there attend to the wound of her fallen hero ? Jane , in her time , have witness the tragic downfall of various delightful jack , and have herself minister tenderly to their broken crown ; for in each case the Jill have remain on the top of the hill , flirt with that objectionable person of the name of Horner , whose cool , calculate way of set to work so unlike poor Jack 's headlong method invariably secure he the plum ; upon which he remark " what a good boy be I ! " and be usually take at his own smug valuation . but Jane 's entire sympathy on these occasion be with the defeat lover , and more than one Jack be now on his foot again , bravely face life , because that kind hand have be hold out to he as he lie in his valley of humiliation , and that comprehend sympathy have prove balm to his broken crown . 

 " Dickery , dickery , dock ! " chant Schehati solemnly , as he haul again ; " Moses run up the clock . the clock strike ' one ' " 

 the CLOCK strike " one " ? it be nearly three year since that night at Shenstone when the clock have strike " one , " and Jane have arrive at her decision , the decision which precipitate she Jack from his Pisgah of future promise . and yet no . he have not fall before the blow . he have take it erect , and his light step have be even firm than usual as he walk down the church and leave she , after quietly and deliberately accept her decision . it be Jane herself , leave alone , who fall hopelessly over the pail . she shiver even now when she remember how its icy water drench her heart . ah , what would have happen if Garth have come back in answer to her cry during those first moment of intolerable suffering and loneliness ? but Garth be not the sort of man who , when a door have be shut upon he , wait on the mat outside , hop to be recall . when she put he from she , and he realise that she mean it he pass completely out of her life . he be at the railway station by the time she reach the house , and from that day to this they have never meet . Garth evidently consider the avoidance of meeting to be his responsibility , and he never fail she in this . once or twice she go on a visit to house where she know he to be stay . he always happen to have leave that morning , if she arrive in time for luncheon ; or by an early afternoon train , if she be due for tea . he never time it so that there should be tragic passing of each other , with set face , at the railway station ; or a formal word of greeting as she arrive and he depart , just enough to awaken all the slumber pain and set people wonder . Jane remember with shame that this be the sort of picturesque tragedy she would have expect from Garth Dalmain . but the man who have surprise she by his dignified acquiescence in her decision , continue to surprise she by the strength with which he silently accept it as final and keep out of her way . Jane have not probe the depth of the wound she have inflict . 

 never once be his departure connect , in the mind of other , with her arrival . there be always some excellent and perfectly natural reason why he have be oblige to leave , and he be openly talk of and regret , and Jane hear all the late " dal story , " and find herself surround by the atmosphere of his exotic , beauty - love nature . and there be usually a girl always the lovely of the party confidentially point out to Jane , by the rest , as a certainty , if only Dal have have another twenty - four hour of her society . but the girl herself would appear quite heart - whole , only very full of an evidently delightful friendship , express all Dal 's idea on art and colour , as her own , and confidently happy in an assured sense of her own loveliness and charm and power to please . never do he leave behind he trace which the woman who love he regret to find . but he be always go irrevocably go . Garth Dalmain be not the sort of man to wait on the door - mat of a woman 's indecision . 

 neither do this Jack of hers break his crown . his portrait of Pauline Lister , paint six month after the Shenstone visit , have prove the fine bit of work he have as yet accomplish . he have paint the lovely American , in creamy white satin , stand on a dark oak staircase , one hand rest on the balustrade , the other , full of yellow rose , hold out towards an unseen friend below . behind and above her shone a stain - glass window , century old , the arm , crest , and motto of the noble family to whom the place belong , shin thereon in rose - colour and golden glass . he have wonderfully catch the charm and vivacity of the girl . she be gaily up - to - date , and frankly American , from the crown of her queenly little head , to the point of her satin shoe ; and the suggestiveness of place she in surrounding which breathe an atmosphere of the good tradition of England 's ancient ancestral home , the fearless wedding of the new world with the old , the putting of this sparkle gem from the new into the beautiful mellow setting of the old and there show it at its good , all this be the making of the picture . People smile , and say the painter have do on canvas what he shortly intend do in reality ; but the tie between artist and sitter never grow into anything close than a pleasant friendship , and it be the noble owner of the staircase and window who eventually persuade Miss Lister to remain in surrounding which suit she so admirably . 

 one story about that portrait Jane have hear discuss more than once in circle where both be know . Pauline Lister have come to the first sitting wear her beautiful string of pearl , and Garth have paint they wonderfully , spend hour over the delicate perfecting of each separate gleam drop . suddenly one day he seize his palette - knife , scrap the whole necklace off the canvas with a stroke and , declare she must wear her rose - topaz in order to carry out his scheme of colour . she be wear she rose - topaz when Jane see the picture in the Academy , and very lovely they look on the delicate whiteness of her neck . but people who have see Garth 's painting of the pearl maintain that that scrape of the palette - knife have destroy work which would have be the talk of the year . and Pauline Lister , just after it have happen , be report to have say , with a shrug of her pretty shoulder : " scheme of colour be all very well . but he scrap my pearl off the canvas because some one who come in hum a tune while look at the picture . I would be oblige if people who walk around the studio while I be be paint will in future refrain from hum tune . I do not   want he to scoop off my topaz and call for my emerald . also I feel like offer a reward for the discovery of that tune . I want to know what it have to do with my scheme of colour , anyway . " 

 when Jane hear the story , she be spend a few day with the Brands in Wimpole Street . it be tell at tea , in Lady Brand 's pretty boudoir . the duchess 's Concert , at which Garth have hear she sing the ROSARY , be a thing of the past . nearly a year have elapse since their final parting , and this be the very first thought or word or sign of his remembrance , which directly or indirectly , have come her way . she could not doubt that the tune hum have be the ROSARY . 

 " the hour I spend with thee , dear heart , 
 be as a string of pearl to I ; 
 I count they over , every one , apart . " 
 she seem to hear Garth 's voice on the terrace , as she hear it in those first startled moment of realise the gift which be be lay at her foot " I have learn to count pearl , belove . " 

 Jane 's heart be grow cold and freeze in its emptiness . this incident of the studio warm and wake it for the moment , and with the waking come sharp pain . when the visitor have leave , and Lady Brand have go to the nursery , she walk over to the piano , sit down , and softly play the accompaniment of " the Rosary . " the fine unexpected chord , full of discord work into harmony , seem to suit her mood and her memory . 

 suddenly a voice behind she say : " sing it , Jane . " she turn quickly . the doctor have come in , and be lie back luxuriously in a large arm - chair at her elbow , his hand clasp behind his head . " sing it , Jane , " he say . 

 " I can not , Deryck , " she answer , still softly sound the chord . " I have not sing for month . " 

 " what have be the matter for month ? " 

 Jane take her hand off the key , and swing round impulsively . 

 " oh , boy , " she say . " I have make a bad mess of my life ! and yet I know I do right . I would do the same again ; at least at least , I hope I would . " 

 the doctor sit in silence for a minute , look at she and ponder these short , quick sentence . also he wait for more , know it would come more easily if he wait silently . 

 it come . 

 " boy I give up something , which be more than life itself to I , for the sake of another , and I can not   get over it . I know I do right , and yet I can not   get over it . " 

 the doctor lean forward and take the clench hand between his . 

 " can you tell I about it , Jeanette ? " 

 " I can tell no one , Deryck ; not even you . " 

 " if ever you find you must tell some one , Jane , will you promise to come to I ? " 

 " gladly . " 

 " good ! now , my dear girl , here be a prescription for you . go abroad . and , mind , I do not mean by that , just to Paris and back , or Switzerland this summer , and the Riviera in the autumn . go to America and see a few big thing . see Niagara . and all your life afterwards , when triviality be try you , you will love to let your mind go back to the vast green mass of water sweep over the fall ; to the thunderous roar , and the upward rush of spray ; to the huge perpetual onwardness of it all . you will like to remember , when you be bother about pour water in and out of teacup , ' Niagara be flow still . ' stay in a hotel so near the fall that you can hear their great voice night and day , thunder out theme of power and progress . spend hour walk round and view it from every point . go to the Cave of the Winds , across the frail bridge , where the guide will turn and shout to you : ' be your ring on tight ? ' learn , in pass , the true meaning of the Rock of Ages . receive Niagara into your life and soul as a possession , and thank God for it . " 

 " then go in for other big thing in America . try spirituality and humanity ; love and life . seek out Mrs. Ballington Booth , the great ' Little Mother ' of all american prisoner . I know she well , I be proud to say , and can give you a letter of introduction . ask she to take you with she to sing - sing , or to Columbus State Prison , and to let you hear her address an audience of two thousand convict , hold out to they the gospel of hope and love , her own inspire and inspiring belief in fresh possibility even for the most despairing . " 

 " go to New York City and see how , when a man want a big building and have only a small plot of ground , he make the most of that ground by run his building up into the sky . learn to do likewise . and then , when the great - soule , large - hearted , rapid - minded people of America have wake you to enthusiasm with their bigness , go off to Japan and see a little people nobly do their good to become great . then to Palestine , and spend month in trace the footstep of the great human life ever live . take Egypt on your way home , just to remind yourself that there be still , in this very modern world of ours , a few passably ancient thing , a well - preserve wooden man , for instance , with eye of opaque white quartz , a piece of rock crystal in the centre for a pupil . these glitter eye look out upon the world from beneath their eyelid of bronze , in the time of Abraham . you will find it in the museum at Cairo . ride a donkey in the Mooskee if you want real sport ; and if you feel a little slack , climb the Great Pyramid . ask for an Arab name Schehati , and tell he you want to do it one minute quick than any lady have ever do it before . " 

 " then come home , my dear girl , ring I up and ask for an appointment ; or chance it , and let Stoddart slip you into my consulting - room between patient , and report how the prescription have work . I never give a well ; and you need not offer I a guinea ! I attend old friend gratis . " 

 Jane laugh , and grip his hand . " oh , boy , " she say , " I believe you be right . my whole idea of life have be focusse on myself and my own individual pain and loss . I will do as you say ; and God bless you for say it . here come Flower . Flower , " she say , as the doctor 's wife trail in , wear a soft tea - gown , and turn on the electric light as she pass , " will this boy of ours ever grow old ? here he be , seriously advise that a stout , middle - aged woman should climb the Great Pyramid as a cure for depression , and do it in record time ! " 

 " darling , " say the doctor 's wife , seat herself on the arm of his chair , " whom have you be see who be stout , or depressed , or middle - aged ? if you mean Mrs. Parker Bangs , she be not middle - aged , because she be an american , and no American be ever middle - aged . and she be only depressed because , even after paint her lovely niece 's portrait , Garth Dalmain have fail to propose to she . and it be no good advise she to climb the Great Pyramid , though she be do Egypt this winter , because I hear she say yesterday that she should never think of go up the pyramid until the child of Israel , or whoever the native be who live around those part , have the sense to put an elevator right up the centre . " 

 Jane and the doctor laugh , and Flower , settle herself more comfortably , for the doctor 's arm have steal around she , say : " jane , I hear you play the rosary just now , such a favourite of mine , and it be month since I hear it . do sing it , dear . " 

 Jane meet the doctor 's eye and smile reassuringly ; then turn without any hesitation and do as Flower ask . the prescription have already do she good . 

 at the last word of the song the doctor 's wife bend over and lay a tender little kiss just above his temple , where the thick dark hair be streak with silver . but the doctor 's mind be intent on Jane , and before the final chord be strike he know he have diagnose her case correctly . " but she have well go abroad , " he think . " it will take her mind off herself altogether , give she a large view of thing in general , and a well proportion view of thing in particular . and the boy will not   change ; or , if he do , Jane will be prove right , to her own satisfaction . but , if this be her side , good heaven , what must his be ! I have wonder what be sap all his buoyant youthfulness . to care for Jane would be an education ; but to have make Jane care ! and then to have lose she ! he must have nerve of steel , to be face life at all . what be this cross they be both learn to kiss , and hold up between they ? perhaps Niagara will sweep it away , and she will cable he from there . " 

 then the doctor take the dear little hand rest on his shoulder and kiss it softly , while Jane 's back be still turn . for the doctor have have past experience of the cross , and now the pearl be very precious . 

 so Jane take the prescription , and two year go by in the taking ; and here she be , on the top of the Great Pyramid , and , moreover , she have do it in record time , and laugh as she think of how she should report the fact to Deryck . 

 her Arabs lie around , very hot and shiny , and content . large backsheesh be assure , and they look up at she with pleased possessive eye , as an achievement of their own ; hardly realise how large a part she finely develop athletic power and elastic limb have play in the speed of the ascent . 

 and Jane stand there , sound in wind and limb , and with the exhilarate sense , always helpful to the mind , of a bodily feat accomplish . 

 she be look she good in her Norfolk coat and skirt of brown tweed with hint of green and orange in it , plenty of useful pocket pip with leather , leather button , and a broad band of leather round the bottom of the skirt . a connoisseur would have name at once the one and only firm from which that costume could have come , and the hatter who supply the soft green tyrolian hat for Jane scorn pith helmet which match it so admirably . but Schehati be no connoisseur of clothing , though a pretty shrewd judge of way and manner , and he sum up Jane thus : " nice gentleman - lady ! give good backsheesh , and not sit down halfway and say : ` no top ' ! but real lady - gentleman ! give backsheesh with kind face , and not send poor Arab to Assouan . " 

 Jane be deeply tan by the eastern sun . burn a splendid brown , and enjoy the process , she have no need of veil or parasol ; and her strong eye face the golden light of the desert without the aid of smoke glass . she have once hear Garth remark that a sight which make he feel really ill , be the back view of a woman in a motor - veil , and Jane have laughingly agree , for to her veil of any kind have always seem superfluous . the heavy coil of her brown hair never blow about into fascinating little curl and wisp , but remain where , with a few well - direct hairpin , she each morning solidly place they . 

 Jane have never look well than she do on this March day , stand on the summit of the Great Pyramid . strong , brown , and well - knit , a reliable mind in a capable body , the undeniable plainness of her face redeem by its kindly expression of interest and enjoyment ; her wide , pleasant smile reveal her fine white tooth , witness to her perfect soundness and health , within and without . 

 " nice gentleman - lady , " murmur Schehati again : and have Jane overheard the remark it would not have offend she ; for , though she hold a masculine woman only one degree less in abhorrence than an effeminate man , she would have take Schehati 's compound noun as a tribute to the fact that she be well - groom and independent , know her own mind , and , when she start out to go to a place , reach it in the short possible time , without fidget , fuss , or flurry . these three feminine attribute be hold in scorn by Jane , who know herself so deeply womanly that she could afford in minor way to be frankly unfeminine . 

 the doctor 's prescription have work admirably . that look of fall to piece and age prematurely a general dilapidation of mind and body which it have grieve and startle he to see in Jane as she sit before he on the music - stool , be go completely . she look a calm , pleasant thirty ; ready to go happily on , year by year , towards an equally agreeable and delightful forty ; and not afraid of fifty , when that time should come . her clear eye look frankly out upon the world , and her sane mind form sound opinion and pronounce fair judgment , temper by the kindliness of an unusually large and generous heart . 

 just now she be consider the view and find it very good . its strong contrast hold she . 

 on one side lie the fertile Delta , with its grove of wave palm , orange , and olive tree , grow in rich profusion on the bank of the Nile , a broad band of gleam silver . on the other , the Desert , with its far - distant horizon , stretch away in undulation of golden sand ; not a tree , not a leaf , not a blade of grass , but boundless liberty , an ocean of solid golden glory . for the sun be set , and the sky flame into colour . 

 " a parting of the way , " say Jane ; " a place of choice . how difficult to know which to choose liberty or fruitfulness . one would have to consult the Sphinx wise old guardian of the age , silent keeper of Time 's secret , gaze on into the future as it have always gaze , while future become present , and present glide into past . Come , Schehati , let we descend . oh , yes , I will certainly sit upon the stone on which the King sit when he be Prince of Wales . thank you for mention it . it will supply a delightful topic of conversation next time I be honour by a few minute of his gracious Majesty 's attention , and will save I from flounder into trite remark about the weather . and now take I to the Sphinx , Schehati . there be a question I would ask of it , just as the sun dip below the horizon . " 




 CHAPTER XIII 

 the answer of the SPHINX 

 Moonlight in the desert . 

 Jane order she after - dinner coffee on the piazza of the hotel , that she might lose as little as possible of the mystic loveliness of the night . the pyramid appear so huge and solid , in the clear white light ; and the Sphinx gather unto itself more mystery . 

 Jane promise herself a stroll round by moonlight presently . meanwhile she lie back in a low wicker chair , comfortably upholster , sip her coffee , and give herself up to the sense of dreamy content which , in a healthy body , be apt to follow vigorous exertion . 

 very tender and quiet thought of Garth come to she this evening , perhaps bring about by the association of moonlight . 

 " the moon shin bright : in such a night as this , 
 when the sweet wind do gently kiss the tree , 
 and they do make no noise " 
 ah ! the great poet know the effect upon the heart of a vivid reminder to the sens . Jane now pass beneath the spell . 

 to begin with , Garth 's voice seem sing everywhere : 

 " enable with perpetual light 
 the dulness of our blind sight . " 
 then from out the deep blue and silvery light , Garth 's dear adore eye seem watch she . Jane close her own , to see they well . to - night she do not feel like shrink from they , they be so full of love . 

 no shade of critical regard be in they . ah ! have she wrong he with her fear for the future ? her heart seem full of trust to - night , full of confidence in he and in herself . it seem to she that if he be here she could go out with he into this brilliant moonlight , seat herself upon some ancient fall stone , and let he kneel in front of she and gaze and gaze in his persistent way , as much as he please . in thought there seem to - night no shrinking from those dear eye . she feel she would say : " it be all your own , Garth , to look at when you will . for your sake , I could wish it beautiful ; but if it be as you like it , my own dear , why should I hide it from you ? " 

 what have bring about this change of mind ? have Deryck 's prescription do its full work ? be this a saner point of view than the one she have feel constrain to take when she arrive , through so much agony of renunciation , at her decision ? instead of go up the Nile , and then to Constantinople and Athens , should she take the steamer which sail from Alexandria to - morrow , be in London a week hence , send for Garth , make full confession , and let he decide as to their future ? 

 that he love she still , it never occur to Jane to doubt . at the very thought of send for he and tell he the simple truth , he seem so near she once more , that she could feel the clasp of his arm , and his head upon her heart . and those dear shin eye ! oh , Garth , Garth ! 

 " one thing be clear to I to - night , " think Jane . " if he still need I want I I can not live any long away from he . I must go to he . " she open her eye and look towards the Sphinx . the whole line of reasoning which have carry such weight at Shenstone flash through her mind in twenty second . then she close her eye again and clasp her hand upon her bosom . 

 " I will risk it , " she say ; and deep joy awake within her heart . 

 a party of english people come from the dining - room on to the piazza with a clatter . they have arrive that evening and go in late to dinner . Jane have hardly notice they , a handsome woman and her daughter , two young man , and an old man of military appearance . they do not interest Jane , but they break in upon her reverie ; for they seat themselves at a table near by and , in truly british fashion , continue a loud - voice conversation , as if no one else be present . one or two foreigner , who have be peacefully dream over coffee and cigarette , rise and stroll away to quiet seat under the palm tree . Jane would have do the same , but she really feel too comfortable to move , and afraid of lose the sweet sense of Garth 's nearness . so she remain where she be . 

 the elderly man hold in his hand a letter and a copy of the MORNING POST , just receive from England . they be discuss news contain in the letter and a paragraph he have be read aloud from the paper . 

 " poor fellow ! how too sad ! " say the chaperon of the party . 

 " I should think he would soon have be kill outright ! " exclaim the girl . " I know I would . " 

 " oh , no , " say one of the young man , lean towards she . " life be sweet , under any circumstance . " 

 " oh , but blind ! " cry the young voice , with a shudder . " quite blind for the rest of one 's life . horrible ! " 

 " be it his own gun ? " ask the old woman . " and how come they to be have a shooting party in March ? " 

 Jane smile a fierce smile into the moonlight . passionate love of animal life , intense regard for all life , even of the tiny insect , be as much a religion with she as the worship of beauty be with Garth . she never could pretend sorrow over these account of shoot accident , or fall in the hunting - field . when those who go out to inflict cruel pain be hurt themselves ; when those who go forth to take eager , palpitate life , lose their own ; it seem to Jane a just retribution . she feel no regret , and pretend none . so now she smile fiercely to herself , think : " one pair of eye the less to look along a gun and frustrate the despairing dash for home and little one of a terrify little mother rabbit . one hand that will never again change a soar upward flight of spread wing , into an agonised mass of fall feather . one chance to the good , for the noble stag , as he make a brave run to join his hind in the valley . " 

 meanwhile the military - look man have readjust his eye - glass and be hold the sheet of a closely write letter to the light . 

 " no , " he say after a moment , ' shoot party be over . there be nothing do on the moor now . they be pot bunny . " 

 " be he shoot ? " ask the girl . 

 " no , " reply the owner of the letter , " and that seem such hard luck . he have give up shoot altogether a year or two ago . he never really enjoy it , because he so love the beauty of life and hat death in every form . he have a lovely place in the North , and be up there painting . he happen to pass within sight of some fellow rabbit - shooting , and see what he consider cruelty to a wound rabbit . he vault over a gate to expostulate and to save the little creature from further suffering . then it happen . one of the lad , apparently startle , let off his gun . the charge strike a tree a few yard off , and the shot glance . it do not strike he full . the face be only slightly pepper and the brain quite uninjured . but shot pierce the retina of each eye , and the sight be hopelessly go . " 

 " awful hard luck , " say the young man . 

 " I never can understand a chap not bein ' keen on shootin ' , " say the youth who have not yet speak . 

 " ah , but you would if you have know he , " say the soldier . " he be so full of life and vivid vitality . one could not imagine he either die or deal death . and his love of the beautiful be almost a form of religious worship . I can not   explain it ; but he have a way of make you see beauty in thing you have hardly notice before . and now , poor chap , he can not   see they himself . " 

 " has he a mother ? " ask the old woman . 

 " no , he have no one . he be absolutely alone . score of friend of course ; he be a most popular man about town , and could stay in almost any house in the kingdom if he choose to send a post - card to say he be come . but no relation , I believe , and never would marry . poor chap ! he will wish he have be less fastidious , now . he might have have the pick of all the nice girl , most season . but not he ! just charming friendship , and wed to his art . and now , as Lady Ingleby , say , he lie in the dark , helpless and alone . " 

 " oh , do talk of something else ! " cry the girl , push back her chair and rise . " I want to forget it . it be too horribly sad . Fancy what it must be to wake up and not know whether it be day or night , and to have to lie in the dark and wonder . oh , do come out and talk of something cheerful . " 

 they all rise , and the young man slip his hand through the girl 's arm , glad of the excuse her agitation provide . 

 " forget it , dear , " he say softly . " come on out and see the old Sphinx by moonlight . " 

 they leave the piazza , follow by the rest of the party ; but the man to whom the MORNING POST belong lay it on the table and stay behind , light a cigar . 

 Jane rise from her chair and come towards he . 

 " may I look at your paper ? " she say abruptly . 

 " certainly , " he reply , with ready courtesy . then , look more closely at she : " why , certainly , Miss Champion . and how do you do ? I do not know you be in these part . " 

 " ah , General Loraine ! your face seem familiar , but I have not recognise you , either . thank , I will borrow this if I may . and do not   let I keep you from your friend . we shall meet again by and by . " 

 Jane wait until the whole party have pass out of sight and until the sound of their voice and laughter have die away in the distance . then she return to her chair , the place where Garth have seem so near . she look once more at the Sphinx and at the huge pyramid in the moonlight . 

 then she take up the paper and open it . 

 " enable with perpetual light 
 the dulness of our blind sight . " 
 yes it be Garth Dalmain her Garth , of the adore shin eye who lie at his house in the North ; blind , helpless , and alone . 




 CHAPTER XIV 

 in DERYCK 's SAFE CONTROL 

 the white cliff of Dover gradually become more solid and distinct , until at length they rise from the sea , a strong white wall , emblem of the undeniable purity of England , the stainless honour and integrity of her throne , her church , her parliament , her court of justice , and her dealing at home and abroad , whether with friend or foe . " Strength and whiteness , " think Jane as she pace the steamer 's deck ; and after a two year ' absence her heart go out to her native land . then Dover Castle catch her eye , so beautiful in the pearly light of that spring afternoon . her mind leap to enjoyment , then fall back stunned by the blow of quick remembrance , and Jane shut her eye . 

 all beautiful sight bring this pang to her heart since the reading of that paragraph on the piazza of the Mena House Hotel . 

 an hour after she have read it , she be drive down the long straight road to Cairo ; embark at Alexandria the next day ; land at Brindisi , and this night and day travel have bring she at last within sight of the shore of England . in a few minute she would set foot upon they , and then there would be but two more stage to her journey . for , from the moment she start , Jane never doubt her ultimate destination , the room where pain and darkness and despair must be wag so terrible a conflict against the moral courage , the mental sanity , and the instinctive hold on life of the man she love . 

 that she be go to he , Jane know ; but she feel utterly unable to arrange how or in what way she go could be manage . that it be a complicated problem , her common sense tell she ; though her yearn arm and ache bosom cry out : " o God , be it not simple ? blind and alone ! MY Garth ! " 

 but she know an unbiased judgment , steady than her own , must solve the problem ; and that her sure way to Garth lie through the doctor 's consulting - room . so she telegraph to Deryck from Paris , and at present her mind see no far than Wimpole Street . 

 at Dover she buy a paper , and hastily scan its page as she walk along the platform in the wake of the capable porter who have take possession of her rug and hand baggage . in the personal column she find the very paragraph she seek . 

 " we regret to announce that Mr. Garth Dalmain still lie in a most precarious condition at his house on Deeside , Aberdeenshire , as a result of the shooting accident a fortnight ago . his sight be hopelessly go , but the injure part be progress favourably , and all fear of brain complication seem over . during the last few day , however , a serious reaction from shock have set in , and it have be consider necessary to summon Sir Deryck Brand , the well - know nerve specialist , in consultation with the oculist and the local practitioner in charge of the case . there be a feeling of wide - spread regret and sympathy in those social and artistic circle where Mr. Dalmain be so well - know and so deservedly popular . " 

 " oh , thank you , m'lady , " say the efficient porter when he have ascertain , by a rapid glance into his palm , that Jane 's half - crown be not a penny . he have a sick young wife at home , who have be order extra nourishment , and just as the rush on board begin , he have put up a simple prayer to the Heavenly Father " who knoweth that ye have need of these thing , " ask that he might catch the eye of a generous traveller . he feel he have indeed be " lead " to this plain , brown - face , broad - shoulder lady , when he remember how nearly , after her curt nod from a distance have engage he , he have respond to the blandishment of a fussy little woman , with many more bag and rug , and a parrot cage , who be now dole french copper out of the window of the next compartment . " seven penny ' apenny of this stuff be not   much for carry all that along , I don't think ! " grumble his mate ; and Jane 's young porter experience the double joy of faith confirm , and willing service generously reward . 

 a telegraph boy walk along the train , say : " honrubble Jain Champyun " at interval . Jane hear her name , and her arm shoot out of the window . 

 " here , my boy ! it be for I . " 

 she tear it open . it be from the doctor . 

 " welcome home . just back from Scotland . will meet you Charing Cross , and give you all the time you want . have coffee at Dover . DERYCK . " 

 Jane give one hard , tearless sob of thankfulness and relief . she have be so lonely . 

 then she turn to the window . " here , somebody ! fetch I a cup of coffee , will you ? " 

 Coffee be the last thing she want ; but it never occur to any one to disobey the doctor , even at a distance . 

 the young porter , who still stand sentry at the door of Jane 's compartment , dash off to the refreshment room ; and , just as the train begin to move , hand a cup of steam coffee and a plate of bread - and - butter in at the window . 

 " oh , thank you , my good fellow , " say Jane , put the plate on the seat , while she dive into her pocket . " here ! you have do very well for I . no , never mind the change . coffee at a moment 's notice should fetch a fancy price . good - bye . " 

 the train move on , and the porter stand look after it with tear in his eye . over the first half - crown he have say to himself : " milk and new - lay egg . " now , as he pocket the second , he add the other two thing mention by the parish doctor : " Soup and jelly " ; and his heart glow . " your heavenly Father knoweth that ye have need of these thing . " 

 and Jane , seat in a comfortable corner , choke back the tear of relief which threaten to fall , drink her coffee , and be thereby more revived than she could have think possible . she , also , have need of many thing . not of half - crown ; of those she have plenty . but above all else she need just now a wise , strong , helpful friend , and Deryck have not fail she . 

 she read his telegram through once more , and smile . how like he to think of the coffee ; and oh , how like he to be come to the station . 

 she take off her hat and lean back against the cushion . she have be travel night and day , in one feverish whirl of haste , and at last she have bring herself within reach of Deryck 's hand and Deryck 's safe control . the turmoil of her soul be still ; a great calm take its place , and Jane drop quietly off to sleep . " your heavenly Father knoweth that ye have need of these thing . " 

 wash and brush and greatly refresh , Jane stand at the window of her compartment as the train steam into Charing Cross . 

 the doctor be station exactly opposite the door when her carriage come to a standstill ; mere chance , and yet , to Jane , it seem so like he to have take up his position precisely at the right spot on that long platform . an enthusiastic lady patient have once say of Deryck Brand , with more accuracy of definition than of grammar : " you know , he be always so very just there . " and this characteristic of the doctor have make he to many a very present help in time of trouble . 

 he be through the line of porter and have his hand upon the handle of Jane 's door in a moment . stand at the window , she take one look at the firm lean face , now alight with welcome , and read in the kind , steadfast eye of her childhood 's friend a perfect sympathy and comprehension . then she see behind he her aunt 's footman , and her own maid , who have be give a place in the duchess 's household . in another moment she be on the platform and her hand be in Deryck 's . 

 " that be right , dear , " he say . " all fit and well , I can see . now hand over your key . I suppose you have nothing contraband ? I telephone the duchess to send some of her people to meet your luggage , and not to expect you herself until dinner time , as you be take tea with we . be that right ? this way . come outside the barrier . what a rabble ! all want to break every possible rule and regulation , and each try to be the first person in the front row . really the patience and good temper of railway official should teach the rest of mankind a lesson . " 

 the doctor , talk all the time , pilot Jane through the crowd ; open the door of a neat electric brougham , help she in , take his seat beside she , and they glide swiftly out into the Strand , and turn towards Trafalgar Square . 

 " well , " say the doctor , " Niagara be a big thing be not   it ? when people say to I , ' be you not disappoint in Niagara ? we be ! ' I feel tempt to wish , for one homicidal moment , that the earth would open her mouth and swallow they up . People who can be disappoint in Niagara , and talk about it , should no long be allow to crawl on the face of the earth . and how about the ' Little Mother ' ? be not   she worth know ? I hope she send I her love . and New York harbour ! do you ever see anything to equal it , as you steam away in the sunset ? " 

 Jane give a sudden sob ; then turn to he , dry - eyed . 

 " be there no hope , Deryck ? " 

 the doctor lay his hand on her . " he will always be blind , dear . but life hold other thing beside sight . we must never say : ' no hope . ' " 

 " will he live ? " 

 " there be no reason he should not live . but how far life will be worth live , largely depend upon what can be do for he , poor chap , during the next few month . he be more shattered mentally than physically . " 

 Jane pull off her glove , swallow suddenly , then grip the doctor 's knee . " Deryck I love he . " 

 the doctor remain silent for a few moment , as if ponder this tremendous fact . then he lift the fine , capable hand rest upon his knee and kiss it with a beautiful reverence , a gesture express the homage of the man to the brave truthfulness of the woman . 

 " in that case , dear , " he say , " the future hold in store so great a good for Garth Dalmain that I think he may dispense with sight . meanwhile you have much to say to I , and it be , of course , your right to hear every detail of his case that I can give . and here we be at Wimpole Street . now come into my consulting - room . Stoddart have order that we be on no account to be disturb . " 




 CHAPTER XV 

 the consultation 

 the doctor 's room be very quiet . Jane lean back in his dark green leather arm - chair , her foot on a footstool , her hand grip the arm on either side . 

 the doctor sit at his table , in the round pivot - chair he always use , a chair which enable he to swing round suddenly and face a patient , or to turn away very quietly and bend over his table . 

 just now he be not look at Jane . he have be give she a detailed account of his visit to Castle Gleneesh , which he have leave only on the previous evening . he have spend five hour with Garth . it seem kind to tell she all ; but he be look straight before he as he talk , because he know that at last the tear be run unchecked down Jane 's cheek , and he wish she to think he do not notice they . 

 " you understand , dear , " he be say , " the actual wound be go on well . strangely enough , though the retina of each eye be pierce , and the sight be irrecoverably go , there be very little damage do to surround part , and the brain be quite uninjured . the present danger arise from the shock to the nervous system and from the extreme mental anguish cause by the realisation of his loss . the physical suffering during the first day and night must have be terrible . poor fellow , he look shatter by it . but his constitution be excellent , and his life have be so clean , healthy , and normal , that he have every chance of make a good recovery , be it not that as the pain abate and his blindness become more a thing to be daily and hourly realise , his mental torture be so excessive . sight have mean so infinitely much to he , beauty of form , beauty of colour . the artist in he be so all - pervading . they tell I he say very little . he be a brave man and a strong one . but his temperature begin to vary alarmingly ; he show symptom of mental trouble , of which I need not give you technical detail ; and a nerve specialist seem more necessary than an oculist . therefore he be now in my hand . " 

 the doctor pause , straighten a few book lie on the table , and draw a small bowl of violet close to he . he study these attentively for a few moment , then put they back where his wife have place they and go on speak . 

 " I be satisfied on the whole . he need a friendly voice to penetrate the darkness . he need a hand to grasp his , in faithful comprehension . he do not want pity , and those who talk of his loss without understand it , or be able to measure its immensity , madden he . he need a fellow - man to come to he and say : ' it be a fight an awful , desperate fight . but by God 's grace you will win through to victory . it would be far easy to die ; but to die would be to lose ; you must live to win . it be utterly beyond all human strength ; but by God 's grace you will come through conqueror . ' all this I say to he , Jeanette , and a good deal more ; and then a strangely beautiful thing happen . I can tell you , and of course I could tell Flower , but to no one else on earth would I repeat it . the difficulty have be to obtain from he any response whatever . he do not seem able to rouse sufficiently to notice anything go on around he . but those word , ' by God 's grace , ' appear to take hold of he and find immediate echo in his inner consciousness . I hear he repeat they once or twice , and then change they to ' with the abundance of Thy grace . ' then he turn his head slowly on the pillow , and what one could see of his face seem transform . he say : ' now I remember it , and the music be this ' ; and his hand move on the bedclothe , as if form chord . then , in a very low voice , but quite clearly , he repeat the second verse of the VENI , creator SPIRITUS . I know it , because I use to sing it as a chorister in my father 's church at home . you remember ? " 

 " ' enable with perpetual light 
 the dulness of our blind sight . 
 anoint and cheer our soiled face 
 with the abundance of Thy grace . 
 keep far our foe ; give peace at home ; 
 where Thou art Guide , no ill can come . ' " 
 " it be the most touching thing I ever hear . " 

 the doctor pause , for Jane have bury her face in her hand and be sob convulsively . when her sob grow less violent , the doctor 's quiet voice continue : " you see , this give I something to go upon . when a crash such as this happen , all a man have leave to hold on to be his religion . accord as his spiritual side have be develop , will his physical side stand the strain . Dalmain have more of the real thing than any one would think who only know he superficially . well , after that we talk quite definitely , and I persuade he to agree to one or two important arrangement . you know , he have no relation of his own , to speak of ; just a few cousin , who have never be very friendly . he be quite alone up there ; for , though he have host of friend , this be a time when friend would have to be very intimate to be admit ; and though he seem so boyish and easy to know , I begin to doubt whether any of we know the real Garth the soul of the man , deep down beneath the surface . " 

 Jane lift her head . " I do , " she say simply . 

 " ah , " say the doctor , " I see . well , as I say , ordinary friend could not be admit . Lady Ingleby go , in her sweet impulsive way , without let they know she be come ; travel all the way up from Shenstone with no maid , and nothing but a handbag , and arrive at the door in a fly . Robert Mackenzie , the local medical man , who be an inveterate misogynist , fear at first she be an unsuspected wife of Dal 's . he seem to think unannounced lady arrive in hire vehicle must necessarily turn out to be undesirable wife . I gather they have a somewhat funny scene . but Lady Ingleby soon get round old Robbie , and come near to charm he as whom do she not ? but of course they do not dare let she into Dal 's room ; so her ministry of consolation appear to have consist in let Dal 's old housekeeper weep on her beautiful shoulder . it be somewhat of a comedy , hear about it , when one happen to know they all , well than they know each other . but to return to practical detail . he have have a fully train male nurse and his own valet to wait on he . he absolutely refuse one of our London hospital nurse , who might have bring a little gentle comfort and womanly sympathy to his sick - room . he say he could not stand be touch by a woman ; so there it remain . a competent man be find instead . but we can now dispense with he , and I have insist upon send up a lady nurse of my own choosing ; not so much to wait on he , or do any of a sick - nurse 's ordinary duty his own man can do these , and he seem a capable fellow but to sit with he , read to he , attend to his correspondence , there be pile of unopened letter he ought to hear , in fact help he to take up life again in his blindness . it will need training ; it will require tact ; and this afternoon I engage exactly the right person . she be a gentlewoman by birth , have nurse for I before , and be well up in the special knowledge of mental thing which this case require . also she be a pretty , dainty little thing ; just the kind of elegant young woman poor Dal would have like to have about he when he could see . he be such a fastidious chap about appearance , and such a connoisseur of good look . I have write a descriptive account of she to Dr. Mackenzie , and he will prepare his patient for her arrival . she be to go up the day after to - morrow . we be lucky to get she , for she be quite first - rate , and she have only just finish with a long consumptive case , now on the mend and order abroad . so you see , Jeanette , all be shape well . and now , my dear girl , you have a story of your own to tell I , and my whole attention shall be at your disposal . but first of all I be go to ring for tea , and you and I will have it quietly down here , if you will excuse I for a few minute while I go upstairs and speak to Flower . " 

 it seem so natural to Jane to be pour out the doctor 's tea , and to watch he put a liberal allowance of salt on the thin bread - and - butter , and then fold it over with the careful accuracy which have always characterise his small action . in the essential he have change so little since the day when as a youth of twenty spend his vacation at the rectory he use to give the lonely girl at the manor so much pleasure by come up to her school - room tea ; and when it prove possible to dispose of her governess 's chaperonage and be by themselves , what delightful time they use to have , sit on the hearth - rug , roast chestnut and discuss the many subject which be of mutual interest . Jane could still remember the painful pleasure of turn hot chestnut on the bar with her finger , and how she hasten to do they herself , lest he should be burn . she have always secretly like and admire his hand , with the brown thin finger , so delicate in their touch and yet full of such gentle strength . she use to love watch they while he sharpen her pencil or draw wonderful diagram in her exercise book ; think how in year to come , when he perform important operation , human life would depend upon their skill and dexterity . in those early year he have seem so much old than she . and then come the time when she shoot up rapidly into young womanhood and their eye be on a level and their age seem the same . then , as the year go on , Jane begin to feel old than he , and take to call he " boy " to emphasise this fact . and then come Flower ; and complication . and Jane have to see his face grow thin and worn , and his hair whiten on the temple . and she yearn over he , yet dare not offer sympathy . at last thing come right for the doctor , and all the high good seem his ; in his profession ; in his standing among man ; and , above all , in his heart life , which Flower have always hold between her two sweet hand . and Jane rejoice , but feel still more lonely now she have no companion in loneliness . and still their friendship hold , with Flower admit as a third a wistful , grateful third , anxious to learn from the woman whose friendship mean so much to her husband , how to succeed where she have hitherto fail . and Jane 's faithful heart be generous and loyal to both , though in sight of their perfect happiness her loneliness grow . 

 and now , in her own hour of need , it have to be Deryck only ; and the doctor know this , and have arrange accordingly ; for at last his chance have come , to repay the faithful devotion of a lifetime . the conversation of that afternoon would be the supreme test of their friendship . and so , with a specialist 's appreciation of the mental effect of the most trivial external detail , the doctor have order muffin , and a kettle on the fire , and have ask Jane to make the tea . 

 by the time the kettle boil , they have remember the chestnut , and be laugh about poor old Fraulein 's effort to keep they in order , and the strategy by which they use to evade her vigilance . and the year roll back , and Jane feel herself very much at home with the chum of her childhood . 

 nevertheless , there be a moment of tension when the doctor draw back the tea - table and they face each other in easy - chair on either side of the fireplace . each notice how characteristic be the attitude of the other . 

 Jane sit forward , her foot firmly plant on the hearth - rug , her arm on her knee , and her hand clasp in front of she . 

 the doctor lean back , one knee cross over the other , his elbow on the arm of his chair , the tip of his finger meet , in absolute stillness of body and intense concentration of mind . 

 the silence between they be like a deep , calm pool . 

 Jane take the first plunge . 

 " Deryck , I be go to tell you everything . I be go to speak of my heart , and mind , and feeling , exactly as if they be bone , and muscle , and lung . I want you to combine the office of doctor and confessor in one . " 

 the doctor have be contemplate his finger - tip . he now glance swiftly at Jane , and nod ; then turn his head and look into the fire . 

 " Deryck , mine have be a somewhat lonely existence . I have never be essential to the life of another , and no one have ever touch the real depth of mine . I have know they be there , but I have know they be unsounde . " 

 the doctor open his lip , as if to speak ; then close they in a firm line than before , and merely nod his head silently . 

 " I have never be love with that love which make one absolutely first to a person , nor have I ever so loved . I have care very much ; but caring be not love . oh , boy , I know that now ! " 

 the doctor 's profile show rather white against the dark - green background of his chair ; but he smile as he answer : " quite true , dear . there be a distinction , and a difference . " 

 " I have heap of friend , and amongst they a good many nice man , mostly rather young than myself , who call I ' Miss Champion . ' to my face , and ' good old Jane ' behind my back . " 

 the doctor smile . he have as often hear the expression , and could recall the whole - hearted affection and admiration in the tone of those who use it . 

 " man as a rule , " continue Jane , " get on well with I than do woman . be large and solid , and usually call a spade ' a spade ; ' and not ' a garden implement , ' woman consider I strong - minded , and be inclined to be afraid of I . the boy know they can trust I ; they make a confidante of I , look upon I as a sort of convenient eld sister who know less about they than an eld sister would know , and be probably more ready to be interested in those thing which they choose to tell . among my man friend , Deryck , be Garth Dalmain . " 

 Jane pause , and the doctor wait silently for she to continue . 

 " I be always interested in he , partly because he be so original and vivid in his way of talk , and partly because " a bright flush suddenly creep up into the tan cheeks-"well , though I do not realise it then , I suppose I find his extraordinary beauty rather fascinating . and then , our circumstance be so much alike , both orphan , and well off ; responsible to no one for our action ; with heap of mutual friend , and constantly stay at the same house . we drift into a pleasant intimacy , and of all my friend , he be the one who make I feel most like ` a man and a brother . ' we discuss woman by the dozen , all his special admiration in turn , and the effect of their beauty upon he , and I watch with interest to see who , at last , would fix his roving fancy . but on one eventful day all this be change in half an hour . we be both stay at Overdene . there be a big house party , and Aunt Georgina have arrange a concert to which half the neighbourhood be come . Madame Velma fail at the last minute . aunt ' Gina , in a great state of mind , be borrow remark from her macaw . you know how ? she always say she be merely quote ` the dear bird . ' something have to be do . I offer to take Velma 's place ; and I sing . " 

 " ah , " say the doctor . 

 " I sing the Rosary the song Flower ask for the last time I be here . do you remember ? " 

 the doctor nod . " I remember . " 

 " after that , all be change between Garth and I . I do not understand it at first . I know the music have move he deeply , beauty of sound have upon he much the same effect as beauty of colour ; but I think the effect would pass in the night . but the day go on , and there be always this strange sweet difference ; not anything other would notice ; but I suddenly become conscious that , for the first time in my whole life , I be essential to somebody . I could not enter a room without realise that he be instantly aware of my presence ; I could not leave a room without know that he would at once feel and regret my absence . the one fact fill and complete all thing ; the other leave a blank which could not be remove . I know this , and yet incredible though it may appear I do not realise it mean LOVE . I think it be an extraordinarily close bond of sympathy and mutual understanding , bring about principally by our enjoyment of one another 's music . we spend hour in the music - room . I put it down to that ; yet when he look at I his eye seem to touch as well as see I , and it be a very tender and wonderful touch . and all the while I never think of love . I be so plain and almost middle - aged ; and he , such a beautiful , radiant youth . he be like a young sun - god , and I feel warm and vivified when he be near ; and he be almost always near . honestly , that be my side of the day succeed the concert . but HIS ! he tell I afterwards , Deryck , it have be a sudden revelation to he when he hear I sing the Rosary , not of music only , but of I . he say he have never think of I otherwise than as a good sort of chum ; but then it be as if a veil be lift , and he see , and know , and feel I as a woman . and no doubt it will seem odd to you . boy ; it do to I ; but he say , that the woman he find then be his ideal of womanhood , and that from that hour he want I for his own as he have never want anything before . " 

 Jane pause , and look into the glow heart of the fire . 

 the doctor turn slowly and look at Jane . he himself have experience the intense attraction of her womanliness , all the more overpowering when it be realise , because it do not appear upon the surface . he have sense the strong mother - tenderness lie dormant within she ; have know that her arm would prove a haven of refuge , her bosom a soothe pillow , her love a consolation unspeakable . in his own day of loneliness and disappointment , the doctor have have to flee from this in Jane , a precious gift , so easy to have take because of her very ignorance of it ; but a gift to which he have no right . thus the doctor could well understand the hold it would gain upon a man who have discover it , and who be free to win it for his own . 

 but he only say , " I do not think it odd , dear . " 

 Jane have forget the doctor . she come back promptly from the glow heart of the fire . 

 " I be glad you do not , " she say . " I do . well , we both leave Overdene on the same day . I come to you ; he go to Shenstone . it be a Tuesday . on the Friday I go down to Shenstone , and we meet again . have be apart for a little while seem to make this curious feeling of ` togetherness , ' deep and sweet than ever . in the Shenstone house party be that lovely american girl , Pauline Lister . Garth be enthusiastic about her beauty , and set on paint she . everybody make sure he be go to propose to she . Deryck , I think so , too ; in fact I have advise he to do it . I feel so pleased and interested over it , though all the while his eye touch I when he look at I , and I know the day do not begin for he until we have meet , and be over when we have say good - night . and this experience of be first and most to he make everything so golden , and life so rich , and still I think of it only as an unusually delightful friendship . but the evening of my arrival at Shenstone he ask I to come out on to the terrace after dinner , as he want specially to talk to I . Deryck , I think it be the usual proceeding of make a confidante of I , and that I be to hear detail of his intention regard Miss Lister . think that , I walk calmly out beside he ; sit down on the parapet , in the brilliant moonlight , and quietly wait for he to begin . then oh , Deryck ! it happen . " 

 Jane put her elbow on her knee , and bury her face in her clasp hand . 

 " I can not tell you detail . his love it just pour over I like molten gold . it melt the shell of my reserve ; it burst through the ice of my conviction ; it sweep I off my foot upon a torrent of wondrous fire . I know nothing in heaven or earth but that this love be mine , and be for I . and then oh , Deryck ! I can not   explain I do not   know myself how it happen but this whirlwind of emotion come to rest upon my heart . he kneel with his arm around I , and we hold each other in a sudden great stillness ; and in that moment I be all his , and he know it . he might have stay there hour if he have not move or speak ; but presently he lift up his face and look at I . then he say two word . I can not   repeat they , boy ; but they bring I suddenly to my sens , and make I realise what it all mean . Garth Dalmain want I to marry he . " 

 Jane pause , await the doctor 's expression of surprise . 

 " what else could it have mean ? " say Deryck Brand , very quietly . he pass his hand over his lip , know they tremble a little . Jane 's confession be give he a stiff time than he have expect . " well , dear , so you ? " 

 " I stand up , " say Jane ; " for while he kneel there he be master of I , mind and body ; and some instinct tell I that if I be to be win to wifehood , my reason must say ` yes ' before the rest of I . it be ` spirit , soul , and body ' in the Word , not ` body , soul , and spirit , ' as be so often misquote ; and I believe the inspire sequence to be the right one . " 

 the doctor make a quick movement of interest . " good heaven , Jane ! " he say . " you have get hold of a truth there , and you have express it exactly as I have often want to express it without be able to find the right word . you have find they , Jeanette . " 

 she look into his eager eye and smile sadly . " have I , boy ? " she say . " well , they have cost I dear . I put my lover from I and tell he I must have twelve hour for calm reflection . he be so sure so sure of I , so sure of himself that he agree without a protest . at my request he leave I at once . the manner of his go I can not tell , even to you , Dicky . I promise to meet he at the village church next day and give he my answer . he be to try the new organ at eleven . we know we should be alone . I come . he send away the blower . he call I to he at the chancel step . the setting be so perfect . the artist in he sing for joy , and thrill with expectation . the glory of absolute certainty be in his eye ; though he have himself well in hand . he keep from touch I while he ask for my answer . then I refuse he , point blank , give a reason he could not question . he turn from I and leave the church , and I have not speak to he from that day to this . " 

 a long silence in the doctor 's consulting - room . one manly heart be enter into the pain of another , and yet strive not to be indignant until he know the whole truth . 

 Jane 's spirit be string up to the same pitch as in that fateful hour , and once more she think herself right . 

 at last the doctor speak . he look at she searchingly now , and hold her eye . 

 " and why do you refuse he , Jane ? " the kind voice be rather stern . 

 Jane put out her hand to he appealingly . " ah , boy , I must make you understand ! how could I do otherwise , though , indeed , it be put away the high good life will ever hold for I ? Deryck , you know Garth well enough to realise how dependent he be on beauty ; he must be surround by it , perpetually . before this unaccountable need of each other come to we he have talk to I quite freely on this point , say of a plain person whose character and gift he greatly admire , and whose face he grow to like in consequence : ' but of course it be not the sort of face one would have want to live with , or to have day after day opposite to one at table ; but then one be not call to that sort of discipline , which would be martyrdom to I . ' oh , Deryck ! could I have tie Garth to my plain face ? could I have let myself become a daily , hourly discipline to that radiant , beauty - love nature ? I know they say , ' love be blind . ' but that be before Love have enter into his kingdom . love desirous , see only that , in the one belove , which have awaken the desire . but Love content , regain full vision , and , as time go on , those power of vision increase and become , by mean of daily , hourly , use , microscopic and telescopic . wed love be not blind . bah ! an outsider stay with married people be apt to hear what love see , on both side , and the delusion of love 's blindness be dispel forever . I know Garth be blind , during all those golden day , to my utter lack of beauty , because he want I so much . but when he have have I , and have steep himself in all I have to give of soul and spirit beauty ; when the daily routine of life begin , which after all have to be live in complexion , and with feature to the fore ; when he sit down to breakfast and I see he glance at I and then look away , when I be conscious that I be sit behind the coffee - pot , look my very plain , and that in consequence my boy 's discipline have begin ; could I have bear it ? should I not , in the miserable sense of fail he day by day , through no fault of my own , have grow plainer and plainer ; until bitterness and disappointment , and perhaps jealousy , all combine to make I positively ugly ? I ask you , Deryck , could I have bear it ? " 

 the doctor be look at Jane with an expression of keen professional interest . 

 " how awfully well I diagnose the case when I send you abroad , " he remark meditatively . " really , with so little datum to go upon " 

 " oh , boy , " cry Jane , with a movement of impatience , " do not   speak to I as if I be a patient . treat I as a human being , at least , and tell I as man to man could I have tie Garth Dalmain to my plain face ? for you know it be plain . " 

 the doctor laugh . he be glad to make Jane a little angry . " my dear girl , " he say , " be we speak as man to man , I should have a few very strong thing to say to you . as we be speak as man to woman , and as a man who have for a very long time respect , honour , and admire a very dear and noble woman , I will answer your question frankly . you be not beautiful , in the ordinary acceptation of the word , and no one who really love you would answer otherwise ; because no one who know and love you would dream of tell you a lie . we will even allow , if you like , that you be plain , although I know half a dozen young man who , be they here , would want to kick I into the street for say so , and I should have to pretend in self - defence that their ear have play they false and I have say , ' you be JANE , ' which be all they would consider matter . so long as you be yourself , your friend will be well content . at the same time , I may add , while this dear face be under discussion , that I can look back to time when I have feel that I would gladly walk twenty mile for a sight of it ; and in its absence I have always wish it present , and in its presence I have never wish it away . " 

 " ah , but , Deryck , you do not have to have it always opposite you at meal , " insist Jane gravely . 

 " unfortunately not . but I enjoy the meal more on the happy occasion when it be there . " 

 " and , Deryck you do not have to kiss it . " 

 the doctor throw back his head and shout with laughter , so that Flower , pass up the stair , wonder what turn the conversation could be take . 

 but Jane be quite serious ; and see in it no laugh matter . 

 " no , dear , " say the doctor when he have recover ; " to my infinite credit be it record , that in all the year I have know it I have never once kiss it . " 

 " Dicky , do not   tease ! oh , boy , it be the most vital question of my whole life ; and if you do not now give I wise and thoughtful advice , all this difficult confession will have be for nothing . " 

 the doctor become grave immediately . he lean forward and take those clasp hand between his . 

 " dear , " he say , " forgive I if I seem to take it lightly . my most earnest thought be wholly at your disposal . and now let I ask you a few question . how do you ever succeed in convince Dalmain that such a thing as this be an insuperable obstacle to your marriage ? " 

 " I do not give it as a reason . " 

 " what then do you give as your reason for refuse he ? " 

 " I ask he how old he be . " 

 " jane ! stand there beside he in the chancel , where he have come await your answer ? " 

 " yes . it do seem awful when I come to think it over afterwards . but it work . " 

 " I have no doubt it work . what then ? " 

 " he say he be twenty - seven . I say I be thirty , and look thirty - five , and feel forty . I also say he might be twenty - seven , but he look nineteen , and I be sure he often feel nine . " 

 " well ? " 

 " then I say that I could not marry a mere boy . " 

 " and he acquiesce ? " 

 " he seem stunned at first . then he say of course I could not marry he if I consider he that . he say it be the first time he have give a thought to himself in the matter . then he say he bow to my decision , and he walk down the church and go out , and we have not meet since . " 

 " Jane , " say the doctor , " I wonder he do not see through it . you be so unused to lie , that you can not have lie , on the chancel step , to the man you love , with much conviction . " 

 a dull red creep up beneath Jane 's tan . 

 " oh , Deryck , it be not entirely a lie . it be one of those dreadful lie which be ' part a truth , ' of which Tennyson say that they be ' a hard matter to fight . ' " 

 " ' a lie which be all a lie 
 may be meet and fight with outright ; 
 but a lie which be part a truth 
 be a hard matter to fight , ' " 
 quote the doctor . 

 " yes , " say Jane . " and he could not fight this , just because it be partly true . he be young than I by three year , and still more by temperament . it be partly for his delightful youthfulness that I fear my maturity and staidness . it be part a truth , but oh , Deryck , it be more a lie ; and it be altogether a lie to call he the man whom I have feel complete master of I the evening before ' a mere boy . ' also he could not fight it because it take he so utterly by surprise . he have be all the time as completely without self - consciousness , as I have be morbidly full of it . his whole thought have be of I . mine have be of he and of myself . " 

 " Jane , " say the doctor , " of all that you have suffer since that hour , you deserve every pang . " 

 Jane bend her head . " I know , " she say . 

 " you be false to yourself , and not true to your lover . you rob and defraud both . can not you now see your mistake ? to take it on the low ground , Dalmain , worshipper of beauty as he be , have have a surfeit of pretty face . he be like the confectioner 's boy who when first engage be allow to eat all the cake and sweet he like , and who eat so many in the first week , that ever after he want only plain bread - and - butter . you be Dal 's bread - and - butter . I be sorry if you do not like the simile . " 

 Jane smile . " I do like the simile , " she say . 

 " ah , but you be far more than this , my dear girl . you be his ideal of womanhood . he believe in your strength and tenderness , your graciousness and truth . you shatter this ideal ; you fail this faith in you . his fanciful , artistic , eclectic nature with all its unused possibility of faithful and passionate devotion , have find its haven in your love ; and in twelve hour you turn it adrift . Jane it be a crime . the magnificent strength of the fellow be show by the way he take it . his progress in his art be not arrest . all his good work have be do since . he have make no bad mad marriage , in mockery of his own pain ; and no grand loveless one , to spite you . he might have do both I mean either . and when I realise that the poor fellow I be with yesterday make such a brave fight in the dark , and turn his head on the pillow to say with a gleam of hope on his draw face : ` where Thou art Guide , no ill can come ' have already be put through all this by you Jane , if you be a man , I would horsewhip you ! " say the doctor . 

 Jane square her shoulder and lift her head with more of her old spirit than she have yet show . 

 " you have lash I well , boy , " she say , " as only word speak in faithful indignation can lash . and I feel the well for the pain . and now I think I ought to tell you that while I be on the top of the Great Pyramid I suddenly see the matter from a different standpoint . you remember that view , with its sharp line of demarcation ? on one side the river , and verdure , vegetation , fruitfulness , a veritable ' garden enclose ' ; on the other , vast space as far as the eye could reach ; golden liberty , away to the horizon , but no sign of vegetation , no hope of cultivation , just barren , arid , loneliness . I feel this be an exact picture of my life as I live it now . Garth 's love , flow through it , as the river , could have make it a veritable ' garden of the Lord . ' it would have mean less liberty , but it would also have mean no loneliness . and , after all , the liberty to live for self alone become in time a weary bondage . then I realise that I have condemn he also to this hard desert life . I come down and take counsel of the old Sphinx . those calm , wise eye , look on into futurity , seem to say : ' they only live who love . ' that evening I resolve to give up the Nile trip , return home immediately , send for Garth , admit all to he , ask he to let we both begin again just where we be three year ago in the moonlight on the terrace at Shenstone . ten minute after I have form this decision , I hear of his accident . " 

 the doctor shade his face with his hand . " the wheel of time , " he say in a low voice , " move forward always ; backward , never . " 

 " oh , Deryck , " cry Jane , ' sometimes they do . you and Flower know that sometimes they do . " 

 the doctor smile sadly and very tenderly . " I know , " he say , " that there be always one exception which prove every rule . " then he add quickly : " but , unquestionably , it help to mend matter , so far as your own mental attitude be concern , that before you know of Dalmain 's blindness you should have admit yourself wrong , and make up your mind to trust he . " 

 " I do not   know that I be altogether clear about have be wrong , " say Jane , " but I be quite convinced that I could not   live any long without he , and be therefore prepared to risk it . and of course now , all doubt or need to question be sweep away by my poor boy 's accident , which simplify matter , where that particular point be concern . " 

 the doctor look at Jane with a sudden raising of his level brow . " simplifie matter ? " he say . 

 then , as Jane , apparently satisfied with the expression , do not attempt to qualify it , he rise and stir the fire ; stand over it for a few moment in silent thought . when he sit down again , his voice be very quiet , but there be an alertness about his expression which rouse Jane . she feel that the crisis of their conversation have be reach . 

 " and now , my dear Jeanette , " say the doctor , ' suppose you tell I what you intend do . " 

 " do ? " say Jane . " why , of course , I shall go straight to Garth . I only want you to advise I how good to let he know I be come , and whether it be safe for he to have the emotion of my arrival . also I do not   want to risk be keep from he by doctor or nurse . my place be by his side . I ask no well thing of life than to be always beside he . but sick - room attendant be apt to be pig - head ; and a fuss under these circumstance would be unbearable . a wire from you will make all clear . " 

 " I see , " say the doctor slowly . " yes , a wire from I will undoubtedly open a way for you to Garth Dalmain 's bedside . and , arrive there , what then ? " 

 a smile of ineffable tenderness part Jane 's lip . the doctor see it , but turn away immediately . it be not for he , or for any man , to see that look . the eye which should have see it be sightless evermore . 

 " what then , Deryck ? Love will know well what then . all barrier will be sweep away , and Garth and I will be together . " 

 the doctor 's finger - tip meet very exactly before he speak again ; and when he do speak , his tone be very level and very kind . 

 " ah , Jane , " he say , " that be the woman 's point of view . it be certainly the simple , and perhaps the good . but at Garth 's bedside you will be confront with the man 's point of view ; and I should be fail the trust you have place in I do I not put that before you now . from the man 's point of view , your own mistaken action three year ago have place you now in an almost impossible position . if you go to Garth with the simple offer of your love the treasure he ask three year ago and fail to win he will naturally conclude the love now give be mainly pity ; and Garth Dalmain be not the man to be content with pity , where he have think to win love , and fail . nor would he allow any woman least of all his crown of womanhood to tie herself to his blindness unless he be sure such bind be her deep joy . and how could you expect he to believe this in face of the fact that , when he be all a woman 's heart could desire , you refuse he and send he from you ? if , on the other hand , you explain , as no doubt you intend to do , the reason of that refusal , he can but say one thing : ' you could not trust I to be faithful when I have my sight . blind , you come to I , when it be no long in my power to prove my fidelity . there be no virtue in necessity . I can never feel I possess your trust , because you come to I only when accident have put it out of my power either to do the thing you fear , or to prove myself well than your doubt . ' my dear girl , that be how matter stand from the man 's point of view ; from his , I make no doubt , even more than from mine ; for I recognise in Garth Dalmain a strong man than myself . have it be I that day in the church , want you as he do , I should have grovel at your foot and promise to grow up . Garth Dalmain have the iron strength to turn and go , without a protest , when the woman who have own he mate the evening before , refuse he on the score of inadequacy the next morning . I fear there be no question of the view he would take of the situation as it now stand . " 

 Jane 's pale , startled face go to the doctor 's heart . 

 " but Deryck he love " 

 " just because he love , my poor old girl , where you be concerned he could never be content with less than the good . " 

 " oh , boy , help I ! find a way ! tell I what to do ! " despair be in Jane 's eye . 

 the doctor consider long , in silence . at last he say : " I see only one way out . if Dal could somehow be bring to realise your point of view at that time as a possible one , without know it have actually be the cause of your refusal of he , and could have the chance to express himself clearly on the subject to I , for instance in a way which might reach you without be mean to reach you , it might put you in a well position toward he . but it would be difficult to manage . if you could be in close contact with his mind , constantly near he unseen ah , poor chap , that be easy now I mean unknown to he ; if , for instance , you could be in the shoe of this nurse - companion person I be send he , and get at his mind on the matter ; so that he could feel when you eventually make your confession , he have already justify himself to you , and thus go behind his blindness , as it be . " 

 Jane bound in her chair . " Deryck , I have it ! oh , send I as his nurse - companion ! he would never dream it be I. it be three year since he hear my voice , and he think I in Egypt . the society column in all the paper , a few week ago , mention I as winter in Egypt and Syria and remain abroad until May . not a soul know I have come home . you be the good judge as to whether I have have training and experience ; and all through the war our work be fully as much mental and spiritual , as surgical . it be not up to much otherwise . oh , Dicky , you could safely recommend I ; and I still have my uniform stow away in case of need . I could be ready in twenty - four hour , and I would go as Sister anything , and eat in the kitchen if necessary . " 

 " but , my dear girl , " say the doctor quietly , " you could not go as Sister Anything , unfortunately . you could only go as Nurse Rosemary Gray ; for I engage she this morning , and post a full and explicit account of she to Dr. Mackenzie , which he will read , to our patient . I never take a case from one nurse and give it to another , except for incompetency . and Nurse Rosemary Gray could more easily fly , than prove incompetent . she will not be require to eat in the kitchen . she be a gentlewoman , and will be treat as such . I wish indeed you could be in her shoe , though I doubt whether you could have carry it through and now I have something to tell you . just before I leave he , Dalmain ask after you . he sandwich you most carefully in between the duchess and Flower ; but he could not keep the blood out of his thin cheek , and he grip the bedclothe in his effort to keep his voice steady . he ask where you be . I say , I believe , in Egypt . when you be come home . I tell he I have hear you intend return to Jerusalem for Easter , and I suppose we might expect you home at the end of April or early in May . he inquire how you be . I reply that you be not a good correspondent , but I gather from occasional cable and post - card that you be very fit and have a good time . I then volunteer the statement that it be I who have send you abroad because you be go all to piece . he make a quick movement with his hand as if he would have strike I for use the expression . then he say : ' go to piece ? she ! ' in a tone of most utter contempt for I and my opinion . then he hastily make minute inquiry for Flower . he have already ask about the duchess all the question he intend ask about you . when he have ascertain that Flower be at home and well , and have send he her affectionate sympathy , he beg I to glance through a pile of letter which be wait until he feel able to have they read to he , and to tell he any of the handwriting know to I . all the world seem to have send he letter of sympathy , poor chap . I tell he a dozen or so of the name I know , a royal handwriting among they . he ask whether there be any from abroad . there be two or three . I know they all , and name they . he could not bear to hear any of they read ; even the royal letter remain unopened , though he ask to have it in his hand , and finger the tiny crimson crown . then he ask . ' be there one from the duchess ? ' there be . he wish to hear that one , so I open and read it . it be very characteristic of her grace ; full of kindly sympathy , heartily yet tactfully express . half - way through she say : ' Jane will be upset . I shall write and tell she next time she send I an address . at present I have no idea in which quarter of the globe my dear niece be to be find . last time I hear of she she seem in a fair way towards marry a little Jap and settle in Japan . not a bad idea , my dear Dal , be it ? though , if Japan be at all like the paper screen , I do not   know where in that liliputian country they will find a house , or a husband , or a what - do - you - call-'em thing they ride in , solid enough for our good jane ! ' with intuitive tact of a very high order , I omit this entire passage about marry the Jap . when your aunt 's letter be finish , he ask point blank whether there be one from you . I say no , but that it be unlikely the news have reach you , and I feel sure you would write when it do . so I hope you will , dear ; and Nurse Rosemary Gray will have instruction to read all his letter to he . " 

 " oh , Deryck , " say Jane brokenly , " I can not   bear it ! I must go to he ! " 

 the telephone bell on the doctor 's table whir sharply . he go over and take up the receiver . 

 " Hullo ! ... yes , it be Dr. Brand .... who be speak ? ... oh , be it you , Matron ? " Jane feel quite sorry the matron could not see the doctor 's charming smile into the telephone . " yes ? what name do you say ? ... undoubtedly . this morning ; quite definitely . a most important case . she be to call and see I to - night ... what ? ... mistake on register ? ah , I see ... go where ? ... where ? ... spell it , please ... Australia ! oh , quite out of reach ! ... yes , I hear he be order there ... never mind , Matron . you be in no way to blame ... thank , I think not . I have some one in view ... yes .... yes .... no doubt she might do ... I will let you know if I should require she ... good - bye , Matron , and thank you . " 

 the doctor hang up the receiver . then he turn to Jane ; a slow , half - doubtful smile gathering on his lip . 

 " Jeanette , " he say , " I do not believe in chance . but I do believe in a Higher Control , which make and unmake our plan . you shall go . " 




 CHAPTER XVI 

 the doctor find a WAY 

 " and now as to way and mean , " say the doctor , when Jane feel well . " you must leave by the night mail from Euston , the day after to - morrow . can you be ready ? " 

 " I be ready , " say Jane . 

 " you must go as Nurse Rosemary Gray . " 

 " I do not   like that , " Jane interpose . " I should prefer a fictitious name . suppose the real Rosemary Gray turn up , or some one who know she . " 

 " my , dear girl , she be half - way to Australia by now , and you will see no one up there but the household and the doctor . any one who turn up would be more likely to know you . we must take these risk . besides , in case of complication arise , I will give you a note , which you can produce at once , explain the situation , and state that in agree to fill the breach you consent at my request to take the name in order to prevent any necessity for explanation to the patient , which at this particular juncture would be most prejudicial . I can honestly say this , it be even more true than appear . so you must dress the part , Jane , and endeavour to look the part , so far as your five foot eleven will permit ; for please remember that I have describe you to Dr. Mackenzie as ' a pretty , dainty little thing , refined and elegant , and considerably more capable than she look . ' " 

 " Dicky ! he will instantly realise that I be not the person mention in your letter . " 

 " not so , dear . remember we have to do with a Scotchman , and a Scotchman never realise anything ' instantly . ' the Gaelic mind work slowly , though it work exceed sure . he will be exceed sure , when he have contemplate you for a while , that I be a ' ve rra poor judge o ' woman , ' and that Nurse Gray be a far fine woman than I describe . but he will have already create for Dalmain , from my letter , a mental picture of his nurse ; which be all that really matter . we must trust to Providence that old Robbie do not proceed to amend it by the original . try to forestall any such conversation . if the good doctor seem to mistrust you , take he on one side , show he my letter , and tell he the simple truth . but I do not suppose this will be necessary . with the patient , you must remember the extreme sensitiveness of a blind man 's hearing . Tread lightly . do not give he any opportunity to judge of your height . try to remember that you be not suppose to be able to reach the top shelf of an eight - foot bookcase without the aid of step or a chair . and when the patient begin to stand and walk , try to keep he from find out that his nurse be slightly tall than himself . this should not be difficult ; one of his fix idea be that in his blindness he will not be touch by a woman . his valet will lead he about . and , Jane , I can not imagine any one who have ever have your hand in his , fail to recognise it . so I advise you , from the first , to avoid shake hand . but all these precaution do not obviate the great difficulty of all , your voice . do you suppose , for a moment , he will not recognise that ? " 

 " I shall take the bull by the horn in that case , " say Jane , " and you must help I . explain the fact to I now , as you might do if I be really Nurse Rosemary Gray , and have a voice so like my own . " 

 the doctor smile . " my dear Nurse Rosemary , " he say , " you must not be surprised if our patient detect a remarkable similarity between your voice and that of a mutual friend of his and mine . I have constantly notice it myself . " 

 " indeed , sir , " say Jane . " and may I know whose voice mine so closely resemble ? " 

 " the Honourable Jane Champion 's , " say the doctor , with the delightful smile with which he always speak to his nurse . " do you know she ? " 

 " slightly , " say Jane , " and I hope to know she well and well as the year go by . " 

 then they both laugh . " thank you , Dicky . now I shall know what to say to the patient . ah , but the misery of it ! think of it be possible thus to deceive Garth , Garth of the bright , keen all perceive vision ! shall I ever have the courage to carry it through ? " 

 " if you value your own eventual happiness and his you will , dear . and now I must order the brougham and speed you to Portland Place , or you will be late for dinner , a thing the duchess can not overlook ' as you very well know , ' even in a traveller return from round the world . and if you take my advice , you will tell your kind , sensible old aunt the whole story , omit of course all moonlight detail , and consult she about this plan . her shrewd counsel will be invaluable , and you may be glad of her assistance later on . " 

 they rise and face each other on the hearth - rug . 

 " boy , " say Jane with emotion , " you have be so good to I , and so faithful . whatever happen , I shall be grateful always . " 

 " hush , " say the doctor . " no need for gratitude when long - stand debt be pay . to - morrow I shall not have a free moment , and I foresee the next day as very full also . but we might dine together at Euston at seven , and I will see you off . your train leave at eight o'clock , get you to Aberdeen soon after seven the next morning , and out to Gleneesh in time for breakfast . you will enjoy arrive in the early morning light ; and the air of the moor brace you wonderfully . thank you , Stoddart . Miss Champion be ready . Hullo , Flower ! look up , Jane . Flower , and Dicky , and Blossom , be hang over the topmost banister , drop you shower of kiss . yes , the river you mention do produce a veritable ' garden of the Lord . ' God send you the same , dear . and now , sit well back , and lower your veil . ah , I remember , you do not   wear they . wise girl ! if all woman follow your example it would impoverish the optician . why ? oh , constant focussing on spot , for one thing . but lean back , for you must not be see if you be suppose to be still in Cairo , wait to go up the Nile . and , look here " the doctor put his head in at the carriage window " very plain luggage , mind . the sort of thing nurse speak of as ' my box ' ; with a very obvious R. G. on it ! " 

 " thank you , boy , " whisper Jane . " you think of everything . " 

 " I think of you , " say the doctor . and in all the hard day to come , Jane often find comfort in remember those last quiet word . 




 CHAPTER XVII 

 ENTER NURSE ROSEMARY 

 Nurse Rosemary Gray have arrive at Gleneesh . 

 when she and her " box " be deposit on the platform of the little wayside railway station , she feel she have indeed drop from the cloud ; leave her own world , and her own identity , on some far - distant planet . 

 a motor wait outside the station , and she have a momentary fear lest she should receive deferential recognition from the chauffeur . but he be as solid and stolid as any other portion of the car , and pay no more attention to she than he do to her baggage . the one be a nurse ; the other , a box , both common noun , and merely article to be convey to Gleneesh accord to order . so he look straight before he , present a sphinx - like profile beneath the peak of his leather cap , while a slow and solemn porter help Jane and her luggage into the motor . when she have reward the porter with threepence , conscientiously endeavour to live down to her box , the chauffeur move foot and hand with the silent precision of a machine , they swing round into the open , and take the road for the hill . 

 up into the fragrant heather and grey rock ; mile of moor and sky and solitude . More than ever Jane feel as if she have drop into another world , and so small an incident as the omission of the usual respectful salute of a servant , give she a delightful sense of success and security in her new role . 

 she have often hear of Garth 's old castle up in the North , an inheritance from his mother 's family , but be hardly prepare for so much picturesque beauty or such stateliness of archway and entrance . as they wound up the hillside and the grey turret come into view , with pine wood behind and above , she seem to hear Garth 's boyish voice under the cedar at Overdene , with its ring of buoyant enjoyment , say : " I should like you to see Castle Gleneesh . you would enjoy the view from the terrace ; and the pine wood , and the moor . " and then he have laughingly declare his intention of get up a " good party " of his own , with the duchess as chaperon ; and she have promise to make one of it . and now he , the owner of all this loveliness , be blind and helpless ; and she be enter the fair portal of Gleneesh , unknown to he , unrecognise by any , as a nurse - secretary sort of person . Jane have say at Overdene : " yes , ask we , and see what happen . " and now this be happen . what would happen next ? 

 Garth 's man , Simpson , receive she at the door , and again a possible danger be safely pass . he have enter Garth 's service within the last three year and evidently do not know she by sight . 

 Jane stand look round the old hall , in the leisurely way of one accustom to arrive for the first time as guest at the country home of her friend ; note the quaint , large fireplace , and the shadowy antler high up on the wall . then she become aware that Simpson , already half - way up the wide oak staircase , be expect the nurse to hurry after he . this she do , and be receive at the top of the staircase by old Margery . it do not require the lawn kerchief , the black satin apron , and the lavender ribbon , for Jane to recognise Garth 's old Scotch nurse , housekeeper , and friend . one glance at the grave , kindly face , wrinkle and rosy , a beautiful combination of perfect health and advance year , be enough . the shrewd , keen eye , see quickly beneath the surface , be unmistakable . she conduct Jane to her room , talk all the time in a kindly effort to set she at her ease , and to express a warm welcome with gentle dignity , not forget the cloud of sadness which hang over the house and render her presence necessary . she call she " Nurse Gray " at the conclusion of every sentence , with an upward inflection and pretty rolling of the r 's , which charm Jane . she long to say : " you old dear ! how I shall enjoy be in the house with you ! " but remember in time that a remark which would have be gratify condescension on the part of the Honourable Jane Champion , would be little short of impertinent familiarity from Nurse Rosemary Gray . so she follow meekly into the pretty room prepare for she ; admire the chintz ; answer question about her night journey ; admit that she would be very glad of breakfast , but still more of a bath if convenient . 

 and now bath and breakfast be both over , and Jane be stand beside the window in her room , look down at the wonderful view , and wait until the local doctor should arrive and summon she to Garth 's room . 

 she have put on the freshest - look and most business - like of her uniform , a blue print gown , linen collar and cuff , and a white apron with shoulder strap and large pocket . she also wear the become cap belong to one of the institution to which she have once be for training . she do not intend wear this later on , but just this morning she omit no detail which could impress Dr. Mackenzie with her extremely professional appearance . she be painfully conscious that the severe simplicity of her dress tend rather to add to her height , notwithstanding her low - heeled ward shoe with their noiseless rubber sol . she could but hope Deryck would prove right as to the view Dr. Mackenzie would take . 

 and then far away in the distance , along the white ribbon of road , wind up from the valley , she see a high gig , trot swiftly ; one man in it , and a small groom seat behind . her hour have come . 

 Jane fall upon her knee , at the window , and pray for strength , wisdom , and courage . she could realise absolutely nothing . she have think so much and so continuously , that all mental vision be out of focus and have become a blur . even his dear face have fade and be hide from she when she frantically strove to recall it to her mental view . only the actual fact remain clear , that in a few short minute she would be take to the room where he lay . she would see the face she have not see since they stand together at the chancel step the face from which the glad confidence slowly fade , a horror of chill disillusion take its place . 

 " anoint and cheer our soiled face 
 with the abundance of Thy grace . " 
 she would see that dear face , and he , sightless , would not see her , but would be easily delude into believe she to be some one else . 

 the gig have turn the last bend of the road , and pass out of sight on its way to the front of the house . 

 Jane rise and stand wait . suddenly she remember two sentence of her conversation with Deryck . she have say : " shall I ever have the courage to carry it through ? " and Deryck have answer , earnestly : " if you value your own eventual happiness and his , you will . " 

 a tap come at her door . Jane walk across the room , and open it . 

 Simpson stand on the threshold . 

 " Dr. Mackenzie be in the library , nurse , " he say , " and wish to see you there . " 

 " then , will you kindly take I to the library , Mr. Simpson , " say Nurse Rosemary Gray . 




 CHAPTER xviii 

 the NAPOLEON of the moors 

 on the bear - skin rug , with his back to the fire , stand Dr. Robert Mackenzie , know to his friend as " Dr. Rob " or " Old Robbie , " accord to their degree of intimacy . 

 Jane 's first impression be of a short , stout man , in a sealskin waistcoat which have see well day , a light box - cloth overcoat three size too large for he , a napoleonic attitude , little spindle leg plant far apart , arm fold on chest , shoulder hunch up , which lead one to expect , as the eye travel upwards , an ivory - white complexion , a roman nose , masterful jaw , and thin lip fold in a line of conscious power . instead of which one find a red , freckled face , a nose which turn cheerfully skyward , a fat pink chin , and droop sandy moustache . the only striking feature of the face be a pair of keen blue eye , which , when turn upon any one intently , almost disappear beneath bushy red eyebrow and become little point of turquoise light . 

 Jane have not be in his presence two minute before she perceive that , when his mind be work , he be entirely unconscious of his body , which be apt to do most peculiar thing automatically ; so that his friend have pass round the remark : " Robbie chew up dozen of good pen - holder , while Dr. Mackenzie be think out excellent prescription . " 

 when Jane enter , his eye be fix upon an open letter , which she instinctively know to be Deryck 's , and he do not look up at once . when he do look up , she see his unmistakable start of surprise . he open his mouth to speak , and Jane be irresistibly remind of a tame goldfish at Overdene , which use to rise to the surface when the duchess drop crumb . he close it without utter a word , and turn again to Deryck 's letter ; and Jane feel herself to be the crumb , or rather the camel , which he be find it difficult to swallow . 

 she wait in respectful silence , and Deryck 's word pass with calm effect through the palpitate suspense of her brain . " the gaelic mind work slowly , though it work exceed sure . he will be exceed sure that I be a verra poor judge o ' woman . " 

 at last the little man on the hearth - rug lift his eye again to Jane 's ; and , alas , how high he have to lift they ! 

 " Nurse er ? " he say inquiringly , and Jane think his search eye look like little bit of broken blue china in a hay - stack . 

 " Rosemary Gray , " reply Jane meekly , with a curtsey in her voice ; feel as if they be rehearse amateur theatrical at Overdene , and the next minute the duchess 's cane would rap the floor and they would be tell to speak up and not be so slow . 

 " ah , " say Dr. Robert Mackenzie , " I see . " 

 he star hard at the carpet in a distant corner of the room , then walk across and pick up a spline break from a bass broom ; bring it back to the hearth - rug ; examine it with minute attention ; then put one end between his tooth and begin to chew it . 

 Jane wonder what be the correct thing to do at this sort of interview , when a doctor neither sit down himself nor suggest that the nurse should do so . she wish she have ask Deryck . but he could not possibly have enlighten she , because the first thing he always say to a nurse be : " my dear nurse SO - and - so , pray sit down . People who have much unavoidable standing to do should cultivate the habit of seat themselves comfortably at every possible opportunity . " 

 but the stout little person on the hearth - rug be not Deryck . so Jane stand at attention , and watch the stiff bit of bass wag up and down , and shorten , inch by inch . when it have finally disappear , Dr. Robert Mackenzie speak again . 

 " so you have arrive , Nurse Gray , " he say . 

 " truly the mind of a Scotchman work slowly , " think Jane , but she be thankful to detect the complete acceptance of herself in his tone . Deryck be right ; and oh the relief of not have to take this unspeakable little man into her confidence in this matter of the deception to be practise on Garth . 

 " yes , sir , I have arrive , " she say . 

 another period of silence . a fragment of the bass broom reappear and vanish once more , before Dr. Mackenzie speak again . 

 " I be glad you have arrive , Nurse Gray , " he say . 

 " I be glad to have arrive , sir , " say Jane gravely , almost expect to hear the duchess 's delighted " ha , ha ! " from the wing . the little comedy be progress . 

 then suddenly she become aware that during the last few minute Dr. Mackenzie 's mind have be concentrate upon something else . she have not fill it at all . the next moment it be turn upon she and two swift turquoise gleam from under the shaggy brow sweep over she , with the rapidity and brightness of search - light . Dr. Mackenzie commence speak quickly , with a wonderful rolling of r 's . 

 " I understand , Miss Gray , you have come to minister to the patient 's mind rather than to his body . you need not trouble to explain . I have it from Sir Deryck Brand , who prescribe a nurse - companion for the patient , and engage you . I fully agree with his prescription ; and , allow I to say , I admire its ingredient . " 

 Jane bow , and realise how the duchess would be chuckle . what an insufferable little person ! Jane have time to think this , while he walk across to the table - cloth , bend over it , and examine an ancient spot of ink . find a drop of candle grease near it , he remove it with his thumb nail ; bring it carefully to the fire , and lay it on the coal . he watch it melt , fizzle , and flare , with an intense concentration of interest ; then jump round on Jane , and catch her look of fury . 

 " and I think there remain very little for I to say to you about the treatment , Miss Gray , " he finish calmly . " you will have receive minute instruction from Sir Deryck himself . the great thing now be to help the patient to take an interest in the outer world . the temptation to person who suddenly become totally blind , be to form a habit of live entirely in a world within ; a world of recollection , retrospection , and imagination ; the only world , in fact , in which they can see . " 

 Jane make a quick movement of appreciation and interest . after all she might learn something useful from this eccentric little scotchman . oh to keep his attention off rubbish on the carpet , and grease spot on the table - cloth ! 

 " yes ? " she say . " do tell I more . " 

 " this , " continue Dr. Mackenzie , " be our present difficulty with Mr. Dalmain . there seem to be no possibility of arouse his interest in the outside world . he refuse to receive visitor ; he decline to hear his letter . hour pass without a word be speak by he . unless you hear he speak to I or to his valet , you will easily suppose yourself to have a patient who have lose the power of speech as well as the gift of sight . should he express a wish to speak to I alone when we be with he , do not leave the room . walk over to the fireplace and remain there . I desire that you should hear , that when he choose to rouse and make an effort , he be perfectly well able to do so . the most important part of your duty , Nurse Gray , will be the aid he day by day to resume life , the life of a blind man , it be true ; but not therefore necessarily an inactive life . now that all danger of inflammation from the wound have subside , he may get up , move about , learn to find his way by sound and touch . he be an artist by profession . he will never paint again . but there be other gift which may form reasonable outlet to an artistic nature . " 

 he pause suddenly , have apparently catch sight of another grease spot , and walk over to the table ; but the next instant jump round on Jane , quick as lightning , with a question . 

 " do he play ? " say Dr. Rob . 

 but Jane be on her guard , even against accidental surprise . 

 " Sir Deryck do not happen to mention to I , Dr. Mackenzie , whether Mr. Dalmain be musical or not . " 

 " ah , well , " say the little doctor , resume his napoleonic attitude in the centre of the hearth - rug ; " you must make it your business to find out . and , by the way , Nurse , do you play yourself ? " 

 " a little , " say Jane . 

 " ah , " say Dr. Rob . " and I dare say you sing a little , too ? " 

 Jane acquiesce . 

 " in that case , my dear lady , I leave most explicit order that you neither sing a little nor play a little to Mr. Dalmain . we , who have our sight , can just endure while people who ' play a little ' show we how little they can play ; because we be able to look round about we and think of other thing . but to a blind man , with an artist 's sensitive soul , the experience might culminate in madness . we must not risk it . I regret to appear uncomplimentary , but a patient 's welfare must take precedence of all other consideration . " 

 Jane smile . she be begin to like Dr. Rob . 

 " I will be most careful , " she say , " neither to play nor to sing to Mr. Dalmain . " 

 " good , " say Dr. Mackenzie . " but now let I tell you what you most certainly may do , by - and - by . lead he to the piano . place he there upon a seat where he will feel secure ; none of your twirly , rickety stool . make a little notch on the key - board by which he can easily find middle C. then let he relieve his pen - up soul by the painting of sound - picture . you will find this will soon keep he happy for hour . and , if he be already something of a musician , as that huge grand piano , with no knick - knack on it indicate , he may begin that sort of thing at once , before he be ready to be worry with the Braille system , or any other method of instruct the blind . but contrive an easy way a little notch in the wood - work below the note by mean of which , without hesitation or irritation , he can locate himself instantly at middle C. never mind the other note . it be all the seeing he will require when once he be at the piano . ha , ha ! not bad for a Scotchman , eh , Nurse Gray ? " 

 but Jane could not laugh ; though somewhere in her mental background she seem to hear laughter and applause from the duchess . this be no comedy to Jane , her blind Garth at the piano , his dear beautiful head bent over the key , his finger feel for that pathetic little notch , to be make by herself , below middle C. she loathe this individual who could make a pun on the subject of Garth 's blindness , and , in the back of her mind , Tommy seem to join the duchess , flap up and down on his perch and shrieking : " kick he out ! stop his jaw ! " 

 " and now , " say Dr. Mackenzie unexpectedly , " the next thing to be do , Nurse Gray , be to introduce you to the patient . " 

 Jane feel the blood slowly leave her face and concentrate in a terrible pound at her heart . but she stand her ground , and wait silently . 

 Dr. Mackenzie ring the bell . Simpson appear . 

 " a decanter of sherry , a wine - glass , and a couple of biscuit , " say Dr. Rob . 

 Simpson vanish . 

 " little beast ! " think Jane . " at eleven o'clock in the morning ! " . 

 Dr. Rob stand , and wait ; tug spitefully at his red moustache , and look intently out of the window . 

 Simpson reappear , place a small tray on the table , and go quietly out , close the door behind he . 

 Dr. Rob pour out a glass of sherry , draw up a chair to the table , and say : " now , Nurse , sit down and drink that , and take a biscuit with it . " 

 Jane protest . " but , indeed , doctor , I never " 

 " I have no doubt you ' never , ' " say Dr. Rob , " especially at eleven o'clock in the morning . but you will to - day ; so do not waste any time in discussion . you have have a long night journey ; you be go upstairs to a very sad sight indeed , a strain on the nerve and sensibility . you have come through a try interview with I , and you be praise Heaven it be over . but you will praise Heaven with more fervency when you have drink the sherry . also you have be stand during twenty - three minute and a half . I always stand to speak myself , and I prefer folk should stand to listen . I can never talk to people while they loll around . but you will walk upstairs all the more steadily , Nurse Rosemary Gray , if you sit down now for five minute at this table . " 

 Jane obey , touch and humble . so , after all , it be a kind , comprehend heart under that old sealskin waistcoat ; and a shrewd understanding of man and matter , in spite of the erratic , somewhat objectionable exterior . while she drink the wine and finish the biscuit , he find busy occupation on the other side of the room , polish the window with his silk pocket - handkerchief ; make a queer hum noise all the time , like a bee buzz up the pane . he seem to have forget her presence ; but , just as she put down the empty glass , he turn and , walk straight across the room , lay his hand upon her shoulder . 

 " now , Nurse , " he say , " follow I upstairs , and , just at first , speak as little as possible . remember , every fresh voice intrude into the still depth of that utter blackness , cause an agony of bewilderment and disquietude to the patient . speak little and speak low , and may God Almighty give you tact and wisdom . " 

 there be a dignity of conscious knowledge and power in the small quaint figure which precede Jane up the staircase . as she follow , she become aware that her spirit lean on his and feel sustained and strengthen . the unexpected conclusion of his sentence , old - fashioned in its wording , yet almost a prayer , give her fresh courage . " may God Almighty give you tact and wisdom , " he have say , little guess how greatly she need they . and now another voice , echo through memory 's arch to organ - music , take up the strain : " where Thou art Guide , no ill can come . " and with firm though noiseless step , Jane follow Dr. Mackenzie into the roam where Garth be lie , helpless , sightless , and disfigure . 




 CHAPTER XIX 

 the voice in the darkness 

 just the dark head upon the pillow . that be all Jane see at first , and she see it in sunshine . somehow she have always picture a darken room , forget that to he darkness and light be both alike , and that there be no need to keep out the sunlight , with its healing , purifying , invigorate power . 

 he have request to have his bed move into a corner the corner farth from door , fireplace , and window with its left side against the wall , so that he could feel the blank wall with his hand and , turn close to it , know himself shut away from all possible prying of unseen eye . this be how he now lay , and he do not turn as they enter . 

 just the dear dark head upon the pillow . it be all Jane see at first . then his right arm in the sleeve of a blue silk sleeping - suit , stretch slightly behind he as he lie on his left side , the thin white hand limp and helpless on the coverlet . 

 Jane put her hand behind she . the impulse be so strong to fall on her knee beside the bed , take that poor hand in both her strong one , and cover it with kiss . ah surely , surely then , the dark head would turn to she , and instead of seek refuge in the hard , blank wall , he would hide that sightless face in the boundless tenderness of her arm . but Deryck 's warning voice sound , grave and persistent : " if you value your own eventual happiness and his " so Jane put her hand behind her back . 

 Dr. Mackenzie advance to the side of the bed and lay his hand upon Garth 's shoulder . then , with an incredible softening of his rather strident voice , he speak so slowly and quietly , that Jane could hardly believe this to be the man who have jerk out question , comment , and order to she , during the last half - hour . 

 " good morning , Mr. Dalmain . Simpson tell I it have be an excellent night , the good you have yet have . now that be good . no doubt you be relieve to be rid of Johnson , capable though he be , and to be back in the hand of your own man again . these train attendant be never content with do enough ; they always want to do just a little more , and that little more be a weariness to the patient . now I have bring you to - day one who be prepared to do all you need , and yet who , I feel sure , will never annoy you by attempt more than you desire . Sir Deryck Brand 's prescription , Nurse Rosemary Gray , be here ; and I believe she be prepared to be companion , secretary , reader , anything you want , in fact a new pair of eye for you , Mr. Dalmain , with a clever brain behind they , and a kind , sympathetic , womanly heart direct and control that brain . Nurse Gray arrive this morning , Mr. Dalmain . " 

 no response from the bed . but Garth 's hand grope for the wall ; touch it , then drop listlessly back . 

 Jane could not realise that she be " Nurse Gray . " she only long that her poor boy need not be bother with the woman ! it all seem , at this moment , a thing apart from herself and he . 

 Dr. Mackenzie speak again . " Nurse Rosemary Gray be in the room , Mr. Dalmain . " 

 then Garth 's instinctive chivalry struggle up through the blackness . he do not turn his head , but his right hand make a little courteous sign of greeting , and he say in a low , distinct voice : " how do you do ? I be sure it be most kind of you to come so far . I hope you have an easy journey . " 

 Jane 's lip move , but no sound would pass they . 

 Dr. Rob make answer quickly , without look at she : " Miss Gray have a very good journey , and look as fresh this morning as if she have spend the night in bed . I can see she be a cold - water young lady . " 

 " I hope my housekeeper will make her comfortable . please give order , " say the tired voice ; and Garth turn even close to the wall , as if to end the conversation . 

 Dr. Rob attack his moustache , and stand look down at the blue silk shoulder for a minute , silently . 

 then he turn and speak to Jane . " come over to the window , Nurse Gray . I want to show you a special chair we have obtain for Mr. Dalmain , in which he will be most comfortable as soon as he feel inclined to sit up . you see ? here be an adjustable support for the head , if necessary ; and these various tray and stand and movable table can be swing round into any position by a touch . I consider it excellent , and Sir Deryck approve it . have you see one of this kind before , Nurse Gray ? " 

 " we have one at the hospital , but not quite so complete as this , " say Jane . 

 in the stillness of that sunlit chamber , the voice from the bed break upon they with startling suddenness ; and in it be the cry of one lose in an abyss of darkness , but appeal to they with a frantic demand for instant enlightenment . 

 " who be in the room ? " cry Garth Dalmain . 

 his face be still turn to the wall ; but he have raise himself on his left elbow , in an attitude which betoken intent listen . 

 Dr. Mackenzie answer . " no one be in the room , Mr. Dalmain , but myself and Nurse Gray . " 

 " there be some one else in the room ! " say Garth violently . " how dare you lie to I ! who be speak ? " 

 then Jane come quickly to the side of the bed . her hand be tremble , but her voice be perfectly under control . 

 " it be I who speak , sir , " she say ; " Nurse Rosemary Gray . and I feel sure I know why my voice startle you . Dr. Brand warn I it might do so . he say I must not be surprised if you detect a remarkable similarity between my voice and that of a mutual friend of yours and his . he say he have often notice it . " 

 Garth , in his blindness , remain quite still ; listen and consider . at length he ask slowly : " do he say whose voice ? " 

 " yes , for I ask he . he say it be Miss Champion 's . " 

 Garth 's head drop back upon the pillow . then without turn he say in a tone which Jane know mean a smile on that dear hidden face : " you must forgive I , Miss Gray , for be so startled and so stupidly , unpardonably agitated . but , you know , be blind be still such a new experience , and every fresh voice which break through the black curtain of perpetual night , mean so infinitely more than the speaker realise . the resemblance in your voice to that of the lady Sir Deryck mention be so remarkable that , although I know she to be at this moment in Egypt , I could scarcely believe she be not in the room . and yet the most unlikely thing in the world would be that she should have be in this room . so I owe you and Dr. Mackenzie most humble apology for my agitation and unbelief . " 

 he stretch out his right hand , palm upwards , towards Jane . 

 Jane clasp her shake hand behind she . 

 " now , Nurse , if you please , " break in Dr. Mackenzie 's rasp voice from the window , " I have a few more detail to explain to you over here . " 

 they talk together for a while without interruption , until Dr. Rob remark : " I suppose I will have to be go . " 

 then Garth say : " I wish to speak to you alone , doctor , for a few minute . " 

 " I will wait for you downstairs , Dr. Mackenzie , " say Jane , and be move towards the door , when an imperious gesture from Dr. Rob stop she , and she turn silently to the fireplace . she could not see any need now for this subterfuge , and it annoy she . but the freckle little Napoleon of the moor be not a man to be lightly disobey . he walk to the door , open and close it ; then return to the bedside , draw up a chair , and sit down . 

 " now , Mr. Dalmain , " he say . 

 Garth sit up and turn towards he eagerly . 

 then , for the first time , Jane see his face . 

 " Doctor , " he say , " tell I about this nurse . describe she to I . " 

 the tension in tone and attitude be extreme . his hand be clasp in front of he , as if implore sight through the eye of another . his thin white face , wear with suffering , look so eager and yet so blank . 

 " describe she to I , doctor , " he say ; " this Nurse Rosemary Gray , as you call she . " 

 " but it be not a pet name of mine , my dear sir , " say Dr. Rob deliberately . " it be the young lady 's own name , and a pretty one , too . ' rosemary for remembrance . ' be not that shakespeare ? " 

 " describe she to I , " insist Garth , for the third time . 

 Dr. Mackenzie glance at Jane . but she have turn she back , to hide the tear which be stream down her cheek . oh , Garth ! oh , beautiful Garth of the shin eye ! 

 Dr. Rob draw Deryck 's letter from his pocket and study it . 

 " well , " he say slowly , ' she be a pretty , dainty little thing ; just the sort of elegant young woman you would like to have about you , could you see she . " 

 " dark or fair ? " ask Garth . 

 the doctor glance at what he could see of Jane 's cheek , and at the brown hand hold on to the mantelpiece . 

 " Fair , " say Dr. Rob , without a moment 's hesitation . 

 Jane start and glanced round . why should this little man be lie on his own account ? 

 " Hair ? " query the strained voice from the bed . 

 " well , " say Dr. Rob deliberately , " it be mostly tuck away under a modest little cap ; but , be it not for that wise restraint , I should say it might be that kind of fluffy , fly - away floss - silk , which put the finish touch to a dainty , pretty woman . " 

 Garth lie back , panting , and press his hand over his sightless face . 

 " Doctor , " he say , " I know I have give you heap of trouble , and to - day you must think I a fool . but if you do not wish I to go mad in my blindness , send that girl away . do not let she enter my room again . " 

 " now , Mr. Dalmain , " say Dr. Mackenzie patiently ; " let we consider this thing . we may take it you have nothing against this young lady except a chance resemblance in her voice to that of a friend of yours now far away . be not this other lady a pleasant person ? " 

 Garth laugh suddenly , bitterly ; a laugh like a hard , sob . " oh , yes , " he say , ' she be quite a pleasant person . " 

 " ' rosemary for remembrance , ' " quote Dr. Rob . " then why should not Nurse Rosemary call up a pleasant remembrance ? also it seem to I to be a kind , sweet , womanly voice , which be something to be thankful for nowadays , when so many woman talk , fit to scare the crow ; cackle , cackle , cackle like stone rattle in a tin canister . " 

 " but can not   you understand , doctor , " say Garth wearily , " that it be just the remembrance and the resemblance which , in my blindness , I can not bear ? I have nothing against her voice , Heaven know ! but I tell you , when I hear it first I think it be it be she the other come to I here and " Garth 's voice cease suddenly . 

 " the pleasant lady ? " suggest Dr. Rob . " I see . well now , Mr. Dalmain , Sir Deryck say the good thing that could happen would be if you come to wish for visitor . it appear you have many friend ready and anxious to come any distance in order to bring you help or cheer . why not let I send for this pleasant lady ? I make no doubt she would come . then when she herself have sit beside you , and talk with you , the nurse 's voice would trouble you no long . " 

 Garth sit up again , his face wild with protest . Jane turn on the hearth - rug , and stand watch it . 

 " no , doctor , " he say . " oh , my God , no ! in the whole world , she be the last person I would have enter this room ! " 

 Dr. Mackenzie bend forward to examine minutely a microscopic darn in the sheet . " and why ? " he ask very low . 

 " because , " say Garth , " that pleasant lady , as you rightly call she , have a noble , generous heart , and it might overflow with pity for my blindness ; and pity from she I could not accept . it would be the last straw upon my heavy cross . I can bear the cross , doctor ; I hope in time to carry it manfully , until God bid I lay it down . but that last straw her pity would break I . I should fall in the dark , to rise no more . " 

 " I see , " say Dr. Rob gently . " poor laddie ! the pleasant lady must not come . " 

 he wait silently a few minute , then push back his chair and stand up . 

 " meanwhile , " he say , " I must rely on you , Mr. Dalmain , to be agreeable to Nurse Rosemary Gray , and not to make her task too difficult . I dare not send she back . she be Dr. Brand 's choice . besides think of the cruel blow to she in her profession . think of it , man ! send off at a moment 's notice , after spend five minute in her patient 's room , because , forsooth , her voice madden he ! poor child ! what a statement to enter on her report ! see she appear before the matron with it ! can not   you be generous and unselfish enough to face whatever trial there may be for you in this bit of a coincidence ? " 

 Garth hesitate . " Dr. Mackenzie , " he say at last , " will you swear to I that your description of this young lady be accurate in every detail ? " 

 " ' swear not at all , ' " quote Dr. Rob unctuously . " I have a pious mother , laddie . besides I can do well than that . I will let you into a secret . I be read from Sir Deryck 's letter . I be no authority on woman myself , have always consider dog and horse less ensnare and more companionable creature . so I would not trust my own eye , but prefer to give you Sir Deryck 's description . you will allow he to be a fine judge of woman . you have see Lady Brand ? " 

 " seen she ? yes , " say Garth eagerly , a slight flush tinting his thin cheek , " and more than that , I have   paint she . ah , such a picture ! stand at a table , the sunlight in her hair , arrange golden daffodil in an old venetian vase . do you see it , doctor , in the New Gallery , two year ago ? " 

 " no , " say Dr. Rob . " I be not find myself in gallery , new or old . but " he turn a swift look of inquiry on Jane , who nod " Nurse Gray be tell I she have see it . " 

 " really ? " say Garth , interested . " somehow one do not connect nurse with picture gallery . " 

 " I do not   know why not , " say Dr. Rob . " they must go somewhere for their outing . they can not   be everlastingly nose shop window in all weather ; so why not go in and have a look at your picture ? besides , Miss Rosemary be a young lady of part . Sir Deryck assure I she be a gentlewoman by birth , well - read and intelligent . now , laddie , what be it to be ? " 

 Garth consider silently . 

 Jane turn away and grip the mantelpiece . so much hang in the balance during that quiet minute . 

 at length Garth speak , slowly , hesitatingly . " if only I could quite disassociate the voice from the from that other personality . if I could be quite sure that , though her voice be so extraordinarily like , she herself be not " he pause , and Jane 's heart stand still . be a description of herself come ? " be not at all like the face and figure which stand clear in my remembrance as associate with that voice . " 

 " well , " say Dr. Rob , " I be think we can manage that for you . these nurse know their patient must be humour . we will call the young lady back , and she shall kneel down beside your bed bless you ! she will not   mind , with I to play old Gooseberry ! and you shall pass your hand over her face and hair , and round her little waist , and assure yourself , by touch , what an elegant , dainty little person it be , in a blue frock and white apron . " 

 Garth burst out laugh , and his voice have a tone it have not yet hold . " of all the preposterous suggestion ! " he say . " good heaven ! what an ass I must have be make of myself ! and I begin to think I have exaggerate the resemblance . in a day or two , I shall cease to notice it . and , look here , doctor , if she really be interested in that portrait here , I say where be you go ? " 

 " all right , sir , " say Dr. Rob . " I be merely move a chair over to the fireside , and take the liberty of pour out a glass of water . really you be become abnormally quick of hearing . now I be all attention . what about the portrait ? " 

 " I be only go to say , if she the nurse , you know be really interested in my portrait of Lady Brand , there be study of it up in the studio , which she might care to see . if she bring they here and describe they to I I could explain but , I say , doctor . I can not   have dainty young lady in and out of my room while I be in bed . why should not   I get up and try that chair of your ? send Simpson along ; and tell he to look out my brown lounge - suit and orange tie . good heaven ! what a blessing to have the MEMORY of colour and of how they blend ! think of the fellow who be bear blind . and please ask Miss Gray to go out in the pine wood , or on the moor , or use the motor , or rest , or do anything she like . tell she to make herself quite at home ; but on no account to come up here until Simpson report I ready . " 

 " you may rely on Nurse Gray to be most discreet , " say Dr. Rob ; whose voice have suddenly become very husky . " and as for get up , laddie , do not   go too fast . you will not find your strength equal to much . but I be bind to tell you there be nothing to keep you in bed if you feel like rise . " 

 " good - bye , doctor , " say Garth , grope for his hand ; " and I be sorry I shall never be able to offer to paint Mrs. Mackenzie ! " 

 " you would have to paint she with a shaggy head , four paw , and the soft amber eye in the world , " say Dr. Rob tenderly ; " and , look out from those eye , the most faithful , love dog - heart in creation . in all the year we have   keep house together she have never fail to meet I with a welcome , never contradict I or want the last word , and never worry I for so much as the price of a bonnet . there be a woman for you ! well , good - bye , lad , and God Almighty bless you . and be careful how you go . do not be surprised if I look in again on my way back from my round to see how you like that chair . " 

 Dr. Mackenzie hold open the door . Jane pass noiselessly out before he . he follow , sign to she to precede he down the stair . 

 in the library , Jane turn and face he . he put she quietly into a chair and stand before she . the bright blue eye be moist , beneath the shaggy brow . 

 " my dear , " he say , " I feel myself somewhat of a blunder old fool . you must forgive I . I never contemplate put you through such an ordeal . I perfectly understand that , while he hesitate , you must have feel your whole career at stake . I see you have be weep ; but you must not take it too much to heart that our patient make so much of your voice resemble this Miss Champion 's . he will forget all about it in a day or two , and you will be worth more to he than a dozen Miss Champions . see what good you have do he already . here he be want to get up and explain his picture to you . never you fear . you will soon win your way , and I shall be able to report to Sir Deryck what a fine success you have make of the case . now I must see the valet and give he very full instruction . and I recommend you to go for a blow on the moor and get an appetite for lunch . only put on something warm than that . you will have no sick - room work to do ; and have duly impress I with your washableness and serviceableness , you may as well wear something comfortable to protect you from our Highland nip . have you warm clothing with you ? " 

 " it be the rule of our guild to wear uniform , " say Jane ; " but I have a grey merino . " 

 " ah , I see . well , wear the grey merino . I shall return in two hour to observe how he stand that move . now , do not   let I keep you . " 

 " Dr. Mackenzie , " say Jane quietly , " may I ask why you describe I as fair ; and my very straight , heavy , plainly coil hair , as fluffy , fly - away floss - silk ? " 

 Dr. Rob have already reach the bell , but at her question he stay his hand and , turning , meet Jane 's steadfast eye with the shrewd turquoise gleam of his own . 

 " why certainly you may ask , Nurse Rosemary Gray , " he say , " though I wonder you think it necessary to do so . it be of course perfectly evident to I that , for reason of his own , Sir Deryck wish to paint an imaginary portrait of you to the patient , most likely represent some know ideal of his . as the description be so different from the reality , I conclude that , to make the portrait complete , the two touch unfortunately leave to I to supply , have well be as unlike what I see before I as the rest of the picture . and now , if you will be good enough " Dr. Rob ring the bell violently . 

 " and why do you take the risk of suggest that he should feel I ? " persist Jane . 

 " because I know he be a gentleman , " shout Dr. Rob angrily . " oh , come in , Simpson come in , my good fellow and shut that door ! and God Almighty be praise that he make you and I MEN , and not woman ! " 

 a quarter of an hour later , Jane watch he drive away , think to herself : " Deryck be right . but what a queer mixture of shrewdness and obtuseness , and how marvellously it work out to the furtherance of our plan . " 

 but as she watch the dog - cart start off at a smart trot across the moor , she would have be more than a little surprised could she have overhear Dr. Rob 's muttered remark to himself , as he gather up the rein and cheer on his sturdy cob . he have a habit of talk over his experience , half aloud , as he drive from case to case ; the two side of his rather complex nature apparently compare note with each other . and the present conversation open thus : 

 " now what have bring the Honourable Jane up here ? " say Dr. Rob . 

 " dashed if I know , " say Dr. Mackenzie . 

 " you must not swear , laddie , " say Dr. Rob ; " you have a pious mother . " 




 CHAPTER XX 

 JANE REPORTS PROGRESS 

 Letter from the Honourable Jane Champion to Sir Deryck Brand . 

 Castle Gleneesh , N. B. 

 my dear Deryck : my wire and post - card have not tell you much beyond the fact of my safe arrival . have be here a fortnight , I think it be time I send you a report . only you must remember that I be a poor scribe . from infancy it have always be difficult to I to write anything beyond that stock commencement : " I hope you be quite well ; " and I approach the task of a descriptive letter with an effort which be colossal . and yet I wish I might , for once , borrow the pen of a ready writer ; because I can not help know that I have be pass through experience such as do not often fall to the lot of a woman . 

 Nurse Rosemary Gray be get on capitally . she be make herself indispensable to the patient , and he turn to she with a completeness of confidence which cause her heart to swell with professional pride . 

 Poor Jane have get no far than hear , from his own lip , that she be the very last person in the whole world he would wish should come near he in his blindness . when she be suggest as a possible visitor , he say : " oh , my God , NO ! " and his face be one wild , horrified protest . so Jane be get her horsewhipping , boy , and accord to the method of a careful and thoughtful judge , who order thirty lash of the " cat , " in three application of ten so be Jane 's punishment lay on at interval ; not more than she can bear at a time ; but enough to keep her heart continually sore , and her spirit in perpetual dread . and you , dear , clever doctor , be prove perfectly right in your diagnosis of the sentiment of the case . he say her pity would be the last straw on his already heavy cross ; and the expression be an apt one , her pity for he be indeed a thing of straw . the only pity she feel be pity for herself , thus hopelessly catch in the mesh of her own mistake . but how to make he realise this , be the puzzle . 

 do you remember how the Israelites be shut in , between Migdol and the sea ? I know Migdol mean " tower , " but I never understand the passage , until I stand upon that narrow wedge of desert , with the Red Sea in front and on the left ; the rocky range of Gebel Attaka on the right , tower up against the sky , like the weird shape of an impregnable fortress ; the sole outlet or inlet behind , be the route they have just travel from Egypt , and along which the chariot and horseman of Pharaoh be then thunder in hot pursuit . even so , boy , be poor Jane now tramp her patch of desert , which narrow daily to the measure of her despair . Migdol be his certainty that her love could only be pity . the Red Sea be the confession into which she must inevitably plunge , to avoid scale Migdol ; in the chill water of which , as she drag he in with she , his love be bind to drown , as wave of doubt and mistrust sweep over its head , doubt which he have lose the power of remove ; mistrust which he can never hope to prove to have be false and mistaken . and behind come gallop the host of Pharaoh ; chance , speed on the wheel of circumstance . at any moment some accident may compel a revelation ; and instantly he will be scale rocky Migdol , with torn hand and bleed foot ; and she poor Jane flounder in the depth of the Red Sea . o for a Moses , with divine commission , to stretch out the rod of understand love , make a safe way through ; so that together they might reach the Promised Land ! dear wise old boy , dare you undertake the role of Moses ! 

 but here be I write like a page of Baedeker , and fail to report on actual fact . 

 as you may suppose , Jane grow haggard and thin in spite of old Margery 's porridge which be " put on " every day after lunch , for the next morning 's breakfast , and anybody pass " give it a stir . " do you know that be the right way to make porridge , Deryck ? I always think it be make in five minute , as want . Margery say that must be the english stuff which profanely go by the name .   N.B. please mark the self - control with which I repeat Scotch remark , without rush into weird spelling ; a senseless performance , it seem to I . for if you know already how old Margery pronounce " porridge , " you can read her pronunciation into the sentence ; and if you do not know it , no grotesque spelling on my part could convey to your mind any but a caricatured version of the pretty Scotch accent with which Margery say : " stir the porridge , Nurse Gray . " in fact , I be agreeably surprised at the ease with which I understand the native , and the pleasure I derive from their conversation ; for , after wrestle with one or two modern novel deal with the Highlands , I have expect to find the language an unknown tongue . instead of which , lo ! and behold , old Margery , Maggie the housemaid , Macdonald the gardener , and Macalister the game - keeper , all speak a rather purer English than I do ; far more carefully pronounce , and with every r sound and roll . their idiom be more characteristic than their accent . they say " whenever " for " when , " and use in their verbs several quaint variation of tense . 

 but what a syntactical digression ! oh , boy , the wound at my heart be so deep and so sore that I dread the dressing , even by your delicate touch . where be I ? ah , the porridge give I my loophole of escape . well , as I be say , Jane grow wear and thin , old Margery 's porridge notwithstanding ; but Nurse Rosemary Gray be flourish , and remain a pretty , dainty little thing , with the additional charm of fluffy , fly - away floss - silk , for hair , Dr. Rob 's own unaided contribution to the fascinating picture . by the way , I be quite unprepared to find he such a character . I learn much from Dr. Mackenzie , and I love Dr. Rob , except on those occasion when I long to pick he up by the scruff of his fawn overcoat and drop he out of the window . 

 on the point of Nurse Rosemary 's personal appearance , I find it good to be perfectly frank with the household . you can have no conception how often awkward moment arise ; as , for instance , in the library , the first time Garth come downstairs ; when he order Simpson to bring the step for Miss Gray , and Simpson open his lip to remark that Nurse Gray could reach to the top shelf on her own tiptoe with the great ease , he have just see she do it . mercifully , the perfect training of an english man - servant save the situation , and he merely say : " Yessir ; certainly sir , " and look upon , I , stand silently by , as a person who evidently delight in give unnecessary trouble . have it be dear old Margery with her Scotch tongue , which start slowly , but gather momentum as it roll , and can never be arrest until the full flood of her thought have be pour forth , I should have be constrain to pick she up bodily in my dainty arm and carry she out . 

 so I send for Simpson and Margery to the dining - room that evening , when the master be safely out of ear - shot , and tell they that , for reason which I could not fully explain , a very incorrect description of my appearance have be give he . he think I small and slim ; fair and very pretty ; and it be most important , in order to avoid long explanation and mental confusion for he , that he should not at present be undeceive . Simpson 's expression of polite attention do not vary , and his only comment be : " certainly , miss . quite so . " but across old Margery 's countenance , while I be speak , pass many shade of opinion , which , fortunately , by the time I have finish , crystallize into an approve smile of acquiescence . she even add her own commentary : " and a very good thing , too , I be think . for Master Garth , poor laddie , be always so set upon have beauty about he . ' Master Garthie , ' I would say to he , when he have friend come , and all his idea in talk over the dinner concern the cleaning up of the old silver , and put out of Valentine glass and Worstered china ; ' Master Garthie , ' I would say , feel the occasion call for the apt quoting of Scripture , ' it appear to I your attention be give entirely to the outside of the cup and platter , and you care nothing for all the good thing that lie within . ' so it be just as well to keep he deceive , Miss Gray . " and then , as Simpson cough tactfully behind his hand , and nudge she very obviously with his elbow , she add , as a sympathetic after - think : " for , though a homey face may indeed be redeem by its kindly expression , you can not very well explain expression to the blind . " so you see , Deryck , this shrewd old body , who have know Garth from boyhood , would have entirely agree with the decision of three year ago . 

 well , to continue my report . the voice give we some trouble , as you foresaw , and the whole plan hang in the balance during a few awful moment ; for , though he easily accept the explanation we have plan , he send I out , and tell Dr. Mackenzie my voice in his room would madden he . Dr. Rob be equal to the occasion , and win the day ; and Garth , have once give in , never mention the matter again . only , sometimes I see he listen and remembering . 

 but Nurse Rosemary Gray have beautiful hour when poor anxious , yearn Jane be shut out . for her patient turn to she , and depend on she , and talk to she , and try to reach her mind , and show she his , and be a wonderful person to live with and know . jane , march about in the cold , outside , and hear they talk , realise how little she understand the beautiful gift which be lay at her foot ; how little she have grasp the nature and mind of the man whom she dismiss as " a mere boy . " Nurse Rosemary , sit beside he during long sweet hour of companionship , be learn it ; and Jane , ramp up and down her narrowing strip of desert , taste the sirocco of despair . 

 and now I come to the point of my letter , and , though I be a woman , I will not put it in a postscript . 

 Deryck , can you come up soon , to pay he a visit , and to talk to I ? I do not   think I can bear it , unaided , much long ; and he would so enjoy have you , and show you how he have get on , and all the thing he have already learn to do . also you might put in a word for Jane ; or at all event , get at his mind on the subject . oh , boy , if you could spare forty - eight hour ! and a breath of the moor would be good for you . also I have a little private plan , which depend largely for its fulfilment on your coming . oh , boy come ! 

 your , need you , 
 Jeanette . 


 from Sir Deryck Brand to Nurse Rosemary Gray , Castle Gleneesh , N. B. 

 Wimpole Street . 

 my dear Jeanette : certainly I will come . I will leave Euston on Friday evening . I can spend the whole of Saturday and most of Sunday at Gleneesh , but must be home in time for Monday 's work . 

 I will do my good , only , alas ! I be not Moses , and do not possess his wonder - work rod . moreover , late investigation have prove that the Israelites could not have cross at the place you mention , but far north at the Bitter Lakes ; a mere matter of detail , in no way affect the extreme appositeness of your illustration , rather , add to it ; for I fear there be bitter water ahead of you , my poor girl . 

 still I be hopeful , nay , more than hopeful , confident . often of late , in connection with you , I have think of the promise about all thing work together for good . any one can make good thing work together for good : but only the Heavenly Father can bring good out of evil ; and , take all our mistake and failing and foolishness , cause they to work to our most perfect well - being . the more intricate and involve this problem of human existence become , the great the need to take as our own clear rule of life : " trust in the Lord with all thine heart ; and lean not unto thine own understanding . in all thy way acknowledge he , and he shall direct thy path . " ancient marching order , and simple ; but true , and therefore eternal . 

 I be glad Nurse Rosemary be prove so efficient , but I hope we may not have to face yet another complication in our problem . suppose our patient fall in love with dainty little Nurse Rosemary , where will Jane be then ? I fear the desert would have to open its mouth and swallow she up . we must avert such a catastrophe . could not Rosemary be induce to drop an occasional h , or to confess herself as rather " go " on Simpson ? 

 oh , my poor old girl ! I could not jest thus , be I not come shortly to your aid . 

 how madden it be ! and you so priceless ! but most man be either fool or blind , and one be both . trust I to prove it to he , to my own satisfaction and his , if I get the chance . 

 your always devotedly , 
 Deryck Brand . 


 from Sir Deryck Brand to Dr. Robert Mackenzie . 

 dear mackenzie : do you consider it to be advisable that I should shortly pay a visit to our patient at Gleneesh and give an opinion on his progress ? 

 I find I can make it possible to come north this week - end . 

 I hope you be satisfied with the nurse I send up . 

 your very faithfully , 
 Deryck Brand . 


 from Dr. Robert Mackenzie to Sir Deryck Brand . 

 Dear Sir Deryck : every possible need of the patient 's be be meet by the capable lady you send to be his nurse . I be no long need . nor be you for the patient . but I deem it exceedingly advisable that you should shortly pay a visit to the nurse , who be lose more flesh than a lady of her proportion can well afford . 

 some secret care , besides the natural anxiety of have the responsibility of this case , be wear she out . she may confide in you . she can not quite bring herself to trust in 

 your humble servant , 
 Robert Mackenzie . 




 CHAPTER XXI 

 hard ON the SECRETARY 

 Nurse Rosemary sit with her patient in the sunny library at Gleneesh . a small table be between they , upon which lie a pile of letter his morning mail ready for she to open , read to he , and pass across , should there chance to be one among they he wish to touch or to keep in his pocket . 

 they be seat close to the french window opening on to the terrace ; the breeze , fragrant with the breath of spring flower , blow about they , and the morning sun stream in . 

 Garth , in white flannel , wear a green tie and a button - hole of primrose , lie back luxuriously , enjoy , with his rapidly quicken sens , the scent of the flower and the touch of the sun - beam . 

 Nurse Rosemary finish read a letter of her own , fold it , and put it in her pocket with a feeling of thankful relief . Deryck be come . he have not fail she . 

 " a man 's letter , Miss Gray , " say Garth unexpectedly . 

 " quite right , " say Nurse Rosemary . " how do you know ? " 

 " because it be on one sheet . a woman 's letter on a matter of great importance would have run to two , if not three . and that letter be on a matter of importance . " 

 " right again , " say Nurse Rosemary , smile . " and again , how do you know ? " 

 " because you give a little sigh of relief after read the first line , and another , as you fold it and replace it in the envelope . " 

 Nurse Rosemary laugh . " you be get on so fast , Mr. Dalmain , that soon we shall be able to keep no secret . my letter be from " 

 " oh , do not   tell I , " cry Garth quickly , put out his hand in protest . " I have no idea of seem curious as to your private correspondence , Miss Gray . only it be such a pleasure to report progress to you in the thing I manage to find out without be tell . " 

 " but I mean to tell you anyway , " say Nurse Rosemary . " the letter be from Sir Deryck , and , amongst other thing , he say he be come up to see you next Saturday . " 

 " ah , good ! " say Garth . " and what a change he will find ! and I shall have the pleasure of report on the nurse , secretary , reader , and unspeakably patient guide and companion he provide for I . " then he add , in a tone of suddenly awaken anxiety : " he be not come to take you away , be he ? " 

 " no , " say Nurse Rosemary , " not yet . but , Mr. Dalmain , I be want to ask whether you could spare I just during forty - eight hour ; and Dr. Brand 's visit would be an excellent opportunity . I could leave you more easily , know you would have his companionship . if I may take the week - end , leave on Friday night , I could return early on Monday morning , and be with you in time to do the morning letter . Dr. Brand would read you Saturday 's and Sunday 's Ah , I forget ; there be no Sunday post . so I should miss but one ; and he would more than take my place in other way . " 

 " very well , " say Garth , strive not to show disappointment . " I should have like that we three should have talk together . but no wonder you want a time off . shall you be go far ? " 

 " no ; I have friend near by . and now , do you wish to attend to your letter ? " 

 " yes , " say Garth , reach out his hand . " wait a minute . there be a newspaper among they . I smell the printing ink . I do not   want that . but kindly give I the rest . " 

 Nurse Rosemary take out the newspaper ; then push the pile along , until it touch his hand . 

 Garth take they . " what a lot ! " he say , smile in pleasurable anticipation . " I say , Miss Gray , if you profit as you ought to do by the reading of so many epistle write in every possible and impossible style , you ought to be able to bring out a pretty comprehensive ' Complete letter - writer . ' do you remember the condolence of Mrs. Parker - Bangs ? I think that be the first time we really laugh together . kind old soul ! but she should not have mention blind Bartimaeus dipping seven time in the pool of Siloam . it be always good to avoid classical allusion , especially if sacred , unless one have they accurately . now " Garth pause . 

 he have be handle his letter , one by one ; carefully finger each , before lay it on the table beside he . he have just come to one write on foreign paper , and seal . he break off his sentence abruptly , hold the letter silently for a moment , then pass his finger slowly over the seal . 

 Nurse Rosemary watch he anxiously . he make no remark , but after a moment lay it down and take up the next . but when he pass the pile across to she , he slip the seal letter beneath the rest , so that she should come to it last of all . 

 then the usual order of proceeding commence . Garth light a cigarette one of the first thing he have learn to do for himself and smoke contentedly , carefully place his ash - tray , and almost unfailingly locate the ash , in time and correctly . 

 Nurse Rosemary take up the first letter , read the postmark , and describe the writing on the envelope . Garth guess from whom it come , and be immensely pleased if , on opening , his surmise prove correct . there be nine to - day , of vary interest , some from man friend , one or two from charming woman who profess themselves ready to come and see he as soon as he wish for visitor , one from a blind asylum ask for a subscription , a short note from the doctor herald his visit , and a bill for tie from a Bond Street shop . 

 Nurse Rosemary 's finger shake as she replace the eighth in its envelope . the last of the pile lie on the table . as she take it up , Garth with a quick movement fling his cigarette - end through the window , and lie back , shade his face with his hand . 

 " do I shoot straight , nurse ? " he ask . 

 she lean forward and see the tiny column of blue smoke rise from the gravel . 

 " quite straight , " she say . " Mr. Dalmain , this letter have an egyptian stamp , and the postmark be Cairo . it be seal with scarlet sealing - wax , and the engraving on the seal be a plumed helmet with the visor close . " 

 " and the writing ? " ask Garth , mechanically and very quietly . 

 " the handwriting be rather bold and very clear , with no twirl or flourish . it be write with a broad nib . " 

 " will you kindly open it , nurse , and tell I the signature before read the rest of the letter . " 

 Nurse Rosemary fight with her throat , which threaten to close altogether and stifle her voice . she open the letter , turn to the last page , and find the signature . 

 " it be sign ' Jane Champion , ' Mr. Dalmain , " say Nurse Rosemary . 

 " read it , please , " say Garth quietly . and Nurse Rosemary begin . 

 Dear Dal : what can I write ? if I be with you , there would be so much I could say ; but writing be so difficult , so impossible . 

 I know it be hard for you than it would have be for any of we ; but you will be braver over it than we should have be , and you will come through splendidly , and go on think life beautiful , and make it seem so to other people . I never think it so until that summer at Overdene and Shenstone when you teach I the perception of beauty . since then , in every sunset and sunrise , in the blue - green of the Atlantic , the purple of the mountain , the spray of Niagara , the cherry blossom of Japan , the golden desert of Egypt , I have think of you , and understand they well , because of you . oh , Dal ! I should like to come and tell you all about they , and let you see they through my eye ; and then you would widen out my narrow understanding of they , and show they again to I in great loveliness . 

 I hear you receive no visitor ; but can not you make just one exception , and let I come ? 

 I be at the Great Pyramid when I hear . I be sit on the piazza after dinner . the moonlight call up memory . I have just make up my mind to give up the Nile , and to come straight home , and write ask you to come and see I ; when General Loraine turn up , with an english paper and a letter from Myra , and I hear . would you have come , Garth ? 

 and now , my friend , as you can not come to I , may I come to you ? if you just say : " come , " I will come from any part of the world where I may chance to be when the message reach I . never mind this egyptian address . I shall not be there when you be hear this . direct to I at my aunt 's town house . all my letter go there , and be forward unopened . 

 let I come . and oh , do believe that I know something of how hard it be for you . but God can " enable . " 

 believe I to be , 

 your , more than I can write , 
 Jane Champion . 

 Garth remove the hand which have be shield his face . 

 " if you be not tired , Miss Gray , after read so many letter , I should like to dictate my answer to that one immediately , while it be fresh in my mind . have you paper there ? thank you . may we begin ? dear Miss Champion ... I be deeply touch by your kind letter of sympathy ... it be especially good of you to write to I from so far away amid so much which might well have divert your attention from friend at home . " 

 a long pause . Nurse Rosemary Gray wait , pen in hand , and hop the beating of her heart be only in her own ear , and not audible across the small table . 

 " I be glad you do not give up the Nile trip but " 

 an early bee hum in from the hyacinth and buzz against the pane . otherwise the room be very still . 

  " but of course , if you have send for I I should have come . " 

 the bee fight the window angrily , up and down , up and down , for several minute ; then find the open glass and whirl out into the sunshine , joyfully . 

 absolute silence in the room , until Garth 's quiet voice break it as he go on dictate . 

 " it be more than kind of you to suggest come to see I , but " 

 Nurse Rosemary drop her pen . " oh , Mr. Dalmain , " she say , " let she come . " 

 Garth turn upon she a face of blank surprise . 

 " I do not wish it , " he say , in a tone of absolute finality . 

 " but think how hard it must be for any one to want so much to be near a a friend in trouble , and to be keep away . " 

 " it be only her wonderful kindness of heart make her offer to come , Miss Gray . she be a friend and comrade of long ago . it would greatly sadden she to see I thus . " 

 " it do not seem so to she , " plead Nurse Rosemary . " ah , can not you read between the line ? or do it take a woman 's heart to understand a woman 's letter ? do I read it badly ? may I read it over again ? " 

 a look of real annoyance gather upon Garth 's face . he speak with quiet sternness , a frown bend his straight black brow . 

 " you read it quite well , " he say , " but you do not do well to discuss it . I must feel able to dictate my letter to my secretary , without have to explain they . " 

 " I beg your pardon , sir , " say Nurse Rosemary humbly . " I be wrong . " 

 Garth stretch his hand across the table , and leave it there a moment ; though no responsive hand be place within it . 

 " never mind , " he say , with his win smile , " my kind little mentor and guide . you can direct I in most thing , but not in this . now let we conclude . where be we ? ah ' to suggest come to see I . ' do you put ` it be most kind ' or ` it be more than kind ? ' " 

 " ' More than kind , ' " say Nurse Rosemary , brokenly . 

 " right , for it be indeed more than kind . only she and I can possibly know how much more . now let we go on ... but I be receive no visitor , and do not desire any until I have so master my new circumstance that the handicap connect with they shall neither be painful nor very noticeable to other people . during the summer I shall be learn step by step to live this new life , in complete seclusion at Gleneesh . I feel sure my friend will respect my wish in this matter . I have with I one who most perfectly and patiently be help ah , wait ! " cry Garth suddenly . " I will not say that . she might think she might misunderstand . have you begin to write it ? no ? what be the last word ? ' matter ? ' ah yes . that be right . full stop after ' matter . ' now let I think . " 

 Garth drop his face into his hand , and sit for a long time absorb in thought . 

 Nurse Rosemary wait . her right hand hold the pen poise over the paper . her left be press against her breast . her eye rest on that dark bow head , with a look of unutterable yearning and of passionate tenderness . at last Garth lift his face . " your very sincerely , Garth Dalmain ; " he say . and , silently , Nurse Rosemary write it . 




 CHAPTER XXII 

 DR . ROB to the RESCUE 

 into the somewhat oppressive silence which follow the addressing and closing of the envelope , break the cheery voice of Dr. Rob . 

 " which be the patient to - day ? the lady or the gentleman ? ah , neither , I see . both flaunt the bloom of perfect health and make the doctor shy . it be spring without , but summer within , " run on Dr. Rob gaily , wonder why both face be so white and perturb , and why there be in the air a sense of heart in torment . " Flannels seem to call up boat and picnic party ; and I see you have discard the merino , Nurse Gray , and return to the pretty blue washable . More become , undoubtedly ; only , do not   take cold ; and be sure you feed up well . in this air people must eat plenty , and you have be perceptibly lose weight lately . we do not   want TOO airy - fairy dimension . " 

 " why do you always chaff Miss Gray about be small , Dr. Rob ? " ask Garth , in a rather vex tone . " I be sure be short be in no way detrimental to she . " 

 " I will chaff she about be tall if you like , " say Dr. Rob , look at she with a wicked twinkle , as she stand in the window , draw up to her full height , and regard he with cold disapproval . 

 " I would soon no comment of any kind be make upon her personal appearance , " say Garth shortly ; then add , more pleasantly : " you see , she be just a voice to I a kind , guide voice . at first I use to form mental picture of she , of a hazy kind ; but now I prefer to appropriate in all its helpfulness what I do know , and leave unimagined what I do not . do it ever strike you that she be the only person bar that fellow Johnson , who belong to a nightmare time I be quickly forget I have yet have near I , in my blindness , whom I have not already see ; the only voice I have ever hear to which I could not put a face and figure ? in time , of course , there will be many . at present she stand alone to I in this . " 

 Dr. Rob 's observant eye have be dart about during this explanation , seek to focus itself upon something worthy of minute examination . suddenly he spy the foreign letter lie close beside he on the table . 

 " hello ! " he say . " pyramid ? the egyptian stamp ? that be interesting . have you friend out there , Mr. Dalmain ? " 

 " that letter come from Cairo , " Garth reply ; " but I believe Miss Champion have by now go on to Syria . " Dr. Rob attack his moustache , and star at the letter meditatively . " champion ? " he repeat . " Champion ? it be an uncommon name . be your correspondent , by any chance , the Honourable Jane ? " 

 " why , that letter be from she , " reply Garth , surprised . " do you know she ? " his voice vibrate eagerly . 

 " well , " answer Dr. Rob , with slow deliberation , " I know her face , and I know her voice ; I know her figure , and I know a pretty good deal of her character . I know she at home , and I know she abroad . I have   see she under fire , which be more than most man of her acquaintance can claim . but there be one thing I never know until to - day and that be her handwriting . may I examine this envelope ? " he turn to the window ; yes , this audacious little Scotchman have ask the question of Nurse Rosemary . but only a broad blue back meet his look of inquiry . Nurse Rosemary be study the view . he turn back to Garth , who have evidently already make a sign of assent , and on whose face be clearly express an eager desire to hear more , and an extreme disinclination to ask for it . 

 Dr. Mackenzie take up the envelope and ponder it . 

 " yes , " he say , at last , " it be like she , clear , firm , unwavering ; know what it mean to say , and say it ; go where it mean to go , and get there . ay , lad , it be a grand woman that ; and if you have the Honourable Jane for your friend , you can be do without a few other thing . " 

 a tinge of eager colour rise in Garth 's thin cheek . he have be so starve in his darkness for want of some word concern she , from that outer light in which she move . he have feel so hopelessly cut off from all chance of hearing of she . and all the while , if only he have know it , old Robbie could have talk of she . he have have to question Brand so cautiously , fear to betray his secret and her ; but with Dr. Rob and Nurse Gray no such precaution be need . he could safely guard his secret , and yet listen and speak . 

 " where when ? " ask Garth . 

 " I will tell you where , and I will tell you when , " answer Dr. Rob , " if you feel inclined for a war tale on this peaceful spring morning . " 

 Garth be aflame with eagerness . " have you a chair , doctor ? " he say . " and have Miss Gray a chair ? " 

 " I have no chair , sir , " say Dr. Rob , " because when I intend thoroughly to enjoy my own eloquence it be my custom to stand . Nurse Gray have no chair , because she be stand at the window absorb in the view . she have apparently cease to pay any heed to you and I . you will very rarely find one woman take much interest in tale about another . but you lean back in your own chair , laddie , and light a cigarette . and a wonderful thing it be to see you do it , too , and well than pound the wall . eh ? all of which we may consider we owe to the lady who disdain we and prefer the scenery . well , I be not much to look at , goodness know ; and she can see you all the rest of the day . now that be a brand worth smoking . what do you call it ' Zenith ' ? ah , and ' marcovitch . ' yes ; you can not   well that for drawing - room and garden purpose . it mingle with the flower . lean back and enjoy it , while I smell gun - powder . for I will tell you where I first see the Honourable Jane . out in South Africa , in the very thick of the Boer war . I have volunteer for the sake of the surgery experience . she be out there , nursing ; but the real thing , mind you . none of your dabbling in eau - de - cologne with lace handkerchief , and wash handsome face when the orderly have wash they already ; make charming conversation to man who be get well , but flee in dread from the dead or the dying . none of that , you may be sure , and none of that allow in her hospital ; for Miss Champion be in command there , and I can tell you she make they scoot . she do the work of ten , and expect other to do it too . doctor and orderly adore she . she be always call ' the Honourable Jane , ' most of the man sound the h and pronounce the title as four syllable . ay , and the wound soldier ! there be many a lad out there , far from home and friend , who , when death come , die with a smile on his lip , and a sense of mother and home quite near , because the Honourable Jane 's arm be around he , and his die head rest against her womanly breast . her voice when she talk to they ? no , that I shall never forget . and to hear her snap at the woman , and order along the man ; and then turn and speak to a sick Tommy as his mother or his sweetheart would have wish to hear he speak to , be a lesson in quick - change from which I be profit still . and that big , love heart must often have be rack ; but she be always brave and bright . just once she break down . it be over a boy whom she try hard to save quite a youngster . she have hold he during the operation which be his only chance ; and when it prove no good , and he lie back against her unconscious , she quite break down and say : ' oh , doctor , a mere boy and to suffer so , and then die like this ! ' and gather he to she , and weep over he , as his own mother might have do . the surgeon tell I of it himself . he say the hard heart in the tent be touch and soften . but , it be the only time the Honourable Jane break down . " 

 Garth shield his face with his hand . his half - smoke cigarette fall unheeded to the floor . the hand that have hold it be clench on his knee . Dr. Rob pick it up , and rub the scorch spot on the carpet carefully with his foot . he glance towards the window . Nurse Rosemary have turn and be lean against the frame . she do not look at he , but her eye dwelt with troubled anxiety on Garth . 

 " I come across her several time , at different centre , " continue Dr. Rob ; " but we be not in the same department , and she speak to I only once . I have ride in , from a temporary overflow sort of place where we be deal with the bad case straight off the field , to the main hospital in the town for a fresh supply of chloroform . while they fetch it , I walk round the ward , and there in a corner be Miss Champion , kneel beside a man whose last hour be very near , talk to he quietly , and take measure at the same time to ease his pain . suddenly there come a crash a deafening rush and another crash , and the Honourable Jane and her patient be cover with dust and splinter . a boer shell have go clean through the roof just over their head . the man sit up , yell with fear . poor chap , you could not   blame he ; die , and half under morphine . the Honourable Jane never turn a hair . ' lie down , my man , ' she say , ' and keep still . ' ' not here , ' sob the man . ' all right , ' say the Honourable Jane ; ' we will soon move you . ' then she turn and see I . I be in the most nondescript khaki , a non - com 's jacket which I have catch up on leave the tent , and various odd and end of my outfit which have survive the wear and tear of the campaign . also I be dusty with a long gallop . ' here , serjeant , ' she say , ' lend a hand with this poor fellow . I can not   have he disturb just now . ' that be Jane 's only comment on the passing of a shell within a few yard of her own head . do you wonder the man adore she ? she place her hand beneath his shoulder , and sign to I to take he under the knee , and together we carry he round a screen , out of the ward , and down a short passage ; turn unexpectedly into a quiet little room , with a comfortable bed , and photograph and book arrange on the tiny dressing - table . she say : ' here , if you please , serjeant , ' and we lay he on the bed . ' whose be it ? ' I ask . she look surprised at be question , but see I be a stranger , answer civilly : ' mine . ' and then , note that he have doze off while we carry he , add : ' and he will have do with bed , poor chap , before I need it . ' there be nerve for you ! well , that be my only conversation out there with the Honourable Jane . soon after I have have enough and come home . " 

 Garth lift his head . " do you ever meet she at home ? " he ask . 

 " I do , " say Dr. Rob . " but she do not remember I . not a flicker of recognition . well , how could I expect it ? I wear a beard out there ; no time to shave ; and my jacket proclaim I a serjeant , not a surgeon . no fault of hers if she do not expect to meet a comrade from the front in the wild of of Piccadilly , " finish Dr. Rob lamely . " now , have spin so long a yarn , I must be off to your gardener 's cot in the wood , to see his good wife , who have have what he pathetically call ' an increase . ' I should think a decrease would have well suit the size of his house . but first I must interview Mistress Margery in the dining - room . she be anxious about herself just now because she ' canna eat bacon . ' she say it fly between her shoulder . so erratic a deviation from its normal route on the part of the bacon , undoubtedly require investigation . so , by your leave , I will ring for the good lady . " 

 " not just yet , doctor , " say a quiet voice from the window . " I want to see you in the dining - room , and will follow you there immediately . and afterwards , while you investigate Margery , I will run up for my bonnet , and walk with you through the wood , if Mr. Dalmain will not mind an hour alone . " 

 when Jane reach the dining - room , Dr. Robert Mackenzie be stand on the hearth - rug in a napoleonic attitude , just as on the morning of their first interview . he look up uncertainly as she come in . 

 " well ? " he say . " be I to pay the piper ? " 

 Jane come straight to he , with both hand extend . 

 " ah , serjeant ! " she say . " you dear faithful old serjeant ! see what come of wear another man 's coat . and my dilemma come from take another woman 's name . so you know I all the time , from the first moment I come into the room ? " 

 " from the first moment you enter the room , " assent Dr. Rob . 

 " why do you not say so ? " ask Jane . 

 " well , I conclude you have your reason for be ' Nurse Rosemary Gray , ' and it do not come within my province to question your identity . " 

 " oh , you dear ! " say Jane . " be there ever anything so shrewd , and so wise , and so bewilderingly far - seeing , stand on two leg on a hearth - rug before ! and when I remember how you say : ' so you have arrive , Nurse Gray ? ' and all the while you might have be say . ' how do you do , Miss Champion ? and what bring you up here under somebody else 's name ? " 

 " I might have so say , " agree Dr. Rob reflectively ; " but praise be , I do not . " 

 " but tell I " say Jane " why let it out now ? " 

 Dr. Rob lay his hand on her arm . " my dear , I be an old fellow , and all my life I have make it my business to know , without be tell . you have be come through a strain , a prolonged period of strain , sometimes hard , sometimes easy , but never quite relaxed , a strain such as few woman could have bear . it be not only with he ; you have to keep it up towards we all . I know , if it be to continue , you must soon have the relief of some one with whom to share the secret , some one towards whom you could be yourself occasionally . and when I find you have be write to he here , send the letter to be post in Cairo   how like a woman , to strain at a gnat , after swallow such a camel ! , await its return day after day , then oblige to read it to he yourself , and take down his dictate answer , which I gather from your face when I enter be his refusal of your request to come and see he , well , it seem to I about time you be make to realise that you might as well confide in an old fellow who , in common with all the man who know you in South Africa , would gladly give his right hand for the Honourable Jane . " 

 Jane look at he , her eye full of gratitude . for the moment she could not speak . 

 " but tell I , my dear , " say Dr. Rob , " tell I , if you can : why do the lad put from he so firmly that which , if indeed it might be his for the asking , would mean for he so great , so wonderful , so comfort a good ? " 

 " ah , doctor , " say Jane , " thereby hang a tale of sad mistrust and mistake , and the mistrust and mistake , alas , be mine . now , while you see Margery , I will prepare for walk ; and as we go through the wood I will try to tell you the woeful thing which come between he and I and place our life so far apart . your wise advice will help I , and your shrewd knowledge of man and of the human heart may find we a way out , for indeed we be shut in between Migdol and the sea . " 

 as Jane cross the hall and be about to mount the stair , she look towards the closed library door . a sudden fear seize she , lest the strain of listen to that tale of Dr. Rob 's have be too much for Garth . none but she could know all it must have awaken of memory to be tell so vividly of the die soldier whose head be pillow on her breast , and the strange coincidence of those word , " a mere boy and to suffer so ! " she could not leave the house without be sure he be safe and well . and yet she instinctively fear to intrude when he imagine himself alone for an hour . 

 then Jane , in her anxiety , do a thing she have never do before . she open the front door noiselessly , pass round the house to the terrace , and when approach the open window of the library , trod on the grass border , and reach it without make the faint sound . 

 never before have she come upon he unawares , know he hat and dread the thought of an unseen intrusion on his privacy . 

 but now just this once 

 Jane look in at the window . 

 Garth sit sideways in the chair , his arm fold on the table beside he , his face bury in they . he be sob as she have sometimes hear man sob after agonising operation , bear without a sound until the bad be over . and Garth 's sob of agony be this : " OH , MY WIFE MY WIFE MY WIFE ! " 

 Jane creep away . how she do it she never know . but some instinct tell she that to reveal herself then , take he at a disadvantage , when Dr. Rob 's story have unnerve and unmanned he , would be to ruin all . " if you value your ultimate happiness and his , " Deryck 's voice always sound in warning . besides , it be such a short postponement . in the calm earnest thought which would succeed this storm , his need of she , would win the day . the letter , not yet post , would be rewrite . he would say " COME " and the next minute he would be in her arm . 

 so Jane turn noiselessly away . 

 come in , an hour later , from her walk with Dr. Rob , her heart fill with glad anticipation , she find he stand in the window , listen to the countless sound he be learn to distinguish . he look so slim and tall and straight in his white flannel , both hand thrust deep into the pocket of his coat , that when he turn at her approach it seem to she as if the shin eye must be there . 

 " be it lovely in the wood ? " he ask . " Simpson shall take I up there after lunch . meanwhile , be there time , if you be not tired , Miss Gray , to finish our morning 's work ? " 

 five letter be dictate and a cheque write . then Jane notice that hers to he have go from among the rest . but his to she lie on the table ready for stamp . she hesitate . 

 " and about the letter to Miss Champion ? " she say . " do you wish it to go as it be , Mr. Dalmain ? " 

 " why certainly , " he say . " do we not finish it ? " 

 " I think , " say Jane nervously , look away from his blank face , " I think perhaps after Dr. Rob 's story you might " 

 " Dr. Rob 's story could make no possible difference as to whether I should let she come here or not , " say Garth emphatically ; then add more gently : " it only remind I " 

 " of what ? " ask Jane , her hand upon her breast . 

 " of what a glorious woman she be , " say Garth Dalmain , and blow a long , steady cloud of smoke into the summer air . 




 CHAPTER XXIII 

 the only WAY 

 when Deryck Brand alight at the little northern wayside station , he look up and down the gravelled platform , more than half expect to see Jane . the hour be early , but she invariably say " so much the well " to any plan which involve rise early than usual . nothing be to be see , however , but his portmanteau in the distance look as if it have take up a solitary and permanent position where the guard have place it and one slow porter , who appear to be overwhelm by the fact that he alone be on duty to receive the train . 

 there be no other passenger descend ; there be no other baggage to put out . the guard swing up into his van as the train move off . 

 the old porter , shade his eye from the slanting ray of the morning sun , watch the train glide round the curve and disappear from sight ; then slowly turn and look the other way , as if to make sure there be not another coming , see the portmanteau , and shamble towards it . he stand look down upon it pensively , then move slowly round , apparently read the name and particular of all the various continental hotel at which the portmanteau have recently stay with its owner . 

 Dr. Brand never hurry people , he always say : " it answer good , in the long run , to let they take their own time . the minute or two gain by hurry they be lose in the final result . " but this apply chiefly to patient in the consulting - room ; to anxious young student in hospital ; or to nurse , too excitedly conscious at first of the fact that he be talk to they , to take in fully what he be say . his habit of give people , even in final moment , the full time they want , have once lose he an overcoat , almost lose he a train , and win he the thing in life he most desire . but that belong to another story . 

 meanwhile he want his breakfast on this fresh spring morning . and he want to see Jane . therefore , as porter and portmanteau make no advance towards he , the doctor stride down the platform . 

 " now then , my man ! " he call . 

 " I beg your pardon ? " say the Scotch porter . 

 " I want my portmanteau . " 

 " would this be your portmanteau ? " inquire the porter doubtfully . 

 " it would , " say the doctor . " and it and I would be on our way to Castle Gleneesh , if you would be bring it out and put it into the motor , which I see wait outside . " 

 " I will be fetch a truck , " say the porter . but when he return , carefully trundle it behind he , the doctor , the portmanteau , and the motor be all out of sight . 

 the porter shade his eye and gaze up the road . 

 " I will be hop it be his portmanteau , " he say , and go back to his porridge . 

 meanwhile the doctor speed up into the hill , his mind alight with eagerness to meet Jane and to learn the development of the last few day . her non - appearance at the railway station fill he with an undefinable anxiety . it would have be so like Jane to have be there , prompt to seize the chance of a talk with he alone before he reach the house . he have call up , in anticipation , such a vivid picture of she , wait on the platform , bright , alert , vigorous , with that fresh and healthy vigour which betoken a good night 's rest , a pleasant early awakening , and a cold tub recently enjoy , and the disappointment of not see she have work in he a strange foreboding . what if her nerve have give way under the strain ? 

 they turn a bend in the wind road , and the grey turret of Gleneesh come in sight , high up on the other side of the glen , the moor stretch away behind and above it . as they wound up the valley to the moorland road which would bring they round to the house , the doctor could see , in the clear morning light , the broad lawn and terrace of Gleneesh , with its gay flower - bed , smooth gravelled walk , and broad stone parapet , from which be a drop almost sheer down into the glen below . 

 Simpson receive he at the hall door ; and he just stop himself in time , as he be about to ask for Miss Champion . this perilous approach to a slip remind he how carefully he must guard word and action in this house , where Jane have successfully steer she intricate course . he would never forgive himself if he give she away . 

 " Mr. Dalmain be in the library , Sir Deryck , " say Simpson ; and it be a very alert , clear - head doctor who follow the man across the hall . 

 Garth rise from his chair and walk forward to meet he , his right hand outstretche , a smile of welcome on his face , and so direct and unhesitate a course that the doctor have to glance at the sightless face to make sure that this lithe , graceful , easy - move figure be indeed the blind man he have come to see . then he notice a length of brown silk cord stretch from an arm of the chair Garth have quit to the door . Garth 's left hand have slip lightly along it as he walk . 

 the doctor put his hand into the one outstretche , and grip it warmly . 

 " my dear fellow ! what a change ! " 

 " be not   it ? " say Garth delightedly . " and it be entirely she who have work it , the capital little woman you send up to I . I want to tell you how first - rate she be . " he have reach his chair again , and find and draw forward for the doctor the one in which Jane usually sit , " this be her own idea . " he unhitch the cord , and let it fall to the floor , a fine string remain attach to it and to the chair , by which he could draw it up again at will . " there be one on this side lead to the piano , and one here to the window . now how should you know they apart ? " 

 " they be brown , purple , and orange , " reply the doctor . 

 " yes , " say Garth . " you know they by the colour , but I distinguish they by a slight difference in the thickness and in the texture , which you could not see , but which I can feel . and I enjoy think of the colour , too . and sometimes I wear tie and thing to match they . you see , I know exactly how they look ; and it be so like she to remember that . an ordinary nurse would have put red , green , and blue , and I should have sit and hat the thought of they know how vilely they must be clash with my persian carpet . but she understand how much colour mean to I , even though I can not see they . " 

 " I conclude that by ' she ' you mean Nurse Rosemary , " say the doctor . " I be glad she be a success . " 

 " a success ! " exclaim Garth . " why , she help I to live again ! I be ashamed to remember how at the bottom of all thing I be when you come up before , Brand , just pound the wall , as old Robbie express it . you must have think I a fool and a coward . " 

 " I think you neither , my dear fellow . you be come through a stiff fight than any of we have be call to face . thank God , you have win . " 

 " I owe a lot to you , Brand , and still more to Miss Gray . I wish she be here to see you . she be away for the week - end . " 

 " away ! J just now ? " exclaim the doctor , almost surprised into another slip . 

 " yes ; she go last night . she be week - end in the neighbourhood . she say she be not go far , and should be back with I early on Monday morning . but she seem to want a change of scene , and think this a good opportunity , as I shall have you here most of the time . I say , Brand , I do think it be extraordinarily good of you to come all this way to see I . you know , from such a man as yourself it be almost overwhelming . " 

 " you must not be overwhelm , my dear chap ; and , though I very truly come to see you , I be also up , about another old friend in the near neighbourhood in whom I be interested . I only mention this in order to be quite honest , and to lift from off you any possible burden of feel yourself my only patient . " 

 " oh , thank ! " say Garth . " it lessen my compunction without diminish my gratitude . and now you must be want a brush up and breakfast , and here be I selfishly keep you from both . and I say , Brand , " Garth colour hotly , boyishly , and hesitate , " I be awfully sorry you will have no companion at your meal , Miss Gray be away . I do not like to think of you have they alone , but I I always have mine by myself . Simpson attend to they . " 

 he could not see the doctor 's quick look of comprehension , but the understand sympathy of the tone in which he say : " ah , yes . yes , of course , " without further comment , help Garth to add : " I could not   even have Miss Gray with I . we always take our meal apart . you can not imagine how awful it be chase your food all round your plate , and never sure it be not on the cloth , after all , or on your tie , while you be hunt for it elsewhere . " 

 " no , I can not   imagine , " say the doctor . " no one could who have not be through it . but can you bear it well with Simpson than with Nurse Rosemary ? she be train to that sort of thing , you know . " 

 Garth colour again . " well , you see , Simpson be the chap who shave I , and get I into my clothe , and take I about ; and , though it will always be a trial , it be a trial to which I be grow accustom . you might put it thus : Simpson be eye to my body ; Miss Gray be vision to my mind . Simpson 's be the only touch which core to I in the darkness . do you know , Miss Gray have never touch I , not even to shake hand . I be awfully glad of this . I will tell you why presently , if I may . it make she just a MIND and VOICE to I , and nothing more ; but a wonderfully kind and helpful voice . I feel as if I could not live without she . " 

 Garth ring the bell and Simpson appear . 

 " take Sir Deryck to his room ; and he will tell you what time he would like breakfast . and when you have see to it all , Simpson , I will go out for a turn . then I shall be free , Brand , when you be . but do not give I any more time this morning if you ought to be rest , or out on the moor have a holiday from mind and man . " 

 the doctor tubbe and get into his knickerbocker and an old Norfolk jacket ; then find his way to the dining - room , and do full justice to an excellent breakfast . he be still ponder the problem of Jane , and at the same time wonder in another compartment of his mind in what sort of machine old Margery make her excellent coffee , when that good lady appear , envelop in an air of mystery , and the doctor immediately propound the question . 

 " a jug , " say old Margery . " and would you be come with I , Sir Deryck , and softly , whenever you have finish your breakfast ? " 

 " softly , " say Margery again , as they cross the hall , the doctor 's tall figure closely follow in she portly wake . after mount a few stair she turn to whisper impressively : " it be not what ye make it in ; it be how ye make it . " she ascend a few more step , then turn to say : " it all hang upon the word FRESH , " and go on mount . " freshly roast freshly ground water freshly - boil " say old Margery , reach the topmost stair somewhat breathless ; then turn , bustle along a rather dark passage , thickly carpet , and hang with old armour and picture . 

 " where be we go , Mistress Margery ? " ask the doctor , adapt his stride to her trot one to two . 

 " you will be see whenever we get there , Sir Deryck , " say Margery . " and never touch it with metal , Sir Deryck . pop it into an earthenware jug , pour your boiling water straight upon it , stir it with a wooden spoon , set it on the hob ten minute to settle ; the ground will all go to the bottom , though you might not think it ; and you pour it out fragrant , strong , and clear . but the secret be , fresh , fresh , fresh , and do not   stint your coffee . " 

 Old Margery pause before a door at the end of the passage , knock lightly ; then look up at the doctor with her hand on the door - handle , and an expression of plead earnestness in her faithful Scotch eye . 

 " and you will not forget the wooden spoon , Sir Deryck ? " 

 the doctor look down into the kind old face raise to his in the dim light . " I will not forget the wooden spoon , Mistress Margery , " he say , gravely . and old Margery , turn the handle whisper mysteriously into the half - open doorway : " it will be Sir Deryck , Miss Gray , " and usher the doctor into a cosy little sitting - room . 

 a bright fire burn in the grate . in a high - back arm - chair in front of it sit Jane , with her foot on the fender . he could only see the top of her head , and her long grey knee ; but both be unmistakably Jane 's : 

 " oh , Dicky ! " she say , and a great thankfulness be in her voice , " be it you ? oh , come in , boy , and shut the door . be we alone ? come round here quick and shake hand , or I shall be plunge about try to find you . " 

 in a moment the doctor have reach the hearth - rug , drop on one knee in front of the large chair , and take the vaguely groping hand hold out to he . 

 " Jeanette ? " he say . " Jeanette ! " and then surprise and emotion silence he . 

 Jane 's eye be securely bandaged . a black silk scarf , fold in four thickness , be firmly tie at the back of her smooth coil of hair . there be a pathetic helplessness about her large capable figure , sit alone , in this bright little sitting - room , do nothing . 

 " Jeanette ! " say the doctor , for the third time . " and you call this week - end ? " 

 " dear , " say Jane , " I have go into Sightless Land for my week - end . oh , Deryck , I have to do it . the only way really to help he be to know exactly what it mean , in all the small , try detail . I never have much imagination , and I have exhaust what little I have . and he never complain , or explain how thing come hard . so the only way to find out be to have forty - eight hour of it one 's self . Old Margery and Simpson quite enter into it , and be help I splendidly . Simpson keep the coast clear if we want to come down or go out ; because with two blind people about , it would be a complication if they run into one another . Margery help I with all the thing in which I be helpless ; and , oh Dicky , you would never believe how many they be ! and the awful , awful dark a black curtain always in front of you , sometimes seem hard and firm , like a wall of coal , within an inch of your face ; sometimes sink away into soft depth of blackness mile and mile of distant , silent , horrible darkness ; until you feel you must fall forward into it and be submerge and overwhelmed . and out of that darkness come voice . and if they speak loudly , they hit you like tap hammer ; and if they murmur indistinctly , they madden you because you can not   see what be cause it . you can not   see that they be hold pin in their mouth , and that therefore they be mumble ; or that they be half under the bed , try to get out something which have roll there , and therefore the voice seem to come from somewhere beneath the earth . and , because you can not see these thing to account for it , the variableness of sound torment you . ah ! and the wake in the morning to the same blackness as you have have all night ! I have experience it just once , I begin my darkness before dinner last night , and I assure you , Deryck , I dread to - morrow morning . think what it must be to wake to that always , with no prospect of ever again see the sunlight ! and then the meal " 

 " what ! you keep it on ? " the doctor 's voice sound rather strained . 

 " of course , " say Jane . " and you can not imagine the humiliation of follow your food all round the plate , and then find it on the table - cloth ; of be quite sure there be a last bit somewhere , and when you have give up the search and go on to another course , discover it , eventually , in your lap . I do not wonder my poor boy would not let I come to his meal . but after this I believe he will , and I shall know exactly how to help he and how to arrange so that very soon he will have no difficulty . oh , Dicky , I have to do it ! there be no other way . " 

 " yes , " say the doctor quietly , " you have to do it . " and Jane in her blindness could not see the working of his face , as he add below his breath : " you be you , dear , there be no other way . " 

 " ah , how glad I be you realise the necessity , Deryck ! I have so fear you might think it useless or foolish . and it be now or never ; because I trust if he forgive I this will be the only week - end I shall ever have to spend away from he . boy , do you think he will forgive I ? " 

 it be fortunate Jane be blind : the doctor swallow a word , then : " hush , dear , " he say . " you make I sigh for the duchess 's parrot . and I shall do no good here , if I lose patience with Dalmain . now tell I ; you really never remove that bandage ? " 

 " only to wash my face , " reply Jane , smile . " I can trust myself not to peep for two minute . and last night I find it make my head so hot that I could not sleep ; so I slip it off for an hour or two , but woke and put it on again before dawn . " 

 " and you mean to wear it until to - morrow morning ? " 

 Jane smile rather wistfully . she know what be involve in that question . 

 " until to - morrow night , boy , " she answer gently . 

 " but , Jeanette , " exclaim the doctor , in indignant protest ; ' surely you will see I before I go ! my dear girl , would it not be carry the experiment unnecessarily far ? " 

 " ah , no , " say Jane , lean towards he with her pathetic bandaged eye . " do not   you see , dear , you give I the chance of pass through what will in time be one of his hard experience , when his dear friend will come and go , and be to he only voice and touch ; their face unseen and but dimly remember ? Deryck , just because this hearing and not see you be so hard , I realise how it be enrich I in what I can share with he . he must not have to say : ' ah , but you see he before he leave . ' I want to be able to say : ' he come and go , my great friend , and I do not see he at all . ' " 

 the doctor walk over to the window and stand there , whistle softly . Jane know he be fight down his own vexation . she wait patiently . presently the whistling stop and she hear he laugh . then he come back and sit down near she . 

 " you always be a thorough old thing ! " he say . 

 " no half - measure would do . I suppose I must agree . " 

 Jane reach out for his hand . " ah , boy , " she say , " now you will help I . but I never before know you so nearly selfish . " 

 " the ' other man ' be always a problem , " say the doctor . " we male brute , by nature , always want to be first with all our woman ; not merely with the one , but with all those in whom we consider , sometimes with egregious presumption , that we hold a right . you see it everywhere , father towards their daughter , brother as regard their sister , friend in a friendship . the ' other man , ' when he arrive , be always a pill to swallow . it be only natural , I suppose ; but it be fall nature and therefore to be surmount . now let I go and forage for your hat and coat , and take you out upon the moor . no ? why not ? I often find thing for Flower , so really I know likely place in which to search . oh , all right ! I will send Margery . but do not   be long . and you need not be afraid of Dalmain hear we , for I see he just now walk briskly up and down the terrace , with only an occasional touch of his cane against the parapet . how much you have already accomplish ! we shall talk more freely out on the moor ; and , as I march you along , we can find out tip which may be useful when the time come for you to lead the ' other man ' about . only do be careful how you come downstairs with old Margery . think if you fall upon she , Jane ! she do make such excellent coffee ! " 




 CHAPTER XXIV 

 the MAN 'S POINT of VIEW 

 a deep peace reign in the library at Gleneesh . Garth and Deryck sit together and smoke in complete fellowship , enjoy that sense of calm content which follow an excellent dinner and a day spend in moorland air . 

 Jane , sit upstairs in her self - impose darkness , with nothing to do but listen , fancy she could hear the low hum of quiet voice in the room beneath , carry on a more or less continuous conversation . 

 it be a pity she could not see they as they sit together , each look his very good , Garth in the dinner jacket which suit his slight upright figure so well ; the doctor in immaculate evening clothe of the late cut and fashion , which he have take the trouble to bring , know Jane expect the man of her acquaintance to be punctilious in the matter of evening dress , and little dream she would have , literally , no eye for he . 

 and indeed the doctor himself be fastidious to a degree where clothe be concern , and always well groomed and unquestionably correct in cut and fashion , except in the case of his favourite old Norfolk jacket . this he keep for occasion when he intend to be what he call " happy and glorious , " though Lady Brand make gentle but persistent attempt to dispose of it . 

 the old Norfolk jacket have walk the moor that morning with Jane . she have recognise the feel of it as he draw her hand within his arm , and they have laugh over its many association . but now Simpson be fold it and put it away , and a very correctly clothe doctor sit in an arm - chair in front of the library fire , his long leg cross the one over the other , his broad shoulder bury in the depth of the chair . 

 Garth sit where he could feel the warm flame of the fire , pleasant in the chill evening which succeed the bright spring day . his chair be place sideways , so that he could , with his hand , shield his face from his visitor should he wish to do so . 

 " yes , " Dr. Brand be say thoughtfully , " I can easily see that all thing which reach you in that darkness assume a different proportion and possess a greatly enhance value . but I think you will find , as time go on , and you come in contact with more people , there will be a great readjustment , and you will become less consciously sensitive to sound and touch from other . at present your whole nervous system be highly string , and respond with an exaggerated vibration to every impression make upon it . a highly string nervous system usually exaggerate . and the medium of sight have be take away , the other mean of communication with the outer world , hearing and touch , draw to themselves an overplus of nervous force , and have become painfully sensitive . eventually thing will right themselves , and they will only be usefully keen and acute . what be it you be go to tell I about Nurse Rosemary not shake hand ? " 

 " ah , yes , " say Garth . " but first I want to ask , be it a rule of her order , or guild , or institution , or whatever it be to which she belong , that the nurse should never shake hand with their patient ? " 

 " not that I have ever hear , " reply the doctor . 

 " well , then , it must have be Miss Gray 's own perfect intuition as to what I want , and what I do not   want . for from the very first she have never shake hand , nor in any way touch I . even in pass across letter , and hand I thing , as she do score of time daily , never once have I feel her finger against mine . " 

 " and this please you ? " inquire the doctor , blow smoke ring into the air , and watch the blind face intently . 

 " ah , I be so grateful for it , " say Garth earnestly . " do you know , Brand , when you suggest send I a lady nurse and secretary , I feel I could not possibly stand have a woman touch I . " 

 " so you say , " comment the doctor quietly . 

 " no ! do I ? what a bear you must have think I . " 

 " by no mean , " say the doctor , " but a distinctly unusual patient . as a rule , man " 

 " ah , I dare say , " Garth interpose half impatiently . " there be a time when I should have like a soft little hand about I . and I dare say by now I should often enough have catch it and hold it , perhaps kiss it who know ? I use to do such thing , lightly enough . but , Brand , when a man have know the touch of the Woman , and when that touch have become nothing but a memory ; when one be dash into darkness , and that memory become one of the few thing which remain , and , remain , bring untold comfort , can you wonder if one fear another touch which might in any way dim that memory , supersede it , or take away from its utter sacredness ? " 

 " I understand , " say the doctor slowly . " it do not come within my own experience , but I understand . only my dear boy , may I say it ? if the one woman exist and it be excusable in your case to doubt it , because there be so many surely her place should be here ; her actual touch , one of the thing which remain . " 

 " ah , say it , " answer Garth , light another cigarette . " I like to hear it say , although as a matter of fact you might as well say that if the view from the terrace exist , I ought to be able to see it . the view be there , right enough , but my own deficiency keep I from see it . " 

 " in other word , " say the doctor , lean forward and pick up the match which , not be throw so straight as usual , have just miss the fire ; " in other word , though she be the one Woman , you be not the one man ? " 

 " yes , " say Garth bitterly , but almost beneath his breath . " I be ' a mere boy . ' " 

 " or you think you be not , " continue the doctor , seem not to have hear the last remark . " as a matter of fact , you be always the one man to the one Woman , unless another be before you in the field . only it may take time and patience to prove it to she . " 

 Garth sit up and turn a face of blank surprise towards the doctor . " what an extraordinary statement ! " he say . " do you really mean it ? " 

 " absolutely , " reply the doctor in a tone of quiet conviction . " if you eliminate all other consideration , such as money , land , title , wish of friend , attraction of exterior that be to say , admiration of mere physical beauty in one another , which be after all just a question of comparative anatomy ; if , free of all this social and habitual environment , you could place the man and the woman in a mental Garden of Eden , and let they face one another , strip of all sham and conventionality , soul view soul , naked and unashamed ; if under those circumstance she be so truly his mate , that all the noblest of the man cry out : ' this be the one woman ! ' then I say , so truly be he her mate , that he can not fail to be the one man ; only he must have the confidence require to prove it to she . on he it burst , as a revelation ; on she it dawn slowly , as the breaking of the day . " 

 " oh , my God , " murmur Garth brokenly , " it be just that ! the Garden of Eden , soul to soul , with no reservation , nothing to fear , nothing to hide . I realise she my wife , and call she so . and the next morning she call I ' a mere boy , ' whom she could not for a moment think of marry . so what become of your fool theory , Brand ? " 

 " confirm , " reply the doctor quietly . " Eve , afraid of the immensity of her bliss , doubtful of herself , fearful of come short of the marvel of his ideal of she , flee from Adam , to hide among the tree of the garden . do not   talk about fool theory , my boy . the fool - fact be Adam , if he do not start in prompt pursuit . " 

 Garth sit forward , his hand clutch the arm of his chair . that quiet , level voice be awaken doubt as to his view of the situation , the first he have have since the moment of turn and walk down the Shenstone village church three year ago . his face be livid , and as the firelight play upon it the doctor see bead of perspiration gleam on his forehead . 

 " oh , Brand , " he say , " I be blind . be merciful . thing mean so terribly much in the dark . " 

 the doctor consider . could his nurse and student have see the look on his face at that moment , they would have say that he be perform a most critical and delicate operation , in which a slip of the scalpel might mean death to the patient . they would have be right ; for the whole future of two people hang in the balance ; depend , in this crisis , upon the doctor 's firmness and yet delicacy of touch . this strain white face in the firelight , with its bead of mental agony and its appealing " I be blind , " have not enter into the doctor 's calculation . it be a view of " the other man " upon which he could not look unmoved . but the thought of that patient figure with bandaged eye sit upstairs in suspense , stretch dear helpless hand to he , steady the doctor 's nerve . he look into the fire . 

 " you may be blind , Dalmain , but I do not want you to be a fool , " say the doctor quietly . 

 " be I be I a fool ? " ask Garth . 

 " how can I judge ? " reply the doctor . " give I a clear account of the circumstance from your point of view , and I will give you my opinion of the case . " 

 his tone be so completely dispassionate and matter - of - fact , that it have a calming effect on Garth , give he also a sense of security . the doctor might have be speak of a sore throat , or a tendency to sciatica . 

 Garth lean back in his chair , slip his hand into the breast - pocket of his jacket , and touch a letter lie there . dare he risk it ? could he , for once take for himself the comfort of speak of his trouble to a man he could completely trust , and yet avoid the danger of betray her identity to one who know she so intimately ? 

 Garth weigh this , after the manner of a chess - player look several move ahead . could the conversation become more explicit , sufficiently so to be of use , and yet no clue be give which would reveal Jane as the one Woman ? 

 have the doctor utter a word of pressure or suggestion , Garth would have decide for silence . but the doctor do not speak . he lean forward and reach the poker , mend the fire with extreme care and method . he place a fragrant pine log upon the springing flame , and as he do so he whistle softly the close bar of Veni , Creator Spiritus . 

 Garth , occupy with his own mental struggle , be , for once , oblivious to sound from without , and do not realise why , at this critical moment , these word should have come with gentle insistence into his mind : 

 " keep far our foe ; give peace at home ; 
 where Thou art Guide , no ill can come . " 
 he take they as an omen . they turn the scale . 

 " Brand , " he say , " if , as you be so kind as to suggest , I give myself the extreme relief of confide in you , will you promise I never to attempt to guess at the identity of the one woman ? " 

 the doctor smile ; and the smile in his voice as he answer , add to Garth 's sense of security . 

 " my dear fellow , " he say , " I never guess at other people 's secret . it be a form of mental recreation which do not appeal to I , and which I should find neither entertaining nor remunerative . if I know they already , I do not require to guess they . if I do not know they , and their possessor wish I to remain in ignorance , I would as soon think of steal their purse as of filch their secret . " 

 " ah , thank , " say Garth . " personally , I do not mind what you know . but I owe it to she , that her name should not appear . " 

 " undoubtedly , " say the doctor . " except in so far as she herself , choose to reveal it , the one Woman 's identity should always remain a secret . get on with your tale , old chap . I will not interrupt . " 

 " I will state it as simply and as shortly as I can , " begin Garth . " and you will understand that there be detail of which no fellow could speak . I have know she several year in a friendly way , just stay at the same house , and meet at Lord 's and Henley and all the place where those in the same set do meet . I always like she , and always feel at my good with she , and think no end of her opinion , and so forth . she be a friend and a real chum to I , and to lot of other fellow . but one never think of love - making in connection with she . all the silly thing one say to ordinary woman she would have laugh at . if one have send her flower to wear , she would have put they in a vase and wonder for whom they have really be intend . she dance well , and ride straight ; but the man she dance with have to be awfully good at it , or he find himself be guide through the giddy maze ; and the man who want to be in the same field with she , must be prepare for any fence or any wall . not that I ever see she in the hunting - field ; her love of life and of fair play would have keep she out of that . but I use it as a descriptive illustration . one be always glad to meet she in a house party , though one could not have explain why . it be quite impossible to describe she . she be just well , just " 

 the doctor see " just jane " tremble on Garth 's lip , and know how inadequate be every adjective to express this name . he do not want the flood of Garth 's confidence check , so he supply the need word . 

 " just a good sort . yes , I quite understand . well ? " 

 " I have have my infatuation , plenty of they , " go on the eager young voice . " the one thing I think of in woman be their exterior . beauty of all kind of any kind craze I for the moment . I never want to marry they , but I always want to paint they . their mother , and aunt , and other old dowager in the house party use to think I mean marriage , but the girl themselves know well . I do not   believe a girl now walk this earth who would accuse I of flirt . I admire their beauty , and they know it , and they know that be all my admiration mean . it be a pleasant experience at the time , and , in several instance , help forward good marriage later on . Pauline Lister be apportion to I for two whole season , but she eventually marry the man on whose jolly old staircase I paint she . why do not   I come a cropper over any of they ? because there be too many , I suppose . also , the attraction be skin - deep . I do not   mind tell you quite frankly : the only one whose beauty use to cause I a real pang be Lady Brand . but when I have paint it and show it to the world in its perfection , I be content . I ask no more of any woman than to paint she , and find she paintable . I could not explain this to the husband and mother and chaperon , but the woman themselves understand it well enough ; and as I sit here in my darkness not a memory rise up to reproach I . " 

 " good boy , " say Deryck Brand , laugh . " you be vastly misunderstood , but I believe you . " 

 " you see , " resume Garth , " that sort of thing be merely skin - deep , I go no deeply . the only woman I really know be my mother , who die when I be nineteen , and Margery Graem , whom I always hug at meeting and parting , and always shall hug until I kiss the old face in its coffin , or she straighten I in mine . those tie of one 's infancy and boyhood be among the close and most sacred life can show . well , so thing be until a certain evening in June several year ago . she the one Woman and I be in the same house party at a lovely old place in the country . one afternoon we have be talk intimately , but quite casually and frankly . I have no more thought of want to marry she than of propose to old Margery . then something happen , I must not tell you what ; it would give too clear a clue to her identity . but it reveal to I , in a few marvellous moment , the woman in she ; the wife , the mother ; the strength , the tenderness ; the exquisite perfection of her true , pure soul . in five minute there awaken in I a hunger for she which nothing could still , which nothing ever will still , until I stand beside she in the Golden City , where they shall hunger no more , neither thirst any more ; and there shall be no more darkness , or depend upon sun , moon , or candle , for the glory of God shall lighten it ; and there shall be no more sorrow , neither shall there be any more pain , for former thing shall have pass away . " 

 the blind face shine in the firelight . Garth 's retrospection be bring he vision of thing to come . 

 the doctor sit quite still and watch the vision fade . then he say : " well ? " 

 " well , " continue the young voice in the shadow , with a sound in it of have drop back to earth and find it a mournful place ; " I never have a moment 's doubt as to what have happen to I . I know I love she ; I know I want she ; I know her presence make my day and her absence mean chill night ; and every day be radiant , for she be there . " 

 Garth pause for breath and to enjoy a moment of silent retrospection . 

 the doctor 's voice break in with a question , clear , incisive . " be she a pretty woman ; handsome , beautiful ? " 

 " a pretty woman ? " repeat Garth , amazed : " good heaven , no ! handsome ? beautiful ? well you have I there , for , ' pon my honour , I do not   know . " 

 " I mean , would you have wish to paint she ? " 

 " I have paint she , " say Garth very low , a move tenderness in his voice ; " and my two painting of she , though do in sadness and do from memory , be the most beautiful work I ever produce . no eye but my own have ever see they , and now none ever will see they , except those of one whom I must perforce trust to find they for I , and bring they to I for destruction . " 

 " and that will be ? " query the doctor . 

 " Nurse Rosemary Gray , " say Garth . 

 the doctor kick the pine log , and the flame dart up merrily . " you have choose well , " he say , and have to make a conscious effort to keep the mirth in his face from pass into his voice . " Nurse Rosemary will be discreet . very good . then we may take it the one Woman be beautiful ? " 

 but Garth look perplexed . " I do not know , " he answer slowly . " I can not see she through the eye of other . my vision of she , in that illuminate moment , follow the inspire order of thing , spirit , soul , and body . her spirit be so pure and perfect , her soul so beautiful , noble , and womanly , that the body which clothe soul and spirit partook of their perfection and become unutterably dear . " 

 " I see , " say the doctor , very gently . " yes , you dear fellow , I see . "   oh , Jane , Jane ! you be blind , without a bandage , in those day ! 

 " several glorious day go by , " continue Garth . " I realise now that I be live in the glow of my own certainty that she be the one woman . it be so clear and sweet and wonderful to I , that I never dream of it not be equally clear to she . we do a lot of music together for pure enjoyment ; we talk of other people for the fun of it ; we enjoy and appreciate each other 's view and opinion ; but we do not talk of ourselves , because we know , at least I know , and , before God , I think she do . every time I see she she seem more grand and perfect . I hold the golden key to trifle matter not understand before . we young fellow , who all admire she , use nevertheless to joke a bit about she wear collar and stock , top boot and short skirt ; whack her leg with a riding - whip , and stir the fire with her toe . but after that evening , I understand all this to be a sort of fence behind which she hide her exquisite womanliness , because it be of a deep quality than any man look upon the mere surface of she have ever fathom or understand . and when she come trail down in the evening , in something rich and cling and black , with lot of soft old lace cover her bosom and move with the beating of her great tender heart ; ah , then my soul rejoice and my eye take their fill of delight ! I see she , as all day long I have know she to be , perfect in her proud , sweet womanliness . " 

 " be he really unconscious , " think the doctor , " of how unmistakable a word - picture of Jane he be paint ? " 

 " very soon , " continue Garth , " we have three day apart , and then meet again at another house , in a weekend party . one of the season 's beauty be there , with whom my name be be freely couple , and something she say on that subject , combine with the fearful blankness of those three interminable day , make I resolve to speak without delay . I ask she to come out on to the terrace that evening . we be alone . it be a moonlight night . " 

 a long silence . the doctor do not break it . he know his friend be go over in his mind all those thing of which a man do not speak to another man . 

 at last Garth say simply , " I tell she . " 

 no comment from the doctor , who be vividly remind of Jane 's " then it happen , " when she have reach this point in the story . after a few moment of further silence , steep in the silver moonlight of reminiscence for Garth ; occupy by the doctor in a rapid piecing in of Jane 's version ; the sad young voice continue : 

 " I think she understand completely . afterwards I know she have not understand at all . her action lead I to believe I be accept , take into her great love , even as she be wrap around by mine . not through fault of her , ah , no ; she be blameless throughout ; but because she do not , could not , understand what any touch of hers must mean to I . in her dear life , there have never be another man ; that much I know by unerre instinct and by her own admission . I have sometimes think that she may have have an ideal in her girlish day , against whom , in after year , she measure other , and , find they come short , hold they at arm 's length . but , if I be right in this surmise , he must have be a blind fool , unconscious of the priceless love which might have be his , have he try to win it . for I be certain that , until that night , no man 's love have ever flame about she ; she have never feel herself envelop in a cry which be all one passionate , in - articulate , inexplicable , boundless need of herself . while I think she understand and respond , Heaven know I do think it , she do not in the least understand , and be only try to be sympathetic and kind . " 

 the doctor stir in his chair , slowly cross one leg over the other , and look searchingly into the blind face . he be find these confidence of the " other man " more try than he have expect . 

 " be you sure of that ? " he ask rather huskily . 

 " quite sure , " say Garth . " listen . I call she what she be to I just then , what I want she to be always , what she be forever , so far as my part go , and will be till death and beyond . that one word , no , there be two , those two word make she understand . I see that now . she rise at once and put I from she . she say I must give she twelve hour for quiet thought , and she would come to I in the village church next morning with her answer . brand , you may think I a fool ; you can not think I a more egregious ass than I now think myself ; but I be absolutely certain she be mine ; so sure that , when she come , and we be alone together in the house of God , instead of go to she with the anxious haste of suppliant and lover , I call she to I at the chancel step as if I be indeed her husband and have the right to bid her come . she come , and , just as a sweet formality before take she to I , I ask for her answer . it be this : ' I can not marry a mere boy . ' " 

 Garth 's voice choke in his throat on the last word . his head be bow in his hand . he have reach the point where most thing stop for he ; where all thing have cease forever to be as they be before . 

 the room seem strangely silent . the eager voice have pour out into it such a flow of love and hope and longing ; such a revealing of a soul in which the true love of beauty have create perpetual youth ; of a heart hold free by high ideal from all play with less love , but rise to volcanic force and height when the true love be find at last . 

 the doctor shiver at that anticlimax , as if the chill of an empty church be in his bone . he know how far bad it have be than Garth have tell . he know of the cruel , humiliating question : " how old be you ? " Jane have confess to it . he know how the outward glow of adore love have fade as the mind be suddenly turn inward to self - contemplation . he have know it all as abstract fact . now he see it actually before he . he see Jane 's stricken lover , bow beside he in his blindness , live again through those sight and sound which no merciful curtain of oblivion could ever hide or veil . 

 the doctor have his fault , but they be not Peter 's . he never , under any circumstance , speak because he wist not what to say . 

 he lean forward and lay a hand very tenderly on Garth 's shoulder . " poor chap , " he say . " ah , poor old chap . " 

 and for a long while they sit thus in silence . 




 CHAPTER XXV 

 the DOCTOR 's DIAGNOSIS 

 " so you express no opinion ? explain nothing ? let he go on believe that ? oh , Dicky ! and you might have say so much ! " 

 in the quiet of the Scotch Sabbath morning , Jane and the doctor have climb the wind path from the end of the terrace , which zigzag up to a clearing amongst the pine . two fall tree at a short distance from each other provide convenient seat in full sunshine , face a glorious view , down into the glen , across the valley , and away to the purple hill beyond . the doctor have guide Jane to the sunnier of the two trunk , and seat himself beside she . then he have quietly recount practically the whole of the conversation of the previous evening . 

 " I express no opinion . I explain nothing . I let he continue to believe what he believe ; because it be the only way to keep you on the pinnacle where he have place you . let any other reason for your conduct than an almost infantine ignorance of man and thing be suggest and accept , and down you will come , my poor jane , and great will be the fall . mine shall not be the hand thus to hurl you headlong . as you say , I might have say so much , but I might also have live to regret it . " 

 " I should fall into his arm , " say Jane recklessly , " and I would soon be there than on a pinnacle . " 

 " excuse I , my good girl , " reply the doctor . " it be more likely you would fall into the first express go south . in fact , I be not certain you would wait for an express . I can almost see the Honourable Jane quit yonder little railway station , seat in an empty coal - truck . no ! do not   start up and attempt to stride about among the pine needle , " continue the doctor , pull Jane down beside he again . " you will only trip over a fir cone and go headlong into the valley . it be no use forestall the inevitable fall . " 

 " oh , Dicky , " sigh Jane , put her hand through his arm ; and lean her bandaged eye against the rough tweed of his shoulder ; " I do not   know what have come to you to - day . you be not kind to I . you have harrow my poor soul by repeat all Garth say last night ; and , thank to that terribly good memory of your , you have reproduce the tone of his voice in every inflection . and then , instead of comfort I , you leave I entirely in the wrong , and completely in the lurch . " 

 " in the wrong yes , " say Deryck ; " in the lurch no . I do not say I would do nothing to - day . I only say I could do nothing last night . you can not take up a wound thing and turn it about and analyse it . when we bade each other good - night , I tell he I would think the matter over and give he my opinion to - day . I will tell you what have happen to I if you like . I have look into the inmost recess of a very rare and beautiful nature , and I have see what havoc a woman can work in the life of the man who love she . I can assure you , last night be no pastime . I wake this morning feeling as if I have , metaphorically , be beat black and blue . " 

 " then what do you suppose I feel ? " inquire Jane pathetically . 

 " you still feel yourself in the right partly , " reply Deryck . " and so long as you think you have a particle of justification and cle to it , your case be hopeless . it will have to be : ' I confess . can you forgive ? ' " 

 " but I act for the good , " say Jane . " I think of he before I think of myself . it would have be far easy to have accept the happiness of the moment , and chance the future . " 

 " that be not honest , Jeanette . you think of yourself first . you dare not face the possibility of the pain to you if his love cool or his admiration wan . when one come to think of it , I believe every form of human love a mother 's only excepted be primarily selfish . the good chance for Dalmain be that his helpless blindness may awaken the mother love in you . then self will go to the wall . " 

 " ah I ! " sigh Jane . " I be lose and weary and perplex in this bewildering darkness . nothing seem clear ; nothing seem right . if I could see your kind eye , boy , your hard voice would hurt less . " 

 " well , take off the bandage and look , " say the doctor . 

 " I will not ! " cry Jane furiously . " have I go through all this to fail at the last ? " 

 " my dear girl , this self - impose darkness be get on your nerve . take care it do not do more harm than good . strong remedy " 

 " hush ! " whisper Jane . " I hear footstep . " 

 " you can always hear footstep in a wood if you hearken for they , " say the doctor ; but he speak low , and then sit quiet , listen . 

 " I hear Garth 's step , " whisper Jane . " oh , Dicky , go to the edge and look over . you can see the winding of the path below . " 

 the doctor step forward quietly and look down upon the way they have ascend . then he come back to Jane . 

 " yes , " he say . " Fortune favour we . Dalmain be come up the path with Simpson . he will be here in two minute . " 

 " Fortune favour we ? my dear Dicky ! of all mis - chance ! " Jane 's hand fly to her bandage , but the doctor stay she just in time . 

 " not at all , " he say . " and do not fail at the last in your experiment . I ought to be able to keep you two blind people apart . trust I , and keep dark I mean , sit still . and can you not understand why I say fortune favour we ? Dalmain be come for my opinion on the case . you shall hear it together . it will be a saving of time for I , and most enlightening for you to mark how he take it . now keep quiet . I promise he shall not sit on your lap . but if you make a sound , I shall have to say you be a bunny or a squirrel , and throw fir cone at you . " 

 the doctor rise and saunter round the bend of the path . 

 Jane sit on in darkness . 

 " Hullo , Dalmain , " she hear Deryck say . " find your way up here ? an ideal spot . shall we dispense with Simpson ? take my arm . " 

 " yes , " reply Garth . " I be tell you be up here , Brand , and follow you . " 

 they come round the bend together , and out into the clearing . 

 " be you alone ? " ask Garth stand still . " I think I hear voice . " 

 " you do , " reply the doctor . " I be talk to a young woman . " 

 " what sort of young woman ? " ask Garth . 

 " a buxom young person , " reply the doctor , " with a decidedly touchy temper . " 

 " do you know her name ? " 

 " Jane , " say the doctor recklessly . 

 " not ' jane , ' " say Garth quickly , " Jean . I know she , my gardener 's eld daughter . rather weigh down by family care , poor girl . " 

 " I see she be weigh down , " say the doctor . " I do not know it be by family care . let we sit on this trunk . can you call up the view to mind ? " 

 " yes , " reply Garth ; " I know it so well . but it terrify I to find how my mental picture be fade ; all but one . " 

 " and that be ? " ask the doctor . 

 " the face of the one Woman , " say Garth in his blindness . 

 " ah , my dear fellow , " say the doctor , " I have not forget my promise to give you this morning my opinion on your story . I have be think it over carefully , and have arrive at several conclusion . shall we sit on this fallen tree ? will not   you smoke ? one can talk well under the influence of the fragrant weed . " 

 Garth take out his cigarette case , choose a cigarette , light it with care , and fling the flame match straight on to Jane 's clasp hand . 

 before the doctor could spring up , Jane have smilingly flick it off . 

 " what nerve ! " think Deryck , with admiration . " ninety - nine woman out of a hundred would have say ' ah ! ' and give away the show . really , she deserve to win . " 

 suddenly Garth stand up . " I think we shall do well on the other log , " he say unexpectedly . " it be always in full sunshine . " and he move towards Jane . 

 with a bind the doctor spring in front of he , seize Jane with one strong hand and draw she behind he ; then guide Garth to the very spot where she have be sit . 

 " how accurately you judge distance , " he remark , back with Jane towards the further trunk . then he seat himself beside Garth in the sunshine . " now for our talk , " say the doctor , and he say it rather breathlessly . 

 " be you sure we be alone ? " ask Garth . " I seem conscious of another presence . " 

 " my dear fellow , " say the doctor , " be one ever alone in a wood ? countless little presence surround we . bright eye peep down from the branch ; furry tail flick in and out of hole ; thing unseen move in the dead leaf at our foot . if you seek solitude , shun the wood . " 

 " yes , " reply Garth , " I know , and I love listen to they . I mean a human presence . brand , I be often so try by the sense of an unseen human presence near I . do you know , I could have swear the other day that she the one Woman come silently , look upon I in my blindness , pity I , as her great tender heart would do , and silently depart . " 

 " when be that ? " ask the doctor . 

 " a few day ago . Dr. Rob have be tell we how he come across she in Ah ! I must not say where . then he and Miss Gray leave I alone , and in the lonely darkness and silence I feel her eye upon I . " 

 " dear boy , " say the doctor , " you must not encourage this dread of unseen presence . remember , those who care for we very truly and deeply can often make we conscious of their mental nearness , even when far away , especially if they know we be in trouble and need they . you must not be surprised if you be often conscious of the nearness of the one Woman , for I believe and I do not say it lightly , Dalmain I believe her whole heart and love and life be your . " 

 " Good Lord ! " exclaim Garth , and spring up , stride forward aimlessly . 

 the doctor catch he by the arm . in another moment he would have fall over Jane 's foot . 

 " sit down , man , " say the doctor , " and listen to I . you gain nothing by dash about in the dark in that way . I be go to prove my word . but you must give I your calm attention . now listen . we be confront in this case by a psychological problem , and one which very likely have not occur to you . I want you for a moment to picture the one Man and the one Woman face each other in the Garden of Eden , or in the moonlight wherever it be if you like well . now will you realise this ? the effect upon a man of fall in love be to create in he a complete unconsciousness of self . on the other hand , the effect upon a woman of be love and seek , and of respond to that love and seeking , be an accession of intense self - consciousness . he , long to win and take , think of she only . she , call upon to yield and give , have her mind turn at once upon herself . can she meet his need ? be she all he think she ? will she be able to content he completely , not only now but in the long vista of year to come ? the more natural and unconscious of self she have be before , the hard she would be hit by this sudden , overwhelming attack of self - consciousness . " 

 the doctor glance at Jane on the log six yard away . she have lift her clasp hand and be nod towards he , her face radiant with relief and thankfulness . 

 he feel he be on the right tack . but the blind face beside he cloud heavily , and the cloud deepen as he proceed . 

 " you see , my dear chap , I gather from yourself she be not of the type of feminine loveliness you be know to admire . might she not have fear that her appearance would , after a while , have fail to content you ? " 

 " no , " reply Garth with absolutely finality of tone . " such a suggestion be unworthy . besides , have the idea by any possibility enter her mind , she would only have have to question I on the point . my decision would have be final ; my answer would have fully reassure she . " 

 " love be blind , " quote the doctor quietly . 

 " they lie who say so , " cry Garth violently . " love be so far - seeing that it see beneath the surface and delight in beauty unseen by other eye . " 

 " then you do not accept my theory ? " ask the doctor . 

 " not as an explanation of my own trouble , " answer Garth ; " because I know the greatness of her nature would have lift she far above such a consideration . but I do indeed agree as to the complete oblivion to self of the man in love . how else could we ever venture to suggest to a woman that she should marry we ? ah , Brand , when one think of it , the intrusion into her privacy ; the ask the right to touch , even her hand , at will ; it could not be do unless the love of she and the thought of she have sweep away all thought of self . look back upon that time I remember how completely it be so with I . and when she say to I in the church : ' how old be you ? ' ah , I do not tell you that last night the revulsion of feeling bring about by be turn at that moment in upon myself be so great , that my joy seem to shrivel and die in horror at my own unworthiness . " 

 Silence in the wood . the doctor feel he be play a lose game . he dare not look at the silent figure opposite . at last he speak . 

 " Dalmain , there be two possible solution to your problem . do you think it be a case of Eve hold back in virginal shyness , expect Adam to pursue ? " 

 " ah , no , " say Garth emphatically . " we have go far beyond all that . nor could you suggest it , do you know she . she be too honest , too absolutely straight and true , to have deceive I . besides , have it be so , in all these lonely year , when she find I make no sign , she would have send I word of what she really mean . " 

 " should you have go to she then ? " ask the doctor . 

 " yes , " say Garth slowly . " I should have go and I should have forgive because she be my own . but it could never have be the same . it would have be unworthy of we both . " 

 " well , " continue the doctor , " the other solution remain . you have admit that the one Woman come somewhat short of the conventional standard of beauty . your love of loveliness be so well know . do you not think , during the long hour of that night , remember how new it be to she to be so worshipped and want , do you not think her courage fail she ? she fear she might come short of what eventually you would need in the face and figure always opposite you at your table ; and , despite her own great love and your , she think it wisest to avoid future disillusion by reject present joy . her very love for you would have arm she to this decision . " 

 the silent figure opposite nod , and wait with clasped hand . Deryck be plead her cause well than she could have plead it herself . 

 silence in the wood . all nature seem to hush and listen for the answer . 

 then : " no , " say Garth 's young voice unhesitatingly . " in that case she would have tell I her fear , and I should have reassure she immediately . your suggestion be unworthy of my beloved . " 

 the wind sigh in the tree . a cloud pass before the sun . the two who sit in darkness , shiver and be silent . 

 then the doctor speak . " my dear boy , " he say , and a deep tenderness be in his voice : " I must maintain my unalterable belief that to the one woman you be still the one man . in your blindness her rightful place be by your side . perhaps even now she be yearn to be here . will you tell I her name , and give I leave to seek she out , hear from herself her version of the story ; and , if it be as I think , bring she to you , to prove , in your affliction , her love and tenderness ? " 

 " never ! " say Garth . " never , while life shall last ! can you not see that if when I have sight , and fame , and all heart could desire , I could not win her love , what she might feel for I now , in my helpless blindness , could be but pity ? and pity from she I could never accept . if I be ' a mere boy ' three year ago , I be ' a mere blind man ' now , an object for kind commiseration . if indeed you be right , and she mistrust my love and my fidelity , it be now out of my power forever to prove her wrong and to prove myself faithful . but I will not allow the vision of my beloved to be dim by these suggestion . for her completion , she need so much more than I could give . she refuse I because I be not fully worthy . I prefer it should be so . let we leave it at that . " 

 " it leave you to loneliness , " say the doctor sadly . 

 " I prefer loneliness , " reply Garth 's young voice , " to disillusion . Hark ! I hear the first gong , Brand . Margery will be grieve if we keep she Sunday dish wait . " 

 he stand up and turn his sightless face towards the view . 

 " ah , how well I know it , " he say . " when Miss Gray and I sit up here , she tell I all she see , and I tell she what she do not see , but what I know be there . she be keen on art , and on most of the thing I care about . I must ask for an arm , Brand , though the path be wide and good . I can not risk a tumble . I have come one or two awful cropper , and I promise Miss Gray the path be wide . yes , we can walk two abreast , three abreast if necessary . it be well we have this good path make . it use to be a steep scramble . " 

 " three abreast , " say the doctor . " so we could if necessary . " he step back and raise Jane from her seat , draw her cold hand through his left arm . " now , my dear fellow , my right arm will suit you well ; then you can keep your stick in your right hand . " 

 and thus they start down through the wood , on that lovely Sabbath morn of early summer ; and the doctor walk erect between those two sever heart , unite , and yet divide they . 

 just once Garth pause and listen . " I seem to hear another footstep , " he say , " besides yours and mine . " 

 " the wood be full of footstep , " say the doctor , " just as the heart be full of echo . if you stand still and listen you can hear what you will in either . " 

 " then let we not stand still , " say Garth , " for in old day , if I be late for lunch , Margery use to spank I . " 




 CHAPTER XXVI 

 heart meet in SIGHTLESS LAND 

 " it will be absolutely impossible , Miss Gray , for I ever to tell you what I think of this that you have do for my sake . " 

 Garth stand at the open library window . the morning sunlight pour into the room . the air be fragrant with the scent of flower , resonant with the song of bird . as he stand there in the sunshine , a new look of strength and hopefulness be apparent in every line of his erect figure . he hold out eager hand towards Nurse Rosemary , but more as an expression of the outgoing of his appreciation and gratitude than with any expectation of responsive hand be place within they . 

 " and here be I , picture you have a gay weekend , and wonder where , and who your friend in this neighbourhood could be . and all the while you be sit blindfold in the room over my head . ah , the goodness of it be beyond word ! but do you not feel somewhat of a deceiver , Miss Gray ? " 

 she always feel that poor jane . so she readily answer : " yes . and yet I tell you I be not go far . and my friend in the neighbourhood be Simpson and Margery , who aid and abet . and it be true to say I be go , for be I not go into darkness ? and it be a different world from the land of light . " 

 " ah , how true that be ! " cry Garth . " and how difficult to make people understand the loneliness of it , and how they seem suddenly to arrive close to one from another world ; stoop from some distant planet , with sympathetic voice and friendly touch ; and then away they go to another sphere , leave one to the immensity of solitude in Sightless Land . " 

 " yes , " agree Nurse Rosemary , " and you almost dread the coming , because the going make the darkness darker , and the loneliness more lonely . " 

 " ah , so you experience that ? " say Garth . " do you know , now you have week - end in Sightless Land , I shall not feel it such a place of solitude . at every turn I shall be able to say : ' a dear and faithful friend have be here . ' " 

 he laugh a laugh of such almost boyish pleasure , that all the mother in Jane 's love rise up and demand of her one supreme effort . she look at the slight figure in white flannel , lean against the window frame , so manly , so beautiful still , and yet so helpless and so need the wealth of tenderness which be her to give . then , stand face he , she open her arm , as if the great preparedness of that place of rest , so close to he must , magnet - like , draw he to she ; and stand thus in the sunlight , Jane speak . 

 be she beautiful ? be she paintable ? would a man grow weary of such a look turn on he , of such arm hold out ? alas ! too late ! on that point no lover shall ever be able to pass judgment . that look be for one man alone . he only will ever bring it to that love face . and he can not pronounce upon its beauty in voice of rapturous content . he can not judge . he can not see . he be blind ! 

 " Mr. Dalmain , there be many small detail ; but before we talk of those I want to tell you the great of all the lesson I learn in Sightless Land . " then , conscious that her emotion be produce in her voice a resonant depth which might remind he too vividly of note in the Rosary , she pause , and resume in the high , soft edition of her own voice which it have become second nature to she to use as Nurse Rosemary : " Mr. Dalmain , it seem to I I learn to understand how that which be loneliness unspeakable to one might be Paradise of a very perfect kind for TWO . I realise that there might be circumstance in which the dark would become a very wonderful meeting - place for soul . if I love a man who lose his sight , I should be glad to have mine in order to be eye for he when eye be need ; just as , be I rich and he poor , I should value my money simply as a thing which might be useful to he . but I know the daylight would often be a trial to I , because it would be something he could not share ; and when evening come , I should long to say : ' let we put out the light and shut away the moonlight and sit together in the sweet soft darkness , which be more unite than the light . ' " 

 while Jane be speak , Garth pal as he listen , and his face grow strangely set . then , as if under a reaction of feeling , a boyish flush spread to the very root of his hair . he visibly shrink from the voice which be say these thing to he . he fumble with his right hand for the orange cord which would guide he to his chair . 

 " Nurse Rosemary , " he say , and at the tone of his voice Jane 's outstretche arm drop to her side ; " it be kind of you to tell I all these beautiful thought which come to you in the darkness . but I hope the man who be happy enough to possess your love , or who be go to be fortunate enough to win it , will neither be so unhappy nor so unfortunate as to lose his sight . it will be well for he to live with you in the light , than to be call upon to prove the kind way in which you would be willing to adapt yourself to his darkness . how about open our letter ? " he slip his hand along the orange cord and walk over to his chair . 

 then , with a sense of unutterable dismay , Jane see what she have do . she have completely forget Nurse Rosemary , use she only as a means of awakening in Garth an understanding of how much her Jane 's love might mean to he in his blindness . she have forget that , to Garth , Nurse Rosemary 's be the only personality which count in this conversation ; she , who have just give he such a proof of her interest and devotion . and o poor dear Garth ! o bold , brazen Nurse Rosemary ! he very naturally conclude she be make love to he . Jane feel herself between Scylla and Charybdis , and she take a very prompt and characteristic plunge . 

 she come across to her place on the other side of the small table and sit down . " I believe it be the thought of he make I realise this , " she say ; " but just now I and my young man have fall out . he do not even know I be here . " 

 Garth unbent at once , and again that boyish heightening of colour indicate his sense of shame at what he have imagine . 

 " ah , Miss Gray , " he say eagerly , " you will not think it impertinent or intrusive on my part , but do you know I have wonder sometimes whether there be a happy man . " 

 Nurse Rosemary laugh . " well , we can not   call he a happy man just now , " she say , ' so far as his thought of I be concern . my whole heart be his , if he could only be bring to believe it . but a misunderstanding have grow up between we , my fault entirely , and he will not allow I to put it right . " 

 " what a fool ! " cry Garth . " be you and he engage ? " 

 Nurse Rosemary hesitate . " well not exactly engage , " she say , " though it practically amount to that . neither of we would give a thought to any one else . " 

 Garth know there be a class of people whose preliminary step to marriage be call " keep company , " a stage above the housemaid 's " walk out , " both expression be exactly descriptive of the circumstance of the case ; for , whereas pretty Phyllis and her swain go walk out of an evening in byway and between hedge , or along pavement and into the park , these keep each other company in the parlour and arbour of their respective friend and relation . yet , somehow , Garth have never think of Nurse Rosemary as belong to any other class than his own . perhaps this ass of a fellow , whom he already cordially dislike , come of a low stratum ; or perhaps the rule of her nursing guild forbid a definite engagement , but allow " an understanding . " anyway the fact remain that the kind - hearte , clever , delightful little lady , who have do so much for he , have " a young man " of her own ; and this admit fact lift a weight from Garth 's mind . he have be so afraid lately of not be quite honest with she and with himself . she have become so necessary to he , nay , so essential , and by her skill and devotion have win so deep a place in his gratitude . their relation be of so intimate a nature , their companionship so close and continuous ; and into this rather ideal state of thing have heavily tread Dr. Rob the other day with a suggestion . Garth , alone with he , bad be explain how indispensable Miss Gray have become to his happiness and comfort , and how much he dread a recall from her matron . 

 " I fear they do not let they go on indefinitely at one case ; but perhaps Sir Deryck can arrange that this should be an exception , " say Garth . 

 " oh , hang the matron , and blow Sir Deryck , " say Dr. Rob breezily . " if you want she as a permanency , make sure of she . marry she , my boy ! I will warrant she would have you ! " 

 thus trod Dr. Rob , with heavily nail boot , upon the bare toe of a delicate situation . 

 Garth try to put the suggestion out of his mind and fail . he begin to notice thought and plan of Nurse Rosemary 's for his benefit , which so far exceed her professional duty that it seem as if there must be behind they the prompting of a more tender interest . he put the thought away again and again , call Dr. Rob an old fool , and himself a conceited ass . but again and again there come about he , with Nurse Rosemary 's presence , the subtile surround atmosphere of a watchful love . 

 then , one night , he face and fight a great temptation . 

 after all why should he not do as Dr. Rob suggest ? why not marry this charming , capable , devoted nurse , and have she constantly about he in his blindness ? she do not consider he " a mere boy . " ... what have he to offer she ? a beautiful home , every luxury , abundant wealth , a companionship she seem to find congenial ... but then the Tempter overreach himself , for he whisper : " and the voice would be always Jane 's . you have never see the nurse 's face ; you never will see it . you can go on put to the voice the face and form you adore . you can marry the little nurse , and go on love Jane . " ... then Garth cry out in horror : " Avaunt , Satan ! " and the battle be win . 

 but it trouble his mind lest by any chance her peace of heart should be disturb through he . so it be with relief , and yet with an unreasonable smoulder jealousy , that he hear of the young man to whom she be devote . and now it appear she be unhappy through her young man , just as he be unhappy through no , because of Jane . 

 a sudden impulse come over he to do away forever with the thought which in his own mind have lately come between they , and to establish their intimacy on an even close and firm basis , by be absolutely frank with she on the matter . 

 " Miss Gray , " he say , lean towards she with that delightful smile of boyish candour which many woman have find irresistible , " it be good of you to have tell I about yourself ; and , although I confess to feel unreasonably jealous of the fortunate fellow who possess your whole heart , I be glad he exist , because we all miss something unless we have in our life the wonderful experience of the one Woman or the one Man . and I want to tell you something , dear sweet friend of mine , which closely touch you and I ; only , before I do so , put your hand in mine , that I may realise you in a close intimacy than heretofore . you , who have be in Sightless Land , know how much a hand clasp mean down here . " 

 Garth stretch his hand across the table , and his whole attitude be tense with expectation . 

 " I can not do that , Mr. Dalmain , " say Nurse Rosemary , in a voice which shake a little . " I have burn my hand . oh , not seriously . do not look so distressed . just a lighted match . yes ; while I be blind . now tell I the thing which touch you and I . " 

 Garth withdraw his hand and clasp both around his knee . he lean back in his chair , his face turn upwards . there be upon it an expression so pure , the exaltation of a spirit so lift above the temptation of the low nature , that Jane 's eye fill with tear as she look at he . she realise what his love for she , supplement by the discipline of suffering , have do for her lover . 

 he begin to speak softly , not turn towards she . " tell I , " he say , " be he very much to you ? " 

 Jane 's eye could not leave the dear face and figure in the chair . Jane 's emotion tremble in Nurse Rosemary 's voice . 

 " he be all the world to I , " she say . 

 " do he love you as you deserve to be love ? " 

 Jane bend and lay her lip on the table where his outstretched hand have rest . then Nurse Rosemary answer : " he love I far , far more than I ever deserve . " 

 " why do you say ' love ' ? be not ' love ' the truer tense ? " 

 " alas , no ! " say Nurse Rosemary , brokenly ; " for I fear I have lose his love by my own mistrust of it and my own wrong - doing . " 

 " never ! " say Garth . " ' love never faileth . ' it may for a time appear to be dead , even bury . but the Easter morn soon dawn , and lo , Love ariseth ! love grieve , be like a bird with wet wing . it can not fly ; it can not rise . it hop about upon the ground , chirp anxiously . but every flutter shake away more drop ; every moment in the sunshine be dry the tiny feather ; and very soon it soar to the tree top , all the well for the bath , which seem to have rob it of the power to rise . " 

 " ah , if my beloved could but dry his wing , " murmur Nurse Rosemary . " but I fear I do more than wet they . I clip they . worse still , I break they . " 

 " do he know you feel yourself so in the wrong ? " Garth ask the question very gently . 

 " no , " reply Nurse Rosemary . " he will give I no chance to explain , and no opportunity to tell he how he wrong himself and I by the view he now take of my conduct . " 

 " poor girl ! " say Garth in tone of sympathy and comprehension . " my own experience have be such a tragedy that I can feel for those whose course of true love do not run smooth . but take my advice , Miss Gray . write he a full confession . keep nothing back . tell he just how it all happen . any man who truly love would believe , accept your explanation , and be thankful . only , I hope he would not come tear up here and take you away from I ! " 

 Jane smile through a mist of tear . 

 " if he want I , Mr. Dalmain , I should have to go to he , " say Nurse Rosemary . 

 " how I dread the day , " continue Garth , " when you will come and say to I : ' I have to go . ' and , do you know , I have sometimes think you have do so much for I and become so much to I I have sometimes think I can tell you frankly now it might have seem as if there be a very obvious way to try to keep you always . you be so immensely worthy of all a man could offer , of all the devotion a man could give . and because , to one so worthy , I never could have offer less than the good , I want to tell you that in my heart I hold shrine forever one beloved face . all other be gradually fade . now , in my blindness , I can hardly recall clearly the many lovely face I have paint and admire . all be more or less blurred and indistinct . but this one face grow clear , thank God , as the darkness deepen . it will be with I through life , I shall see it in death , the face of the woman I love . you say ' love ' of your lover , hesitate to be sure of his present state of heart . I can neither say ' love ' nor ' love ' of my beloved . she never love I . but I love she with a love which make it impossible for I to have any ' good ' to offer to another woman . if I could bring myself , from unworthy motif and selfish desire , to ask another to we d I , I should do she an untold wrong . for her unseen face would be nothing to I ; always that one and only face would be shin in my darkness . her voice would be dear , only in so far as it remind I of the voice of the woman I love . dear friend , if you ever pray for I , pray that I may never be so base as to offer to any woman such a husk as marriage with I would mean . " 

 " but " say Nurse Rosemary . " she she who have make it a husk for other ; she who might have the fine of the wheat , the full corn in the ear , herself ? " 

 " she , " say Garth , " have refuse it . it be neither fine enough nor full enough . it be not worthy . o my God , little girl ! what it mean , to appear inadequate to the woman one love ! " 

 Garth drop his face between his hand with a groan . 

 silence unbroken reign in the library . 

 suddenly Garth begin to speak , low and quickly , without lift his head . 

 " now , " he say , " now I feel it , just as I tell Brand , and never so clearly before , except once , when I be alone . ah , Miss Gray ! do not   move ! do not   stir ! but look all round the room and tell I whether you see anything . look at the window . look at the door . lean forward and look behind the screen . I can not believe we be alone . I will not believe it . I be be deceive in my blindness . and yet I be not deceive . I be conscious of the presence of the woman I love . her eye be fix upon I in pity , sorrow , and compassion . her grief at my woe be so great that it almost enfold I , as I have dream her love would do ... o my god ! she be so near and it be so terrible , because I do not wish she near . I would soon a thousand mile be between we and I be certain there be not many yard ! ... be it psychic ? or be it actual ? or be I go mad ? ... Miss Gray ! you would not lie to I . no persuasion or bribery or confound chicanery could induce you to deceive I on this point . look around , for God 's sake , and tell I ! be we alone ? and if not , who be in the room besides you and I ? " 

 Jane have be sit with her arm fold upon the table , her yearn eye fix upon Garth 's bow head . when he wish she a thousand mile away she bury her face upon they . she be so near he that have Garth stretch out his right hand again , it would have touch the heavy coil of her soft hair . but Garth do not raise his head , and Jane still sit with her face bury . 

 there be silence in the library for a few moment after Garth 's question and appeal . then Jane lift her face . 

 " there be no one in the room , Mr. Dalmain , " say Nurse Rosemary , " but you and I . " 




 CHAPTER XXVII 

 the EYES GARTH trust 

 " so you enjoy motor , Miss Gray ? " 

 they have be out in the motor together for the first time , and be now have tea together in the library , also for the first time ; and , for the first time , Nurse Rosemary be pour out for her patient . this be only Monday afternoon , and already her week - end experience have win for her many new privilege . 

 " yes , I like it , Mr. Dalmain ; particularly in this beautiful air . " 

 " have you have a case before in a house where they keep a motor ? " 

 Nurse Rosemary hesitate . " yes , I have stay in house where they have motor , and I have be in Dr. Brand 's . he meet I at Charing Cross once with his electric brougham . " 

 " ah , I know , " say Garth . " very neat . on your way to a case , or return from a case ? " 

 Nurse Rosemary smile , then bit her lip . " to a case , " she reply quite gravely . " I be on my way to his house to talk it over and receive instruction . " 

 " it must be splendid work under such a fellow as Brand , " say Garth ; " and yet I be certain most of the good thing you do be quite your own idea . for instance , he do not suggest your week - end plan , do he ? I think not . ah , the difference it have make ! now tell I . when we be motor we never slow up suddenly to pass anything , or toot to make something move out of the way , without your have already tell I what we be go to pass or what be in the road a little way ahead . it be : ' we shall be pass a hay cart at the next bend ; there will be just room , but we shall have to slow up ' ; or , ' an old red cow be in the very middle of the road a little way on . I think she will move if we hoot . ' then , when the sudden slow down and swerve come , or the toot toot of the horn , I know all about it and be not take unawares . do you know how try it be in blindness to be speed along and suddenly alter pace without have any idea why , or swerve to one side , and not know what one have just be avoid ? this afternoon our spin be pure pleasure , because not once do you let these thing happen . I know all that be take place , as soon as I should have know it have I have my sight . " 

 Jane press her hand over her bosom . ah , how able she be always to fill her boy 's life with pure pleasure . how little of the needless suffering of the blind should ever be his if she win the right to be beside he always . 

 " well , Mr. Dalmain , " say Nurse Rosemary , " I motor to the station with Sir Deryck yesterday afternoon , and I notice all you describe . I have never before feel nervous in a motor , but I realise yesterday how largely that be owe to the fact that all the time one keep an unconscious look - out ; measure distance , judge speed , and know what each turn of the handle mean . so when we go out you must let I be eye to you in this . " 

 " how good you be ! " say Garth , gratefully . " and do you see Sir Deryck off ? " 

 " no . I do not see Sir Deryck at all . but he say good - bye , and I feel the kind , strong grip of his hand as he leave I in the car . and I sit there and hear his train start and rush away into the distance . " 

 " be it not hard to you to let he come and go and not to see his face ? " 

 Jane smile . " yes , it be hard , " say Nurse Rosemary ; " but I wish to experience that hardness . " 

 " it give one an awful blank feeling , do not   it ? " say Garth . 

 " yes . it almost make one wish the friend have not come . " 

 " ah " there be a depth of contented comprehension in Garth 's sigh ; and the brave heart , which have refuse to lift the bandage to the very last , feel more than recompensed . 

 " next time I reach the Gulf of Partings in Sightless Land , " continue Garth , " I shall say : ' a dear friend have stand here for my sake . ' " 

 " oh , and one 's meal , " say Nurse Rosemary laugh . " be they not grotesquely try ? " 

 " yes , of course ; I have forget you would understand all that now . I never could explain to you before why I must have my meal alone . you know the hunt and chase ? " 

 " yes , " say Nurse Rosemary , " and it usually resolve itself into ' go away , ' and turn up afterwards unexpectedly ! but , Mr. Dalmain , I have think out several way of help so much in that and make it all quite easy . if you will consent to have your meal with I at a small table , you will see how smoothly all will work . and later on , if I be still here , when you begin to have visitor , you must let I sit at your left , and all my little way of help would be so unobtrusive , that no one would notice . " 

 " oh , thank , " say Garth . " I be immensely grateful . I have often be remind of a silly game we use to play at Overdene , at dessert , when we be a specially gay party . do you know the old Duchess of Meldrum ? or anyway , you may have hear of she ? ah , yes , of course , Sir Deryck know she . she call he in once to her macaw . she do not mention the macaw on the telephone , and Sir Deryck , think he be want for the duchess , throw up an important engagement and go immediately . luckily she be at her town house . she would have send just the same have she be at Overdene . I wish you know Overdene . the duchess give perfectly delightful ' good party , ' in which all the people who really enjoy meet one another find themselves together , and be well fed and well house and well mount , and do exactly as they like ; while the dear old duchess tramp in and out , with her queer beast and bird , shed a kindly and exciting influence wherever she go . last time I be there she use to let out six egyptian jerboas in the drawing - room every evening after dinner , awfully jolly little beggar , like miniature kangaroo . they use to go skip about on their hind leg , frighten some of the woman into fit by hide under their gown , and make young footman drop tray of coffee cup . the last importation be a toucan , a south american bird , with a beak like a banana , and a voice like an old sheep in despair . but Tommy , the scarlet macaw , remain prime favourite , and I must say he be clever and know more than you would think . " 

 " well , at Overdene we use to play a silly game at dessert with muscatel . we each put five raisin at interval round our plate , then we shut our eye and make jab at they with fork . whoever succeed first in spike and eat all five be the winner . the duchess never would play . she enjoy be umpire , and scream at the people who peep . Miss Champion and I she be the duchess 's niece , you know always play fair , and we nearly always make a dead heat of it . " 

 " yes , " say Nurse Rosemary , " I know that game . I think of it at once when I have my blindfold meal . " 

 " ah , " cry Garth , " have I know , I would not have let you do it ! " 

 " I know that , " say Nurse Rosemary . " that be why I week - end . " 

 Garth pass his cup to be refill , and lean forward confidentially . 

 " now , " he say , " I can venture to tell you one of my minor trial . I be always so awfully afraid of there be a fly in thing . ever since I be a small boy I have have such a horror of inadvertently eat fly . when I be about six , I hear a lady visitor say to my mother : ' oh , one have to swallow a fly about once a year ! I have just swallow mine , on the way here ! ' this terrible idea of an annual fly take possession of my small mind . I use to be thankful when it happen , and I get it over . I remember quickly finish a bit of bread in which I have see sign of leg and wing , feel it be an easy way of take it and I should thus be exempt for twelve glad month ; but I have to run up and down the terrace with clench hand while I swallow it . and when I discover the fallacy of the annual fly , I be just as particular in my dread of an accidental one . I do not   believe I ever sit down to sardine on toast at a restaurant without look under the toast for my bugbear , though as I lift it I feel rather like the old woman who always look under the bed for a burglar . ah , but since the accident this foolishly small thing have make I suffer ! I can not say : ' Simpson , be you sure there be not a fly in this soup ? ' Simpson would say : ' no sir ; no fly sir , ' and would cough behind his hand , and I could never ask he again . " 

 Nurse Rosemary lean forward and place his cup where he could reach it easily , just touch his right hand with the edge of the saucer . " have all your meal with I , " she say , in a tone of such complete understanding , that it be almost a caress ; " and I can promise there shall never be any fly in anything . could you not trust my eye for this ? " 

 and Garth reply , with a happy , grateful smile : " I could trust your kind and faithful eye for anything . ah ! and that remind I : I want to intrust to they a task I could confide to no one else . be it twilight yet , Miss Gray , or be an hour of daylight leave to we ? " 

 Nurse Rosemary glance out of the window and look at her watch . " we order tea early , " she say , " because we come in from our drive quite hungry . it be not five o'clock yet , and a radiant afternoon . the sun set at half - past seven . " 

 " then the light be good , " say Garth . " have you finish tea ? the sun will be shin in at the west window of the studio . you know my studio at the top of the house ? you fetch the study of Lady Brand from there . I dare say you notice stack of canvas in the corner . some be unused ; some contain mere sketch or study ; some be finish picture . Miss Gray , among the latter be two which I be most anxious to identify and to destroy . I make Simpson guide I up the other day and leave I there alone . and I try to find they by touch ; but I could not be sure , and I soon grow hopelessly confused amongst all the canvas . I do not wish to ask Simpson 's help , because the subject , be well , somewhat unusual , and if he find out I have destroy they it might set he wonder and talk , and one hat to awaken curiosity in a servant . I could not fall back on Sir Deryck because he would have recognise the portrait . the principal figure be know to he . when I paint those picture I never dream of any eye but my own see they . so you , my dear and trusted secretary , be the one person to whom I can turn . will you do what I ask ? and will you do it now ? " 

 Nurse Rosemary push back her chair . " why of course , Mr. Dalmain . I be here to do anything and everything you may desire ; and to do it when you desire it . " 

 Garth take a key from his waistcoat pocket , and lay it on the table . " there be the studio latch - key . I think the canvas I want be in the corner furth from the door , behind a yellow japanese screen . they be large five foot by three and a half . if they be too cumbersome for you to bring down , lie they face to face , and ring for Simpson . but do not leave he alone with they . " 

 Nurse Rosemary pick up the key , rise , and go over to the piano , which she open . then she tighten the purple cord , which guide Garth from his chair to the instrument . 

 " sit and play , " she say , " while I be upstairs , do your commission . but just tell I one thing . you know how greatly your work interest I . when I find the picture , be it your wish that I give they a mere cursory glance , just sufficient for identification ; or may I look at they , in the beautiful studio light ? you can trust I to do whichever you desire . " 

 the artist in Garth could not resist the wish to have his work see and appreciate . " you may look at they of course , if you wish , " he sail . " they be quite the good work I ever do , though I paint they wholly from memory . that be I mean , that use to be a knack of mine . and they be in no sense imaginary . I paint exactly what I see at least , so far as the female face and figure be concern . and they make the picture . the other be mere accessory . " he stand up , and go to the piano . his finger begin to stray softly amongst the harmony of the Veni . 

 Nurse Rosemary move towards the door . " how shall I know they ? " she ask , and wait . 

 the chord of the Veni hush to a murmur , Garth 's voice from the piano come clear and distinct , but blend with the harmony as if he be recite to music . 

 " a woman and a man ... alone , in a garden but the surrounding be only indicate . she be in evening dress ; soft , black , and trail ; with lace at her breast . it be call : ' the Wife . ' " 

 " yes ? " 

 " the same woman ; the same scene ; but without the man , this time . no need to paint the man ; for now visible or invisible to she , he be always there . in her arm she hold " the low murmur of chord cease ; there be perfect silence in the room-"a little child . it be call : ' the Mother . ' " 

 the Veni burst forth in an unrestrained upbearing of confident petition : 

 " keep far our foe ; give peace at home " and the door close behind Nurse Rosemary . 




 CHAPTER XXVIII 

 in the STUDIO 

 Jane mount to the studio ; unlock the door , and , enter , close it after she . 

 the evening sun shine through a western window , impart an add richness to the silk screen and hanging ; the mauve wistaria of a japanese embroidery ; or the golden dragon of China on a deep purple ground , wind up in its own interminable tail , and show rampant claw in unexpected place . 

 several time already Jane have be into Garth 's studio , but always to fetch something for which he wait eagerly below ; and she have never feel free to linger . Margery have a duplicate key ; for she herself go up every day to open the window , dust tenderly all special treasure ; and keep it exactly as its owner have like it keep , when his quick eye could look around it . but this key be always on Margery 's bunch ; and Jane do not like to ask admission , and risk a possible refusal . 

 now , however , she could take her own time ; and she seat herself in one of the low and very deep wicker lounge - chair , comfortably upholstered ; so exactly fitting her proportion , and support arm , knee , and head , just rightly , that it seem as if all other chair would in future appear inadequate , owe to the absolute perfection of this one . ah , to be just that to her beloved ! to so fully meet his need , at every point , that her presence should be to he always a source of strength , and rest , and consolation . 

 she look around the room . it be so like Garth ; every detail perfect ; every shade of colour enhance another , and be enhance by it . the arrangement for regulate the light , both from roof and window ; the easel of all kind and size ; clean bareness , where space , and freedom from dust , be require ; the luxurious comfort round the fireplace , and in nook and corner ; all be so perfect . and the plain brown wall - paper , of that beautiful quiet shade which have in it no red , and no yellow ; a clear nut - brown . on an easel near the further window stand an unfinished painting ; palette and brush beside it , just as Garth have leave they when he go out on that morning , nearly three month ago ; and , vault over a gate to protect a little animal from unnecessary pain , be plunge himself into such utter loss and anguish . 

 Jane rise , and take stock of all his quaint treasure on the mantelpiece . especially her mind be hold and fascinate by a stout little bear in brass , sit solidly yet jauntily on its haunch , its front paw clasp a brazen pole ; its head turn sideways ; its small , beady , eye , look straight before it . the chain , from its neck to the pole denote captivity and possible fierceness . Jane have no doubt its head would lift , and its body prove a receptacle for match ; but she feel equally certain that , should she lift its head and look , no match would be within it . this little bear be unmistakably early Victorian ; a friend of childhood 's day ; and would not be put to common us . she lift the head . the body be empty . she replace it gently on the mantelpiece , and realise that she be deliberately postpone an ordeal which must be face . 

 Deryck have tell she of Garth 's picture of the one Woman . Garth , himself , have now tell she even more . but the time have come when she must see they for herself . it be useless to postpone the moment . she look towards the yellow screen . 

 then she walk , over to the western window , and throw it wide open . the sun be dip gently towards the purple hill . the deep blue of the sky begin to pale , as a hint of lovely rose creep into it . Jane look heavenward and , thrust her hand deeply into her pocket , speak aloud . " before God " she say , " in case I be never able to say or think it again , I will say it now I believe I be right . I consider Garth 's future happiness , and I consider my own . I decide as I do for both our sake , at terrible cost to present joy . but , before God , I believe I be right ; and I believe it still . " 

 Jane never say it again . 




 CHAPTER XXIX 

 JANE look into LOVE 's MIRROR 

 behind the yellow screen , Jane find a great confusion of canvas , and unmistakable evidence of the blind hand which have grope about in a vain search , and then make fruitless endeavour to sort and rearrange . very tenderly , Jane pick up each canvas from the fallen heap ; turn it the right way up , and stand it with its face to the wall . beautiful work , be there ; some of it finish ; some , incomplete . one or two face she know , look out at she in their picture loveliness . but the canvas she seek be not there . 

 she straighten herself , and look around . in a further corner , partly conceal by a Cairo screen , stand another pile . Jane go to they . 

 almost immediately she find the two she want ; large than the rest , and distinguishable at a glance by the soft black gown of the central figure . 

 without give they more than a pass look , she carry they over to the western window , and place they in a good light . then she draw up the chair in which she have be sit ; take the little brass bear in her left hand , as a talisman to help she through what lie before she ; turn the second picture with its face to the easel ; and sit down to the quiet contemplation of the first . 

 the noble figure of a woman , nobly paint , be the first impression which leapt from eye to brain . yes , nobility come first , in stately pose , in uplifted brow , in breadth of dignity . then as you mark the grandly massive figure , too well - proportion to be cumbersome , but large and full , and amply develop ; the length of limb ; the firmly plant foot ; the large capable hand , you realise the second impression convey by the picture , to be strength ; strength to do ; strength to be ; strength to continue . then you look into the face . and there you be confront with a great surprise . the third thought express by the picture be Love love , of the high , holiest , most ideal , kind ; yet , withal , of the most tenderly human order ; and you find it in that face . 

 it be a large face , well proportion to the figure . it have no pretension whatever to ordinary beauty . the feature be good ; there be not an ugly line about they ; and yet , each one just miss the beautiful ; and the general effect be of a good - look plainness ; unadorned , unconcealed , and unashamed . but the long you look , the more desirable grow the face ; the less you notice its negation ; the more you admire its honesty , its purity , its immense strength of purpose ; its noble simplicity . you take in all these outward detail ; you look away for a moment , to consider they ; you look back to verify they ; and then the miracle happen . into the face have steal the " light that never be on sea or land . " it shine from the quiet grey eye , as , over the head of the man who kneel before she , they look out of the picture with an expression of the sublime surrender of a woman 's whole soul to an emotion which , though it sway and master she , yet give she the power to be more truly herself than ever before . the startled joy in they ; the marvel at a mystery not yet understand ; the passionate tenderness ; and yet the almost divine compassion for the unrestrained violence of feeling , which have fling the man to his knee , and drive he to the haven of her breast ; the yearning to soothe , and give , and content ; all these be blend into a look of such exquisite sweetness , that it bring tear to the eye of the beholder . 

 the woman be seat on a broad marble parapet . she look straight before she . her knee come well forward , and the long curve of the train of her black gown fill the foreground on the right . on the left , slightly to one side of she , kneel a man , a tall slight figure in evening dress , his arm throw forward around her waist ; his face completely hide in the soft lace at her bosom ; only the back of his sleek dark head , visible . and yet the whole figure denote a passion of tense emotion . she have gather he to she with what you know must have be an exquisite gesture , combine the utter self - surrender of the woman , with the tender throb of maternal solicitude ; and now her hand be clasp behind his head , hold he closely to she . not a word be be speak . the hidden face be obviously silent ; and her firm lip above his dark head be fold in a line of calm self - control ; though about they hover the dawning of a smile of bliss ineffable . 

 a crimson rambler rise climb some woodwork faintly indicate on the left , and hang in a glowing mass from the top left - hand corner , supply the only vivid colour in the picture . 

 but , from take in these minor detail , the eye return to that calm tender face , alight with love ; to those strong capable hand , now learn for the first time to put forth the protective passion of a woman 's tenderness ; and the mind whisper the only possible name for that picture : the Wife . 

 Jane gaze at it long , in silence . have Garth 's little bear be anything less solid than early victorian brass ; it must have bend and break under the strong pressure of those clench hand . 

 she could not doubt , for a moment , that she look upon herself ; but , oh , merciful heaven ! how unlike the reflect self of her own mirror ! once or twice as she look , her mind refuse to work , and she simply gaze blankly at the minor detail of the picture . but then again , the expression of the grey eye draw she , recall so vividly every feeling she have experience when that dear head have come so unexpectedly to its resting - place upon her bosom . " it be true , " she whisper ; and again : " yes ; it be true . I can not deny it . it be as I feel ; it must be as I look . " 

 and then , suddenly ; she fall upon her knee before the picture . " oh , my God ! be that as I look ? and the next thing that happen be my boy lift his shin eye and gaze at I in the moonlight . be this what he see ? do I look so ? and do the woman who look so ; and who , look so , press his head down again upon her breast , refuse next day to marry he , on the ground of his youth , and her superiority ? ... oh , Garth , Garth ! ... o God , help he to understand ! ... help he to forgive I ! " 

 in the work - room just below , Maggie the housemaid be sing as she sew . the sound float through the open window , each syllable distinct in the clear Scotch voice , and reach Jane where she kneel . her mind , stun to blankness by its pain , take eager hold upon the word of Maggie 's hymn . and they be these . 

 " o love , that will not let I go , 
 I rest my weary soul in Thee ; 
 I give Thee back the life I owe , 
 that in Thine ocean depth its flow 
 May rich , full be . " 
 " o Light , that follow all my way , 
 I yield my flick'ring torch to Thee ; 
 my heart restore its borrow ray , 
 that in Thy sunshine 's blaze its day 
 may brighter , fair be . " 
 Jane take the second picture , and place it in front of the first . 

 the same woman , seat as before ; but the man be not there ; and in her arm , its tiny dark head pillow against the fulness of her breast , lie a little child . the woman do not look over that small head , but bent above it , and gaze into the baby face . 

 the crimson rambler have grow right across the picture , and form a glowing arch above mother and child . a majesty of tenderness be in the large figure of the mother . the face , as regard contour and feature , be no less plain ; but again it be transfigure , by the mother - love thereon depict . you know " the wife " have more than fulfil her abundant promise . the wife be there in full realisation ; and , add to wifehood , the wonder of motherhood . all mystery be explain ; all joy experience ; and the smile on her calm lip , bespoke ineffable content . 

 a rambler rise have burst above they , and fall in a shower of crimson petal upon mother and child . the baby - finger clasp tightly the soft lace at her bosom . a petal have fall upon the tiny wrist . she have lift her hand to remove it ; and , catch the baby - eye , so dark and shin , pause for a moment , and smile . 

 Jane , watch they , fall to desperate weeping . the " mere boy " have understand her potential possibility of motherhood far well than she understand they herself . have have one glimpse of she as " the wife , " his mind have leap on , and see she as " the Mother . " and again she be force to say : " it be true yes ; it be true . " 

 and then she recall the old line of cruel reasoning : 

 " it be not the sort of face one would have want to see always in front of one at table . " be this the sort of face this , as Garth have paint it , after a suppose year of marriage ? would any man weary of it , or wish to turn away his eye ? 

 Jane take one more long look . then she drop the little bear , and bury her face in her hand ; while a hot blush creep up to the very root of her hair , and tingle to her finger - tip . 

 below , the fresh young voice be sing again . 

 " o Joy , that seek I through pain , 
 I can not close my heart to Thee ; 
 I trace the rainbow through the rain , 
 and feel the promise be not vain 
 that morn shall tearless be . " 
 after a while Jane whisper : " oh , my darling , forgive I . I be altogether wrong . I will confess ; and , God help I , I will explain ; and , oh , my darling , you will forgive I ? " 

 once more she lift her head and look at the picture . a few stray petal of the crimson rambler lie upon the ground ; remind she of those crush rose , which , fall from her breast , lie scatter on the terrace at Shenstone , emblem of the joyous hope and glory of love which her decision of that night have lay in the dust of disillusion . but crown this picture , in rich cluster of abundant bloom , grow the rambler rise . and through the open window come the final verse of Maggie 's hymn . 

 " O Cross , that liftest up my head , 
 I dare not ask to fly from Thee ; 
 I lay in dust life 's glory dead , 
 and from the ground there blossom red 
 Life that shall endless be . " 
 Jane go to the western window , and stand , with her arm stretch above she , look out upon the radiance of the sunset . the sky blaze into gold and crimson at the horizon ; gradually as the eye lift , pal to primrose , fleck with rosy cloud ; and , overhead , deep blue fathomless , boundless , blue . 

 Jane gaze at the golden battlement above the purple hill , and repeat , half aloud : " and the city be of pure gold ; and have no need of the sun , neither of the moon to shine in it : for the glory of God do lighten it . and there shall be no more death ; neither sorrow , nor cry , neither shall there be any more pain : for the former thing be pass away . " 

 ah , how much have pass away since she stand at that western window , not an hour before . all life seem readjust ; its outlook alter ; its perspective change . Truly Garth have " go behind his blindness . " 

 Jane raise her eye to the blue ; and a smile of unspeakable anticipation part her lip . " Life , that shall endless be , " she murmur . then , turning , find the little bear , and restore he to his place upon the mantelpiece ; put back the chair ; close the western window ; and , pick up the two canvas , leave the studio , and make her way carefully downstairs . 




 CHAPTER XXX 

 " the lady PORTRAYED " 

 " it have take you long , Miss Gray . I nearly send Simpson up , to find out what have happen . " 

 " I be glad you do not do that , Mr. Dalmain . Simpson would have find I weep on the studio floor ; and to ask his assistance under those circumstance , would have be more humbling than inquire after the fly in the soup ! " 

 Garth turn quickly in his chair . the artist - ear have catch the tone which mean comprehension of his work . 

 " weep ! " he say . " why ? " 

 " because , " answer Nurse Rosemary , " I have be entrance . these picture be so exquisite . they stir one 's deep depth . and yet they be so pathetic ah , so pathetic ; because you have make a plain woman , beautiful . " 

 Garth rise to his foot , and turn upon she a face which would have blaze , have it not be sightless . 

 " a what ? " he exclaim . 

 " a plain woman , " repeat Nurse Rosemary , quietly . " surely you realise your model to be that . and therein lie the wonder of the picture . you have so beautify she by wifehood , and glorify she by motherhood , that the long one look the more one forget her plainness ; see she as love and love ; lovable , and therefore lovely . it be a triumph of art . " 

 Garth sit down , his hand clasp before he . 

 " it be a triumph of truth , " he say . " I paint what I see . " 

 " you paint her soul , " say Nurse Rosemary , " and it illuminate her plain face . " 

 " I see her soul , " say Garth , almost in a whisper ; " and that vision be so radiant that it illumine my dark life . the remembrance lighten my darkness , even now . " 

 a very tender silence fall in the library . 

 the twilight deepen . 

 then Nurse Rosemary speak , very low . " Mr. Dalmain , I have a request to make of you . I want to beg you not to destroy these picture . " 

 Garth lift his head . " I must destroy they , child , " he say . " I can not risk their be see by people who would recognise my the the lady portray . " 

 " at all event , there be one person who must see they , before they be destroy . " 

 " and that be ? " query Garth . 

 " the lady portray , " say Nurse Rosemary , bravely . 

 " how do you know she have not see they ? " 

 " have she ? " inquire Nurse Rosemary . 

 " no , " say Garth , shortly ; " and she never will . " 

 " she must . " 

 something in the tone of quiet insistence strike Garth . 

 " why ? " he ask ; and listen with interest for the answer . 

 " because of all it would mean to a woman who know herself plain , to see herself thus beautify . " 

 Garth sit very still for a few moment . then : " a woman who know herself plain ? " he repeat , with interrogative amazement in his voice . 

 " yes , " proceed Nurse Rosemary , encourage . " do you suppose , for a moment , that that lady 's mirror have ever show she a reflection in any way approach what you have make she in these picture ? when we stand before our look - glass , Mr. Dalmain , scowl anxiously at hat and bow , and parting , we usually look our very bad ; and that lady , at she very bad , would be of a most discouraging plainness . " 

 Garth sit perfectly silent . 

 " depend upon it , " continue Nurse Rosemary , ' she never see herself as ' the Wife ' ' the Mother . ' be she a wife ? " . 

 Garth hesitate only the fraction of a second . " yes , " he say , very quietly . 

 Jane 's hand fly to her breast . her heart must be hold down , or he would hear it throb . 

 Nurse Rosemary 's voice have in it only a slight tremor , when she speak again . 

 " be she a mother ? " 

 " no , " say Garth . " I paint what might have be . " 

 " if ? " 

 " if it have be , " reply Garth , curtly . 

 Nurse Rosemary feel rebuke . " dear Mr. Dalmain , " she say , humbly ; " I realise how officious I must seem to you , with all these question , and suggestion . but you must blame the hold these wonderful painting of yours have take on my mind . oh , they be beautiful beautiful ! " 

 " ah , " say Garth , the keen pleasure of the artist spring up once more . " Miss Gray , I have somewhat forget they . have you they here ? that be right . put they up before you , and describe they to I . let I hear how they strike you , as picture . " Jane rise , and go to the window . she throw it open ; and as she breathe in the fresh air , breathe out a passionate prayer that her nerve , her voice , her self - control might not fail she , in this critical hour . she herself have be convict by Garth 's picture . now she must convince Garth , by her description of they . he must be make to believe in the love he have depict . 

 then Nurse Rosemary sit down ; and , in the gentle , unemotional voice , which be quite her own , describe to the eager ear of the blind artist , exactly what Jane have see in the studio . 

 it be perfectly do . it be mercilessly do . all the desperate , hopeless , hunger for Jane , awake in Garth ; the madden knowledge that she have be his , and yet not his ; that , have he press for her answer that evening , it could not have be a refusal ; that the cold calculation of later hour , have no place in those moment of ecstasy . yet he lose she lose she ! why ? ah , why ? be there any possible reason other than the one she give ? 

 Nurse Rosemary 's quiet voice go on , regardless of his writhing . but she be draw to a close . " and it be such a beautiful crimson rambler , Mr. Dalmain , " she say . " I like the idea of its be small and in bud , in the first picture ; and bloom in full glory , in the second . " 

 Garth pull himself together and smile . he must not give way before this girl . 

 " yes , " he say ; " I be glad you notice that . and , look here . we will not destroy they at once . now they be find , there be no hurry . I be afraid I be give you a lot of trouble ; but will you ask for some large sheet of brown paper , and make a package , and write upon it : ' not to be open , ' and tell Margery to put they back in the studio . then , when I want they , at any time , I shall have no difficulty in identify they . " 

 " I be so glad , " say Nurse Rosemary . " then perhaps the plain lady " 

 " I can not have she speak of so , " say Garth , hotly . " I do not know what she think of herself I doubt if she ever give a thought to self at all . I do not know what you would have think of she . I can only tell you that , to I , hers be the one face which be visible in my darkness . all the loveliness I have paint , all the beauty I have admire , fade from my mental vision , as wreath of mist ; flutter from memory 's sight , as autumn leave . her face alone abide ; calm , holy , tender , beautiful , it be always before I . and it pain I that one who have only see she as my hand depict she should speak of she as plain . " 

 " forgive I , " say Nurse Rosemary , humbly . " I do not mean to pain you , sir . and , to show you what your picture have do for I , may I tell you a resolution I make in the studio ? I can not miss what they depict the sweetest joy of life for want of the courage to confess myself wrong ; pocket my pride ; and be frank and humble . I be go to write a full confession to my young man , as to my share of the misunderstanding which have part we . do you think he will understand ? do you think he will forgive ? " 

 Garth smile . he try to call up an image of a pretty troubled face , frame in a fluffy setting of soft fair hair . it harmonise so little with the voice ; but it undoubtedly be Nurse Rosemary Gray , as other see she . 

 " he will be a brute if he do not , child , " he say . 




 CHAPTER XXXI 

 in LIGHTER vein 

 Dinner that evening , the first at their small round table , be a great success . Nurse Rosemary 's plan all work well ; and Garth delight in arrangement which make he feel less helpless . 

 the strain of the afternoon bring its reaction of merriment . a little judicious questioning draw forth further story of the duchess and her pet ; and Miss Champion 's name come in with a frequency which they both enjoy . 

 it be a curious experience for Jane , to hear herself describe in Garth 's vivid word - painting . until that fatal evening at Shenstone , she have be remarkably free from self - consciousness ; and she have no idea that she have a way of look straight into people 's eye when she talk to they , and that that be what muddle up " the silly little mind of woman who say they be afraid of she , and that she make they nervous ! you see she look right into their shallow shuffle little soul , full of conceited thought about themselves , and nasty ill - natured thought about she ; and no wonder they grow panic - stricken , and flee ; and talk of she as ' that formidable Miss Champion . ' I never find she formidable ; but , when I have the chance of a real talk with she , I use to be thankful I have nothing of which to be ashamed . those clear eye touch bottom every time , as our kindre over the water so expressively put it . " 

 neither have Jane any idea that she always talk with a poker , if possible ; build up the fire while she build up her own argument ; or attack it vigorously , while she demolish her opponent 's ; that she stir the fire with her toe , but her very smart boot never seem any the bad ; that when ponder a difficult problem , she usually stand hold her chin in her right hand , until she have find the solution . all these small characteristic Garth describe with vivid touch , and dwelt upon with a tenacity of remembrance , which astonish Jane , and reveal he , in his relation to herself three year before , in a new light . 

 his love for she have be so suddenly disclose , and have at once have to be consider as a thing to be either accept or put away ; so that when she decide to put it away , it seem not to have have time to become in any sense part of her life . she have view it ; realise all it might have mean ; and put it from she . 

 but now she understand how different it have be for Garth . during the week which precede his declaration , he have realise , to the full , the meaning of their grow intimacy ; and , as his certainty increase , he have more and more weave she into his life ; his vivid imagination cause she to appear as his belove from the first ; love and want , when as yet they be merely acquaintance ; kindre spirit ; friend . 

 to find herself thus shrine in his heart and memory be infinitely touch to Jane ; and seem to promise , with sweet certainty , that it would not be difficult to come home there to abide , when once all barrier between they be remove . 

 after dinner , Garth sit long at the piano , fill the room with harmony . once or twice the theme of the Rosary creep in , and Jane listen anxiously for its development ; but almost immediately it give way to something else . it seem rather to haunt the other melody , than to be actually there itself . 

 when Garth leave the piano , and , guide by the purple cord , reach his chair , Nurse Rosemary say gently " Mr. Dalmain , can you spare I for a few day at the end of this week ? " 

 " oh , why ? " say Garth . " to go where ? and for how long ? ah , I know I ought to say : ' certainly ! delight ! ' after all your goodness to I . but I really can not ! you do not   know what life be without you , when you week - end ! that week - end seem month , even though Brand be here . it be your own fault for make yourself so indispensable . " 

 Nurse Rosemary smile . " I daresay I shall not be away for long , " she say . " that be , if you want I , I can return . but , Mr. Dalmain , I intend to - night to write that letter of which I tell you . I shall post it to - morrow . I must follow it up almost immediately . I must be with he when he receive it , or soon afterwards . I think I hope he will want I at once . this be Monday . may I go on Thursday ? " 

 Poor Garth look blankly dismayed . 

 " do nurse , as a rule , leave their patient , and rush off to their young man in order to find out how they have like their letter ? " he inquire , in mock protest . 

 " not as a rule , sir , " reply Nurse Rosemary , demurely . " but this be an exceptional case . " 

 " I shall wire to Brand . " 

 " he will send you a more efficient and more dependable person . " 

 " oh you wicked little thing ! " cry Garth . " if Miss Champion be here , she would shake you ! you , know perfectly well that nobody could fill your place ! " 

 " it be good of you to say so , sir , " reply Nurse Rosemary , meekly . " and be Miss Champion much addict to shake people ? " 


 " do not   call I ' sir ' ! yes ; when people be tiresome she often say she would like to shake they ; and one have a mental vision of how their tooth would chatter . there be a certain little lady of our acquaintance whom we always call ' Mrs. do - and - don't . ' she be not   in our set ; but she call upon it ; and sometimes it ask she to lunch , for fun . if you inquire whether she like a thing , she say : ' well , I do , and I do not . ' if you ask whether she be go to a certain function , she say : ' well , I be , and I be not . ' and if you send she a note , implore a straight answer to a direct question , the answer come back : ' yes and no . ' Miss Champion use to say she would like to take she up by the scruff of her feather boa , and shake she , ask at interval : ' shall I stop ? ' so as to wring from Mrs. do - and - don't   a definite affirmative , for once . " 

 " could Miss Champion carry out such a threat ? be she a very massive person ? " 

 " well , she could , you know ; but she would not . she be most awfully kind , even to little freak she laugh at . no , she be not   massive . that word do not describe she at all . but she be large , and very finely developed . do you know the Venus of Milo ? yes ; in the Louvre . I be glad you know Paris . well , just imagine the Venus of Milo in a tailor - make coat and skirt , and you have Miss Champion . " 

 Nurse Rosemary laugh , hysterically . either the Venus of Milo , or Miss Champion , or this combination of both , prove too much for she . 

 " Little Dicky Brand sum up Mrs. do - and - don't   rather well , " pursue Garth . " she be call at Wimpole Street , on Lady Brand 's ' at home ' day . and Dicky stand talk to I , in his black velvet and white waistcoat , a miniature edition of Sir Deryck . he indicate Mrs. do - and - don't   on a distant lounge , and remark : ' that lady never knows ; she always think . I ask she if her little girl might come to my party , and she say : " I think so . " now if she have ask I if I be come to her party , I should have say : " thank you ; I be . " it be very try when people only think about important thing , such as little girl and party ; because their thinking never amount to much . it do not so much matter what they think about other thing the weather , for instance ; because that all happen , whether they think or not . Mummie ask that lady whether it be rain when she get here ; and she say : " I think not . " I can not   imagine why Mummie always want to know what her friend think about the weather . I have hear she ask seven lady this afternoon whether it be rain . now if father or I want to know whether it be rain we should just step over to the window , and look out ; and then come back and go do with really interesting conversation . but Mummie ask they whether it be rain , or whether they think it have be rain , or be go to rain ; and when they have tell she , she hurry away and ask somebody else . I ask the thinking lady in the feather thing , whether she know who the father and mother be , of the young lady whom Cain marry ; and she say : " well , I do ; and I do not . " I say : " if you do , perhaps you will tell I . and if you don't , perhaps you would like to take my hand , and we will walk over together and ask the Bishop the one with the thin leg , and the gold cross , talk to Mummie . " but she think she have to go , quite in a hurry . so I see she off ; and then ask the Bishop alone . bishop be most satisfactory kind of people ; because they be quite sure about everything ; and you feel safe in quote they to Nurse . Nurse tell Marsdon that this one be in ' sheep 's clothing , " because he wear a gold cross . I see the cross ; but I see no sheep 's clothing . I be look out for the kind of woolly thing our new curate wear on his back in church . should you call that ' sheep 's clothing " ? I ask father , and he say : " no . Bunny - skin . " and mother seem as shock as if father and I have speak in church , instead of just as we come out . and she say : " it be a B.A. hood . " possibly she think " baa " be spell with only one " a. " anyway father and I feel it good to let the subject drop . ' " 

 Nurse Rosemary laugh . " how exactly like Dicky , " she say . " I could hear his grave little voice , and almost see he pull down his small waistcoat ! " 

 " why , do you know the little chap ? " ask Garth . 

 " yes , " reply Nurse Rosemary ; " I have stay with they . talk to Dicky be an education ; and Baby Blossom be a sweet romp . here come Simpson . how quickly the evening have fly . then may I be off on Thursday ? " 

 " I be helpless , " say Garth . " I can not say ' no . ' but suppose you do not come back ? " 

 " then you can wire to Dr. Brand . " 

 " I believe you want to leave I , " say Garth reproachfully . 

 " I do , and I do not ! " laugh Nurse Rosemary ; and flee from his outstretche hand . 

 when Jane have lock the letter - bag early that evening , and hand it to Simpson , she have slip in two letter of her own . one be address to 

 Georgina , Duchess of Meldrum 
 Portland Place 
 the other , to 

 Sir Deryck Brand 
 Wimpole Street 
 both be mark : Urgent . if absent , forward immediately . 




 CHAPTER XXXII 

 AN INTERLUDE 

 Tuesday pass uneventfully , to all outward seem . 

 there be nothing to indicate to Garth that his secretary have sit up write most of the night ; only vary that employment by spend long moment in silent contemplation of his picture , which have find a temporary place of safety , on their way back to the studio , in a deep cupboard in her room , of which she have the key . 

 if Nurse Rosemary mark , with a pang of tender compunction , the worn look on Garth 's face , tell how mental suffering have chase away sleep ; she make no comment thereupon . 

 thus Tuesday pass , in uneventful monotony . 

 two telegram have arrive for Nurse Gray in the course of the morning . the first come while she be read a Times leader aloud to Garth . Simpson bring it in , say : " a telegram for you , miss . " 

 it be always a source of gratification to Simpson afterwards , that , almost from the first , he have be lead , by what he call his " unhaide HintuHition , " to drop the " nurse , " and address Jane with the conventional " miss . " in time he almost convince himself that he have also discern in her " a honourable " ; but this , Margery Graem firmly refuse to allow . she herself have have her " doot , " and keep they to herself ; but all Mr. Simpson 's surmising have be freely express and reiterate in the housekeeper 's room ; and never a word about any honourable lead pass Mr. Simpson 's lip . therefore Mrs. Graem berate he for be so ready to " go astray and speak lie . " but Maggie , the housemaid , have always feel sure Mr. Simpson know more than he say . " say more than he know , you mean , " prompt old Margery . " no , " retort Maggie , " I know what I say ; and I say what I mean . " " you may have say what you mean , but you do not mean what you know , " insist Margery ; " and if anybody say another word on the matter , I shall say grace and dismiss the table , " continue old Margery , exercise the cloture , by virtue of her authority , in a way which Simpson and Maggie , who both wish for cheese , afterwards describe as " mean . " 

 but this be long after the uneventful Tuesday , when Simpson enter , with a salver ; and , find Jane envelop in the Times , say : " a telegram for you , miss . " 

 Nurse Rosemary take it ; apologise for the interruption , and open it . it be from the duchess , and run thus : 

 MOST INCONVENIENT , as you very well know ; but AM leave EUSTON TO - NIGHT . will await FURTHER order AT ABERDEEN . 

 Nurse Rosemary smile , and put the telegram into her pocket . " no answer , thank you , Simpson . " 

 " not bad news , I hope ? " ask Garth . 

 " no , " reply Nurse Rosemary ; " but it make my departure on Thursday imperative . it be from an old aunt of mine , who be go to my ' young man 's ' home . I must be with he before she be , or there will be endless complication . " 

 " I do not   believe he will ever let you go again , when once he get you back , " remark Garth , moodily . 

 " you think not ? " say Nurse Rosemary , with a tender little smile , as she take up the paper , and resume her reading . 

 the second telegram arrive after luncheon . Garth be at the piano , thunder Beethoven 's Funeral March on the death of a Hero . the room be be rent asunder by mighty chord ; and Simpson 's smug face and side - whisker appear noiselessly in the doorway , be an insupportable anticlimax . Nurse Rosemary lay her finger on her lip ; advance with her firm noiseless tread , and take the telegram . she return to her seat and wait until the hero 's obsequie be over , and the last roll of the drum have die away . then she open the orange envelope . and as she open it , a strange thing happen . Garth begin to play the Rosary . the string of pearl drop in liquid sound from his finger ; and Nurse Rosemary read her telegram . it be from the doctor , and say : SPECIAL LICENSE EASILY OBTAINED . FLOWER and I will come whenever you wish . WIRE again . 

 the Rosary draw to a soft melancholy close . 

 " what shall I play next ? " ask Garth , suddenly . 

 " Veni , Creator Spiritus , " say Nurse Rosemary ; and bow her head in prayer . 




 CHAPTER XXXIII 

 " something be go to happen ! " 

 Wednesday dawn ; an ideal first of May : Garth be in the garden before breakfast . Jane hear he sing , as he pass beneath her window . 

 " it be not mine to sing the stately grace , the great soul beam in my lady 's face . " 

 she lean out . 

 he be walk below in the fresh of white flannel ; his step so light and elastic ; his every movement so lithe and graceful ; the only sign of his blindness the Malacca cane he hold in his hand , with which he occasionally touch the grass border , or the wall of the house . she could only see the top of his dark head . it might have be on the terrace at Shenstone , three year before . she long to call from the window ; " darle my darling ! good morning ! God bless you to - day . " 

 ah what would to - day bring forth ; the day when her full confession , and explanation , and plea for pardon , would reach he ? he be such a boy in many way ; so light - hearted , loving , artistic , poetic , irrepressible ; ever young , in spite of his great affliction . but where his manhood be concern ; his love ; his right of choice and of decision ; of maintain a fairly - form opinion , and set aside the less competent judgment of other ; she know he rigid , inflexible . his very pain seem to cool he , from the molten lover , to the bar of steel . 

 as Jane kneel at her window that morning , she have not the least idea whether the evening would find she travel to Aberdeen , to take the night mail south ; or at home forever in the heaven of Garth 's love . 

 and down below he pass again , still sing : 

 " but mine it be to follow in her train ; 
 do her behest in pleasure or in pain ; 
 burn at her altar love 's sweet frankincense , 
 and worship she in distant reverence . " 
 " ah , beloved ! " whisper Jane , " not ' distant . ' if you want she , and call she , it will be to the close closeness love can devise . no more distance between you and I . " 

 and then , in the curious way in which inspire word will sometimes occur to the mind quite apart from their inspire context , and bear a totally different meaning from that which they primarily bear , these word come to Jane : " for he be our peace , who hath make both one , and hath break down the middle wall of partition between we ... that he might reconcile both ... by the cross . " " ah , dear Christ ! " she whisper . " if Thy cross could do this for Jew and Gentile , may not my boy 's heavy cross , so bravely bear , do it for he and for I ? so shall we come at last , indeed , to ' kiss the cross . ' " 

 the breakfast gong boom through the house . Simpson love gong . he consider they " haristocratic . " he always give full measure . 

 Nurse Rosemary go down to breakfast . 

 Garth come in , through the french window , hum " the thousand beauty that I know so well . " he be in his gayest , most inconsequent mood . he have pick a golden rosebud in the conservatory and wear it in his buttonhole . he carry a yellow rise in his hand . 

 " good day , Miss Rosemary , " he say . " what a May day ! Simpson and I be up with the lark ; be not   we , Simpson ? Poor Simpson feel like a sort of ' queen of the May , ' when my electric bell trill in his room , at 5 A.M. but I could not   stay in bed . I wake with my something - be - go - to - happen feeling ; and when I be a little chap and wake with that , Margery use to say : ' get up quickly then , Master Garth , and it will happen all the soon . ' you ask she if she do not , Simpson . Miss Gray , do you ever learn : ' if you be wake call I early , call I early , mother dear ' ? I always hat that young woman ! I should think , in her excited state , she would have be wake long before her poor mother , who must have be wear to a perfect rag , make all the hussy 's May Queen - clothe , overnight . " 

 Simpson have wait to guide he to his place at the table . then he remove the cover , and leave the room . 

 as soon as he have close the door behind he , Garth lean forward , and with unerring accuracy lay the opening rise upon Nurse Rosemary 's plate . 

 " rose for Rosemary , " he say . " wear it , if you be sure the young man would not object . I have be think about he and the aunt . I wish you could ask they both here , instead of go away on Thursday . we would have the ' maddest , merriest time ! ' I would play with the aunt , while you have it out with the young man . and I could easily keep the aunt away from nook and corner , because my hearing be sharp than any aunt 's eye could be , and if you give a gentle cough , I would promptly clutch hold of auntie , and insist upon be guide in the opposite direction . and I would take she out in the motor ; and you and the young man could have the gig . and then when all be satisfactorily settle , we could pack they off home , and be by ourselves again . ah , Miss Gray , do send for they , instead of leave I on Thursday . " 

 " Mr. Dalmain , " say Nurse Rosemary , reprovingly , as she lean forward and touch his right hand with the rim of his saucer , " this May - Day morning have go to your head . I shall send for Margery . she may have know the symptom , of old . " 

 " it be not that , " say Garth . he lean forward and speak confidentially . " something be go to happen to - day , little Rosemary . whenever I feel like this , something happen . the first time it occur , about twenty - five year ago , there be a rock - horse in the hall , when I run downstairs ! I have never forget my first ride on that rocking - horse . the fearful joy when he go backward ; the awful plunge when he go forward ; and the proud moment when it be possible to cease cling to the leather pommel . I nearly kill the cousin who pull out his tail . I thrash he , then and there , with the tail ; which be such a silly thing to do ; because , though it damage the cousin , it also spoil the tail . the next time ah , but I be bore you ! " 

 " not at all , " say Nurse Rosemary , politely ; " but I want you to have some breakfast ; and the letter will be here in a few minute . " 

 he look so brown and radiant , this dear delightful boy , with his gold - brown tie , and yellow rise . she be conscious of her pallor , and oppressive earnestness , as she say : " the letter will be here . " 

 " oh , bother the letter ! " cry Garth . " let us have a holiday from letter on May Day ! you shall be queen of the May ; and Margery shall be the old mother . I will be Robin , with the break heart , lean on the bridge beneath the hazel tree ; and Simpson can be the ' bold lad . ' and we will all go and ' gather knot of flower , and bud , and garland gay . ' " 

 " Mr. Dalmain , " say Nurse Rosemary , laugh , in spite of herself , " you really must be sensible , or I shall go and consult Margery . I have never see you in such a mood . " 

 " you have never see I , on a day when something be go to happen , " say Garth ; and Nurse Rosemary make no further attempt to repress he . 

 after breakfast , he go to the piano , and play two - step , and rag - time music , so infectiously , that Simpson literally trip as he clear the table ; and Nurse Rosemary , sit pale and preoccupy , with a pile of letter before she , have hard work to keep her foot still . 

 Simpson have two - step to the door with the cloth , and close it after he . Nurse Rosemary 's remark about the post - bag , and the letter , have remain unanswered . " shine little glowworm glimmer " be peal gaily through the room , like silver bell , when the door open , and old Margery appear , in a black satin apron , and a blue print sunbonnet . she come straight to the piano , and lay her hand gently on Garth 's arm . 

 " Master Garthie , " she say , " on this lovely May morning , will you take old Margery up into the wood ? " 

 Garth 's hand drop from the key . " of course I will , Margie , " he say . " and , I say Margie , something be go to happen . " 

 " I know it , laddie , " say the old woman , tenderly ; and the expression with which she look into the blind face fill Jane 's eye with tear . " I wake with it too , Master Garthie ; and now we will go into the wood , and listen to the earth , and tree , and flower , and they will tell we whether it be for joy , or for sorrow . come , my own laddie . " 

 Garth rise , as in a dream . even in his blindness he look so young , and so beautiful , that Jane 's watch heart stand still . 

 at the window he pause . " where be that secretary person ? " he say , vaguely . " she keep try to shut I up . " 

 " I know she do , laddie , " say old Margery , curtsey apologetically towards Jane . " you see she do not know the ' something - be - go - to - happen - to - day ' awakening . " 

 " ah , do not   she ? " think Jane , as they disappear through the window . " but as my Garth have go off his dear head , and be take away by his nurse , the thing that be go to happen , can not   happen just yet . " and Jane sit down to the piano , and very softly run through the accompaniment of the Rosary . then , after shade her eye on the terrace , and make sure that a tall white figure lean on a short dark one , have almost reach the top of the hill , still more softly , she sing it . 

 afterwards she go for a tramp on the moor , and steady her nerve by the rapid swing of her walk , and the deep inbreathing of that glorious air . once or twice she take a telegram from her pocket , stand still and read it ; then tramp on , to the wonder of the word : " special license easily obtain . " ah , the license might be easy to obtain ; but how about his forgiveness ? that must be obtain first . if there be only this darling boy to deal with , in his white flannel and yellow rose , with a May - Day madness in his vein , the license might come at once ; and all he could wish should happen without delay . but this be a pass phase of Garth . what she have to deal with be the white - faced man , who calmly say : " I accept the cross , " and walk down the village church leave she for all these year . love she , as he love she ; and yet leave she , without word or sign , for three long year . to hire , be the confession ; his would be the decision ; and , somehow , it do not surprise she , when she come down to luncheon , a little late , to find HIM seat at the table . 

 " Miss Gray , " he say gravely , as he hear she enter , " I must apologise for my behaviour this morning . I be what they call up here ' fey . ' Margery understand the mood ; and together she and I have listen to kind Mother Earth , lay our hand on her sympathetic softness , and she have tell we her secret . then I lie down under the fir tree and sleep ; and awaken calm and sane , and ready for what to - day must bring . for it will bring something . that be no delusion . it be a day of great thing . that much , Margery know , too . " 

 " perhaps , " suggest Nurse Rosemary , tentatively , " there may be news of interest in your letter . " 

 " ah , " say Garth , " I forget . we have not even open this morning 's letter . let we take time for they immediately after lunch . be there many ? " 

 " quite a pile , " say Nurse Rosemary . 

 " good . we will work soberly through they . " 

 half an hour later Garth be seat in his chair , calm and expectant ; his face turn towards his secretary . he have handle his letter , and amongst they he have find one seal ; and the seal be a plumed helmet , with visor close . Nurse Rosemary see he pale , as his finger touch it . he make no remark ; but , as before , slip it beneath the rest , that it might come up for reading , last of all . 

 when the other be finish , and Nurse Rosemary take up this letter , the room be very still . they be quite alone . bee hum in the garden . the scent of flower steal in at the window . but no one disturb their solitude . 

 Nurse Rosemary take up the envelope . 

 " Mr. Dalmain , here be a letter , seal with scarlet wax . the seal be a helmet with visor " 

 " I know , " say Garth . " you need not describe it far . kindly open it . " 

 Nurse Rosemary open it . " it be a very long letter , Mr. Dalmain . " 

 " indeed ? will you please read it to I , Miss Gray . " 

 a tense moment of silence follow . Nurse Rosemary lift the letter ; but her voice suddenly refuse to respond to her will . Garth wait without further word . 

 then Nurse Rosemary say : " indeed , sir , it seem a most private letter . I find it difficult to read it to you . " 

 Garth hear the distress in her voice , and turn to she kindly . 

 " never mind , my dear child . it in no way concern you . it be a private letter to I ; but my only mean of hear it be through your eye , and from your lip . besides , the lady , whose seal be a plume helmet , can have nothing of a very private nature to say to I . " 

 " ah , but she have , " say Nurse Rosemary , brokenly . 

 Garth consider this in silence . 

 then : " turn over the page , " he say , " and tell I the signature . " 

 " there be many page , " say Nurse Rosemary . 

 " turn over the page then , " say Garth , sternly . " do not keep I wait . how be that letter sign ? " 

 " your wife , " whisper Nurse Rosemary . 

 there be a petrifying quality about the silence which follow . it seem as if those two word , whisper into Garth 's darkness , have turn he to stone . 

 at last he stretch out his hand . " will you give I that letter , if you please , Miss Gray ? thank you . I wish to be alone for a quarter of an hour . I shall be glad if you will be good enough to sit in the dining - room , and stop any one from come into this room . I must be undisturbed . at the end of that time kindly return . " 

 he speak so quietly that Jane 's heart sink within she . some display of agitation would have be reassure . this be the man who , bow his dark head towards the crucifixion window , say : " I accept the cross . " this be the man , whose footstep never once falter as he stride down the aisle , and leave she . this be the man , who have have the strength , ever since , to treat that episode between she and himself , as completely closed ; no word of entreaty ; no sign of remembrance ; no hint of reproach . and this be the man to whom she have sign herself : " your wife . " 

 in her whole life , Jane have never know fear . she know it now . 

 as she silently rise and leave he , she steal one look at his face . he be sit perfectly still ; the letter in his hand . he have not turn his head toward she as he take it . his profile might have be a beautiful carving in white ivory . there be not the faint tinge of colour in his face ; just that ivory pallor , against the ebony line of his straight brow , and smooth dark hair . 

 Jane softly leave the room , close the door behind she . 

 then follow the long fifteen minute she have ever know . she realise what a tremendous conflict be in progress in that quiet room . Garth be arrive at his decision without have hear any of her argument . by the strange fatality of his own insistence , he have hear only two word of her letter , and those the crucial word ; the two word to which the whole letter carefully lead up . they must have reveal to he instantly , what the character of the letter would be ; and what be the attitude of mind towards himself , of the woman who write they . 

 Jane pace the dining - room in desperation , remember the hour of thought which have go to the compiling of sentence , cautiously prepare his mind to the revelation of the signature . 

 suddenly , in the midst of her mental perturbation , there come to she the remembrance of a conversation between Nurse Rosemary and Garth over the picture . the former have say : " be she a wife ? " and Garth have answer : " yes . " Jane have instantly understand what that answer reveal and imply . because Garth have so feel she his during those wonderful moment on the terrace at Shenstone , that he could look up into her face and say , " my wife " not as an interrogation , but as an absolute statement of fact , he still hold she this , as indissolubly as if priest , and book , and ring , have go to the wedding of their union . to he , the union of soul come before all else ; and if that have take place , all that might follow be but the outward indorsement of an accomplished fact . owe to her fear , mistrust , and deception , nothing have follow . their life have be sunder ; they have go different way . he regard himself as be no more to she than any other man of her acquaintance . during these year he have believe , that her part in that evening 's wedding of soul have exist in his imagination , only ; and have no bind effect upon she . but his remain . because those word be true to he then , he have say they ; and , because he have say they , he would consider she his wife , through life , and after . it be the intuitive understanding of this , which have embolden Jane so to sign her letter . but how would he reconcile that signature with the view of her conduct which he have all along take , without ever have the slight conception that there could be any other ? 

 then Jane remember , with comfort , the irresistible appeal make by truth to the soul of the artist ; truth of line ; truth of colour ; truth of value ; and , in the realm of sound , truth of tone , of harmony , of rendering , of conception . and when Nurse Rosemary have say of his painting of " the wife " : " it be a triumph of art " ; Garth have reply : " it be a triumph of truth . " and Jane 's own verdict on the look he have see and depict be : " it be true yes , it be true ! " will he not realise now the truth of that signature ; and , if he realise it , will he not be glad in his loneliness , that his wife should come to he ; unless the confession and admission of the letter cause he to put she away as wholly unworthy ? 

 suddenly Jane understand the immense advantage of the fact that he would hear every word of the rest of her letter , know the conclusion , which she herself could not possibly have put first . she see a high Hand in this arrangement ; and say , as she watch the minute slowly pass : " he hath break down the middle wall of partition between we " ; and a sense of calm assurance descend , and garrison her soul with peace . 

 the quarter of an hour be over . 

 Jane cross the hall with firm , though noiseless , step ; stand a moment on the threshold relegate herself completely to the background ; then open the door ; and Nurse Rosemary re - enter the library . 




 CHAPTER XXXIV 

 " love never FAILETH " 

 Garth be stand at the open window , when Nurse Rosemary re - enter the library ; and he do not turn , immediately . 

 she look anxiously for the letter , and see it lay ready on her side of the table . it bear sign of have be much crumple ; look almost as a letter might appear which have be crush into a ball , fling into the waste - paper basket , and afterwards retrieve . it have , however , be carefully smooth out ; and lie ready to her hand . 

 when Garth turn from the window and pass to his chair , his face bear the sign of a great struggle . he look as one who , sightless , have yet be make frantic effort to see . the ivory pallor be go . his face be flush ; and his thick hair , which grow in beautiful curve low upon his forehead and temple , and be usually carefully brush back in short - cropped neatness , be now ruffle and disorder . but his voice be completely under control , as he turn towards his secretary . 

 " my dear Miss Gray , " he say , " we have a difficult task before we . I have receive a letter , which it be essential I should hear . I be oblige to ask you to read it to I , because there be absolutely no one else to whom I can prefer such a request . I can not but know that it will be a difficult and painful task for you , feel yourself an intermediary between two wound and sunder heart . may I make it easy , my dear little girl , by assure you that I know of no one in this world from whose lip I could listen to the content of that letter with less pain ; and , fail my own , there be no eye beneath which I could less grudgingly let it pass , there be no mind I could so unquestioningly trust , to judge kindly , both of myself and of the writer ; and to forget faithfully , all which be not intend to come within the knowledge of a third person . " 

 " thank you , Mr. Dalmain , " say Nurse Rosemary . 

 Garth lean back in his chair , shield his face with his hand . 

 " now , if you please , " he say . and , very clearly and quietly , Nurse Rosemary begin to read . 

 " DEAR GARTH , as you will not let I come to you , so that I could say , between you and I alone , that which must be say , I be compel to write it . it be your own fault , Dal ; and we both pay the penalty . for how can I write to you freely when I know , that as you listen , it will seem to you of every word I be write , that I be drag a third person into that which ought to be , most sacredly , between you and I alone . and yet , I must write freely ; and I must make you fully understand ; because the whole of your future life and mine will depend upon your reply to this letter . I must write as if you be able to hold the letter in your own hand , and read it to yourself . therefore , if you can not completely trust your secretary , with the private history of your heart and mine , bid she give it you back without turn this first page ; and let I come myself , Garth , and tell you all the rest . " 

 " that be the bottom of the page , " say Nurse Rosemary ; and wait . 

 Garth do not remove his hand . " I do completely trust ; and she must not come , " he say . 

 Nurse Rosemary turn the page , and go on reading . 

 " I want you to remember , Garth , that every word I write , be the simple unvarnished truth . if you look back over your remembrance of I , you will admit that I be not naturally an untruthful person , nor do I ever take easily to prevarication . but , Garth , I tell you one lie ; and that fatal exception prove the rule of perfect truthfulness , which have always otherwise hold , between you and I ; and , please God , always will hold . the confession herein contain , concern that one lie ; and I need not ask you to realise how humbling it be to my pride to have to force the hearing of a confession upon the man who have already refuse to admit I to a visit of friendship . you will remember that I be not naturally humble ; and have a considerable amount of proper pride ; and , perhaps , by the greatness of the effort I have have to make , you will be able to gauge the greatness of my love . God help you to do so my darling ; my beloved ; my poor desolate boy ! " 

 Nurse Rosemary stop abruptly ; for , at this sudden mention of love , and at these word of unexpected tenderness from Jane , Garth have rise to his foot , and take two step towards the window ; as if to escape from something too immense to be face . but , in a moment he recover himself , and sit down again , completely hide his face with his hand . 

 Nurse Rosemary resume the reading of the letter . 

 " ah , what a wrong I have do , both to you , and to myself ! dear , you remember the evening on the terrace at Shenstone , when you ask I to be when you call I when I be your wife ? Garth , I leave this last sentence as it stand , with its two attempt to reach the truth . I will not cross they out , but leave they to be read to you ; for , you see Garth , I finally arrive ! I be your wife . I do not understand it then . I be intensely surprised ; unbelievably inexperienced in matter of feeling ; and bewilder by the flood of sensation which sweep I off my foot and almost engulf I . but even then I know that my soul arise and proclaim you mate and master . and when you hold I , and your dear head lie upon my heart , I know , for the first time the meaning of the word ecstasy ; and I could have ask no kind gift of heaven , than to prolong those moment into hour . " 

 Nurse Rosemary 's quiet voice break , suddenly ; and the reading cease . 

 Garth be lean forward , his head bury in his hand . a dry sob rise in his throat , just at the very moment when Nurse Rosemary 's voice give way . 

 Garth recover first . without lift his head , with a gesture of protective affection and sympathy , he stretch his hand across the table . 

 " poor little girl , " he say , " I be so sorry . it be rough on you . if only it have come when Brand be here ! I be afraid you must go on ; but try to read without realise . leave the realising to I . " 

 and Nurse Rosemary read on . 

 " when you lift your head in the moonlight and gaze long and earnestly at I ah , those dear eye ! your look suddenly make I self - conscious . there sweep over I a sense of my own exceed plainness , and of how little there be in what those dear eye see , to provide reason , for that adoring look . overwhelmed with a shy shame I press your head back to the place where the eye would be hide ; and I realise now what a different construction you must have put upon that action . Garth , I assure you , that when you lift your head the second time , and say , ' my wife , ' it be the first suggestion to my mind that this wonderful thing which be happen mean marriage . I know it must seem almost incredible , and more like a child of eighteen , than a woman of thirty . but you must remember , all my dealing with man up to that hour have be handshake , heartiest comradeship , and an occasional clap on the shoulder give and receive . and do not   forget , dear king of my heart , that , until one short week before , you have be amongst the boy who call I ' good old jane , ' and address I in intimate conversation as ' my dear fellow ' ! do not   forget that I have always look upon you as year young than myself ; and though a strangely sweet tie have grow up between we , since the evening of the concert at Overdene , I have never realise it as love . well you will remember how I ask for twelve hour to consider my answer ; and you yield , immediately ;   you be so perfect , all the time , Garth   and leave I , when I ask to be alone ; leave I , with a gesture I have never forget . it be a revelation of the way in which the love of a man such as you exalt the woman upon whom it be outpoure . the hem of that gown have be a sacred thing to I , ever since . it be always with I , though I never wear it . a detailed account of the hour which follow , I shall hope to give you some day , my dearest . I can not write it . let I hurl on to paper , in all its crude ugliness , the miserable fact which part we ; turn our dawn joy to disillusion and sadness . Garth it be this . I do not believe your love would stand the test of my plainness . I know what a worshipper of beauty you be ; how you must have it , in one form or another , always around you . I get out my diary in which I have record verbatim our conversation about the ugly preacher , whose face become illumined into beauty , by the inspire glory within . and you add that you never think he ugly again ; but he would always be plain . and you say it be not the sort of face one would want to have always before one at meal ; but that you be not call upon to undergo that discipline , which would be sheer martyrdom to you . " 

 " I be so interested , at the time ; and so amuse at the unconscious way in which you stand and explain this , to quite the plain woman of your acquaintance , that I record it very fully in my journal . alas ! on that important night , I read the word , over and over , until they take morbid hold upon my brain . then such be the self - consciousness awaken in a woman by the fact that she be love and seek I turn on all the light around my mirror , and critically and carefully examine the face you would have to see every day behind your coffee - pot at breakfast , for year and year , if I say ' yes , ' on the morrow . darling , I do not see myself through your eye , as , thank God , I have do since . and I do not trust your love to stand the test . it seem to I , I be save both of we from future disappointment and misery , by bravely put away present joy , in order to avoid certain disenchantment . my beloved , it will seem to you so coolly calculate , and so mean ; so unworthy of the great love you be even then lavish upon I . but remember , for year , your remarkable personal grace and beauty have be a source of pleasure to I ; and I have picture you wed to Pauline Lister , for instance , in her dazzle whiteness , and soft radiant youth . so my morbid self - consciousness say : ' what ! this young Apollo , tie to my ponderous plainness ; grow handsomer every year , while I grow old and plainer ? ' ah , darling ! it sound so unworthy , now we know what our love be . but it sound sensible and right that night ; and at last , with a bosom that ache , and arm that hang heavy at the thought of be empty of all that joy , I make up my mind to say ' no . ' ah , believe I , I have no idea what it already mean to you . I think you would pass on at once to another fancy ; and transfer your love to one more able to meet your need , at every point . honestly , Garth , I think I should be the only one leave desolate . then come the question : how to refuse you . I know if I give the true reason , you would argue it away , and prove I wrong , with glow word , before which I should perforce yield . so as I really mean not to let you run the risk , and not to run it myself I lie to you , my beloved . to you , whom my whole be acclaim King of my heart , Master of my will ; supreme to I , in love and life , to you I say : ' I can not marry a mere boy . ' ah , darling ! I do not excuse it . I do not defend it . I merely confess it ; trust to your generosity to admit , that no other answer would have send you away . ah , your poor jane , leave desolate ! if you could have see she in the little church , call you back ; retract and promising ; listen for your return footstep , in an agony of longing . but my Garth be not make of the stuff which stand wait on the door - mat of a woman 's indecision . " 

 " the lonely year which follow so break my nerve , that Deryck Brand tell I I be go all to piece , and order I abroad . I go , as you know ; and in other , and more vigorous , surrounding , there come to I a saner view of life . in Egypt last March , on the summit of the Great Pyramid , I make up my mind that I could live without you no long . I do not see myself wrong ; but I yearn so for your love , and to pour mine upon you , my beloved , that I conclude it be worth the risk . I make up my mind to take the next boat home , and send for you . then oh , my own boy I hear . I write to you ; and you would not let I come . " 

 " now I know perfectly well , that you might say : ' she do not trust I when I have my sight . now that I can not see , she be no long afraid . ' Garth , you might , say that ; but it would not be true . I have have ample proof lately that I be wrong , and ought to have trust you all through . what it be , I will tell you later . all I can say now be : that , if your dear shin eye could see , they would see , now , a woman who be , trustfully and unquestioningly , all your own . if she be doubtful of her face and figure , she say quite simply : ' they please HIM ; and they be just his . I have no further right to criticise they . if he want they , they be not mine , but his . ' darling , I can not tell you now , how I have arrive at this assurance . but I have have proof beyond word of your faithfulness and love . " 

 " the question , therefore , simply resolve itself into this : can you forgive I ? if you can forgive I , I can come to you at once . if this thing be past forgiveness , I must make up my mind to stay away . but , oh , my own Dear , the bosom on which once you lay your head wait for you with the longing ache of lonely year . if you need it , do not thrust it from you . " 

 " write I one word by your own hand : ' forgive . ' it be all I ask . when it reach I , I will come to you at once . do not dictate a letter to your secretary . I could not bear it . just write if you can truly write it ' FORGIVEN ' ; and send it to ' your wife . ' " 

 the room be very still , as Nurse Rosemary finish reading ; and , lay down the letter , silently wait . she wonder for a moment whether she could get herself a glass of water , without disturb he ; but decide to do without it . 

 at last Garth lift his head . 

 " she have ask I to do a thing impossible , " he say ; and a slow smile illumine his draw face . 

 Jane clasp her hand upon her breast . 

 " can you not write ' forgive ' ? " ask Nurse Rosemary , brokenly . 

 " no , " say Garth . " I can not . little girl , give I a sheet of paper , and a pencil . " 

 Nurse Rosemary place they close to his hand . 

 Garth take up the pencil . he grope for the paper ; feel the edge with his left hand ; find the centre with his finger ; and , in large firm letter , write one word . 

 " be that legible ? " he ask , pass it across to Nurse Rosemary . 

 " quite legible , " she say ; for she answer before it be blot by her tear . 

 instead of " forgive , " Garth have write : " loved . " 

 " can you post it at once ? " Garth ask , in a low , eager voice . " and she will come oh , my God , she will come ! if we catch to - night 's mail , she may be here the day after to - morrow ! " 

 Nurse Rosemary take up the letter ; and , by an almost superhuman effort , speak steadily . 

 " Mr. Dalmain , " she say ; " there be a postscript to this letter . it say : ' write to the Palace Hotel , Aberdeen . ' " 

 Garth spring up , his whole face and figure alive with excitement . 

 " in Aberdeen ? " he cry . " jane , in Aberdeen ! oh , my God ! if she get this paper to - morrow morning , she may be here any time in the day . jane ! jane ! dear little Rosemary , do you hear ? Jane will come to - morrow ! do not   I tell you something be go to happen ? you and Simpson be too british to understand ; but Margery know ; and the wood tell we it be Joy come through Pain . could that be post at once , Miss Gray ? " 

 the May - Day mood be upon he again . his face shine . his figure be electric with expectation . Nurse Rosemary sit at the table watch he ; her chin in her hand . a tender smile dawn on her lip , out of keep with her suppose face and figure ; so full be it of the glorious expectation of a mature and perfect love . 

 " I will go to the post - office myself , Mr. Dalmain , " she say . " I shall be glad of the walk ; and I can be back by tea - time . " 

 at the post - office she do not post the word in Garth 's handwriting . that lie hide in her bosom . but she send off two telegram . the first to 

 the Duchess of Meldyum , 
 Palace Hotel , Aberdeen . 

 " come here by 5.50 train without fail this evening . " 
 the second to 

 Sir Deryck Brand , 
 Wimpole Sheet , London . 

 " all be right . " 



 CHAPTER XXXV 

 NURSE ROSEMARY have she REWARD 

 " Mr. Dalmain , " say Nurse Rosemary , with patient insistence , " I really do want you to sit down , and give your mind to the tea - table . how can you remember where each thing be place , if you keep jump up , and move your chair into different position ? and last time you pound the table to attract my attention , which be already anxiously fix upon you , you nearly knock over your own tea , and send flood of mine into the saucer . if you can not behave well , I shall ask Margery for a pinafore , and sit you up on a high chair ! " 

 Garth stretch his leg in front of he , and his arm over his head ; and lie back in his chair , laugh joyously . 

 " then I should have to say : ' please , Nurse , may I get down ? ' what a cheeky little thing you be become ! and you use to be quite oppressively polite . I suppose you would answer : ' if you say your grace nicely , Master Garth , you may . ' do you know the story of ' Tommy , you should say your grace ' ? " 

 " you have tell it to I twice in the last forty - eight hour , " say Nurse Rosemary , patiently . 

 " oh , what a pity ! I feel so like tell it now . if you have really be the sort of sympathetic person Sir Deryck describe , you would have say : ' no ; and I should so love to hear it ! ' " 

 " no ; and I should so love to hear it ! " say Nurse Rosemary . 

 " too late ! that sort of thing , to have any value should be spontaneous . it need not be true ; but it must be spontaneous . but , talk of a high chair , when you say those chaffy thing in a voice like Jane 's , and just as Jane would have say they oh , my wig ! do you know , that be the duchess 's only original little swear . all the rest be quotation . and when she say : ' my wig ! ' we all try not to look at it . it be usually slightly awry . the toucan tweak it . he be so very loving , dear bird ! " 

 " now hand I the buttered toast , " say Nurse Rosemary ; " and do not   tell I any more naughty story about the duchess . no ! that be the thin bread - and - butter . I tell you you would lose your bearing . the toast be in a warm plate on your right . now let we make believe I be Miss Champion , and hand it to I , as nicely as you will be hand it to she , this time to - morrow . " 

 " it be easy to make believe you be Jane , with that voice , " say Garth ; " and yet I do not   know . I have never really associate you with she . one little sentence of old Rob 's make all the difference to I . he say you have fluffy floss - silk sort of hair . no one could ever imagine Jane with fluffy floss - silk sort of hair ! and I believe that one sentence save the situation . otherwise , your voice would have drive I mad , those first day . as it be , I use to wonder sometimes if I could possibly bear it . you understand why , now ; do not   you ? and yet , in a way , it be not like her . Hers be deep ; and she often speak with a delicious kind of drawl , and use heap of slang ; and you be such a very proper little person ; and possess what the primer call ' perfectly correct diction . ' what fun it would be to hear you and Jane talk together ! and yet I do not   know . I should be on thorn , all the time . " 

 " why ? " 

 " I should be so awfully afraid lest you should not like one another . you see , you have really , in a way , be more to I than any one else in the world ; and SHE well , she be my world , " say Garth , simply . " and I should be so afraid lest she should not fully appreciate you ; and you should not quite understand she . she have a sort of way of stand and look people up and down , and , woman hate it ; especially pretty fluffy little woman . they feel she spot all the thing that come off . " 

 " nothing of mine come off , " murmur Nurse Rosemary , " except my patient , when he will not stay on his chair . " 

 " once , " continue Garth , with the gleeful enjoyment in his voice which always presage a story in which Jane figure , " there be a fearfully silly little woman stay at Overdene , when a lot of we be there . we never could make out why she be include in one of the duchess 's ' good party , ' except that the dear duchess vastly enjoy take she off , and tell story about she ; and we could not appreciate the cleverness of the impersonation , unless we have see the original . she be rather pretty , in a fussy , curling - tong , wax - doll sort of way ; but she never could let her appearance alone , or allow people to forget it . almost every sentence she speak , draw attention to it . we get very sick of it , and ask Jane to make she shut up . but Jane say : ' it do not   hurt you , boy ; and it please she . let she be . ' Jane be always extra nice to people , if she suspect they be ask down in order to make sport for the duchess afterwards . Jane hat that sort of thing . she could not   say much to her aunt ; but we have to be very careful how we egg the duchess on , if Jane be within hearing . well one evening , after tea , a little group of we be wait around the fire in the low hall , to talk to Jane . it be Christmas time . the log look so jolly on the hearth . the red velvet curtain be draw right across , cover the terrace door and the window on either side . Tommy sit on his perch , in the centre of the group , keep a keen lookout for cigarette end . outside , the world be deep in snow ; and that wonderful silence reign ; make the talk and laughter within all the more gay by contrast you know , that penetrate silence ; when tree , and field , and path , be cover a foot thick in soft sparkling whiteness . I always look forward , just as eagerly , each winter to the first sight ah , I forget ! ... Fancy never see snow again ! ... never mind . it be something to remember have see it ; and I shall hear the wonderful snow - silence more clearly than ever . perhaps before other people pull up the blind , I shall be able to say : ' there be be a fall of snow in the night . ' what be I tell you ? yes , I remember . about little Mrs. Fussy . well all the woman have go up to dress for dinner ; except Jane , who never need more than half an hour ; and Fussy , who be be sprightly , in a laboured way ; and fancy herself the centre of attraction which keep we congregate in the hall . as a matter of fact , we be wait to tell Jane some private news we have just hear about a young chap in the guard , who be in fearful hot water for rag . his colonel be an old friend of Jane 's , and we think she could put in a word , and improve matter for Billy . so Mrs. Fussy be very much de trop , and do not   know it . Jane be sit with she back to all of we , her foot on the fender , and her skirt turn up over her knee . oh , there be another one , underneath ; a handsome silk thing , with row of little frill , which you would think should have go on outside . but Jane 's good thing be never parade ; always hide . I do not   mean clothe , now ; but her splendid self . well little Fussy be ' chat ' she never talk about herself and her conquest ; quite unconscious that we all wish she at Jericho . Jane go on read the evening paper ; but she feel the atmosphere grow restive . presently ah , but I must not tell you the rest . I have just remember . Jane make we promise never to repeat it . she think it detrimental to the other woman . but we just have time for our confab ; and Jane catch the evening post with the letter which get Billy off scot - free ; and yet come down punctually to dinner , well dress than any of they . we feel it rather hard luck to have to promise ; because we have each count on be the first to tell the story to the duchess . but , you know , you always have to do as Jane say . " 

 " why ? " 

 " oh , I do not   know ! I can not   explain why . if you know she , you would not need to ask . Cake , Miss Gray ? " 

 " thank you . right , this time . " 

 " there ! that be exactly as Jane would have say : ' right , this time . ' be it not strange that after have for week think your voice so like her , to - morrow I shall be think her voice so like your ? " 

 " oh , no , you will not , " say Nurse Rosemary . " when she be with you , you will have no thought for other people . " 

 " indeed , but I shall ! " cry Garth . " and , dear little Rosemary , I shall miss you , horribly . no one not even she can take your place . and , do you know , " he lean forward , and a troubled look cloud the gladness of his face , " I be begin to feel anxious about it . she have not see I since the accident . I be afraid it will give she a shock . do you think she will find I much change ? " 

 Jane look at the sightless face turn so anxiously toward she . she remember that morning in his room , when he think himself alone with Dr. Rob ; and , leave the shelter of the wall , sit up to speak , and she see his face for the first time . she remember turn to the fireplace , so that Dr. Rob should not see the tear rain down her cheek . she look again at Garth now grow conscious , for the first time , of his disfigurement ; and then , only for her sake and an almost overwhelming tenderness grip her heart . she glance at the clock . she could not hold out much long . 

 " be it very bad ? " say Garth ; and his voice shake . 

 " I can not answer for another woman , " reply Nurse Rosemary ; " but I should think your face , just as it be , will always be her joy . " 

 Garth flush ; pleased and relieve , but slightly surprised . there be a quality in Nurse Rosemary 's voice , for which he could not altogether account . 

 " but then , she will not be accustom to my blind way , " he continue . " I be afraid I shall seem so helpless and so blundering . she have not be in Sightless Land , as you and I have be . she do not know all our plan of cord , and notch , and thing . ah , little Rosemary ! promise not to leave I to - morrow . I want she only God , know how I want she ; but I begin to be half afraid . it will be so wonderful , for the great essential ; but , for the little every - day happening , which be so magnify by the darkness , oh , my kind unseen guide , how I shall need you . at first , I think it lucky you have settle to go , just when she be come ; but now , just because she be come , I can not let you go . have she will be wonderful beyond word ; but it will not be the same as have you . " 

 Nurse Rosemary be receive her reward , and she appear to find it rather overwhelming . 

 as soon as she could speak , she say , gently : " do not   excite yourself over it , Mr. Dalmain . believe I , when you have be with she for five minute , you will find it just the same as have I . and how do you know she have not also be in Sightless Land ? a nurse would do that sort of thing , because she be very keen on her profession , and on make a success of her case . the woman who love you would do it for love of you . " 

 " it would be like she , " say Garth ; and lean back , a look of deep contentment gathering on his face . " oh , Jane ! jane ! she be come ! she be come ! " 

 Nurse Rosemary look at the clock . 

 " yes ; she be come , " she say ; and though her voice be steady , her hand tremble . " and , as it be our last evening together under quite the same circumstance as during all these week , will you agree to a plan of mine ? I must go upstairs now , and do some packing , and make a few arrangement . but will you dress early ? I will do the same ; and if you could be down in the library by half - past six , we might have some music before dinner . " 

 " why certainly , " say Garth . " it make no difference to I at what time I dress ; and I be always ready for music . but , I say : I wish you be not pack , Miss Gray . " 

 " I be not exactly pack up , " reply Nurse Rosemary . " I be pack thing away . " 

 " it be all the same , if it mean leave . but you have promise not to go until she come ? " 

 " I will not go until she come . " 

 " and you will tell she all the thing she ought to know ? " 

 " she shall know all I know , which could add to your comfort . " 

 " and you will not leave I , until I be really well , get on all right ? " 

 " I will never leave you , while you need I , " say Nurse Rosemary . and again Garth detect that peculiar quality in her voice . he rise , and come towards where he hear she to be stand . 

 " do you know , you be no end of a brick , " he say , with emotion . then he hold out both hand towards she . " put your hand in mine just for once , little Rosemary . I want to try to thank you . " 

 there be a moment of hesitation . two strong capable hand strong and capable , though , just then , they tremble nearly go home to his ; but be withdraw just in time . Jane 's hour be not yet . this be Nurse Rosemary 's moment of triumph and success . it should not be take from she . 

 " this evening , " she say , softly , " after the music , we will shake hand . now be careful , sir . you be strand . wait . here be the garden - cord , just to your left . take a little air on the terrace ; and sing again the lovely song I hear under my window this morning . and now that you know what it be that be ' go to happen , ' this exquisite May - Day evening will fill you with tender expectation . good - bye , sir for an hour . " 

 " what have come to little Rosemary ? " muse Garth , as he feel for his cane , in its corner by the window . " we could not have go on indefinitely quite as we have be , since she come in from the post - office . " 

 he walk on ; a troubled look cloud his face : suddenly it lift , and he stand still , and laugh . " Duffer ! " he say . " oh , what a conceited duffer ! she be think of her ' young man . ' she be go to he to - morrow ; and her mind be full of he ; just as mine be full of Jane . dear , good , clever , little Rosemary ! I hope he be worthy of she . no ; that he can not be . I hope he know he be not worthy of she . that be more to the point . I hope he will receive she as she expect . somehow , I hate let she go to he . oh , hang the fellow ! as Tommy would say . " 




 CHAPTER xxxvi 

 the REVELATION of the ROSARY 

 Simpson be cross the hall just before half - past six o'clock . he have leave his master in the library . he hear a rustle just above he ; and , look up , see a tall figure descend the wide oak staircase . 

 Simpson stand transfix . the soft black evening - gown , with its trail fold , and old lace at the bosom , do not impress he so much as the quiet look of certainty and power on the calm face above they . 

 " Simpson , " say Jane , " my aunt , the Duchess of Meldrum , and her maid , and her footman , and a rather large quantity of luggage , will be arrive from Aberdeen , at about half - past seven . Mrs. Graem know about prepare room ; and I have give James order for meet the train with the brougham , and the luggage - cart . the duchess dislike motor . when her grace arrive , you can show she into the library . we will dine in the dining - room at a quarter past eight . meanwhile , Mr. Dalmain and myself be particularly engage just now , and must not be disturb on any account , until the duchess 's arrival . you quite understand ? " 

 " yes , miss - m'lady , " stammer Simpson . he have be boot - boy in a ducal household early in his career ; and he consider duchess ' niece to be people before whom one should bow down . 

 Jane smile . " ' Miss ' be quite sufficient , Simpson , " she say ; and sweep towards the library . 

 Garth hear she enter , and close the door ; and his quick ear catch the rustle of a train . 

 " Hullo , Miss Gray , " he say . " pack your uniform ? " 

 " yes , " say Jane . " I tell you I be pack . " 

 she come slowly across the room , and stand on the hearth - rug look down at he . he be in full evening - dress ; just as at Shenstone on that memorable night ; and , as he sit well back in his deep arm - chair , one knee cross over the other , she see the crimson line of his favourite silk sock . 

 Jane stand look down upon he . her hour have come at last . but even now she must , for his sake , be careful and patient . 

 " I do not hear the song , " she say . 

 " no , " reply Garth . " at first , I forget . and when I remember , I have be think of other thing , and somehow ah , Miss Gray ! I can not sing to - night . my soul be dumb with longing . " 

 " I know , " say Jane , gently ; " and I be go to sing to you . " 

 a faint look of surprise cross Garth 's face . " do you sing ? " he ask . " then why have you not sing before ? " 

 " when I arrive , " say Jane , " Dr. Rob ask I whether I play . I say : ' a little . ' thereupon he conclude I sing a little , too ; and he forbid I , most peremptorily , either to play a little ; or sing a little , to you . he say he do not want you drive altogether mad . " 

 Garth burst out laugh . 

 " how like old Robbie , " he say . " and , in spite of his injunction , be you go to take the risk , and ' sing a little , ' to I , to - night ? " 

 " no , " say Jane . " I take no risk . I be go to sing you one song . here be the purple cord , at your right hand . there be nothing between you and the piano ; and you be face towards it . if you want to stop I you can come . " 

 she walk to the instrument , and sit down . 

 over the top of the grand piano , she could see he , lean back in his chair ; a slightly amuse smile play about his lip . he be evidently still enjoy the humour of Dr. Rob 's prohibition . 

 the Rosary have but one opening chord . she strike it ; her eye upon his face . she see he sit up , instantly ; a look of surprise , expectation , bewilderment , gather there . 

 then she begin to sing . the deep rich voice , low and vibrant , as the soft tone of ' cello , thrill into the startled silence . 

 " the hour I spend with thee , dear heart , 
 be as a string of pearl to I ; 
 I count they over , ev'ry one apart , 
 my rosary , my rosary . 
 each hour a pearl " 
 Jane get no far . 

 Garth have rise . he speak no word ; but he be come blindly over to the piano . she turn on the music - stool , her arm hold out to receive he . now he have find the woodwork . his hand crash down upon the bass . now he have find she . he be on his knee , his arm around she . Hers envelop he , yearning , tender , hungry with the repressed longing of all those hard week . 

 he lift his sightless face to her , for one moment . " you ? " he say . " you ? you all the time ? " 

 then he hide his face in the soft lace at her breast . 

 " oh , my boy , my darling ! " say Jane , tenderly ; hold the dear head close . " yes ; I , all the time ; all the time near he , in his loss and pain . could I have stop away ? but , oh , Garth ! what it be , at last to hold you , and touch you , and feel you here ! ... yes , it be I. oh , my beloved , be you not quite sure ? who else could hold you thus ? ... take care , my darling ! come over to the couch , just here ; and sit beside I . " 

 Garth rise , and raise she , without loose she ; and she guide herself and he to a safe seat close by . but there again he fling himself upon his knee , and hold she ; his arm around her waist ; his face hide in the shelter of her bosom . 

 " ah , darling , darling , " say Jane softly , and her hand steal up behind his head , with a touch of unspeakable protective tenderness ; " it have be so sweet to wait upon my boy ; and help he in his darkness ; and shield he from unnecessary pain ; and be always there , to meet his every need . but I could not come myself until he know ; and understand ; and have forgive no , not ' forgive ' ; understand , and yet still loved . for he do now understand ? and he do forgive ? ... oh , Garth ! ... oh hush , my darling ! ... you frighten I ! ... no , I will never leave you ; never , never ! ... oh , can not   you understand , my beloved ? ... then I must tell you more plainly . darling , do be still , and listen . just for a few day we must be as we have be ; only my boy will know it be I who be near he . Aunt ' Gina be come this evening . she will be here in half an hour . then , as soon as possible we will get a special license ; and we will be marry , Garth ; and then " Jane pause ; and the man who kneel beside she , hold his breath to listen " and then , " continue Jane in a low tender voice , which gather in depth of sacred mystery , yet do not falter " then it will be my high joy , to be always with my husband , night and day . " 

 a long sweet silence . the tempest of emotion in her arm be hush to rest . the eternal voice of perfect love have whisper : " peace , be still " ; and there be a great calm . 

 at last Garth lift his head . " always ? always together ? " he say . " ah , that will be ' perpetual light ! ' " 

 when Simpson , pale with importance , fling open the library door , and announce : " her Grace , the Duchess of Meldrum , " Jane be seat at the piano , play soft dreamy chord ; and a slim young man , in evening dress , advance with eager hospitality to greet his guest . 

 the duchess either do not see , or choose to ignore the guide cord . she take his outstretched hand warmly in both her own . 

 " goodness gracious , my dear Dal ! how you surprise I ! I expect to find you blind ! and here you be stride about , just your old handsome self ! " 

 " Dear Duchess , " say Garth , and stoop , kiss the kind old hand still hold his ; " I can not see you , I be sorry to say ; but I do not   feel very blind to - night . my darkness have be lighten by a joy beyond expression . " 

 " oh ho ! so that be the way the land lie ! now which be you go to marry ? the nurse , who , I gather , be a most respectable young person , and highly recommend ; or that hussy , Jane ; who , without the small compunction , order her poor aunt from one end of the kingdom to the other , to suit her own convenience ? " 

 Jane come over from the piano , and slip her hand through her lover 's arm . 

 " Dear Aunt ' Gina , " she say ; " you know you love come ; because you enjoy a mystery , and like be a dear old ' deus ex machina , ' at the right moment . and he be go to marry they both ; because they both love he far too dearly ever to leave he again ; and he seem to think he can not do without either . " 

 the duchess look at the two radiant face ; one sightless ; the other , with glad proud eye for both ; and her own fill with tear . 

 " hoity - toity ! " she say . " be we in Salt Lake City ? well , we always think one girl would not do for Dal ; he would need the combine perfection of several ; and he appear to think he have find they . God bless you both , you absurdly happy people ; and I will bless you , too ; but not until I have din . now , ring for that very nervous person , with side - whisker ; and tell he I want my maid , and my room , and I want to know where they have put my toucan . I have to bring he , Jane . he be so loving , dear bird ! I know you would think he in the way ; but I really could not leave he behind . " 




 CHAPTER XXXVII 

 " in the face of this CONGREGATION " 

 the society paragraph would have describe it as " a very quiet wedding , " when Garth and Jane , a few day later , be pronounce " man and wife together , " in the little Episcopal church among the hill . 

 perhaps , to those who be present , it stand out rather as an unusual wedding , than as a quiet one . 

 to Garth and Jane the essential thing be to be marry , and leave to themselves , with as little delay as possible . they could not be induce to pay any attention to detail as to the manner in which this desire end be to be attain . Jane leave it entirely to the doctor , in one practical though casual sentence : " just make sure it be valid , Dicky ; and send we in the bill . " 

 the duchess , be a true conservative , early begin mention veil , orange - blossom , and white satin ; but Jane say : " my dear Aunt ! fancy I in orange - blossom ! I should look like a Christmas pantomime . and I never wear veil , even in motor ; and white satin be a form of clothing I have always have the wisdom to avoid . " 

 " then in what do you intend to be marry , unnatural girl ? " inquire the duchess . 

 " in whatever I happen to put on , that morning , " reply Jane , knot the silk of a soft crimson cord she be knit ; and glance out of the window , to where Garth sit smoking , on the terrace . 

 " have you a time - table ? " inquire her Grace of Meldrum , with dangerous calmness . " and can you send I to the station this afternoon ? " 

 " we can always send to the station , at a moment 's notice , " say Jane , work in a golden strand , and consider the effect . " but where be you go , dear Aunt ' Gina ? you know Deryck and Flower arrive this evening . " 

 " I be wash my hand of you , and go South , " say the duchess , wrathfully . 

 " do not   do that , dear , " say Jane , placidly . " you have wash your hand of I so often ; and , like the blood of King Duncan of Scotland , I be upon they still . ' all the perfume of Arabia will not sweeten this little hand . ' " then , raise her voice : " Garth , if you want to walk , just give a call . I be here , talk over my trousseau with Aunt ' Gina . " 

 " what be a trousseau ? " come back in Garth 's happy voice . 

 " a thing you get into to be marry , " say Jane . 

 " then let us get into it quickly , " shout Garth , with enthusiasm . 

 " Dear Aunt , " say Jane , " let we make a compromise . I have some quite nice clothe upstairs , include redfern tailor - made , and several uniform . let your maid look through they , and whatever you select , and she put out in readiness on my wedding morning , I promise to wear . " 

 this result in Jane appear at the church in a long blue cloth coat and skirt , handsomely embroider with gold , and suit her large figure to perfection ; a deep yellow vest of brocade silk ; and old lace ruffle at neck and wrist . 

 Garth be as anxious about his wedding garment , as Jane have be indifferent over her ; but he have so often be in requisition as good - man at town wedding , that Simpson have no difficulty in turn he out in the acme of correct bridal attire . and very handsome he look , as he stand wait at the chancel step ; not watch for his bride ; but obviously listen for she ; for , as Jane come up the church on Deryck 's arm , Garth slightly turn his head and smile . 

 the duchess resplendent in purple satin and ermine , with white plume in her bonnet , and many jewelled chain depend from she , which rattle and tinkle , in the silence of the church , every time she move be in a front pew on the left , ready to give her niece away . 

 in a corresponding seat , on the opposite side , as near as possible to the bridegroom , sit Margery Graem , in black silk , with a small quilt satin bonnet , and a white lawn kerchief fold over the faithful old heart which have beat in tenderness for Garth since his babyhood . she turn her head anxiously , every time the duchess jingle ; but otherwise keep her eye fix on the marriage service , in a large - print prayer - book in her lap . Margery be not use to the Episcopal service , and she have her " doot " as to whether it could possibly be go through correctly , by all party concern . in fact this anxiety of old Margery 's increase so painfully when the ceremony actually commence , that it take audible form ; and she repeat all the answer of the bridal pair , in an impressive whisper , after they . 

 Dr. Rob , be the only available bachelor , do duty as good - man ; Jane have stipulate that he should not be intrust with the ring ; her previous observation lead she to conclude that he would most probably slip it unconsciously on to his finger , and then search through all his own pocket and all Garth 's ; and begin take up the church matting , before it occur to he to look at his hand . Jane would not have mind the diversion , but she do object to any delay . so the ring go to church in Garth 's waistcoat pocket , where it have live since Jane bring it out from Aberdeen ; and , without any fumbling or hesitation , be quietly lay by he upon the open book . 

 Dr. Rob have charge of the fee for clerk , verger , bell - ringer , and every person , connect with the church , who could possibly have a tip press upon they . 

 Garth be generous in his gladness , and eager to do all thing in a manner worthy of the great gift make fully his that day . so Dr. Rob be well provide with the wherewithal ; and this he jingle in his pocket as soon as the exhortation commence , and his interest in the proceeding result in his fatal habit of unconsciousness of his own action . thus he and the duchess keep up a tinkle duet , each hear the other , and not their own sound . so the duchess glare at Dr. Rob ; and Dr. Rob frown at the duchess ; and old Margery look tearfully at both . 

 Deryck Brand , the tall man in the church , his fine figure show to advantage in the long frock coat with silk facing , which Lady Brand have pronounce indispensable to the occasion , retire to a seat beside his wife , just behind old Margery , as soon as he have conduct Jane to Garth 's side . as Jane remove her hand from his arm , she turn and smile at he ; and a long look pass between they . all the memory , all the comprehension , all the trust and affection of year , seem to concentrate in that look ; and Lady Brand 's eye drop to her dainty white and gold prayer - book . she have never know jealousy ; the doctor have never give she any possible reason for acquire that cruel knowledge . his Flower bloom for he ; and her fragrance alone make his continual joy . all other lovely woman be mere botanical specimen , to be examine and classify . but Flower have never quite understand the depth of the friendship between her husband and Jane , found on the association and aspiration of childhood and early youth , and a certain similarity of character which would not have wed well , but which work out into a comradeship , provide a source of strength for both . of late , Flower have earnestly try to share , even while fail to comprehend , it . 

 perhaps she , in her pale primrose gown , with daffodil at her waist , and sunbeam in her golden hair , be the most truly bridal figure in the church . as the doctor turn from the bride , and seek his place beside she in the pew , he look at the sweet face , bent so demurely over the prayer - book , and think he have never see his wife look more entrancingly lovely . unconsciously his hand stray to the white rosebud she have fasten in his coat as they stroll round the conservatory together that morning . Flower , glance up , surprise his look . she do not think it right to smile in church ; but a delicate wave of colour sweep over her face , and her cheek lean as near the doctor 's shoulder , as the size of her hat would allow . Flower feel quite certain that be a look the doctor have never give Jane . 

 the service commence . the short - sighted clergyman , very nervous , and rather overwhelmed by the unusual fact of a special license , a blind bridegroom , and the report presence of a duchess , begin read very fast , in an undertone , which old Margery could not follow , though her finger , imprison in unwonted kid , hurry along the line . then conscious of his mistake , he slow down , and become too impressive ; make long nerve - strain pause , flee in by the tinkling of the duchess , and the chink in Dr. Rob 's trouser - pocket . 

 thus they arrive at the demand upon the congregation , if they could show any just cause why these two person might not lawfully be join together , now to speak and the pause here be so long , and so over - powering , that old Margery say " nay " ; and then give a nervous sob . the bridegroom turn and smile in the direction of the voice ; and the doctor , lean forward , lay his hand on the trembling shoulder , and whisper : " steady , old friend . it be all right . " 

 there be no pause whatever after the solemn charge to the couple ; so if Garth and Jane have any secret to disclose , they have perforce to keep they for after discussion . 

 then Jane find she right hand firmly clasp in Garth 's ; and no inadequacy of the Church 's mouth - piece could destroy the exquisite beauty of the Church 's word , in which Garth be ask if he would take she to be his own . 

 to this , Garth , and old Margery , say they would ; with considerable display of emotion . 

 then the all - comprehensive question be put to Jane ; the Church seem to remind she gently , that she take he in his blindness , with all which that might entail . 

 Jane say : " I will " ; and the deep , tender voice , be the voice of the Rosary . 

 when the word be utter , Garth lift the hand he hold , and reverently kiss it . 

 this be not in the rubric , and prove disconcert to the clergyman . he throw up his head suddenly , and inquire : " who giveth this woman to be married to this man ? " and as , for the moment , there be no response , he repeat , the question wildly ; gaze into distant corner of the church . 

 then the duchess , who up to that time have be feel a little bored , realise that her moment have come , and rejoice . she sail out of her pew , and advance to the chancel step . " my dear good man , " she say ; " I give my niece away ; have come north at considerable inconvenience for that express purpose . now , go on . what do we do next ? " 

 Dr. Rob break into an uncontrollable chuckle . the duchess lift her lorgnette , and survey he . Margery search her prayer - book in vain for the duchess 's response . it do not appear to be there . 

 Flower look in distressed appeal at the doctor . but the doctor be study , with grave intentness , a stencilled pattern on the chancel roof ; and pay no attention to Flower 's nudge . 

 the only people completely unconscious of anything unusual in the order of proceeding appear to be the bride and bridegroom . they be take each other " in the sight of God , and in the face of this congregation . " they be altogether absorb in each other , stand together in the sight of God ; and the deportment of " this congregation " be a matter they scarcely notice . " People always behave grotesquely at wedding , " Jane have say to Garth , beforehand ; " and our will be no exception to the general rule . but we can close our eye , and stand together in Sightless Land ; and Deryck will take care it be valid . " 

 " not in Sightless Land , my beloved , " say Garth ; " but in the Land where they need no candle neither light of the sun . however , and wherever , I take you as my wife , I shall be stand on the summit of God 's heaven . " 

 so they stand ; and in their calmness the church hush to silence . the service proceed ; and the minister , who have not know how to keep they from clasp hand when the rubric do not require it , find no difficulty in induce they to do so again . 

 so they take each other these two , who be so deeply each other be already solemnly , reverently , tenderly , in the sight of God , they take each other , accord to God 's holy ordinance ; and the wedding ring , type of that eternal love which have neither begin nor end , pass from Garth 's pocket , over the Holy Book , on to Jane 's finger . 

 when it be over , she take his arm ; and lean upon it , so that he could feel she lean , guide he to the vestry . 

 afterwards , in the brougham , for those few precious minute , when husband and wife find themselves alone for the first time , Garth turn to Jane with an eager naturalness , which thrill her heart as no studied speech could have do . he do not say : " my wife . " that unique moment have be theirs , three year before . 

 " Dearest , " he say , " how soon will they all go ? how soon shall we be quite alone ? oh , why could not   they drive to the station from the church ? " 

 Jane look at her watch . " because we must lunch they , dear , " she say . " think how good they have all be . and we could not start our married life by be inhospitable . it be just one o'clock ; and we order luncheon at half - past . their train leave the station at half - past four . in three hour , Garth , we shall be alone . " 

 " shall I be able to behave nicely for three hour ? " exclaim Garth , boyishly . 

 " you must , " say Jane , " or I shall fetch Nurse Rosemary . " 

 " oh hush ! " he say . " all that be too precious , to - day , for chaff . jane " he turn suddenly , and lay his hand on hers " jane ! do you understand that you be now actually my wife ? " 

 Jane take his hand , and hold it against her heart , just where she so often have press her own , when she fear he would hear it throb . 

 " my darling , " she say , " I do not understand it . but I know ah , thank God ! I know it to be true . " 




 CHAPTER XXXVIII 

 PERPETUAL LIGHT 

 Moonlight on the terrace silvery , white , serene . Garth and Jane have step out into the brightness ; and , find the night so warm and still , and the nightingale fill the wood and hill with soft - throate music , they move their usual fireside chair close to the parapet , and sit there in restful comfort , listen to the sweet sound of the quiet night . 

 the solitude be so perfect ; the restfulness so complete . Garth have remove the cushion seat from his chair , and place it on the gravel ; and sit at his wife 's foot lean against her knee . she stroke his hair and brow softly , as they talk ; and every now and then he put up his hand , draw her to his lip , and kiss the ring he have never see . 

 long tender silence fall between they . now that they be at last alone , thought too deep , joy too sacred for word , tremble about they ; and silence seem to express more than speech . only , Garth could not bear Jane to be for a moment out of reach of his hand . what to another would have be : " I can not let she out of my sight , " be , to he , " I can not let she be beyond my touch . " and Jane fully understand this ; and let he feel she every moment within reach . and the bliss of this be her as well as his ; for sometimes it have seem to she as if the hunger in her heart , cause by those long week of waiting , when her arm ache for he , and yet she dare not even touch his hand , would never be appease . 

 " sweet , sweet , sweet thrill , " sing a nightingale in the wood . and Garth whistle an exact imitation . 

 " oh , darling , " say Jane , " that remind I ; there be something I do so want you to sing to I . I do not   know what it be ; but I think you will remember . it be on that Monday evening , after I have see the picture , and Nurse Rosemary have describe they to you . both our poor heart be on the rack ; and I go up early in order to begin my letter of confession ; but you tell Simpson not to come for you until eleven . while I be write in the room above , I could hear you play in the library . you play many thing I know music we have do together , long ago . and then a theme I have never hear creep in , and catch my ear at once , because it be quite new to I , and so marvellously sweet . I put down my pen and listen . you play it several time , with slight variation , as if try to recall it . and then , to my joy , you begin to sing . I cross the room ; softly open my window , and lean out . I could hear some of the word ; but not all . two line , however , reach I distinctly , with such penetrate , tender sadness , that I lay my head against the window - frame , feel as if I could write no more , and wait no long , but must go straight to you at once . " 

 Garth draw down the dear hand which have hold the pen that night ; turn it over , and softly kiss the palm . 

 " what be they , Jane ? " he say . 

 " ' lead we , o Christ , when all be gone , 
 safe home at last . ' " 
 " and oh , my darling , the pathos of those word , ' when all be go ' ! whoever write that music , have be through suffer such as ours . then come a theme of such inspiring hopefulness and joy , that I arise , arm with fresh courage ; take up my pen , and go on with my letter . again two line have reach I : " 

 " ' where Thou , Eternal Light of Light , 
 Art Lord of All . ' " 
 " what be it , Garth ? and whose ? and where do you hear it ? and will you sing it to I now , darling ? I have a sudden wish that you should sing it , here and now ; and I can not   wait ! " 

 Garth sit up , and laugh a short happy laugh , in which all sort of emotion be mingle . 

 " jane ! I like to hear you say you can not   wait . it be not   like you ; because you be so strong and patient . and yet it be so deliciously like you , if you feel it , to say it . I find the word in the Anthem - book at Worcester Cathedral , this time last year , at even - song . I copy they into my pocket - book , during the reading of the first lesson , I be ashamed to say ; but it be all about what Balak say unto Balaam , and Balaam say unto Balak , so I hope I may be forgive ! they seem to I some of the most beautiful word I have ever read ; and , fortunately , I commit they to memory . of course , I will sing they to you , if you wish , here and now . but I be afraid the air will sound rather poor without the accompaniment . however , not for world would I move from here , at this moment . " 

 so sit up ; in the moonlight , with his back to Jane , his face uplifted , and his hand clasp around one knee , Garth sing . much practice have add greatly to the sweetness and flexibility of his voice ; and he render perfectly the exquisite melody to which the word be set . 

 Jane listen with an overflowing heart . 

 " the radiant morn hath pass away , 
 and spend too soon her golden store ; 
 the shadow of depart day 
 Creep on once more . 
 " our life be but a fade dawn , 
 its glorious noon , how quickly past ! 
 lead we , o Christ , when all be gone , 
 safe home at last . 
 " where saint be clothe in spotless white , 
 and evening shadow never fall ; 
 where Thou , Eternal Light of Light , 
 Art Lord of All . " 
 the triumphant worship of the last line ring out into the night , and die away . Garth loose his hand , and lean back , with a sigh of vast content , against his wife 's knee . 

 " beautiful ! " she say . " beautiful ! Garthie perhaps it be because you sing it ; and to - night ; but it seem to I the most beautiful thing I ever hear . ah , and how appropriate for we ; on this day , of all day . " 

 " oh , I do not   know , " say Garth , stretch his leg in front of he , and cross his foot the one over the other . " I certainly feel ' safe home at last ' not because ' all be go ' ; but because I have all , in have you , Jane . " 

 Jane bend , and lay she cheek upon his head . " my own boy , " she say , " you have all I have to give all , ALL . but , darling , in those dark day which be past , all seem gone , for we both . ' lead we , o Christ ' it be he who lead we safely through the darkness , and have bring we to this . and Garth , I love to know that he be Lord of all Lord of our joy ; Lord of our love ; Lord of our life our wed life , my husband . we could not be so safely , so blissfully , each other 's , be we not one , in HIM . be this true for you also , Garth ? " 

 Garth feel for her left hand , draw it down , and lay his cheek against it ; then gently twist the wedding ring that he might kiss it all round . 

 " yes , my wife , " he say . " I thank God , that I can say in all thing : ' Thou , Eternal Light of Light , art Lord of All . ' " 

 a long sweet silence . then Jane say , suddenly : " oh , but the music , Garthie ! that exquisite setting . whose be it ? and where do you hear it ? " 

 Garth laugh again ; a laugh of half - shy pleasure . 

 " I be glad you like it , Jane , " he say , " because I must plead guilty to the fact that it be my own . you see , I know no music for it ; the Anthem - book give the word only . and on that awful night , when little Rosemary have mercilessly rub it in , about ' the lady portray ' ; and what her love must have be , and would have be , and could have be ; and have make I SEE ' the wife ' again , and ' the ' the other picture ; I feel so bruised , and sore , and lonely . and then those word come to my mind : ' lead we , o Christ , when all be gone , safe home at last . ' all seem go indeed ; and there seem no home to hope for , in this world . " he raise himself a little , and then lean back again ; so that his head rest against her bosom . " safe home at last , " he say , and stay quite still for a moment , in utter content . then remember what he be tell she , and go on eagerly . 

 " so those word come back to I ; and to get away from despairing thought , I begin recite they , to an accompaniment of chord . " 

 " ' the radiant morn hath pass away , 
 and spend too soon her golden store ; 
 the shadow of depart day ' " 
 " and then suddenly , Jane I see it , picture in sound ! just as I use to see a sunset , in light and shadow , and then transfer it to my canvas in shade and colour,-so I hear a sunset in harmony , and I feel the same kind of tingle in my finger as I use to feel when inspiration come , and I could catch up my brush and palette . so I play the sunset . and then I get the theme for life fade , and what one feel when the glorious noon be suddenly plunge into darkness ; and then the prayer . and then , I hear a vision of heaven , where evening shadow never fall : and after that come the end ; just certainty , and worship , and peace . you see the eventual theme , work out of all this . it be like make study for a picture . that be why you hear it over and over . I be not   try to remember . I be gather it into final form . I be awfully glad you like it , Jane ; because if I show you how the harmony go , perhaps you could write it down . and it would mean such a lot to I , if you think it worth sing . I could play the accompaniment Hullo ! be it begin to rain ? I feel a drop on my cheek , and another on my hand . " 

 no answer . then he feel the heave , with which Jane catch her breath ; and realise that she be weep . 

 in a moment he be on his knee in front of she . " jane ! why , what be the matter ; Sweet ? what on earth ? have I say anything to trouble you ? jane , what be it ? o God , why can not   I see she ! " 

 Jane master her emotion ; control her voice , with an immense effort . then draw he down beside she . 

 " Hush , darling , hush ! it be only a great joy a wonderful surprise . lean against I again , and I will try to tell you . do you know that you have compose some of the most beautiful music in the world ? do you know , my own boy , that not only your proud and happy wife , but all woman who can sing , will want to sing your music ? Garthie , do you realise what it mean ? the creative faculty be so strong in you , that when one outlet be deny it , it burst forth through another . when you have your sight , you create by the hand and EYE . now , you will create by the hand and EAR . the power be the same . it merely work through another channel . but oh , think what it mean ! think ! the world lie before you once more ! " 

 Garth laugh , and put up his hand to the dear face , still wet with thankful tear . 

 " oh , bother the world ! " he say . " I do not   want the world . I only want my wife . " 

 Jane put her arm around he . ah , what a boy he be in some way ! how full of light - hearted , irrepressible , essential youth . just then she feel so much old than he ; but how little that matter . the well could she wrap he round with the greatness of her tenderness ; shield he from every jar or disillusion ; and help he to make the most of his great gift . 

 " I know , darling , " she say . " and you have she . she be just all your . but think of the wonderful future . thank God , I know enough of the technical part , to write the score of your composition . and , Garth , fancy go together to noble cathedral , and hear your anthem sing ; and to concert where the most perfect voice in the world will be do their utmost adequately to render your song . fancy thrilling heart with pure harmony , stir soul with tone - picture ; just as before you use to awaken in we all , by your wonderful painting , an appreciation and comprehension of beauty . " 

 Garth raise his head . " be it really as good as that , Jane ? " he say . 

 " dear , " answer Jane , earnestly , " I can only tell you , that when you sing it first , and I have not the faint idea it be your , I say to myself : ' it be the most beautiful thing I ever hear . ' " 

 " I be glad , " say Garth , simply . " and now , let us talk of something else . oh , I say , Jane ! the present be too wonderful , to leave any possible room for thought about the future . do talk about the present . " 

 Jane smile ; and it be the smile of " the Wife " mysterious ; compassionate ; tender ; self - surrendering . she lean over he , and rest she cheek upon his head . 

 " yes , darling . we will talk of this very moment , if you wish . you begin . " 

 " look at the house , and describe it to I , as you see it in the moonlight . " 

 " very grey , and calm , and restful - looking . and so home - like , Garthie . " 

 " be there light in the window ? " 

 " yes . the library light be just as we leave they . the french window be stand wide open . the pedestal lamp , under a crimson silk shade , look very pretty from here , shed a warm glow over the interior . then , I can see one candle in the dining - room . I think Simpson be put away silver . " 

 " any other , Jane ? " 

 " yes , darling . there be a light in the Oriel chamber . I can see Margery move to and fro . she seem to be arrange my thing , and give final touch . there be also a light in your room , next door . ah , now she have go through . I see her stand and look round to make sure all be right . dear faithful old heart ! Garth , how sweet it be to be at home to - day ; serve and tend by those who really love we . " 

 " I be so glad you feel that , " say Garth . " I half fear you might regret not have an ordinary honeymoon and yet , no ! I be not   really afraid of that , or of anything . just , together at last , be all we want . be not   it , my wife ? " 

 " All . " 

 a clock in the house strike nine . 

 " dear old clock , " say Garth , softly . " I use to hear it strike nine , when I be a little chap in my crib , try to keep awake until my mother rustle past ; and go into her room . the door between her room and mine use to stand ajar , and I could see her candle appear in a long streak upon my ceiling . when I see that streak , I fall asleep immediately . it be such a comfort to know she be there ; and would not go down again . jane , do you like the Oriel chamber ? " 

 " yes , dear . it be a lovely room ; and very sacred because it be her . do you know , Aunt Georgina insist upon see it , Garth ; and say it ought to be whiten and paper . but I would not hear of that ; because the beautiful old ceiling be hand - paint , and so be the wall ; and I be certain you have love those painting , as a little boy ; and would remember they now . " 

 " ah , yes , " say Garth , eagerly . " a french artist stay here , and do they . water and rush , and the most lovely flamingo ; those on the wall stand with their foot in the water ; and those on the ceiling , fly with wing outspread , into a pale green sky , all over white billowy clouds . Jane , I believe I could walk round that room , blindfold no ! I mean , as I be now ; and point out the exact spot where each flamingo stand . " 

 " you shall , " say Jane , tenderly . these slip when he talk , momentarily forget his blindness , always wring her heart . " by degree you must tell I all the thing you specially do and love , as a little boy . I like to know they . have you always that room , next door to your mother 's ? " 

 " ever since I can remember , " say Garth . " and the door between be always open . after my mother 's death , I keep it lock . but the night before my birthday , I use to open it ; and when I wake early and see it ajar , I would spring up , and go quickly in ; and it seem as if her dear presence be there to greet I , just on that one morning . but I have to go quickly , and immediately I waken ; just as you must go out early to catch the rosy glow of sunrise on the fleeting cloud ; or to see the gossamer webs on the gorse , outline in diamond , by the sparkling summer dew . but , somehow , Margery find out about it ; and the third year there be a sheet of writing - paper firmly stick to the pincushion by a large black - head pin , say , in Margery 's careful caligraphy : ' many happy return of the day , Master Garthie . ' it be very touching , because it be mean to be so comforting and tactful . but it destroy the illusion ! since then the door have be keep close . " 

 another long sweet silence . two nightingale , in distant tree , sing alternately ; answer one another in liquid stream of melody . 

 again Garth turn the wedding ring ; then speak , with his lip against it . 

 " you say Margery have ' go through . ' be it open to - night ? " he ask . 

 Jane clasp both hand behind his head strong , capable hand , though now they tremble a little and press his face against she , as she have do on the terrace at Shenstone , three year before . 

 " yes , my own boy , " she say ; " it be . " 

 " jane ! oh , Jane " he release himself from the pressure of those restrain hand , and lift his adore face to her . 

 then , suddenly , Jane break down . " ah , darling , " she say , " take I away from this horrible white moonlight ! I can not bear it . it remind I of Shenstone . it remind I of the wrong I do you . it seem a separate thing between you and I this cruel brightness which you can not share . " 

 her tear fall on his upturned fate . 

 then Garth spring to his foot . the sense of manhood and mastery ; the right of control , the joy of possession , arise within he . even in his blindness , he be the strong . even in his helplessness , for the great essential , Jane must lean on he . he raise she gently , put his arm about she , and stand there , glorify by his great love . 

 " hush , sweetest wife , " he say . " neither light nor darkness can separate between you and I : this quiet moonlight can not take you from I ; but in the still , sweet darkness you will feel more completely my own , because it will hold nothing we can not share . come with I to the library , and we will send away the lamp , and close the curtain ; and you shall sit on the couch near the piano , where you sit , on that wonderful evening when I find you , and when I almost frighten my brave Jane . but she will not be frighten now , because she be so my own ; and I may say what I like ; and do what I will ; and she must not threaten I with Nurse Rosemary ; because it be Jane I want Jane , Jane ; just only Jane ! come in , beloved ; and I , who see as clearly in the dark as in the light , will sit and play the ROSARY for you ; and then Veni , Creator Spiritus ; and I will sing you the verse which have be the secret source of peace , and the sustain power of my whole inner life , through the long , hard year , apart . " 

 " now , " whisper Jane . " now , as we go . " 

 so Garth draw her hand through his arm ; and , as they walk , sing softly : 

 " enable with perpetual light , 
 the dulness of our blind sight ; 
 anoint and cheer our soiled face 
 with the abundance of Thy grace . 
 keep far our foe ; give peace at home ; 
 where Thou art Guide , no ill can come . " 
 thus , lean on her husband ; yet guide he as she lean ; Jane pass to the perfect happiness of her wed home . 

