the White Ladies of Worcester 

 CHAPTER I 

 the SUBTERRANEAN WAY 

 the slanting ray of afternoon sunshine , pour through stone arch , lie in broad , golden band , upon the flag of the Convent cloister . 

 the old lay - sister , Mary Antony , step from the cool shade of the cell passage and , blink at the sunshine , shuffle slowly to her appoint post at the top of the crypt step , up which would shortly pass the silent procession of nun return from vesper . 

 Daily they go , and daily they return , by the underground way , a 
 passage over a mile in length , lead from the Nunnery of the White 
 Ladies at Whytstone in Claines , to the Church of St. Mary and St. 
 Peter , the noble Cathedral within the wall of the city of Worcester . 
 enter this passage from the crypt in their own cloister , they walk in darkness below the sunny meadow , pass beneath the Fore - gate , move in silent procession under the busy street , until they reach the crypt of the Cathedral . 

 from the crypt , a wind stairway in the wall lead up to a chamber above the choir , whence , unseeing and unseen , the White Ladies of Worcester daily hear the holy monk below chant vesper . 

 to Sister Mary Antony fall the task of count the five - and - twenty veiled figure , as they pass down the step and disappear beneath the ground , and of again count they as they reappear , and move in stately silence along the cloister , each enter her own cell , to spend , in prayer and adoration , the hour until the Refectory bell should call they to the evening meal . 

 this counting of the White Ladies date from the day , now more than half a century ago , when Sister Agatha , weaken by prolonged fasting , and chance to walk last in the procession , faint and , fall silently , remain behind , unnoticed , in the solitude and darkness . 

 it be the habit of this saintly lady to abide in her own cell after vesper , dispense with the evening meal ; thus her absence be not discover until the following morning when Mary Antony , find the cell empty , hasten to report that Sister Agatha have long , like Enoch , walk with God , have , even , as Enoch , be translate ! 

 the nun who flock to the cell , incline to Mary Antony 's view of the strange happening , kneel upon the floor before the empty couch , and worship . 

 the Prioress of that time , however , be of a practical turn of mind , order the immediate lighting of the lantern , and herself descend to search the underground way . 

 she do not need to go far . 

 the saintly spirit of Sister Agatha have indeed be translate . 

 they find her frail body lie prone against the door , the hand break and tear by much wild beating upon its studded panel . 

 she have run to and fro in the dank darkness , beat first upon the door beneath the Convent cloister , then upon the door , a mile away , lead into the Cathedral crypt . 

 but the nun be shut into their cell , beyond the cloister ; the good people of Worcester city sleep peacefully , not dream of the despairing figure run to and fro beneath they tottering , stumble , fall , arise to fall again , yet hurry blindly onwards ; and the Cathedral Sacristan , when question , confess that , hear cry and rapping come from the crypt at a late hour , he speedily lock the outer gate , say an " Ave , " and go home to supper ; well know that , at such a time , none save spirit of evil would be wander below , in so great torment . 

 thus , through much tribulation , poor Sister Agatha enter into rest ; be hold in deep reverence ever after . 

 More than fifty year have go by . the Prioress of that day , and most of those who walk in that procession , have long lain beside Sister Agatha in the Convent burying - ground . but Mary Antony , now old of the lay - sister , never fail to make careful count , as each veil figure pass , nor to impart the mournful reason for this necessity to all new - comer . so that the nun whose turn it be to walk last in the procession , pray that she might not hear behind she the run foot of Sister Agatha ; while none go alone into the cloister after dark , lest they should hear the poor thin hand of Sister Agatha beat upon the panel of the door . 

 thus do the anguish of a torture brain leave its imperishable impress upon the surrounding in which the mind once suffer , though the freed spirit may have long forget , in the peace of Paradise , that slight affliction , which be but for a moment , through which it pass to the eternal weight of glory . 

 of late , the old lay - sister , Mary Antony , have grow fearful lest she should make mistake in this solemn office of the counting . therefore , in the secret of her own heart , she devise a plan , which she carry out under cover of her scapulary . twenty - five dry pea she hold ready in her wallet ; then , as each veil figure , have mount the step lead from the crypt doorway , move slowly past she , she drop a pea with her right hand into her left . when all the holy Ladies have pass , if all have return , five - and - twenty pea lie in her left hand , none remain in the wallet . 

 this secret dropping of pea become a kind of game to Mary Antony . she keep the pea in a small linen bag , and often take they out and play with they when alone in her cell , place they all in a row , and settle , to her own satisfaction , which pea should represent the various holy Ladies . 

 a large white pea , of fine aspect than the rest , stand for the noble Prioress herself ; a somewhat shrivelled pea , hard , brown , and wizene , do duty as Mother Sub - Prioress , an elderly nun , not love by Mary Antony because of her sharp tongue and strict fault - find way ; while a pale and speckled pea become Sister Mary Rebecca , hold in high scorn by the old lay - sister , as a traitress , sneak , and liar , for if ever tale of wrong or shame be whisper in the Convent , it could be trace for place of origin to the slanderous tongue and crooked mind of Sister Mary Rebecca . 

 when all the pea in line upon the floor of her cell be name , old Mary Antony mark out a distant flagstone , on which the sunlight fall , as heaven ; another , partially in shadow , purgatory ; a third , in a far corner of exceed darkness , hell . she then proceed , with well - direct fillip of thumb and middle finger , to send the holy Ladies there where , in her judgment , they belong . 

 if the game go well , the noble Prioress land safely in heaven , without even the most transitory visit to purgatory ; Mother Sub - Prioress , roll into purgatory , remain there ; while the pale and speckled pea go straight to hell ! 

 when these be safely land , Mary Antony rub her hand and , chuckle gleefully , finish the game at gay hap - hazard , it be of less importance where the rest of the holy Ladies chance to go . 

 CHAPTER II 

 SISTER MARY ANTONY discourse 

 as Mary Antony shuffle slowly from the shadow into the sunshine , a gay little flutter of wing precede she , and a robin perch upon the parapet behind the stone seat upon which it be the lay - sister 's custom to await the sound of the turning of the key in the lock of the heavy door beneath the cloister . 

 " thou good - for - nothing imp ! " exclaim Mary Antony , her old face crinkle with delight . " thou little vain man , in thy red jerkin ! beshrew thine impudence , intrude into a place where woman alone do dwell , and no male thing may enter . I would have thee take warning by the fate of the baker 's boy , who dare to climb into a tree , so that he might peep over the wall and spy upon the holy Ladies in their garden . boast afterward of that which he have do , and make merry over that which he pretend to have see , our great Lord Bishop hear of it , and send and take that baker 's boy , and though he cry for mercy , swear the whole tale be an empty boast , they put out his bold eye with heated tong , and hang he from the very branch he have climb . they would do the like to thee , thou little vain man , if Mary Antony report on thy way . wouldst like to hang , in thy red doublet ? " 

 the robin have hear this warn tale many time already , tell by old 
 Mary Antony with infinite variety . 
 sometimes the tongue of the baker 's boy be cut out at the root ; sometimes he lose his ear , or again , he be tie to a cart - tail , and flog through the tything . often he become a pieman , and once he be a turnspit in the household of the Lord Bishop himself . but , whatever the preliminary , and whether baker , pieman , or turnspit , his final catastrophe be always the same : he be hang from a bough of the very tree into which , impious and greatly daring , he have climb . 

 this be an ancient tale . all who might vouch for it , save the old lay - sister , have pass away ; and , of late , Mary Antony have be strictly forbid by the Reverend Mother , to tell it to new - comer , or to speak of it to any of the nun . 

 so , daily , she tell it to the robin ; and he , be neither baker 's lad , pieman , nor turnspit , and have a conscience void of offence , would listen , wholly unafraid ; then , hop near to Mary Antony , would look up at she , eager inquiry in his bright eye . 

 on this particular afternoon he fly up into the very tree climb by the prying and ill - fat baker 's lad , settle on a bough which branch out over the Convent wall , and pour forth a gay trill of song . 

 " ha , thou little vain man , in thy brown and red suit ! " chuckle Mary Antony , lean she gnarl hand on the stone parapet , as she stand frame in one of the cloister arch overlook the garden . " be that thy little ' grace before meat ' ? but , I pray thee , Sir Robin , who say there be cheese in my wallet ? Nay , be there like to be cheese in a wallet already contain five - and - twenty holy Ladies on their way back from vesper ? out upon thee for a most irreverent little glutton ! I fear I thou hast not only a high look , thou hast also a proud stomach ; just the reverse of the great french Cardinal who come , with much pomp , to visit we at Easter time . he have a proud look and a come down again , thou little naughty man , and I will tell thee what the Lord Cardinal have under his crimson sash . ' tis not a thing to shout to the tree - top . I might have to recite ten Paternosters , if I let thee tempt I so to do . for whisper it in thine ear , I should but say one ; for have remark it , none at all . fact be fact ; and , even in the case of so weighty a fact , the responsibility rest not upon the beholder . " 

 Mary Antony lean over the parapet , look upward . the afternoon sunlight fall full upon the russet parchment of her kind old face , shew the web of wrinkle spin by ninety year of the gently turn wheel of time . 

 but the robin , perch upon the bough , trill and sang , unmoved . he be weary of tale of baker and pieman . he be not at all curious as to what have be beneath the french Cardinal 's crimson sash . he want the tasty morsel which he know lie conceal in Sister Mary Antony 's leathern wallet . so he stay on the bough and sing . 

 the old face , peer up from between the pillar , soften into tenderness at the robin 's song . 

 " I can not let thy little grace return unto thee void , " she say , and fumble at the fastening of her wallet . 

 a flick of wing , a flash of red . the robin have drop from the bough , and perch beside she . 

 she dole out crumb , and fragment of cheese , push they toward he along the parapet ; leave her finger near , to see how close he would adventure to her hand . 

 she watch he peck a morsel of cheese into five tiny piece , then fly , with full beak , on eager wing , to the hidden nest , from which five gap mouth shriek a shrill and hungry welcome . then , back again swift as an arrow from the archer 's bow noting , with bright eye , and head turn sidewise , that the hand rest on the coping have move nearer ; yet brave to take all risk for the sake of those yellow beak , which would gape wide , in expectation , at sound of the beat of his wing . 

 " feed thyself , thou little worldling ! " chuckle old Antony , and cover the remain bit of cheese with her hand . " who art thou to come here presume to teach thy better lesson of self - sacrifice ? first feed thyself ; then give to the hungry , the fragment that remain . have I five squeal child here which Heaven forbid I should eat mine own mess , and count myself charitable if I let they lick the dish . the holy Ladies give to the poor at the Convent gate , that for which they have no further use . do thy jaunty fatherhood presume to shame our saintly celibacy ? Mother Sub - Prioress do chide I sharply because , to a poor soul with many hungry mouth to feed , I give a good piece of venison , and not the piece which be taint . truth to tell , I have already make away with the tainted piece ; but Mother Sub - Prioress be pleased to think it be in the pot , seethe for the holy Ladies ' evening meal ; and wherefore should Mother Sub - Prioress not think as she please ? 

 " ' woman ! ' she cry ; ' woman ! ' and when Mother Sub - Prioress say 
 ' woman ! ' the woman she address feel her estate would be high have 
 God Almighty be pleased to have let she be the Man , or even the 
 Serpent , so much contempt do Mother Sub - Prioress infuse into the 
 name ' woman ! ' say Mother Sub - Prioress , ' wouldst thou make all the 
 Ladies of the Convent ill ? ' 
 " ' nay , ' say I , ' that would I not . yet , if any need must be ill , ' twere easy to tend the holy Ladies in their cell , than the Poor , in humble home , outside the Convent wall , toss on bed of rush . ' 

 " ' tush , fool ! ' snarl Mother Sub - Prioress . " ' the Poor be not easily make ill . ' 

 " tush indeed ! I tell thee , little bright - eyed man , old Antony , can ' tush ' to well purpose ! that night there be strong purging herb in the broth of Mother Sub - Prioress . yet she do but keep her bed for one day . like the Poor , she be not easily make ill ! . . . well , have thy way ; only peck not my finger , Master Robin , or I will have thee flog through the tything at the cart - tail , as be do to a certain pieman , whose history I will now relate . 

 " once upon a time , when Sister Mary Antony be young , and fair to look upon Nay , wink not thy naughty eye " 

 at that moment come the sound of a key turning slowly in the lock of the door at the bottom of the step lead from the crypt to the cloister . 

 CHAPTER III 

 the PRIORESS pass 

 a key turn slowly in the lock of the oaken door at the entrance to the underground way . 

 the old lay - sister seize her wallet and pull out the bag of pea . 

 below , the heavy door swing back upon its hinge . 

 Mary Antony drop upon her knee to the right of the step , her hand hide beneath her scapulary , her eye bent in lowly reverence upon the sunlit flagstone , her lip mumble chance sentence from the Psalter . 

 the measured sound of softly move foot draw near , slightly shuffling as they reach the step and begin to mount , up from the mile - long darkness , into the sunset light . 

 first to appear be a young lay - sister , carry a lantern . hasten up the step , she extinguish the flame , grow sickly in the sunshine , place the lantern in a niche , and , drop upon her knee , opposite old Mary Antony , seek to join in the latter 's pious recitation . 

 " Adhaesit pavimento anima mea , " chant Mary Antony . " wherefore be the holy Ladies late to - day ? " 

 " one fall to weeping in the darkness , " intone the young lay - sister , " whereupon Mother Sub - Prioress cause all to stand still while she strove , by the light of my lantern hold high , to discover who have burst forth with a sob . none shew trace of tear , she give I back the lantern , herself walk last in the line , as all move on . " 

 " convertentur ad vesperam , and the devil catch the hindmost , " chant Mary Antony , with fervour . 

 " amen , " intone Sister Abigail , eye bent upon the ground ; for the tall figure of the prioress , mount the step , now come into view . 

 the Prioress pass up the cloister with a stately grace of motion which , even beneath the heavy cloth of her white robe , reveal the noble length of supple limb . her arm hang by her side , sway gently as she walk . there be a look of strength and of restfulness about the long finger and beautifully mould hand . her face , calm and purposeful , be lift to the sunlight . suffering and sorrow have leave thereon indelible mark ; but the clear grey eye , beneath level brow , be luminous with a light betoken the victory of a pure and noble spirit over passionate and most human flesh . 

 no sinner , in her presence , ever feel crush by hopeless weight of sin ; no saint , before the gaze of her calm eye , feel sure of be altogether faultless . 

 so truly be she woman , that all humanity seem lift to her level ; so completely be she saint , that sin do slink away abash before her come . 

 they who fear she most , be most conscious of her kindness . they who love she good , be least able to venture near . 

 in the first bloom of her womanhood she have leave the world , resign high rank , fair land , and the wealth which make for power . her faith in human love have be rudely shatter , she have seek security in Divine compassion , and consolation in the daily contemplation of the Man of Sorrows . in her cell , on a rough wooden cross , hang a life - size figure of the die Saviour . 

 she have not reach her twenty - fifth year when , flee from the world , she join the Order of the White Ladies of Worcester , and pass into the seclusion and outward calm of the Nunnery at Whytstone . 

 five year later , on the death of the aged prioress , she be elect , by a large majority , to fill the vacant place . 

 she have now , during two year , rule the Nunnery wisely and well . 

 she have rule her own spirit , even well . she have win the victory over the World and the Flesh ; there remain but the Devil . the Devil , alas , always remain . 

 as she move , with uplifted brow and mien of calm detachment , along the sunlit cloister to the lofty , stone passage , within , the Convent , she be fear by many , love by most , and obey by all . 

 and , as she pass , old Mary Antony , bow almost to the ground , drop a large white pea , from between her right thumb and finger , into the horny palm of her left hand . 

 behind the prioress there follow a nun , tall also , but ungainly . her short - sighted eye peer shiftily to right and leave ; her long nose go on before , scent possible scandal and wrong - doing ; her weak lip let loose a ready smile , insinuating , crafty , apologetic . she walk with hand cross upon her breast , in attitude of adoration and humility . as she move by , old Mary Antony let drop the pale and speckle pea . 

 keep their distance , mostly with shrouded face , bent head , and fold hand , all the White Ladies pass . 

 each go in silence to her cell , there kneel in prayer and contemplation until the Refectory bell should call to the evening meal . 

 as the last , save one , go by , the keen eye of the old lay - sister note that her hand be clench against her breast , that she stumble at the topmost step , and catch her breath with a half sob . 

 behind she , move quickly , come the spare form of the Sub - Prioress , ferret - face , alert , vigilant ; fearful lest sin should go unpunished ; wishful to be the punisher . 

 she must have hear the half - strangle sob burst from the slight figure stumble up the step before she , have not old Mary Antony be suddenly move at that moment to uplift her voice in a cracked and raucous " amen . " 

 startle , and vex at be startle , the Sub - Prioress turn upon 
 Mary Antony . 
 " peace , woman ! " she say . " the Convent cloister be not a hen - yard . such ill - time devotion well - nigh merit penance . rise from thy knee , and go at once about thy business . " 

 the Sub - Prioress hasten on . 

 scowl darkly , old Antony bend forward , look , past Mother 
 Sub - Prioress , up the cloister to the distant passage . 
 Sister Mary Seraphine have reach her cell . the door be shut . 

 Old Antony 's knee creak as she arise , but her wizened face be once more cheerful . 

 " Beans in her broth to - night , " she say . " one for ' woman ' ; another for the hen - yard ; a third for threaten penance when I do but chant a melodious ' amen . ' I will give her bean castor bean ! " 

 down the step she go , push the heavy door to , lock it , and draw forth the key ; then turn her step toward the cell of the Reverend Mother . 

 on her way thither , she pause at a certain door and listen , her ear against the oaken panel . then she hurry onward , knock upon the door of the Reverend Mother 's cell and , be bid to enter , pass within , close the door behind she , and drop upon her knee . 

 the Prioress stand beside the casement , gaze at the golden glory of the sunset . she be , for the moment , unconscious of her surrounding . her mind be away behind those crimson battlement . 

 presently she turn and see the old woman , kneel at the door . 

 " how now , dear Antony ? " she say , kindly . " get up ! hang the key in its appoint place , and make I thy report . have all return ? as always , be all well ? " 

 the old lay - sister rise , hang the massive key upon a nail ; then come to the foot of the prioress , and knelt again . 

 " Reverend Mother , " she say , " all who go forth have return . but all be not well . Sister Mary Seraphine be utter wild cry in her cell ; and much I fear I , Mother Sub - Prioress may pass by , and hear she . " 

 the face of the prioress grow stern and sad ; yet , withal , tender . she raise the lay - sister , and gently pat the old hand which tremble . 

 " go thy way , dear Antony , " she say . " I myself will visit the little 
 Sister in her cell . none will attempt to enter while I be there . " 
 CHAPTER IV 

 " give ME tenderness , " she say 

 the Prioress knelt before a marble group of the Virgin and Child , place where the ray of evening sunshine , enter through the western casement , play over its white beauty , shed a radiance on the pure face of the Madonna , and a halo of golden glory around the Infant Christ . 

 " Mother of God , " pray the prioress , with folded hand , " give I patience in deal with wilfulness ; grant I wisdom to cope with unreason ; may it be give I to share the pain of this heart in torment , even as when thou didst witness the suffering of thy dear Son , our Lord , on Calvary a sword pierce through thine own soul also . 

 " give I this gift of sympathy with suffering , though the cross be not mine own , but another 's . 

 " but give I firmness and authority : even as when thou didst say to the servant at Cana : ' Whatsoever he saith unto you , do it . ' " 

 the Prioress wait , with bow head . 

 then , of a sudden she put forth her hand , and touch the marble foot of the Babe . 

 " give I tenderness , " she say . 

 CHAPTER V 

 the WAYWARD NUN 

 Sister Mary Seraphine lie prone upon the floor of her cell . 

 tightly clench in her hand be fragment of her tear veil . 

 she beat her knuckle upon the stone with rhythmic regularity ; then , when her arm would lift no long , take up the measure with her toe , in wild imitation of a gallop horse . 

 as she lay , she repeat with monotonous reiteration : " trapping of crimson , and silver bell : mane and tail , like foam of the wave ; a palfrey as white as snow ! " 

 the Prioress enter , close the door behind she , and look searchingly at the prostrate figure ; then , lift the master - key which hang from her girdle , lock the door on the inside . 

 Sister Mary Seraphine have be silent long enough to hear the closing and locking of the door . 

 now she start afresh . 

 " trapping of crimson , and silver bell " 

 the Prioress walk over to the narrow casement , and stand look out at the rosy cloud wreathe a pale green sky . 

 " oh ! . . . oh ! . . . oh ! . . . " wail Sister Mary Seraphine , writhe upon the floor ; " mane and tail , like foam of the wave ; a palfrey as white as snow ! " 

 the Prioress watch the swallow on swift wing , chase fly in the evening light . 

 so complete be the silence , that Sister Mary Seraphine notwithstanding that turning of the key in the lock fancy she must be alone . 

 " trapping of crimson , and silver bell ! " she declaim with vehemence ; then lift her face to peep , and see the tall figure of the Prioress stand at the casement . 

 instantly , Sister Mary Seraphine drop her head . 

 " Mane and tail , " she begin then her courage fail ; the " foam of the wave " quaver into indecision ; and indecision , in such a case , be fatal . 

 for a while she lie quite still , moan plaintively , then , of a sudden , quiver from head to foot , start up alert , as if to listen . 

 " Wilfred ! " she shriek ; " Wilfred ! be you come to save I ? " 

 then she open her eye , and peep again . 

 the prioress , wholly unmove by the impending advent of " Wilfred , " stand at the casement , calmly watch the swallow . 

 Sister Mary Seraphine begin to weep . 

 at last the passionate sobbing cease . 

 unbroken silence reign in the cell . 

 from without , the latch of the door be lift ; but the lock hold . 

 presently Sister Mary Seraphine drag herself to the foot of the 
 Prioress , seize the hem of her robe , and kiss it . 
 then the Prioress turn . she firmly withdraw her robe from those cling hand ; yet look , with eye of tender compassion , upon the kneeling figure at her foot . 

 " Sister Seraphine , " she say , " for you must shew true penitence e'er I can permit you to be call by our Lady 's name you will now come to my cell , where I will presently speak with you . " 

 Sister Seraphine instantly fall prone . 

 " I can not walk , " she say . 

 " you will not walk , " reply the prioress , sternly . " you will travel upon your hand and knee . " 

 she cross to the door , unlocked and set it wide . 

 " moreover , " she add , from the doorway , " if you do not appear in my presence in reasonable time , I shall be constrain to send for Mother Sub - Prioress . " 

 the cell of the Prioress be situate at the opposite end of the long , stone passage ; but in less than reasonable time , Sister Seraphine crawl in . 

 the unwonted exercise have have a most salutary effect upon her frame of mind . 

 her straight habit , of heavy cloth , have render progress upon her knee awkward and difficult . her hand have become entangled in her tear veil . each moment she have fear lest cell door , on either side , should open ; old Antony might appear from the cloister , or great disaster of all Mother Sub - Prioress might advance toward she from the refectory stair ! in order to attain a great rate of speed , she have try lift her knee , as elephant lift their foot . this mode of progress , though ungainly , have prove efficacious ; but would have be distinctly mirth - provoking to beholder . the stone have hurt her hand and knee far more than she hurt they when she beat upon the floor of her own cell . 

 she arrive at the Reverend Mother 's footstool , heat in mind and body , ashamed of herself , vex with her garment , in fact in an altogether saner frame of mind than when she have call upon " Wilfred , " and make reiterated mention of trapping of crimson and silver bell . 

 perhaps the Prioress have foresee this result , when she impose the penance . leniency or sympathy , at that moment , would have be fatal and foolish ; and have not the Prioress make special petition for wisdom ? 

 she be seat at her table , when Sister Seraphine bump and shuffle into view . she do not raise her eye from the illuminated missal she be study . one hand lie on the massive clasp , the other rest in readiness to turn the page . her noble form seem stately calm personify . 

 when she hear Sister Seraphine pant close to her foot , she speak ; still without lift her eye . 

 " you may rise to your foot , " she say , " and shut to the door . " 

 then the wait hand turn the page , and silence fall . 

 " you may arrange the disorder of your dress , " say the prioress , and turn another page . 

 when at length she look up , Sister Seraphine , clothed and apparently in her right mind , stand humbly near the door . 

 the Prioress close the book , and shut the heavy clasp . 

 then she point to an oaken stool , sign to the nun to draw it forward . 

 " be seat , my child , " she say , in tone of infinite tenderness . " there be much which must now be say , and your mind will pay well heed , if your body be at rest . " 

 with her steadfast eye the prioress search the pretty , flushed face , swell with weeping , and now gather a look of petulant defiance , thinly veil beneath surface humility . 

 " what be the cause of this outburst , my child ? " ask the prioress , very gently . 

 " while in the Cathedral , Reverend Mother , up in our gallery , I , be place not far from a window , hear , in a moment of silence , the neighing of a horse in the street without . it be like to the neighing of mine own lovely palfrey , wait in the castle court at home , until I should come down and mount he . each time that steed neigh , I could see Snowflake more clearly , in trapping of gay crimson , with silver bell , amid many other prance impatiently , champ their bit as they wait ; for it please I to come out last , when all be mount . then the rider lift their plume cap when I appear , while Wilfred , push my page aside , do swing I into the saddle . thus , with shout and laughter and winding of horn , we would all ride out to the hunt or the tourney ; I first , on Snowflake ; Wilfred , close behind . " 

 very quietly the Prioress sit listen . she do not take her eye from the flushed face . a slight colour ting her own cheek . 

 " who be Wilfred ? " she ask , when Sister Seraphine pause for breath . 

 " my cousin , whom I should have we d if " 

 " if ? " 

 " if I have not leave the world . " 

 the Prioress consider this . 

 " if your heart be set upon wed your cousin , my child , why do you profess a vocation and , renounce all worldly and carnal desire , gain admission to our sacred order ? " 

 " my heart be not set on marry my cousin ! " cry Sister Seraphine , with petulance . " I be weary of Wilfred . I be weary of everything ! I want to profess . I wish to become a nun . there be people I could punish , and people I could surprise , well so , than in any other way . but Wilfred say that , when the time come , he would be there to carry I off . " 

 " and when the time come ? " 

 " he be not there . I never see he again . " 

 the Prioress turn , and look out through the oriel window . she seem to be weigh , carefully , what she should say . 

 when at length she speak , she keep her eye fix upon the wave tree - top beyond the Convent wall . 

 " Sister Seraphine , " she say , " many who embrace the religious life , know what it be to pass through the experience you have now have ; but , as a rule , they fight the temptation and conquer it in the secret of their own heart , in the silence of their own cell . 

 " Memories of the life that be , before , choose the well part , we leave the world , come back to haunt we , with a wanton sweetness . such memory can not change the state , fix forever by our vow ; but they may awaken in we vain regret or worldly longing . therein lie their sinfulness . 

 " to help you against this danger , I will now give you two prayer , which you must commit to memory , and repeat whenever need arise . the first be from the Breviary . " 

 the Prioress draw toward her a black book with silver clasp , open it , and read therefrom a short prayer in Latin . but see no light of response or of intelligence upon the face of Sister Seraphine , she slowly repeat a translation . 

 Almighty and Everlasting God , grant that our will be ever meekly subject to Thy will , and our heart be ever honestly ready to serve Thee . amen . 

 her eye rest , with a wistful smile , upon the book . 

 " this prayer might suffice , " she say , " if our heart be truly honest , if our will be ever yield . but , alas , our heart be deceitful above all thing , and our will be apt to turn traitor to our good intention . 

 " therefore I have find for you , in the Gregorian Sacramentary , another prayer less well - know , yet much more ancient , write over six hundred year ago . it deal effectually with the deceitful heart , the insidious , tempting thought , and the unstable will . here be a translation which I have myself inscribe upon the margin . " 

 the Prioress lay her fold hand upon the missal and as she repeat the ancient sixth - century prayer , in all its depth of inspire simplicity , her voice thrill with deep emotion , for she be give to another that which have mean infinitely much to her own inner life . 

 Almighty God , unto whom all heart be open , all desire know , and from whom no secret be hide : cleanse the thought of our heart by the inspiration of Thy Holy Spirit , that we may perfectly love Thee , and worthily magnify Thy Holy Name , through Christ our Lord . amen . 

 the Prioress turn her face from Sister Seraphine 's unresponsive countenance and fix her eye once more upon the tree - top . she be think of the long year of secret conflict , know only to he from whom no secret be hide ; of the constant cleansing of her thought , for which she have so earnestly plead ; of the fear lest she should never worthily magnify that Holy Name . 

 presently her heart fill with humble tenderness she turn to 
 Sister Seraphine . 
 " these prayer , my child , which you will commit to memory before you sleep this night , will protect you from a too insistent recollection of the world you have resign ; and will assist you , with real inward thoroughness , to die daily to self , in order that the Holy Name of our dear Lord may be more worthily magnify in you . " 

 but , alas ! this gentle treatment , these long silence , this quiet recitation of holy prayer , have but stir the naughty spirit in Sister Seraphine . 

 her shallow nature fail to understand the deep of the noble heart , deal thus tenderly with she . she measure its ocean - wide greatness , by the little artificial runnel of her own morbid emotion . she mistook gentleness for weakness ; calm self - control , for lack of strength of will . her wholesome awe of the Prioress be forget . 

 " but I do not want to die ! " she exclaim . " I want to live to live to live ! " 

 the Prioress look up , astonish . 

 the surface humility have depart from the swollen countenance of 
 Sister Seraphine . the petulant defiance be plainly visible . 
 " Kneel ! " command the prioress , with authority . 

 the wayward nun jerk down upon her knee , upset the stool behind she . 

 the Prioress make a quick movement , then restrain herself . she have pray for patience in deal with wilfulness . 

 " we die that we may live , " she say , solemnly . " Sister Seraphine , this be the lesson your wayward heart must learn . die to self , we live unto God . die to sin , we live unto righteousness . die to the world , we find the Life Eternal . " 

 on her knee upon the floor , Sister Seraphine feel her position to be such as lend itself to pathos . 

 " but I want to live to the world ! " she cry , and burst into tear . 

 now convent life do not tend to further individual grief . constant devout contemplation of the Supreme Sorrow which work the world 's salvation lessen the inclination to shed tear of self - pity . 

 the Prioress be startle and alarm by the pathetic sob of Sister 
 Seraphine . 
 this young nun have but lately be send on to the Nunnery at Whytstone from a convent at Tewkesbury in which she have serve her novitiate , and take her final vow . the Prioress now realise how little she know of the inner working of the mind of Sister Seraphine , and blame herself for have look upon the outward appearance rather than upon the heart , take too much for grant , and rely too entirely upon the report of other . her sense of failure , toward the Community in general , and toward Seraphine in particular , lend she a fresh stock of patience . 

 she raise the weeping nun from the floor , put her arm around she , with protective gesture , and lead she before the Shrine of the Madonna . 

 " my child , " she say , " there be thing we be call upon to suffer which we can well tell to our blessed Lady , herself . try to unburden your heart and find comfort . . . do your mind hark back to the thought of the earthly love you resign in order to give yourself solely to the heavenly ? . . . be you trouble by fear lest you wrong the man you love , when , leave he , you become the bride of Heaven ? " 

 Sister Seraphine smile a scornful little smile . " Nay , " she say , " I be weary of Wilfred . but there be other . " 

 the voice of the prioress grow even graver , and more sad . 

 " be it then the fact of marriage which you desire and regret ? " 

 Sister Seraphine laugh a hard , self - conscious , little laugh . 

 " Nay , I could not have brook to be bind to any man . but I like to be love , and I like to be first in the thought and heart of another . " 

 the Prioress look at the pretty , tear - stain face , at the softly mould form . then an idea come to she . to voice it , lift the veil from the very Holy of Holies of her own heart 's suffering ; but she would not shrink from aught which could help this soul she be strive to uplift . 

 with her eye rest upon the Babe in the arm of the Virgin Mother , she ask , gravely and low : 

 " be it the ceaseless longing to have have a little child of your own to hold in your arm , to gather to your breast , to put to sleep upon your knee , which keep your heart turn restlessly back to the world ? " 

 Sister Seraphine gaze at the prioress , in utter amazement . 

 " Nay , then , indeed ! " she reply , impatiently . " always have I hat child . to escape from the vexation of motherhood be reason enough for leave the world . " 

 then the Prioress withdraw her protective arm , and look sternly upon 
 Sister Seraphine . 
 " you be play false to your vow , " she say ; " you be slight your vocation ; yet no worthy or noble feeling draw your heart back to the world . you do but desire vain pomp and show ; all those thing which minister to the enthronement of self . return to your cell and spend three hour in prayer and penitence before the crucifix . " 

 the Prioress lift her hand and point to the figure of the Christ , hang upon the great rugged cross against the wall , face the door . the sublimity of a supreme adoration be in her voice , as she make she last appeal . 

 " surely , " she say , ' surely no love of self can live , in view of the death and sacrifice of our blessed Lord ! Kneel then before the crucifix and learn " 

 but the over - wrought mind of Sister Seraphine , suddenly convince of the futility of its hopeless rebellion , pass , in that moment , altogether beyond control . 

 with a shout of wild laughter , she fling back her head , point with outstretched finger at the crucifix . 

 " death ! death ! death ! " she shriek , " helpless , hopeless , terrible ! 
 I ask for life , I want to live ; I be young , I be gay , I be beautiful . 
 and they bid bid bid I kneel long hour watch death . " her 
 voice rise to a pierce scream . " ah , HA ! that will I not ! a dead 
 God can not help I ! I want life , not death ! " 
 shriek she leapt to her foot , fly across the room , beat upon the sacred Form with her fist ; tear at it with her finger . 

 one instant of petrify horror . then the prioress be upon she . 

 seize she by both wrist she fling she to the floor , then pull a rope pass over a pulley in the wall , which start the great alarm - bell , in the passage , clang wildly . 

 at once there come a rush of fly foot ; call for the Sub - Prioress ; but she be already there . 

 when they fling wide the door , lo , the prioress stand with white face and blaze eye , her arm outstretche between they and the crucifix . 

 upon the floor , a crumpled heap , lie Sister Mary Seraphine . 

 the nun , in a frightened crowd , fill the doorway , none dare to speak , or to enter ; till old Mary Antony , push past the Sub - Prioress , kneel down beside the Reverend Mother , and , lift the hem of her robe , kiss it and press it to her breast . 

 slowly the Prioress let fall her arm . 

 " Enter , " she say ; and they flock in . 

 " Sister Seraphine , " say the Prioress , in awful tone , " have profane the crucifix , revile our blessed Lord , who hang thereon . " 

 all the nun , fall upon their knee , hide their face in their hand . 

 there be a terrifying quality in the silence of the next moment . 

 slowly the Prioress turn , prostrate herself at the foot of the cross , and lay her forehead against the floor at its base . then the nun hear one deep , shudder sob . 

 not a head be lift . the only nun who peep be Sister Mary 
 Seraphine , prone upon the floor . 
 after a while , the Prioress arise , pale but calm . 

 " carry she to her cell , " she say . 

 two tall nun to whom she make sign lift Sister Seraphine , and bear she out . 

 when the shuffling of their foot die away in the distance , the 
 Prioress give further command . 
 " all will now go to their cell and kneel in adoration before the crucifix . door be to be leave stand wide . the Miserere be to be chant , until the ringing of the Refectory bell . Mother Sub - Prioress will remain behind . " 

 the nun disperse , as quickly as they have gather ; seek their cell , like frightened bird flee before a gathering storm . 

 the tall nun who have carry Sister Seraphine return and wait outside the Reverend Mother 's door . 

 the Prioress stand alone ; a tragic figure in her grief . 

 Mother Sub - Prioress draw near . her narrow face , peer from out her veil , more than ever resemble a ferret . her small eye gleam with a merciless light . 

 " be mine the task , Reverend Mother ? " she whisper . 

 the Prioress incline her head . 

 Mother Sub - Prioress murmur a second question . 

 the Prioress turn and look at the crucifix . 

 " yes , " she say , firmly . 

 Mother Sub - Prioress sidle nearer ; then whisper her third question . 

 the Prioress do not answer . she be look at the carve , oaken stool , overthrow . she be wonder whether she could have act with well judgment , speak more wisely . her heart be sore . such noble nature ever blame themselves for the wrong - doing of the worthless . 

 receive no reply , Mother Sub - Prioress whisper a suggestion . 

 " no , " say the Prioress . 

 Mother Sub - Prioress modify her suggestion . 

 the Prioress turn and look at the tender figure of the Madonna , brood over the blessed babe . 

 " no , " say the Prioress . 

 Mother Sub - Prioress frown , and make a further modification ; but in tone which suggest finality . 

 the Prioress incline her head . 

 the Sub - Prioress , bow low , lift the hem of the Reverend Mother 's veil , and kiss it ; then pass from the room . 

 the Prioress move to the window . 

 the sunset be over . the evening star shine , like a newly - light lamp , in a pale purple sky . the fleet - wing swallow have go to rest . 

 bat flit past the casement , like homeless soul who know not where to go . 

 low chanting begin in the cell ; the nun , with open door , sing miserere . 

 but , as she look at the evening star , the Prioress hear again , with startling distinctness , the final profanity of poor Sister Seraphine : " I want life not death ! " 

 along the corridor pass a short procession , on its way to the cell of 
 Mary Seraphine . 
 First go a nun , carry a lighted taper . 

 next , the two tall nun who have bear Mary Seraphine to her cell . 

 behind they , Mother Sub - Prioress , hold something beneath her scapulary which give to her more of a presence than she usually possess . 

 Solemn and official , nay , almost sacrificial be their measured shuffle , as they move along the passage , and enter the cell of Mary Seraphine . 

 the Prioress close her door , and , kneel before the crucifix , implore forgiveness for the sacrilege which , all unwittingly , she have provoke . 

 the nun , in their separate cell , chant the Miserere . but suddenly with one accord , their voice fall silent ; then hasten on , in uncertain , agitated rhythm . 

 Old Mary Antony below , play her favourite game , also pause , and prick up her ear : then fillipe the wizen pea , which stand for Mother Sub - Prioress , into the dark corner , and hurry off to brew a soothe balsam . 

 so , when the Refectory bell have summon all to the evening meal , the old lay - sister creep to the cell of Mary Seraphine , carry broth and comfort . 

 but Sister Seraphine be well content than she have be for many week . 

 at last she have become the centre of attention ; and , although , during the visit of Mother Sub - Prioress to her cell , this have be a peculiarly painful position to occupy , yet to the morbid mind of Mary Seraphine , the position seem worth the discomfort . 

 therefore , her mind now purge of its discontent , she cheerfully sup old Antony 's broth , and apply the soothe balsam ; yet plan the while , to gain favour with the prioress , by repeat to she , at the first convenient opportunity , the naughty remark concern Mother Sub - Prioress , now be make for her diversion , by the kind old woman who have risk reproof , in order to bring to she , in her disgrace , both food and consolation . 

 CHAPTER VI 

 the KNIGHT of the BLOODY VEST 

 " Nay , I have naught for thee this morning , " say Mary Antony to the robin ; " naught , that is , save spritely conversation . I can tell thee a tale or two ; I can give thee sage advice ; but , in my wallet , little Master Mendicant , I have but my bag of pea . " 

 the old lay - sister sit rest in the garden . she have have a busy hour , yet complicated in its busy - ness , for , start out to do weed , she have presently fancy herself intent upon make a posy , and now , sit upon the stone seat beneath the beech tree , hold a large nosegay make up of many kind of flower weed , arrange with much care , and bind round with convolvulus tendril . 

 Keen and uncommon shrewd though old Antony certainly be in many way , her great age occasionally betray itself by childish vagary . her mind would start off along the line of a false premise , land she eventually in a dream - like conclusion . as now , when wake from a moment 's nodding in the welcome shade , she wonder why her old back seem well - nigh break , and marvel to find herself hold a big posy of dandelion , groundsel , plantain , and bindweed . 

 on the other end of the seat , stand the robin . the beech be just near enough to the cloister , the pieman 's tree , and his own particular yew hedge , to come within his little kingdom . 

 have mention her bag of pea , Mary Antony experience an irresistible desire to view they and , moreover , to display they before the bright eye of the robin . 

 she lay the queer nosegay down upon the grass at her foot , turn sidewise on the stone slab , and draw the bag from her wallet . 

 " now , Master Pieman ! " she say . " at thine own risk thou doest it ; but with thine own bright eye thou shalt see the holy Ladies ; the Unnamed , all like pea in a pod , as the Lord know they do look , when they walk to and fro ; but first , if so be that I can find they , the few which I distinguish from among the rest . " 

 presently , after much peer into the bag , the fine white pea , the wizened pea , and the pale and speckle pea , lie in line upon the stone . 

 " this , " explain Mary Antony , point , with knobby forefinger , to the first , " be the Reverend Mother , Herself large , and pure , and noble . . . . Nay , hop not too close , Sir Redbreast ! when we enter her chamber we kneel at the threshold , till she bid we draw nearer . true , we be merely soberly - clothe , holy woman , whereas thou art a gay , gaudy man ; bold - eye , and , doubtless , steep in sin . but even thou must keep thy distance , in presence of this most Reverend pea of great price . 

 " this , " indicate the shrivelled pea , " be Mother Sub - Prioress , who would love to have the whipping of thee , thou naughty little rascal ! 

 " this be Sister Mary Rebecca who daily grow more crooked , both in mind and body ; yet who ever sweetly smileth . 

 " now will I show thee , if so be that I can find she , Sister Teresa , a kindly soul and gracious , but with a sniff which may be hear in the kitchen when that holy Lady taketh her turn at the refectory reading . and when , the reading over , have sniff every other minute , she at length , feel free to blow , beshrew I , Master Redbreast , one might think our old dun cow have just be part from a newly - bear calf . yea , a kind , gracious soul ; but noisy about the nose , and forgetful of the ear of other people , her own necessity seem excuse enough for veritable trumpet blast . " 

 Mary Antony , half turn as she talk , peer into the open bag in search of Sister Teresa . 

 then , quick as think , the unexpected happen . 

 three rapid hop , a jerky bend of the red breast , a flash of wing 

 the robin have fly off with the white pea ! the shrivelled and the speckle alone remain upon the seat . 

 utter a cry of horror and dismay , the old lay - sister fall upon her knee , lift despair hand to tree and sky . 

 down by the low wall , in earnest meditation , the prioress move back and forth , on the Cypress Walk . 

 Mary Antony 's shriek of dismay , faint but unmistakable , reach her ear . turn , she pass noiselessly up the green sward , on the further side of the yew hedge ; but pause , in surprise , as she draw level with the beech ; for the old lay - sister 's voice penetrate the hedge , and the first word she overhear seem to the Prioress wholly incomprehensible . 

 " ah , thou Knight of the Bloody Vest ! " moan Mary Antony . " Heaven send thy wicked perfidy may fall on thine own pate ! intrude thyself into our most private place ; beg food , which could not be refuse ; wheedle old Mary Antony into let thee have a peep at the holy Ladies thou bold , bad man ! and then carry off the Reverend Mother , herself ! ha ! hadst thou but catch away Mother Sub - Prioress , she would have reform thy home , whip thy child , and mend thine own vile manner , thou graceless churl ! or hadst thou take Sister Mary Rebecca , she would have bring the place about thine ear , tell thy wife fine tale of thine unfaithfulness ; whisper that Mary Antony be young and fair than she . but , nay , forsooth ! neither of these will do ! Thou must need snatch away the Reverend Mother , herself ! oh , sacrilegious fiend ! stand not there mock I ! where be the Reverend mother ? " 

 " why , here be I , dear Antony , " say the Prioress , in soothe tone , come quickly from behind the hedge . 

 one glance reveal , to her relief , that the lay - sister be alone . tear run down the furrow of her wear old face . she kneel upon the grass ; beside she a large nosegay of flower weed ; upon the seat , pea strew from out a much - use , linen bag . above she on a bough , a robin perch , bend to look , with roguish eye , at the scatter pea . 

 to the prioress it seem that indeed the old lay - sister must have take leave of her sens . 

 stoop , she try to raise she ; but Mary Antony , fling herself forward , clasped and kiss the Reverend Mother 's foot , in an abandonment of penitence and grief . 

 " Nay , rise , dear Antony , " say the prioress , firmly . " rise ! I command it . the day be warm . thou hast be dream . no bold , bad man have force his way within these wall . no ' Knight of the Bloody Vest ' be here . rise up and look . we be alone . " 

 but Mary Antony , still on her knee , half raise herself , and , point to the bough above , quaver , amid her sob : " the bold , bad man be there ! " 

 look up , the prioress meet the bright eye of the robin , peep down . 

 why , surely ? yes ! there be the " Bloody Vest . " 

 the Prioress smile . she begin to understand . 

 the robin burst into a stream of triumphant song . at which , old Mary 
 Antony , still kneel , shake her uplifted fist . 
 the Prioress raise and draw she to the seat . 

 " now sit thee here beside I , " she say , " and make full confession . ease thine old heart by tell I the entire tale . then I will pass sentence on the robin if , true to his name , he turn out to be a thief . " 

 so there , in the Convent garden , while the robin sing overhead , the Prioress listen to the quaint recital ; the dread of make mistake in the daily counting ; the elaborate plan of drop pea ; the manner in which the pea become identify with the personality of the White Ladies ; the game in the cell ; the taming of the robin ; the habit of share with the little bird , interest which might not be share with other , which have result that morning in the display of the pea , and this undreame of disaster the abduction of the Reverend Mother . 

 the Prioress listen with outward gravity , strive to conceal all sign of the inward mirth which seize and shake she . but more than once she have to turn her face from the peer eye of Mary Antony , strive anxiously to gather whether her chronicle of sin be place she outside the pale of possible forgiveness . 

 the Prioress do not hasten the recital . she know the importance , to the mind with which she deal , of even the most trivial detail . to be check or hurry , would leave Mary Antony with the sense of an incomplete confession . 

 therefore , with infinite patience the prioress listen , seat in the sunlit garden , undisturbed , save for the silent passing , once or twice , of a veil figure through the cloister , who , see the Reverend Mother seat beneath the beech , do reverence and hasten on , look not again . 

 when the garrulous old voice at last fall silent , the prioress , with kind hand , cover the restless finger clasp and unclasp in anxious contortion and firmly hold they in fold stillness . 

 her first word be of a thing as yet unmentione . 

 " Dear Antony , " she say , " be that thy posy lie at our foot ? " 

 " ah , Reverend Mother , " sigh the old lay - sister , " in this do I again do wrong meaning to do right . Sister Mary Augustine , come into the kitchen with leave , from Mother Sub - Prioress , to make the pasty , and desire to be free to make they heavy unhampere by my advice which , of a surety , would have help they to lightness bade I go out and weed the garden . 

 " weed , I bethink I how much liefer I would be gather a posy of choice flower for our sweet Lady 's shrine ; and , thus think , I begin to do , not accord to Sister Mary Augustine 's hard task , but accord to mine own heart 's prompting . yet , when the posy be finish , alack - a - day ! it be a posy of weed ! " 

 Tears fill the eye of the prioress ; at first she could not trust her voice to make reply . 

 then , stoop she pick up the nosegay . 

 " our Lady shall have it , " she say . " I will place it before her shrine , in mine own cell . she will understand know how often , though the hand perforce do weed , yet , all the time , the heart be gather choicest flower . 

 " Aye , and sometimes when we bring to God offering of fair flower , he see but worthless weed . and , when we mourn , because we have but weed to offer , he see they fragrant blossom . whatever , to the eye of man , the hand may hold , God see therein the bouquet of the heart 's intention . " 

 the Prioress pause , a look of great gladness on her face ; then , as she see the old lay - sister still eye her posy with dissatisfaction : " and , after all , dear Antony , " she say , " who shall decide which flower shall be dub ' weed ' ? no plant of his creation , however humble , be call a ' weed ' by the Creator . when , for man 's sin , he curse the ground , he say : ' thorn also and thistle shall it cause to bud . ' well ? sharpest thorn be find around the rose ; the thistle be the royal bloom of Scotland ; and , if our old white ass could speak her mind , doubtless she would call it king of Flowers . 

 " nowhere in Holy Books , be any plant name a ' weed . ' it be leave to man to proclaim that the flower he want not , be weed . 

 " look at each one of these . could you or I , labour for year , with all our skill , make anything so perfect as the mean of these weed ? 

 " Nay ; they be weed , because they grow , there where they should not be . the gorgeous scarlet poppy be a weed amid the corn . if rose overgrow the wheat , we should dub they weed , and root they out . 

 " and some of we have have , perforce , so to deal with the rose in our life ; those sweet and fragrant thing which overgrow our offering of the wheat of service , our sacrifice of praise and prayer . 

 " perhaps , when our weed be all tear out , and cast in a tangled heap before his foot , our Lord behold in they a garland of choice blossom . the crown of thorn on earth , may prove , in Paradise , a diadem of flower . " 

 the Prioress lay the posy on the seat beside she . 

 " now , Antony , about thy game with pea . there be no wrong in keep count with pea of those who daily walk to and from Vespers ; though , I admit , it seem to I , it be easy to count one , two , three , with fold hand , than to let fall the pea from one hand to the other , beneath thy scapulary . Howbeit , a method which would be but a pitfall to one , may prove a prop to another . so I give thee leave to continue to count with thy pea . also the game in thy cell be harmless , and lead I to think , as already I have sometimes think , that game with ball or ring , something in which eye guide the hand , and mind the eye , might be helpful for all , on summer evening . 

 " but I can not have thee take upon thyself to decide the future state of the White Ladies . who art thou , to send I to Paradise with a fillip of thine old finger - nail , yet to keep our excellent Sub - Prioress in Purgatory ? shame upon thee , Mary Antony ! " but the sternness of the Reverend Mother 's tone be belie by the merriment in her grey eye . 

 " so no more of that , my Antony ; though , truth to tell , thy story give I relief , answer a question I be mean to put to thee . I hear , not an hour ago , that Sister Antony have boast that with a turn of her thumb and finger she could , any night , send Mother Sub - Prioress to Purgatory . " 

 " who say that of I ? " stutter Mary Antony . " who say it , Reverend 
 Mother ? " 
 " a little bird , " murmur the prioress . " a little bird , dear Antony ; but not thy pretty robin . also , the boast be take to mean poison in the broth of Mother Sub - Prioress . Hast thou ever put harmful thing in the broth of Mother Sub - Prioress ? " 

 Mary Antony slip to her knee . 

 " only bean , Reverend Mother , castor bean ; and , when her temper be vilest , purge herb . nothing more , I swear it ! Old Antony know naught of poison ; only of mix balsam ah , ha ! and soothe ointment ! our blessed Lady know the tale be false . " 

 hastily the prioress lift the nosegay and bury her face in bindweed and dandelion . 

 " I believe thee , " she say , in a voice not over steady . " rise from thy knee . but , remember , I forbid thee to put aught into Mother Sub - Prioress 's broth , save thing that soothe and comfort . give I thy word for this , Antony . " 

 the old woman humbly lift the hem of the prioress 's robe , and press it to her lip . 

 " I promise , Reverend Mother , " she say , " and I do repent I of my sin . " 

 " sit beside I , " command the prioress . " I have more to say to thee . . . . think not hard thought of the Sub - prioress . she be stern , and extreme to mark what be do amiss , but this she conceive to be her duty . she be a most pious Lady . her zeal be but a sign of her piety . " 

 Mary Antony 's keen eye , meet those of the Prioress , twinkle . 

 once again the prioress take refuge in the posy . she be begin to have have enough of the scent of dandelion . 

 " Mother Sub - Prioress be sick , " she say . " the cold strike she last evening , after sunset , in the orchard . I have bid she to keep her bed awhile . we must tend she kindly , Antony , and help she back to health again . 

 " Sister Mary Rebecca be also sick , with pain in her bone and slight fever . she too keep her bed to - day . strive to feel kindly toward she , Antony . I know she oft think evil where none be mean , tell tale of wrong which be mostly of her own imagining . but , in so do , she harm herself more than she can harm other . 

 " by stir up the mud in a dark pool , you dim the reflection of the star which , before , shine bright within it . but you do not dim the star , shin on high . 

 " so be it with the slanderous thought of evil mind . they stir up their own murkiness ; but they fail to dim the star . 

 " we must bear with Sister Mary Rebecca . " 

 " go not nigh they , Reverend Mother , " beg old Antony . " I will tend they with due care and patience . these pain in bone , and general shivering , be give quickly from one to another . I pray you , go not near . remember you be take alas ! alas ! and they be leave ! " 

 at this the prioress laugh , gaily . 

 " but I be not take decently , with pain in my bone and a - bed , dear 
 Antony . I be carry off by a bold , bad man thy Knight of the Bloody 
 Vest . " 
 " oh , pray ! " cry the old lay - sister . " I fear I it be an omen . the angel Gabriel , Reverend Mother , send to bear you from earth to heaven . ' the one shall be take , and the other left . ' ah , if he have but fly off with Mother Sub - Prioress ! " 

 the prioress laugh again . " Dear Antony , thy little bird take the first pea he see . have there but be a crumb , or a morsel of cheese , he would have leave thee thy white pea . . . Hark how he sing his little song of praise ! . . . be it not wonderful to call to mind how , century ago , when white - rob Druids cut mistletoe from british oak , the robin redbreast hop around , and sing ; when , early still , man be wild and savage , dwell in hole and cave and hut of mud , when church and cloister be unknown in this land and the one true God undreame of , robin mat and make their nest , the speckle thrush sing , ' do it now do it now , ' as they seek food for their young , the blackbird whistle , and the swallow flash by on joyous wing . Aye , and when Eve and Adam walk in Eden , amid strange beast and gaily plumage bird , here in these Isles the robin redbreast sing , and all our british bird busily build their nest and rear their young ; live their little joyous life , as he who make they teach they how to do . 

 " and , in the century to come , when all thing may be change in this our land , when we shall long have go to dust , when our love cloister may have crumble into ruin ; still the hill of Malvern will stand , and the silvery severn flow along the valley ; while here , in this very garden if it be a garden still the robin will build his nest , and carol his happy song . 

 " mark you this , dear Mary Antony : all thing make by man hold within they the element of change and of decay . but nature be at one with God , and therefore immutable . earthly kingdom may rise and wane ; mighty city may spring up , then fall into ruin . nation may conquer and , in their turn , be conquer . Man may slay man and , in his turn , be slay . but , through it all , the mountain stand , the river flow , the forest wave , and the redbreast build his nest in the hawthorn , and warble a love - song to his mate . " 

 the Prioress rise and stretch wide her arm to the sunlit garden , to the bough where the robin sing . 

 " oh , to be one with God and with Nature ! " she cry . " oh , to know the essential mystery of Life and Light and Love ! this be Life Eternal ! " 

 she have forget the old lay - sister ; aye , for the moment she have forget the Convent and the cloister , the mile - long walk in darkness , the chant of the unseen monk . she trod again the springy heather of her youth ; she hear the rush of the mountain stream ; the sigh of the great forest ; the rustle of the sunlit glade , alive with , life . these all be in the robin 's song . then 

 within the Convent , the Refectory bell clang loudly . 

 the Prioress let fall her arm . 

 she pick up the nosegay of weed . 

 " Come , Antony , " she say , " let we go and discover whether Sister Mary Augustine hath contrive to make the pasty light and savoury , even without the aid of the advice she might have have from thee . " 

 Old Mary Antony , gleeful and marvelling , follow the stately figure of the prioress . never be shriven soul more blissfully at peace . she have keep back nothing ; yet the Reverend Mother have impose no punishment , have merely ask a promise which , in the fulness of her gratitude , Mary Antony have find it easy to give . 

 truly the broth of Mother Sub - Prioress should , for the future , contain naught but what be grateful and soothing . 

 but , as she enter the refectory behind the Reverend Mother and see all the wait nun arise , old Mary Antony lay her finger to her nose . 

 " that ' little bird ' shall have the castor bean , " she say , " that ' little bird ' shall have they . not my pretty robin , but the other ! " 

 and , sad to say , poor Sister Seraphine be sorely grip that night , and suffer many pang . 

 CHAPTER VII 

 the MADONNA in the CLOISTER 

 the Prioress knelt , in prayer and meditation , before the figure of the 
 Virgin Mother hold upon her knee the holy Babe . 
 Moonlight flood the cell with a pure radiance . 

 Mary Antony 's posy of weed , offer , accord to promise , at the Virgin 's shrine , take on , in that silver splendour , the semblance of lily and rose . 

 the Prioress knelt long , with clasped hand and bow head , as white and as motionless as the marble before she . but at length she lift her face , and break into low pleading . 

 " Mother of God , " she say , " help this poor ache heart ; still the wild hunger at my breast . make I content to be at one with the Divine , and to let nature go . . . . Thou know it be not the man I want . in all the long year since he play traitor to his troth to I , I have not want the man . the woman he we d may have he , unbegrudge by I . I do not envy she the encircling of his arm , though time be when I feel they strong and tender . I do not want the man , but o , sweet Mother of God I want the man 's little child ! I envy she the motherhood which , but for she , would have be mine . . . . I want the soft dark head against my breast . . . . I want sweet baby lip draw fresh life from mine . . . . I want the little foot , rest together in my hand . . . . all Nature sing of life , and the power to bestow life . yet mine arm be empty , and my strength do but carry mine own self to and fro . . . . oh , give I grace to turn my thought from Life to Sacrifice . " 

 the Prioress rise , cross the floor , and kneel long in prayer and contemplation before the crucifix . 

 the moonlight fall upon the die face of the suffering Saviour , upon the crown of thorn , the helpless arm out - stretch , the bleed foot . 

 O , Infinite Redeemer ! o , mighty Sacrifice ! o , Love of God , make manifest ! 

 the Prioress kneel long in adore contemplation . at interval she prostrate herself , press her forehead against the base of the cross . 

 at length she rise and move toward the inner room , where stand her couch . 

 but even as she reach the threshold she turn quickly back , and kneeling before the Virgin and Child clasp the little marble foot of the Babe , cover it with kiss , and press it to her breast . 

 then , lift despair eye to the tender face of the Madonna : " o , 
 Mother of God , " she cry , " grant unto I to love the pierce foot of 
 thy dear Son crucify , more than I love the little , baby foot of the 
 Infant Jesus on thy knee . " 
 a great calm fall upon she after this final prayer . it seem , of a sudden , more efficacious than all the long hour of vigil . she feel persuade that it would be grant . 

 she rise to her foot , almost too much dazed and too weary to cross to the inner cell . 

 a breath of exquisite fragrance fill the air . 

 at the foot of the Madonna stand a wondrous bouquet of lily of the valley and white rose . 

 pale but radiant , the Prioress pass into her sleeping - chamber . the love heart of old Mary Antony have be full of lily and rose . it be not her fault that her old hand have be fill with weed . Divine Love , understanding , have work this gracious miracle . 

 as the prioress stretch herself upon her couch , she murmur softly : " the Lord seeth not as man seeth : for man looketh on the outward appearance , but the Lord looketh on the heart . 

 " and , after all , this miracle of the divine perception doth take place daily . 

 " alas , when our vaunted rose and lily appear , in his sight , as mere worthless weed . 

 " the Lord looketh on the heart . " 

           

 when the Prioress awake , the sunlight fill her chamber . 

 she hasten to the archway between the cell , and look . 

 the dandelion seem more gaily golden , in the morning light . the bindweed have fade . 

 the Prioress be disappoint . she have count upon send early for old Mary Antony . she have picture her bewildered joy . yet now the nosegay be as before . 

 Morning light be ever a test for transformation . thing be apt to look again as they be . 

 but a fragrance of rose and lily still linger in the chamber . 

 the blessed Virgin smile upon the Babe . 

 and there be peace in the heart of the prioress . her long vigil , her hour of prayer , have win for she the sense of a calm certainty of come victory . 

 strong in that certainty , she bent , and gently kiss the little foot of the holy Babe . 

 then , as be she will not , she sound the bell which call the entire community to arise , and to begin a new day . 

 CHAPTER VIII 

 on the wing of the storm 

 in the afternoon of that day , Mary Antony await , in the cloister , the return of the White Ladies from Vespers . twenty only , have go ; and , fearful lest she should make mistake with the unusual number , the old lay - sister spend the time of wait in count the twenty pea afresh , pass they back and forth from one hand to the other . 

 Mother Sub - Prioress be still unable to leave her bed . 

 Sister Mary Augustine stay to tend she . 

 Sister Teresa be in less pain , but fevere still , and strangely weak . 
 the Reverend Mother forbid she to rise . 
 shortly before the bell ring call the nun to form procession in the cloister , Sister Seraphine declare herself unable for the walk , and beg to be allow to remain behind . the Prioress find herself misdoubte this sudden indisposition of Sister Seraphine who , though flush and excited , shew none of the usual sign of sickness . 

 not wish , however , to risk have a third patient upon her hand , the Reverend Mother give leave for she to stay , but also elect to remain behind , herself ; let Sister Mary Rebecca , who have recover from her indisposition , lead the procession . 

 thus the Reverend Mother contrive to keep Sister Seraphine with she during the absence of the other nun , give her translation from the Sacramentaries to copy upon strip of vellum , until shortly before the hour when the White Ladies would return from Vespers , when she send she to her cell for the time of prayer and meditation . 

 leave alone , the prioress examine the copy , fairly legible , but sadly unlike her own beautiful work . she sigh and , put they away , rise and pace the room , question how good to deal with the pretty but wayward young nun . 

 two definite cause lead the prioress to mistrust Sister Seraphine : one , that she have call upon " Wilfred " to come and save she , and have admit have expect he to appear and carry she off before she make her final profession ; the other , that she have try to start an evil report concern the old lay - sister , Mary Antony . the Prioress ponder what mean to take in order to bring Sister Seraphine to a well mind . 

 as the prioress walk to and fro , unconsciously miss the daily exercise of the passage to the Cathedral , she note a sudden darkening of her chamber . go to the window , she see the sky grow black with thunder cloud . so quickly the storm gather , that the bright summer world without seem suddenly hang over with a deep purple pall . 

 bird scream and dart by , on hurried wing ; then , reach home , fall silent . all nature seem to hold its breath , await the first flash , and the first roll of thunder . 

 still stand at her window , the Prioress question whether the nun be return , and safely in their cell . while underground they would know nothing of it ; but they love not pass along the cloister in a storm . 

 the Prioress wonder why she have not hear the bell announce their return , and call to the hour of prayer and silence . also why Mary Antony have not bring in the key and her report . 

 think to inquire into this , she turn from the window , just as a dart snake of fire cleft the sky . a crash of thunder follow ; and , at that moment , the door of the chamber burst open , old Mary Antony , breathless , stumble in , forget to knock , omit to kneel , not wait leave to speak , both hand outstretche , one tightly clench , the other hold the great key : " oh , Reverend Mother ! " she gasp . then the stern displeasure on that love face silence she . she drop upon her knee , ashen and trembling . 

 now the prioress hold personal fear in high scorn ; and if , after ninety year ' experience of lightning and thunder , Mary Antony be not well proof against their terror , the Prioress feel scant patience with she . she speak sternly . 

 " how now , Mary Antony ! why this unseemly haste ? why this rush into my presence ; no knock ; no pause until I bid thee enter ? be the storm - fiend at thy heel ? now shame upon thee ! " 

 for only answer , Mary Antony open she clench hand : whereupon twenty pea fall pattering to the floor , chase one another across the Reverend Mother 's cell . 

 the Prioress frown , grow suddenly weary of these game with pea . 

 " have the Ladies return ? " she ask . 

 Mary Antony grovel nearer , let fall the key , and seize the robe of the Prioress with both hand , not to carry it to her lip , but to cling to it as if for protection . 

 with the clang of the key on the flag , a twisted blade of fire rent the sky . 

 as the roar which follow roll away , echo and re - echo by distant hill , the old lay - sister lift her face . 

 her lip move , her gum rattle ; the terror in her eye plead for help . 

 this be the moment when it dawn on the prioress that there be more here than fear of a storm . 

 stoop she lay her hand firmly , yet with kindness in their strength , on the shake shoulder . 

 " what be it , dear Antony ? " she say . 

 " twenty White Ladies go , " whisper the old lay - sister . " I count they . twenty White Ladies go ; but " 

 " well ? " 

 " Twenty - one return , " chatter Mary Antony , and hide her face in the Reverend Mother 's robe . 

 two flash , with their accompanying peal of thunder pass , before the prioress move or speak . then raise Mary Antony she place she in a chair , disengage her robe from the shake hand , pass out into the cell passage , and herself sound the call to silence and prayer . 

 return to her cell she shut the door , pour out a cordial and put it to the trembling lip of Mary Antony . then take a seat just opposite , she look with calm eye at the lay - sister . 

 " what mean this story ? " say the Prioress . 

 " Reverend Mother , twenty holy Ladies go " 

 " I know . and twenty return . " 

 " aye , " say the old woman more firmly , nettle out of her speechlessness ; " twenty return ; and twenty pea I drop from hand to hand . then when no pea remain yet another White Lady glide by ; and with she go an icy wind , and around she come the blackness of the storm . 

 " down the step I flee , lock the door , and take the key . how I mount again , I know not . as I draw level with the cloister , I see that twenty - first White Lady , for whom Saint Peter know I hold no pea , pass from the cloister into the cell passage . as I hasten on , fain to see whither she go , a blind flash , like an evil twisting snake , shoot betwixt she and I . when I could see again , she be go . I flee to the Reverend Mother , and run in on the roar of the thunder . " 

 " see you her face , Mary Antony ? " 

 " Nay , Reverend Mother . but , of late , the holy Ladies mostly walk by with their face shroud . " 

 " I know . now , see here , dear Antony . two pea drop together , the while you count one . " 

 " Nay , Reverend Mother . twenty pea drop one by one ; also I count twenty White Ladies . and , after I have count twenty , yet another pass . " 

 " but how could that be ? " object the prioress . " if twenty go , but twenty could return . who should be the twenty - first ? " 

 then old Mary Antony lean forward , cross herself . 

 " Sister Agatha , " she whisper , tremulously . " poor Sister Agatha return to we again . " 

 but , even as she say it , swift come a name to the mind of the prioress , answer her own question , and fill she with consternation and a great anger . " Wilfred ! Wilfred , be you come to save I ? " foolish little Seraphine have say . be such sacrilege possible ? could one from the outside world have dare to intrude into their holy Sanctuary ? 

 yet old Antony 's tale carry conviction . her abject fear be now explain . 

 that the Dead should come again , and walk and move among the haunt of man , seek out the surrounding they have love and leave , seem always to hold terror for the untutored mind , which know not that the Dead be more alive than the living ; and that there be no death , save the death of sin . 

 but to the Reverend Mother , guard her flock from sin or shame , a visitor from the Unseen World hold less of horror than a possible intruder from the Seen . 

 a rapid glance as she sound the bell , have show she that the passage be empty . 

 which cell now shelter two , where there should be but one ? 

 the prioress walk across to a recess near the south window , touch a spring , and slide back a portion of the oak panelling . pass her hand into a secret hiding place in the wall , she draw forth a beautifully fashioned dagger , with carved ivory handle , cross metal thumb - guard , blade of bevel steel , polished and narrow to a sharp needle point . she test the point , then slip the weapon into her belt , beneath her scapulary . as she close the panel , and turn back into the chamber , a light of high resolve be in her eye . her whole bearing betoken so fine a fearlessness , such noble fixity of purpose that , look on she , Mary Antony feel her own fear vanish . 

 " now listen , dear Antony , " say the Prioress , hold the old woman with her look . " I must make sure that this twenty - first White Lady of thine be but a trick play on thee by thy pea . should she be anywhere in the Convent I shall most certainly have speech with she . 

 " meanwhile , go thou to thy kitchen , and give thy mind to the preparing of the evening meal . but ring not the Refectory bell until I bid thee . Nay , I myself will sound it this evening . it may suit I to keep the nun somewhat long at their devotion . 

 " should I sound the alarm bell , let all thy helper run up here ; but go thou to the cell of Mother Sub - Prioress and persuade she not to rise . if needful say that it be my command that she keep her bed . . . . great heaven ! what a crash ! may our Lady defend we ! the lightning incline to strike . I shall pass to each cell and make sure that none be too greatly alarmed . " 

 " now , haste thee , Antony ; and not a word concern thy fear must pass thy lip to any ; no mention of a twenty - first White Lady nor " the Prioress cross herself " of Sister Agatha , to whom may our Lord grant everlasting rest . " 

 Mary Antony , kneeling , kiss the hem of the prioress 's robe . then , rise , she say with unwonted solemnity and restraint : " the Lord defend you , Reverend Mother , from foe , see and unseen , " and , follow by another blinding flash of lightning , she leave the cell . 

 CHAPTER ix 

 the prioress shuts the DOOR 

 the Prioress wait until the old lay - sister 's shuffle footstep die away . 

 then she pass out into the long , stone passage , leave her own door open wide . 

 into each cell the Prioress go . 

 in each she find a kneeling nun , absorb in her devotion . in no cell be there two white figure . so simple be the fitting of these cell , that no place of concealment be possible . one look , from the doorway , suffice . 

 outside the cell of Sister Seraphine the Prioress pause , hear word within ; then enter swiftly . but Sister Seraphine be alone , recite aloud , for love of hear her own voice . 

 the Prioress now move toward the heavy door in the archway lead into the cloister . it open inward , and have be leave stand wide , by Mary Antony . indeed , in summer it stand open day and night , for coolness . 

 as the prioress walk along the dimly light passage , she could see , through the open door , sheet of rain drive through the cloister . the storm - cloud have burst , at last , and be descend in flood . 

 the Prioress stand in the shelter of the doorway , look out into the cloister . the only place she could not view , be the entrance to the subterranean way , and the flight of step lead thereto . she would have wish to examine these ; but it seem scarcely worth pass into the drive rain , now sweep through the cloister arch . after all , whatever possible danger lurk down those step , the safety of the Convent would be assure if she close this door , between the passage and the cloister , and lock it . 

 step back into the passage , she seize the heavy door and swing it to , note as she do so , how far too heavy it be for the feeble arm of old Mary Antony , and decide for the future to allot the task of close it to a young lay - sister , leave to Mary Antony merely the responsibility of turn the key in the lock . 

 this the prioress be herself proceed to do , when something impel she to turn her eye to the angle of wall lay bare by the closing of the door . 

 in that dark corner , motionless , with shrouded face , stand a tall figure , garb in the dress of the nun of the Order of the White Ladies of Worcester . 

 perhaps the habit of silence be never of great value than in moment of sudden shock and horror . 

 one cry from the Prioress would have mean the instant opening of many door , and the arrival , on fly foot , of a score of frightened nun . 

 instead of scream , the prioress stand silent and perfectly still ; while every pulse in her body cease beat , during one moment of uncontrollable , cold horror . then , with a leap , her heart go on ; pound so loudly , that she could hear it in the silence . yet she keep command of every impulse which drive to sound or motion . 

 before long her pulse quiet ; her heart , beat steadily , be once again the well - manage steed upon which her high courage could ride to victory . 

 and , all the while , her eye never leave the white figure ; know it know itself discover and observe . 

 her hand be still upon the key . 

 she turn it , and withdraw it from the lock . 

 a deafening crash of thunder shake the wall . a swirl of wind and rain beat on the door . 

 when the last echo of the thunder have die away , the prioress speak ; and that calm voice , sound amid the storm , fall on the only ear that hear it , like the Voice of Power on Galilee , which bid the temp cease , and the wild wave be still . 

 " who art thou , and what doest thou here ? " 

 the figure answer not . 

 " art thou a ghostly visitor come back amongst we , from the Realm of the 
 Unseen ? " 
 the figure make no sign . " art thou then flesh and blood , and mortal as ourselves ? " 

 slowly the figure bow its head . 

 " now I adjure thee by our blessed Lady to tell I truly . art thou , in very deed a holy nun , a member of our sacred order ? answer I , yea or nay ? " 

 the figure shake its head . 

 the Prioress advance a step , pass the key into her left hand and , slip she right beneath her scapulary , take firm grip of the dagger at her girdle . 

 " then , masquerader in our sacred dress , " she say , " to I you have to answer for double sacrilege : the wearing of these robe , and your presence here , unbidden . I warn you that your life have never hang by frailer thread than now it hang . your only hope of safety lie in do as I bid you . pass before I along this passage until you reach a chamber on the right , of which the door stand open . enter , and place yourself against the wall on the side farth from the door . there I will speak with you . " 

 with the shuffle step of a woman , and the bent shoulder of the very old , the figure move slowly forward , step upon the front of the white robe , stumble , but recover . 

 the Prioress watching , laugh a short scornful laugh , hold more of anger than of merriment . 

 with an abrupt movement the figure straighten , stand at its full height , and stride forward . the Prioress mark the squaring of the broad shoulder ; the height , great than her own , though she be more than common tall ; the stride , beneath the fold of the long robe ; and she knit her level brow , for well she know with whom she have to deal . she be call to face a desperate danger . single - handed , she have to meet a subtle foe . she ask no help from other , but she take no needless risk . 

 as she pass the cell of Mary Seraphine , use her master - key , she lock that lady in ! 

 CHAPTER x 

 " I know you for a MAN " 

 enter her cell , the Prioress see at once that her order have be obey . 

 the hooded figure stand on the far side of the chamber , lean broad shoulder against the wall . under the cape , the arm be fold ; she could see that the foot be cross beneath the robe . the dress be indeed the dress of a White Lady , but the form within it be so obviously that of a man a big man , at bay , and incline to be defiant that , despite the strange situation , despite her anger , and her fear , the contrast between the holy habit and its hidden wearer , force from the Prioress an unwilling smile . 

 close the door , she draw forward a chair of dark spanish wood , the gift of the Lord Bishop ; a chair which well betoken the dignity of her high office . 

 seat herself , she lay she left hand lightly upon the mane of one of the carve lion which form , on either side , the arm of the chair ; but her right hand still grip unseen the ivory hilt ; while lean slightly forward , with foot firmly plant , she be ready at any moment to spring erect . 

 " I know you for a man , " she say . 

 the thunder rumble far away in the distance . 

 the rain still splash against the casement , but the storm have spend itself ; the sky be brighten . a pale slant of sunshine break through the parting cloud and , enter the casement , gleam on the jewelled cross at the breast of the prioress , and kindle into peculiar radiance the search light of her clear eye . 

 " I know you for a man , " she say again . " you stand there , reveal ; and surely you stand there , sham . by plot and planning , by assume our dress , you have succeed in force your undesired presence into this sacred cloister , where dwell a little company of woman who have leave the world , never to return to it again ; who have give up much in order to devote themselves to a life of continual worship and adoration , gain thereby a power in intercession which bring down blessing upon those who still fight life 's battle in the world without . 

 " but it have mean the breaking of many a tender tie . there be father and brother dear to they , whom the nun would love to see again ; but they can not do so , save , on rare occasion , in the guest - room at the gate ; and then , with the grille between . 

 " Saving Bishop or Priest , no foot of man may tread our cloister ; no voice of man may be hear in these cell . 

 " yet by trick and subterfuge you have intrude . methink I scarce should let you leave this place alive , to boast what you have do . " 

 the Prioress pause . 

 the figure stand , with fold arm , immovable , lean against the 
 wall . there be a quality in this motionless silence such as the 
 Prioress have not connect with her idea of Mary Seraphine 's " Cousin 
 Wilfred . " 
 this be not a man to threaten . her threat come back to she , as if she have fling it against a stone wall . she try another line of reasoning . 

 " I know you , Sir Wilfred , " she say . " and I know why you be here . you have come to tempt away , or mayhap , if possible , to force away one of our number who but lately take her final vow . there be a time , not long ago , when you might have thwart her desire to seek and find the good and high . but now you come too late . no bride of Heaven turn from her high estate . her choice be make . she will abide by it ; and so , Sir Knight , must you . " 

 the rain have cease . the storm be over . Sunshine flood the cell . 

 once more the prioress speak , and her voice be gentle . 

 " I know the disappointment to you must be grievous . you take great risk ; you adventure much . how long you have plot this intrusion , I know not . you have be thwart in your evil purpose by the faithfulness of one old woman , our aged lay - sister , Mary Antony , who never fail to count the White Ladies as they go and as they return , and who report at once to I that one more have return than go . 

 " do you not see in this the Hand of God ? will you not bow in penitence before he , confess the sinfulness of the thing you have in mind to do ? " 

 the shrouded head be lift higher , as if with a proud gesture of disavowal . at the same time , the hood slightly parting , the hand of a man , lean and brown , grip it close . 

 the Prioress look long at that lean , brown hand . 

 then she rise slowly to her foot . 

 " shew I thy face , " she say ; and the tension of each word be like a naked blade pass in and out of quiver flesh . 

 at sound of it the figure stand erect , take one step forward , fling back the hood , tear open the robe and scapulary , loose his arm from the wide sleeve . 

 and as the hood fall back the Prioress find herself look into a face she have not think to see again in life the face of he who once have be her lover . 

 CHAPTER XI 

 the YEARS ROLL back 

 " Hugh ! " exclaim the prioress . 

 and again , in utter bewilderment : " Hugh ? " 

 and yet a third time , in a low whisper of horror , pass she left hand across her eye , as if to clear from her outer vision some nightmare of the inner mind : " Hugh ! " 

 the silent Knight still make no answer ; but he fling aside the cling robe , step from out they , and stride forward , both arm outstretche . 

 " back ! " cry the prioress . but her hand have leave the hilt of the dagger . " come no nearer , " she command . 

 then she sink into her chair , spread her tremble hand upon the carven mane of the lion . 

 the Knight , still silent , fold his arm across his breast . 

 thus for a space they gaze on one another these two , who have part , eight year before , with cling lip and strain arm , a deep , pure passion of love surge within they ; a union of heart , make close by the wrench of outward separation . 

 the Knight look at the lip of the noble woman before he ; and as he look those firm lip quiver , tremble , part 

 then the year roll back 

           

 it be moonlight on the battlement . the horse champ in the courtyard below . they two have climb to the topmost turret , that they might part as near the star as possible , and that , unseen by other , she might watch he ride away . 

 how radiant she look , in her robe of sapphire velvet , jewel at her breast and girdle , a mantle of ermine hang from her shoulder . but brighter than any jewel be the eye full of love and tear ; and soft than soft velvet , the beautiful hair which , cover she , as with a golden veil . stand with his arm around she , it flow over his hand . silent he stand , look deep into her eye . 

 below they could hear Martin Goodfellow call to the man - at - arm . 

 her lip be free , she speak . 

 " thou wilt come back to I , Hugh , " she say . " the Saracens will not slay thee , will not wound thee , will not touch thee . my love will ever be around thee , as a silver shield . " 

 she fling her strong young arm about he , long and supple , enfold he closely , even as his enfold she . 

 he fill his hand with her soft hair , strain she close . 

 " I would I leave thee wife , not maid . could I have we d thee first , I would go with a light heart . " 

 " Wife or maid , " she answer , her face lift to his , " I be all thine own . go with a light heart , dear man of mine , for it make no difference . maid or wife , I be thine , and none other 's , forever . " 

 " let those be the last word I hear thee say , " he murmur , as his lip seek her . 

 so , a little later , stand above he on the turret step , she bent and clasp her hand about his head , push her finger into the thickness of his hair . then : " Maid or wife , " she say , and her voice now steady , be deep and tender ; " Maid or wife , God know , I be all thine own . " then she catch his face to her breast . " thine and none other 's , forever , " she say ; and he feel her bosom heave with one deep sob . 

 then turn quickly he run down the wind stair , reach the courtyard , mount , and ride out through the gate of Castle Norelle , and into the fir wood ; and so down south to follow the King , who already have start on the great crusade . 

 and , as he ride , in moonlight or in shadow , always he see the sweet lip that tremble , always he feel the soft heave of that sob , and the low voice so tender , say : " thine and none other 's , forever . " 

           

 and now 

 the Prioress sit in her chair of state . 

 each moment her face grow calm and more stern . 

 the Knight let his eye dwell on the finger which once creep so tenderly into his hair . 

 she hide they beneath her scapulary , as if his gaze scorch they . 

 he look at the bosom against which his head have be press . 

 a jewelled cross gleam , there where his face have lay hide . 

 then the Knight lift his eye again to that stern , cold face . yet still he keep silence . 

 at length the prioress speak . 

 " so it be you , " she say . 

 " yes , " say the Knight , " it be I. " 

 Wroth with her own poor heart because it thrill at his voice , the 
 Prioress speak with anger . 
 " how do you dare to force your way into this sacred cloister ? " 

 the Knight smile . " I have yet to find the thing I dare not do . " 

 " why be you not with your wife ? " demand the prioress ; and her tone be terrible . 

 " I be with my wife , " reply the Knight . " the only wife I have ever want , the only woman I shall ever we d , be here . " 

 " Coward ! " cry the prioress , white with anger . " Traitor ! " she lean forward , clench her hand upon the lion ' head . " liar ! you wed your cousin , Alfrida , less than one year after you go from I . " 

 " cease to be angry , " say the Knight . " thine anger affright I not , yet it hurt thyself . listen , mine own beloved , and I will tell thee the cruel , and yet bless , truth . 

 " seven month after I leave thee , a messenger reach our camp , bear letter from England ; no word for I from thee ; but a long missive from thy half - sister Eleanor , break to I the news that , be weary of my absence , and somewhat over - persuade , thou hadst wed Humphry ; Earl of Carnforth . 

 " it be no news to I , that Humphry seek to win thee ; but , that thou hadst let thyself be win away from thy vow to I , be hell 's own tiding . 

 " in my first rage of grief I would have speech with none . but , by - and - by , I seek the messenger , and ask he casually of thing at home . he tell I he have see thy splendid nuptial with the lord of Carnforth , have be present at the marriage , and join in the after revel and festivity . he say thou didst make a lovely bride , but somewhat sad , as if thy mind stray elsewhere . the fellow be a kind of lawyer 's clerk , but lean , and out at elbow . 

 " then I seek ' Frida , my cousin . she too have have a letter , give the news . she tell I she long have fear this thing for I , know the heart of Humphry to be set on win thee , and that Eleanor approve his suit , and have already hear that of late thou hadst inclined to smile on he . she beg I to do nothing rash or hasty . 

 " ' what good be it , ' she say , ' to beg the King for leave to hasten home ? if you kill Humphry , Hugh , you do but make a widow of the woman you have love ; nor could you we d the widow of a man yourself have slay . if Humphry kill you well , a valiant arm be lose to the Holy Cause , and other heart , more faithful than her , may come nigh to breaking . stay here , and play the man . ' 

 " so , by the messenger , I send thee back a letter , ask thee to write I word how it be that thou , be my betrothed , hadst come to do this thing ; and whether Humphry be good to thee , and make thy life pleasant . to Humphry I send a letter say that , thy love be round he as a silver shield , I would not slay he , wound he , or touch he ! but if he use thee ill , or give thee any grief or sorrow , then would I come , forthwith , and send he straight to hell . 

 " these letter , with other from the camp , go back to England by that clerkly messenger . no answer be return to mine . 

 " meanwhile I go , with my despair , out to the battlefield . 

 " no tender shield be round I any more . I fight , like a mad wild beast . so often be I wound , that they dub I ' the Knight of the Bloody Vest . ' 

 " at last they bring I back to camp , delirious and die . my cousin ' Frida , there bid her time , nurse I back to life , and seek to win for herself   I shame to say it   the love which thou hadst flout . I need not tell thee , my cousin ' Frida fail . the Queen herself as good as bid I we d her favourite Lady . the Queen herself have to discover that she could command an english soldier 's life , but not his love . 

 " back in the field again , I find myself one day , cut off , surround , hew down , take prisoner ; but by a generous foe . 

 " thereafter follow year of much adventure ; escape , far distant wandering , strange company . many month I spend in a mountain fastness with a wise Hebrew Rabbi , who teach I his sacred scripture ; go back to the beginning of all thing , before the world be ; yet shrewd in judgment of the present , and throw a weird light forward upon the future . a strange man ; wise , as be all of that choose Race ; and a faithful friend . he do much to heal my hurt and woo I back to sanity . 

 " later , more than a year with a band of holy monk in a desert monastery , high among the rock ; good father who believe in Greek and Latin as sure of all balsam for a wound spirit , and who make I to become deeply learn in apostolic writing , and in the teaching of the Church . but , for all their good endeavour , I could not feel call to the perpetual calm of the Cloister . we be a line of fighter and hunter , man to whom pride of race and love of hearth and home , be primal instinct . 

 " thus , after many further wandering and much varying adventure , have by a strange chance hear news of the death of my father , and that my mother mourn . in solitude , the opening of this year find I land in England I who , by most , have long be give up for dead ; though Martin Goodfellow , fail to find trace of I in Palestine , have go back to Cumberland , and staunchly maintain his belief that I live , a captive , and should some day make my escape , and return . 

 " I pass with all speed to our Castle on the moor , know a mother 's heart wait here , for mother never cease to watch and hope . and , sure enough , as I ride up , the great door fly wide ; the house wait its master ; the mother be on the threshold to greet her son . aye ! it be good to be at home once more even in the land where my woman be bear child to another man . 

 " we spend a few happy day , I and my mother , together . then the joy of hope fulfil be sometimes a swifter harbinger to another world than the heavy load of sorrow she pass , without pain or sickness , smile , in her sleep ; she pass leave my home desolate indeed . 

 " not have know of my betrothal to thee , because of the old feud between our family , and my reluctance to cross her wish that I should we d Alfrida , thy name be not speak between we ; but I learn from she that my cousin ' Frida lie die at her manor , nigh to Chester , of some linger disease contract in eastern land . " 

 " with the first stirring of spring in forest and pasture , I feel move to ride south to the Court , and report my return to the king ; yet wait , strangely loath to go abroad where any turn of the road might bring I face to face with Humphry . I doubt , should we meet , if I could pass , without slay he , the man who have steal my betroth from I . so I stay in my own domain , bring thing into order , work in the armoury , and strive by hard exercise to throttle the grim demon of despair . 

 " April bring a burst of early summer ; and , on the first day of May , I set off for Windsor . 

 " pass through carnforth on my way , I find the town keep high holiday . I ask the reason , and be tell of a Tourney now in progress in the neighbourhood , to which the Earl have that morning ride in state , accompany by his Countess , who indeed be choose Queen of Beauty , and be to sit enthrone , attend by her little daughter , two tiny son act as page . 

 " a sudden mad desire come on I , to look upon thy face again ; to see thee with the man who steal thee from I ; with the child , who should have be mine own . 

 " ten minute later , I ride on to the field . push in amid the gay crowd , I seem almost at once to find myself right in front of the throne . 

 " I see the Queen of Beauty , in cloth of gold . I see the little maiden and the page in attendance . I see Humphry , proud husband and father , beside they . all this I see , which I have come to see . but the face of Humphry 's Countess be not thy face ! in that moment I know that , for seven long year , I have be fool ! 

 " I start on a frenzied quest after the truth , and news of thee . 

 " Thy sister Eleanor have die the year before . to thy beautiful castle and land , so near mine own , Eleanor 's son have succeed , and rule there in thy stead . he be at Court just then , I see he not , nor could I hear direct news of thee , though rumour say a convent . 

 " then I remember my cousin , Alfrida , lie sick at her manor in Chester . to she I go ; and , walk in unannounced I , whom she have long think dead I force the truth from she . the whole plot stand reveal . she and Eleanor have hatch it between they . eleanor desire thy land for herself and her boy , and know child of thine would put hers out of succession ; Alfrida it sham I to say it desire for herself , thy lover . 

 " the messenger who bring the letter be bribe to give detail of thy suppose marriage . on his return to England , my letter to thee and to Humphry he hand to Eleanor ; also a lie letter from ' Frida , tell of her marriage with I , with the Queen 's consent and approval , and ask Eleanor to break the news to thee . the messenger then mingle with thy household , describe my nuptial in detail , as , when abroad , he have do thine . hearing of this , my poor Love do even as I have do , send for he , question he , hear the full tale he have to tell , and see , alas ! no reason to misdoubt he . 

 " by the way , my cousin ' Frida know where to lay her hand upon that clerkly fellow . therefore we send for he . he come in haste to see the Lady Alfrida , from whom , during all the year , he have extort endless hush - money . 

 " I and my man await he . 

 " he have fatten on his hush - money ! he be no long lean and out at elbow . 

 " he screech at sight of I , think I rise from the dead . 

 " he screech still louder when he see the noose , fling over a strong bough . 

 " we leave he hang , when we ride away . that Judas kind will do the darkest deed for greed of gain . the first of the tribe himself shew the way by which it be most fitting to speed they from a world into which it have be good for they never to have be bear . 

 " from Alfrida I learn that , as Eleanor have foresee , thy grief at my perfidy drive thee to the Cloister . also that thy Convent be near Worcester . 

 " to Worcester I come , and make myself known to the Lord Bishop , with whom I sup ; and find he most pleasant to talk with , and ready to understand , deem it well , in perfect frankness , to tell he the whole matter ; be careful not to mention thy name , nor to give any clue to thy person . 

 " through chance remark let fall by the Bishop while give I the history of the order , I learn that already thou wert Prioress of the White Ladies . ' the young prioress in the kingdom , ' say the Bishop , ' yet none could be wise or well fit to hold high authority . ' little do he dream that any mention of thee be as water to the parch desert ; yet he talk on , for love of speak of thee , while I sit pray he might tell I more ; yet barely answer yea or nay , seem to be absorb in mine own melancholy thought . 

 " from the Bishop I learn that the order be a strictly close one , and that no man could , on any pretext whatsoever , gain speech alone with one of the White Ladies . 

 " but I also hear of the underground way lead from the Cathedral to the Convent , and of the daily walk to and from vesper . 

 " I go to the crypt , and see the doorway through which the White Ladies pass . stand unseen amid the many pillar , I daily watch the long line of silent figure , note that they all walk veil , with face hide , keep a measured distance apart . also that several be above usual height . then I conceive the plan of wear the outer dress , and of step in amongst those veil figure just at the foot of the wind stair in the wall , lead down from the clerestory to the crypt . I mark that the nun descending , could not keep in view the nun in front who have just step forth into the crypt ; while she , move forward , would not perceive it if , slip from behind a pillar , another white figure silently join the procession behind she . once within the Convent , I trust to our Lady to help I to speech alone with thee ; and our blessed Lady hath not fail I . 

 " now I have tell thee all . " 

 with that the Knight leave speak ; and , after the long steady recitation , the ceasing of his voice cause a silence which , seem , to hold the very air suspend . 

 not once have the Prioress make interruption . she have sit immovable , her eye upon his face , her hand grip the arm of her chair . long before the tale be finish her sad eye have overflow , the tear rain down her cheek , and fall upon the cross at her breast . 

 when he have tell all , when the deep , manly voice now resolute , now eager , now vibrant with fierce indignation , yet tender always when speak of she at last fall silent , the prioress fight with her emotion , and master it ; then , so soon as she could safely trust her voice , she speak . 

 CHAPTER XII 

 ALAS , the pity of it ! 

 at length the prioress speak . 

 " alas , " she say , " the pity of it ! ah , the cruel , cruel pity of it ! " 

 her voice , so sweet and tender , yet so hopeless in the unquestione finality of its regret , strike cold upon the heart of the Knight . 

 " but , my beloved , I have find thee , " he say , and drop upon one knee at her foot , he put out his hand to cover both her . but the Prioress be too quick for he . she hide her hand beneath her scapulary . the Knight 's brown finger close on the lion ' head . 

 " touch I not , " say the Prioress . 

 the Knight flush , darkly . 

 " you be mine , " he say . " mine to have and to keep . during these wretched year we have school ourselves each to think of the other as wed . now we know that neither have be faithless . I have find thee , my beloved , and I will not let thee go . " 

 " Hugh , " say the prioress , " I be wed . you come too late . see you not the sacred ring upon my hand ? know you not that every nun be the bride of Christ ? " 

 " you be mine ! " say the Knight , fiercely ; and he lay his great hand upon her knee . 

 from beneath her scapulary , the Prioress draw the dagger . 

 " before I go to the cloister door , " she say , " I take this from its hiding - place , and put it in my girdle . I guess I have a man to deal with ; though , Heaven know , I dream not it be thou ! but I tell thee , Hugh , if thou , or any man , attempt to lay defiling touch upon any nun in this Priory myself , or another I strike , and I strike home . this blade will be drive up to the hilt in the offender 's heart . " 

 the Knight rise to his foot , step to the window and lean , with fold arm , against the wall . 

 " put back thy weapon , " he say , sternly , " into its hiding - place . no other man be here ; yet , should another come , my sword would well suffice to guard thine honour , and the honour of thy nun . " 

 she look at his dark face , scornful in its pain ; then go at once , obedient , to the secret panel . 

 " yes , Hugh , " she say . " that much of trust indeed I owe thy love . " 

 as she place the dagger in the wall and close the panel , something fall from she , intangible , yet real . 

 for so long , she have have to command . bow , kneeling , hurry woman fly to do her behest . each vie with the other to magnify her office . often , she feel lonely by reason of her dignity . 

 and now a man 's dark face frown on she in scornful anger ; a man 's stern voice fling back her elaborate threat with a short command , which disarm she , yet which she obey . moreover , she find it strangely sweet to obey . behind the sternness , behind the scornful anger , there throb a great love . in that love she trust ; but with that love she have to deal , put it from she with a finality which should be beyond question . 

 yet the " prioress " fall from she , as she close the panel . it be the 
 Woman and the Saint who move over to the window and stand beside the 
 Knight , in the radiance of a golden sunset after storm . 
 there be about she , as she speak , a wistful humbleness ; and a patient sadness , infinitely touching . 

 " Sir Hugh , " she say , " my dear Knight , whom I ever find brave and tender , and whom I now know to have be always loyal and true there be no need that I should add a word to your recital . the fact you wring from Alfrida God grant forgiveness to that torment heart be all true . believe the messenger , not dream of doubt Eleanor , my one thought be to hide from the world my broken heart , my shattered pride . I hasten to offer to God the love and the life which have be slight by man . I confess this have since seem to I but a poor second - good to have bring to he , who indeed should have our very good . but , daily kneeling at his foot , I say : ' a broken and a contrite heart , Lord , Thou wilt not despise . ' my heart be ' break , ' when I bring it here . it have be ' contrite ' since . and well I know , although so far from worthy , it have not be despise . " 

 she lift her eye to the golden glory behind the battlement of purple cloud . 

 " our blessed Lady intercede , " she say , simply ; ' she , who understand a woman 's heart . " 

 the Knight be breathe hard . the fold arm rise and fall , with the heaving of his chest . but he keep his lip firm shut ; though pray , all the while , that our Lady might have , also , some understanding of the heart of a man ! 

 " I think it right that you should know , dear Hugh , " go on the sad voice , gently ; " that , at first , I suffer greatly . I spend long agonizing night , kneel before our Lady 's shrine , implore strength to conquer the love and the longing which have become sin . " 

 a stifle groan break from the Knight . 

 the golden light shine in her steadfast eye , and play about her noble brow . 

 " and strength be give , " she say , very low . 

 " Mora ! " cry the Knight she start . it be so long since she have hear her own name " you pray for strength to conquer , when you think it sin ; just as I ride out to meet the foe , to fight and slay , and afterward wrestle with unknown tongue , do all those thing which be hard , while strive to quench my love for you . but when I know that no other man have right to you or ever have have right , why then I find that nothing have slay my love , nor ever could . and Mora , now you know that I be free , be your love dead ? " 

 she clasp her hand over the cross at her breast . his voice hold a deep passion of appeal ; yet he strove , loyally , to keep it calm . 

 " listen , Hugh , " she say . " if , think I faithless , you have turn for consolation to another ; if , though you bring she but your second well , you yet have win and we d she ; now , find after all that I have not wed Humphry , would you leave your bride , and try to wake again your love for I ? " 

 " you seek to place I , " he say , " in strait in which , by mine own act , I shall never be . love you as I love you , I could we d no other while you live . " 

 she pal , but persist . 

 " but , if , Hugh ? if ? " 

 " then , no , " he say . " I should not leave one I have we d. but " 

 " Hugh , " she say , " think you faithless , I take the holy vow which wed I to Heaven . how can I leave my heavenly Bridegroom , for love of any man upon this earth ? " 

 " not ' any man , ' " he answer ; " but your betrothed , return to claim you ; the man to whom you say as part word : ' maid or wife , I be all thine own ; thine and none other be forever . ' ah , that bring the warm blood to thy cheek ! oh , my heart 's life , if it be true then , it be true still ! God be not a man that he should lie , or rob another of his bride . if I have we d another woman , I should have do that thing , honestly believe thee the wife of another man . but , all these year , while thou and I be both deceive , he , who knoweth all , have know the truth . he know thee betroth to I . he hear thee say , upon the battlement , when last we stand together : ' God know , I be all thine own . ' he know how , when I think I have lose thee , I yet live faithful to the pure memory of our love . the day thy vow be make , he know that I be free , and thou , therefore , still pledge to I . shall a man rob God ? ay , he may . but shall God rob a man ? Nay , then , never ! " 

 she tremble , waver ; then flee to the shrine of the Virgin , kneel with hand outstretche . 

 " Holy Mother of God , " she sob , " teach he that I dare not do this thing ! shew he that I can not break my vow . help he to understand that I would not , if I could . " 

 he follow , and kneel beside she ; his proud head bent ; his voice break with emotion . 

 " Blessed Virgin , " he say . " Thou who didst dwell in the earthly home at Nazareth , help this woman of mine to understand , that if she break she troth to I , hold herself from I , now when I be come to claim she , she send I forth to an empty life , to a hearth beside which no woman will sit , to a home forever desolate . " 

 together they knelt , before the tender image of Mother and Child ; together , yet apart ; he , loyally mindful not so much as to brush against a fold of her veil . 

 the dark face , and the fair , be lift , side by side , as they kneel before the Madonna . for a while so motionless they kneel , they might have be finely - model figure ; he , bronze ; she , marble . 

 then , with a sudden movement , she put out her right hand , and catch his left . 

 firmly his finger close over her ; but he draw no nearer . 

 yet as they kneel thus with clasped hand , his pulsing life seem to flow through she , undo , in one wild , sweet moment , the work of year of fast and vigil . 

 " ah , Hugh , " she cry , suddenly , ' spare I ! spare I ! tempt I not ! " 

 loose her hand from his , she clasp both upon her breast . 

 the Knight rise , and stand beside she . 

 " Mora , " he say , and his voice hold a new tone , a tone of sadness and solemnity ; " far be it from I to tempt you . I will plead with you but once again , in presence of our Lady and of the Holy Child ; and , have so do , I will say no more . 

 " I ask you to leave this place , which you would never have enter have you know your lover be your , and need you . I ask you to keep your plighted word to I , and to become my wife . if you refuse , I go , return not again . I leave you here , to kneel in peace , by night or day , before the shrine of the Madonna . but I bid you to remember , day and night , that because of this which you have do , there can be no Madonna in my home . no woman will ever sit beside my hearth , hold a little child upon her knee . 

 " you leave to I the crucifix heart break , love betray ; foot and hand nail to the wood of cruel circumstance ; side pierce by spear of treachery lonely , forsaken . but you take from I all the good , both in life and in religion ; all that tell of love , of joy , of hope for the year to come . 

 " oh , my beloved , weigh it well ! there be so many , with a true vocation , serve Heaven in Convent and in Cloister . there be but one woman in the whole world for I . in the sight of Heaven , nothing divide we . convent wall now stand between but they be build by man , not God . vow of celibacy be not mean to sunder love heart . Mora ? . . . come ! " 

 the Prioress rise and face he . 

 " I can not come , " she say . " that which I have teach to other , I must myself perform . Hugh , I be dead to the world ; and if I be dead to the world , how can I live to you ? have I , in very deed , die and be entomb , you would not have go down into the vault and force my resting - place , that you might look upon my face , clasp my cold hand , and pour into deaf ear a tale of love . yet that be what , by trick and artifice , you now have do . you come to a dead woman , say ; ' love I , and be my wife . ' she must , perforce , make answer : ' how shall I , who be dead to the world , live any long therein ? ' take a wife from among the Living , Hugh . come not to seek a bride among the Dead . " 

 " Mother of God ! " exclaim the Knight , " be this religion ? " 

 he turn to the window , then to the door . " how can I go from here ? " 

 the stifle horror in his voice chill the very soul of the woman to whom he speak . she have , indeed at last make he to understand . 

 " I must get you hence unseen , " she say . " I dare not pass you out by the Convent gate . I fear I , you must go back the way you come ; nor can you go alone . we hold the key to unlock the door lead from our passage into the Cathedral crypt . I will now send all the nun to the Refectory . then I myself must take you to the crypt . " 

 " can I not walk alone , " ask the Knight , brusquely ; " return you the key by messenger ? " 

 " Nay , " say the prioress , " I dare run no risk . so quickly rumour be afloat . to - morrow , this strange hour must be a dream ; and you and I alone , the dreamer . now , while I go and make safe the way , put you on again the robe and hood . when I return and beckon , follow silently . " 

 the Prioress pass out , close the door behind she . 

 CHAPTER XIII 

 " SEND she to I ! " 

 the Prioress stand for a moment outside the closed door . the peaceful silence of the passage help she to the outward calm which must be her before she could bring herself to face her nun . 

 move slowly to the farth end , she unlock the cell of Sister Mary Seraphine , feel a sham humility that she should have make so sure she have to deal with " Wilfred , " and have think such scorn of he and Seraphine . alas ! the wrong deed of those they love , oft humble the pure , noble spirit into the soil dust . 

 next , the Prioress herself rang the Refectory bell . 

 the hour for the evening meal be long pass ; the nun hasten out , readily . 

 as they troop toward the stair lead down to the Refectory , they see their prioress , very pale , very erect , stand with she back to the door of her chamber . 

 each nun make a genuflexion as she pass ; and to each , the Prioress slightly incline her head . 

 to Sister Mary Rebecca , who kneel at once , she speak : " I come not to the meal this evening . in the absence of Mother Sub - Prioress , you will take my place . " 

 " yes , Reverend Mother , " say Sister Mary Rebecca , meekly , and kiss the hem of the robe of the prioress ; then rise , hasten on , charm to have a position of authority , however temporary . 

 when all have pass , the Prioress go into the cloister , walk round they ; look over into the garden , observe every possible place from which pry eye might have sight of the way from the passage to the crypt entrance . but the garden , already full of purple shadow , be leave to the circling swift . the robin sing an evening song from the bough , of the pieman 's tree . 

 the Prioress return along the passage , look into every cell . each door stand open wide ; each cell be empty . the sick nun be on a further passage , round the corner , beyond the refectory stair . yet she pass along this also , make sure that the door of each occupy cell be shut . 

 stand motionless at the top of the refectory step , she could hear the distant clatter of platter , the shuffle foot of the lay - sister as they carry the dish to and from the kitchen ; and , above it all , the monotonous voice of Sister Mary Rebecca read aloud to the nun while they sup . 

 then the Prioress take down one of the crypt lantern and light it . 

           

 meanwhile the Knight , leave alone , stand for a few moment , as if stun . 

 he have play for a big stake and lose ; yet he feel more unnerved by the unexpected finality of his own acquiescence in defeat , than by the firm refusal which have bring that defeat about . 

 it seem to he , as he now stand alone , that suddenly he have realise the extraordinary detachment work by year of cloistered life . Aflame with love and longing he have come , seek the living among the Dead . it would have be less bitter to have kneel beside her tomb , know the heart forever still have , to the last , beat true with love for he ; know the dead arm , lie cold and stiff , have he come soon , would have be fling around he ; know the lip , now silent in death , living , would have call to he in tender greeting . 

 but this cold travesty of the radiant woman he have leave , say : " touch I not , " and bid he seek a wife elsewhere ; he , who have remain faithful to she , even when he have think her faithless . 

 and yet , cold though she be , in her saintly aloofness , she be still the woman he love . moreover she still have the noble carriage , the rich womanly beauty , the look of vital , physical vigour , which mark she out as mean by Nature to be the mother of brave son and fair daughter . yet he must leave she to this ! 

 he look round the room , note the low archway lead to the sleep chamber , take a step toward it , then fall back as from a sanctuary ; mark the great table , cover with missal , parchment , and vellum . it might well have be the cell of a learn monk , rather than the chamber of the woman he love . his eye , travel round , fall upon the Madonna and Child . 

 in the pure evening light there be a strangely arrest quality about the marble group ; something infinitely human in the brood tenderness of the Mother , as she bend over the smile Babe . it speak of home , rather than of the cloister . it strike a chord in the heart of the Knight , a chord which ring clear and true , above the jangle of disputation and bitterness . 

 he put out his hand and touch the little foot of the Holy Babe . 

 " Mother of God , " he say aloud , ' send she to I ! take pity on a hungry heart , a lonely home , a desolate hearth . send she to I ! " 

 then he lift from the floor the white robe and hood , and draw they on . 

 CHAPTER XIV 

 farewell here , and now 

 when the prioress , a lighted lantern in her hand , open the door of her chamber , a tall figure in the dress of the White Ladies of Worcester stand motionless against the wall , face the door . 

 " come ! " she whisper , beckoning ; and , noiselessly , it stand beside she . then she close the door and , use her master - key , lock it behind she . 

 silently the two white figure pass along the passage , through the cloister , and down the flight of step into the Convent crypt . the Prioress unlock the door and stoop they pass under the arch , and enter the subterranean way . 

 place the lantern on the ground , the Prioress draw out the key , close the door , and lock it on the inside . 

 she turn , and lift the lantern , see that the Knight have rid himself of his disguise , and now stand before she , very straight and tall , just within the circle of light cast by her lantern . 

 with the closing and locking of the door a strange sense come over they , as of stand together in a third world neither his nor her tomblike in its complete isolation and darkness ; heavy with a smell of earth and damp stone ; the slight sound reverberate in hollow exaggeration ; yet , in itself , silent as the grave . 

 this tomblike quality in their surrounding seem to make their own vitality strong and more palpitating . 

 the second of silence , after the grating of the key in the lock cease , seem hour . 

 then the Knight speak . 

 " give I the lantern , " he say . 

 she meet his eye . again the dignity of her Office slip from she . 
 again it be sweet to obey . 
 he hold the lantern so that its light illumine her face and his . 

 " Mora , " he say , " it be long since thou and I last walk together over the sunny field , amid buttercup and cowslip , and the sweet - smell clover . to - night we walk beneath the field instead of through they . we be under the grass , my sweet . I seem to stand beside thee in the grave . and truly my hope lie slain ; the promise of our love be dead , and shall soon be bury . yet thou and I still live , and now must walk together side by side , the sad ghost of our former self . 

 " so now I ask thee , Mora , for the sake of those past walk among the flower , to lay thy hand within my arm and walk with I in gentle fellowship , here in this place of gloom and darkness , as , long ago , we walk among the flower . " 

 his dark eye search her face . an almost youthful eagerness vibrate in his voice . 

 she hesitate , lift her eye to his . then slowly move toward he and lay her hand within his arm . 

 then , side by side , they pace on through the darkness ; he , in his right hand , hold the lantern , swing low , to light their foot ; she , lean on his left arm , keep slow pace with he . 

 over their head , in the meadow , walk lover , arm in arm ; young man and maiden out in the gathering twilight . all nature , refresh , pour forth a fragrant sweetness . but the rose , with its dewy petal , seem to the youth less sweet than the lip of the maid . this , he shyly venture to tell she ; whereupon , as she bend to its fragrance , her cheek reflect the crimson of those delicate fold . 

 so walk and talk young lover in the Worcester meadow ; little dream that , beneath their happy foot , the Knight and the prioress pace slowly , side by side , through the darkness . 

 no word pass between they . with , her hand upon his arm , her face so near his shoulder , his arm press her hand close and close against his heart , silence say more than speech . and in silence they walk . 

 they pass beneath the city wall , under the Foregate . 

 the Sheriff ride home to supper , well pleased with a stroke of business accomplish in a house in which he have chance to shelter during the storm . 

 the good people of Worcester buy and sell in the market . man whose day 's work be over , hasten to reach the rest and comfort of wife and home . crowd jostle gaily through the street , little dream that beneath their hurrying , busy foot , the Knight and the prioress pace slowly , side by side , through the darkness . 

 have the Knight speak , her mind would have be up in arm to resist he . but , because he walk in silence , her heart have leisure to remember ; and , remembering , it grow sorely tender . 

 at length they reach the doorway lead into the Cathedral crypt . 

 the Prioress carry the key in her left hand . free she right from the grip of his arm , she slip the key noiselessly into the lock ; but , leave it there unturned , she pause , and face the Knight . 

 " Hugh , " she say , " I beg you , for my sake and for the sake of all whose fair fame be under my care , to pass through quickly into the crypt , and to go from thence , if possible , unseen , or in such manner as shall prevent any suspicion that you come from out this hide way . tale of wrong be tell so readily , and so quickly grow . " 

 " I will observe the utmost caution , " say the Knight . 

 " Hugh , " she say , " I grieve to have have , perforce , to disappoint you . " the brave voice shake . " this be our final farewell . do you forgive I , Hugh ? will you think kindly , if you ever think on I ? " 

 the Knight hold the lantern so that its ray illumine both her face and his . 

 " Mora , " he say , " I can not as yet take thine answer as final . I will return no more , nor try to speak with thee again . but five day long , I shall wait . I shall have plan make with the utmost care , to bear thee , in safety and unseen , from the Cathedral . I know the door be watch , and that all who pass in and out be note and observe . but , if thou wilt but come to I , beloved , trust I to know how to guard mine own . . . . Nay , speak not ! hear I out . 

 " Daily , after vesper , I shall stand hide among the pillar , close to the wind stair . one step aside only one step and my arm will be around thee . a new life of love and home will lie before we . I shall take thee , safely conceal , to the hostel where I and my man now lodge . there , horse will stand ready , and we shall ride at once to Warwick . at Warwick we shall find a priest one in high favour , both in Church and State who know all , and be prepared to we d we without delay . after which , by easy stage , my wife , I shall take thee home . " 

 he swing the lantern high . she see the lovelight and the triumph , in his eye . " I shall take thee home ! " he say . 

 she step back a pace , lift both hand toward he , palm outward , and stand thus gaze , with eye full of sorrow . 

 " my poor Hugh , " she whisper ; " it be useless to wait . I shall not come . " 

 " yet five day , " say the Knight , " I shall tarry in Worcester . each day , after vesper , I shall be here . " 

 " go to - day , dear Hugh . ride to Warwick and tell thy priest , that which indeed he should know without the telling : that a nun do not break her vow . this be our final farewell , Hugh . Thou hadst well believe it , and go . " 

 " our last farewell ? " he say . 

 " our last . " 

 " here and now ? " 

 " here and now , dear Hugh . " 

 look into that calm face , so lovely in its sadness , he see that she mean it . 

 of a sudden he know he have lose she ; he know life 's way stretch lonely before he , evermore . 

 " yes , " he say , " yes . it be indeed farewell here and now forever . " 

 the dull despair in the voice which , but a few moment before , have vibrate with love and hope , wring her heart . 

 she still hold her hand before she , as if to ward he off . 

 " ah , Hugh , " she cry , sharply , " be merciful , and go ! spare I , and go quickly . " 

 the Knight hear in her voice a tone it have not hitherto hold . but he love she loyally ; therefore he keep his own anguish under strong control . 

 place the lantern on the ground , he kneel on one knee before she . 

 " Farewell , my love , " he say . " our Lady comfort thee ; and may Heaven forgive I , for that I have disturb thy peace . " 

 with which he lift the hem of her robe , and press his lip upon it . 

 thus he kneel , for a space , his dark head bent . 

 slowly , slowly , the Prioress let drop her hand until , lightly as the fall of autumn leaf , sad autumn leaf they rest upon his head , in blessing and farewell . 

 but feel his hair beneath her hand , she could not keep from softly smooth it , nor from pass her finger gently in and out of its crisp thickness . 

 then her heart stand still , for of a sudden , in the silence , she hear a shudder sob . 

 with a cry , she bend and gather he to she , hold his head first against her knee , then stoop lower to clasp it to her breast ; then as his strong arm be fling around she , she loose his head , and , as he rise to his foot , slip her arm about his neck , and surrender to his embrace . 

 his lip seek her , and at once she yield they . his strong hand hold she , and she , feel the force of their constraint , do but clasp he close . 

 long they stand thus . in that embrace a life - time of pain pass from they , a life - time of bliss be bear , and come with a rush to maturity , bring with it a sense of utter completeness . a world of sweetest trust and certainty fill they ; a joy so perfect , that the lonely vista of future year seem , in that moment , to matter not at all . 

 all about they be darkness , silence as of the tomb ; the heavy smell of earth ; the dank chill of the grave . 

 yet theirs be life more abundant ; theirs , joy undreame of ; theirs , love beyond all imagining , while those moment last . 

 then 

 the hand about his neck loosened , unclasped , fall gently away . 

 he set free her lip , and they take their liberty . 

 he unlock his arm , and step back she stand erect , like a fair white lily , need no prop nor stay . 

 so they stand for a space , look upon one another in silence . this thing which have happen , be too wonderful for speech . 

 then the Prioress turn the key in the lock . 

 the heavy door swing open . 

 a dim , grey light , like a pearly dawn at sea , come downwards from the crypt . 

 without a word the Knight , bend his head , pass under the archway , mount the step , and be lose to view among the many pillar . 

 she close the door , lock it , and withdraw the key , stand alone where they have stand together . 

 then , sink to the ground , she lay her face in the dust , there where his foot have be . 

 it be farewell , here and now ; farewell forever . 

           

 after a while the prioress rise , take up the lantern , and start upon her lonely journey , back to the cloister door . 

 CHAPTER XV 

 " SHARPEN the wit of MARY ANTONY " 

 when the prioress start upon her pilgrimage to the Cathedral with the Knight , she lock the door of her chamber , know that thus her absence would remain undiscovered ; for if any , knock on the door , receive no answer , or try it , find it fast , they would hasten away without question ; conclude that some special hour of devotion or time of study demand that the Reverend Mother should be free from intrusion . 

 the atmosphere of the empty cell , charge during the past hour with such unaccustomed force of conflict and of passion , settle into the quietude of an unbroken stillness . 

 the Madonna smile serenely upon the Holy Babe . the dead Christ , with bow head , hang forlorn upon the wooden cross . the ponderous volume in black and silver binding , lie undisturbed upon the table ; and the Bishop 's chair stand empty , with that obtrusive emptiness which , in an empty seat , seem to suggest an unseen presence fill it . the silence be complete . 

 but presently a queer shuffle sound begin in the inner cell , as of something stiff and torpid compelling itself to action . 

 then a weird figure , the wizen face distort by grief and terror , appear in the doorway old Mary Antony , hold a meat chopper in her shake hand , and star , with chatter gum , into the empty cell . 

 that faithful soul , although dismiss , have resolve that the adore Reverend Mother should not go forth to meet danger ghostly or corporeal alone and unprotected . 

 Hastening to the kitchen , she have give instruction that the evening meal be not to be serve until the Reverend Mother herself should sound the bell . 

 then , catch up a meat chopper , as be the most murderous - looking weapon at hand , and the most likely to strike terror into the ghostly heart of Sister Agatha , old Antony have hasten back to the passage . 

 creep up the stair , hug the wall , she have reach the top just in time to see , in the dim distance , the two tall white figure confront one another . 

 cling to her chopper , motionless with horror , she have watch they , until they begin , to come toward she , move in the direction of the Reverend Mother 's cell . they be still thirty yard away , at the cloister end of the passage . Old Antony be close to the open door . 

 through it she have scurry , unheard , unseen , a terrified black shadow ; yet brave withal ; for with she go the meat chopper . also she might have turn and flee back down the stair , rather than into the very place whither she know the Reverend Mother be conduct this tall spectre of the long dead Sister Agatha , grow to most alarming proportion during her fifty year ' entombment ! but be brave and faithful old Antony have speed into the inner cell , and crouch there in a corner ; ready to call for help or strike with her chopper , should need arise . 

 thus it come to pass that this old weaver of romance have perforce become a listener to a true romance so thrilling , so soul - stirring , that she have have to thrust the end of the wooden handle of the chopper into her mouth , lest she should applaud the noble Knight , cry counsel in his extremity , or invoke blessing on his enterprise . at each mention of the Ladies Eleanor and Alfrida , she shake her fist , and make sign with her old finger , as of throttling , in the air . and when the clerkly messenger , arrive to speak with the Lady Alfrida who , Saint Luke be praise , be by that time die find the Knight await he with a noose fling over a strong bough , old Antony have lay down the chopper that she might the well hug herself with silent glee ; and when the Knight ride away and leave he hang , she have whisper " Pieman ! Pieman ! " then clap her hand over her mouth , rock to and fro with merriment . when the Knight make mention that they call he " Knight of the Bloody Vest , " old Antony have start ; then have shake her finger toward the entrance , as she be use to shake it at the robin , and have open her wallet to search for crumb of cheese . but soon again the story hold she and , oblivious of the present , she have be back in the realm of romance . 

 not until the Knight cease speaking and the Reverend Mother 's sad voice fall upon her ear , have old Antony realise the true bearing of the tale . thereafter her heart have be tear by grief and terror . when they kneel together , before the Madonna , with uplifted face , Mary Antony have crawl forward and peep . she have see they kneel a noble pair have see the prioress catch at his hand and clasp it ; then , crawl back have fall prostrate , overwhelmed , a huddle heap upon the floor . 

 the ringing of the Refectory bell have rouse she from her stupor in time to hear the impassioned appeal of the Knight , as he kneel alone before the Virgin 's shrine . 

 then , the Knight and the prioress both be go , Mary Antony have arise , lift she chopper with hand that tremble , and now stand with distraught mien , survey the empty cell . 

 at length it dawn upon she that she and her weapon be lock into the Reverend Mother 's cell ; she , who have be most explicitly bid to go to the kitchen and to remain there . it have be a sense of the enormity of her offence in have disobey the Reverend Mother 's order which , unconsciously , have cause she to stifle all ejaculation and move without noise , lest she should be discover . 

 yet now her first care be not for her own predicament , but for the two noble heart , of whose tragic grief she have secretly be a witness . 

 her eye fall on the Madonna , calmly smile . 

 she totter forward , kneel where the Prioress have kneel . 

 " Holy Mother of God , " she whisper , " teach he that she can not do this thing ! " 

 then , move along on her knee to where the Knight have kneel : " Blessed Virgin ! " she cry , ' shew she that she can not leave he desolate ! " 

 then shuffle back to the centre , and kneeling between the two place : 
 " Sweetest Lady , " she say , " be pleased to sharpen the old wit of Mary 
 Antony . " 
 look furtively at the Madonna , she see that our Lady smile . the blessed infant , also , look merry . Mary Antony chuckle , and take heart . when the Reverend Mother smile , she always know herself forgive . 

 moreover , without delay , her request be grant ; for scarcely have she arise from her knee , when she remember the place where the Reverend Mother keep the key of her cell ; and she , have lock the door , on leave , with her own master - key , the other be quickly in old Antony 's hand , and she out once more in the passage , lock the door behind she ; sure of be able to restore the key to its place , before it should be miss by the Reverend Mother . 

 Sister Mary Antony slip unseen past the refectory and into the kitchen . once there , she fuss and scold and make her presence feel , imply that she have be wait , a good hour go , for the thing for which she have but that moment ask . 

 the young lay - sister might make no retort ; but Sister Mary Martha presently ask : " what have you be do since vesper , Sister Antony ? " 

 by aid of the wit our Lady have sharpen , old Antony , at that moment , realise that sometimes , when you need must deceive , there be nothing so deceptive as the actual truth . 

 " listen to a wondrous romantic tale , " she make answer , " tell by the 
 Knight of the Bloody Vest . " 
 " you verily be foolish about that robin , Sister Antony , " remark Mary Martha ; " and you will take your death of cold , sit out in the garden in the damp , after sunset . " 

 " well so long as I take only that which be mine own , other have no cause to grumble , " snap Mary Antony , and turn her mind upon the making of a savoury broth , favour by the Reverend Mother . 

 and all the while the Devil be whisper in the old woman 's ear : " she will not return . . . . make thy broth , fool ; but she will not be here to drink it . . . . the World and the Flesh have call ; the Reverend Mother will not come back . . . . stir the broth well , but flavour it to thine own taste . thou wilt sup on it thyself this night . when the World and the Flesh call loudly enough , the good of woman go to the Devil . " 

 " liar ! " say Mary Antony , brandish her wooden spoon . " get thee behind I nay , rather , get thee in front of I ! I have have thee skulk behind I long enough . also in front of I , just now , be into the fire , thou wilt feel at home , Master Devil ! only , put not thy tail into the Reverend Mother 's broth . " 

 when the White Ladies pass up from the Refectory , Mary Antony chance to be polish the panelling around the picture of Saint Mary Magdalen , beside the door of the Reverend Mother 's cell . 

 presently Sister Mary Rebecca , arrive , lift her hand to knock . 

 " stay ! " whisper Mary Antony . " the Reverend Mother may not be disturb . " 

 Sister Mary Rebecca veil her scowl with a smile . 

 " and wherefore not , good Sister Antony ? " 

 " ' wherefore not ' be not my business , " retort old Antony , as rudely as she know how . " it may be for special study ; it may be for an hour of extra devotion ; it may be only the very natural desire for a little respite from the sight of two such ugly face as your and mine . but , be the reason what it may , Reverend Mother have lock her door , and see nobody this even . " after which old Antony proceed to polish the outside of the Reverend Mother 's door panel . 

 Sister Mary Rebecca lift her knuckle to rap ; but old Antony 's not over clean clout be push each time between Sister Mary Rebecca 's tap , and the woodwork . 

 mutter concern the report she would make to the Prioress in the morning , Sister Mary Rebecca go to her cell . 

 when all be quiet , when every door be close , the old lay - sister creep into the cloister and , crouch in an archway just beyond the flight of step lead to the underground way , watch and wait . 

 storm cloud be gather again , black on a purple sky . the after - glow in the west have fade . it be dark in the cloister . thunder growl in the distance ; an owl hoot in the Pieman 's tree . 

 Mary Antony 's old bone ache sorely , and her heart fail she . she have sit so long in cramped position , and she have not taste food since the mid - day meal . 

 the Devil draw near , as he be will not to do , when those who have fast long , seek to keep vigil . 

 " the Reverend Mother will not return , " he whisper . " what wait you for ? " 

 " be off ! " say Mary Antony . " I be too old to be keep company , even with thee . also Sister Mary Rebecca await thee in her cell . " 

 " the Reverend Mother ever walk with her head among the star , " sneer the Devil . " why do the high fall the low , when temptation come ? " 

 " ask that of Mother Sub - Prioress , " say Mary Antony , " next time she bid thee to supper . " 

 then she clasp her old hand upon her breast ; for , very softly , in the lock below , a key turn . 

 step , feel rather than hear , pass up into the cloister . 

 then , in the dim light , the tall figure of the prioress move noiselessly over the flagstone , pass through the open door and up the deserted passage . 

 peer eagerly forward , the old lay - sister see the Prioress pause outside the door of her chamber , lift her master - key , unlock the door , and pass within . 

 as the faint sound of the closing of the door reach her strain ear , old Mary Antony begin to sob , helplessly . 

 CHAPTER XVI 

 the echo of wild voices 

 when the prioress enter her cell , she stand for a moment bewilder by the rapid walk in the darkness . she could hardly realise that the long strain be over ; that she have safely regain her chamber . 

 all be as she have leave it . apparently she have not be miss , and have return unobserved . Hugh be by now safely in the hostel at Worcester . none need ever know that he have be here . 

 none need ever know yet , alas , it be that knowledge which hold the 
 Prioress root to the spot on which she stand , gaze round her cell . 
 Hugh have be here ; and when he be here , her one desire have be to get he speedily away . 

 but now ? 

 dumb with the pain of a great yearning , she look about she . 

 yes ; just there he have stand ; here he have kneel , and there he have stand again . 

 this calm monastic air have vibrate to the fervour of his voice . 

 it have grow calm again . 

 would her poor heart in time also grow calm ? would her lip stop tremble , and cease to feel the fire of his ? 

 yet for one moment , only , her mind dwelt upon herself . then all thought of self be merge in the realisation of his loneliness , his suffering , his bitter disillusion . to have find she dead , would have be hard ; to have lose her living , be almost past bearing . would it cost he his faith in God , in truth , in purity , in honour ? 

 the Prioress feel the insistent need of prayer . but pass the gracious image of the Virgin and Child , she cast herself down at the foot of the crucifix . 

 she have see a strong man in agony , nail , by the cruel iron of circumstance , to the cross - beam of sacrifice and surrender . to the suffering Saviour she turn , instinctively , for help and consolation . 

 thus speedily have her prayer of the previous night be grant . the pierce foot of our dear Lord , crucify , have become more to she than the baby foot of the Infant Jesus , on his mother 's knee . 

 yet , even as she kneel supplicate , interceding , adore there echo in her memory the wicked shriek of Mary Seraphine : " a dead God can not help I ! I want life , not death ! " follow almost instantly by Hugh 's stern question : " be this religion ? " 

 truly , of late , wild voice have take liberty of speech in the cell of the prioress , and have leave their impious utterance echo behind they . 

 CHAPTER XVII 

 the dimness of MARY ANTONY 

 the Prioress have be back in her cell for nearly an hour , when a gentle tap come on the door . 

 " Enter , " command the prioress , and Mary Antony appear , bear broth and bread , fruit and a cup of wine . 

 the Prioress sit at her table , parchment and an open missal before she . 
 her face be very white ; also there be dark shadow beneath her eye . 
 she do not smile at sight of old Antony , thus laden . 
 " how now , Antony ? " she say , almost sternly . " I do not bid thee to bring I food . " 

 " Reverend Mother , " say the old lay - sister , in a voice which strove to be steady , yet quaver ; " for long hour you have study , not heed that the evening meal be over . Chide not old Antony for bring you some of that broth , which you like the good . you will not sleep unless you eat . " 

 the Prioress look at her uncomprehendingly ; as if , for the moment , word convey no meaning to her mind . then she see those old hand tremble , and a sudden flood of colour flush the pallor of her face . 

 this sweet stirring of fresh life within her own heart give she to see , in the old woman 's untiring devotion , a human element hitherto unperceive . it bring a rush of comfort , in her sadness . 

 she close the volume , and push aside the parchment . " how kind of thee , dear Antony , to take so much thought for I . place the bowl on the table . . . . now draw up that stool , and stay near I while I sup . I be weary this night , and shall like thy company . " 

 have the golden gate of heaven open before she , and Saint Peter himself invite she to enter , Sister Mary Antony would not have be more astonished and certainly could hardly have be more gratified . it be a thing undreame of , that she should be bid to sit with the Reverend Mother in her cell . 

 draw the carven stool two foot from the wall , Mary Antony take her seat upon it . 

 " Nearer , Antony , nearer , " say the Prioress . " place the stool here , close beside the corner of my table . I have much to say to thee , and would wish to speak low . " 

 truly Sister Antony find herself in the seventh heaven ! 

 yet , quietly observe , the prioress could not fail to note the draw weariness on the old face , the yellow pallor of the wizen skin , which usually wear the bright tint of a russet apple . 

 the Prioress take a portion of the broth ; then push the bowl from she , and turn to the fruit . 

 " there , Antony , " she say . " the broth be excellent ; but I have enough . 
 finish it thyself . it will pleasure I to see thee enjoy it . " 
 faint and thankful , old Antony seize the bowl . and as she drink the broth , her shrewd eye twinkle . for have not the Devil say she would sup on it herself ; know that much , yet not know that she would receive it from the hand of the Reverend Mother ? 

 it have be ever so , from Eden onwards , when the Devil try his hand at prophecy . 

 for a while the prioress talk lightly , of flower and bird ; of the garden and the orchard ; of the gift of three fine salmon , send to they by the good monk of the Priory at Worcester . 

 but , presently , when the broth be finish and a faint colour tint the old cheek , she pass on to the storm and the sunset , the rolling thunder and the torrent of rain . then of a sudden she say : 

 " by the way , Antony , hast thou make mention , to any , of thy fearsome tale of the walking through the cloister , in line with the White Ladies , of the Spectre of the saintly Sister Agatha ? " 

 " Nay , Reverend Mother , " say Mary Antony . " do not you forbid I to speak of it ? " 

 " true , " say the prioress . " well , Antony , I go in the storm , to look for she ; but I find not Sister Agatha . " 

 " that I already know , " say Mary Antony , nod her head sagaciously . 

 the Prioress cast upon she a quick , anxious look . 

 " what mean you , Antony ? " 

 then old Mary Antony fall upon her knee , and kiss the hem of the prioress 's robe . " oh , Reverend Mother , " she stammer , " I have a confession to make ! " 

 " make it , " say the Prioress , with white lip . 

 " Reverend Mother , when you send I from you , after make my report , I go first , as command , to the kitchen . but afterward , in my cell , I find these . " 

 Mary Antony open her wallet and draw out the linen bag in which she keep her pea . shake its content into the palm of her hand , she hold out six pea to view . 

 " Reverend Mother , " she say , " there be twenty - five in the bag . I think I have count twenty out into my hand ; so when all the pea have drop and yet another holy Lady pass , I think that make twenty - one . but when I find six pea in my bag , I become aware of my folly . I have but count nineteen , and have no pea to let fall for the twentieth holy Lady . yet I run in haste with my false report , when , have I but think to look in my wallet , all would have be make clear . will the Reverend Mother forgive old Mary Antony ? " 

 she shoot a quick glance at the prioress ; and , at sight of the immense relief on that love face , feel ready for any punishment with which it might please Heaven to visit her deceit . 

 " Dear Antony , " begin the Reverend Mother , smile . 

 " Dear Antony " she say , and laugh aloud . 

 then she place her hand beneath the old woman 's arm , and gently raise she . " mistake arise so easily , " she say . " with the good of intention , we all sometimes make mistake . there be nothing to forgive , my Antony . " 

 " I be old , and dim , and stupid , " say the lay - sister , humbly ; " but I have beg of our sweet Lady to sharpen the old wit of Mary Antony . " 

 after which statement , make in a voice of humble penitence , Mary Antony , unseen by the thankful prioress , do give a knowing wink with the eye next to the Madonna . our blessed Lady smile . the sweet Babe look merry . the prioress rise , a great light of relief illumine her weary face . 

 " let we to bed , dear Antony ; then , with the dawn of a new day we shall all arise with heart refresh and wit more keen . so now God rest thee . " 

 leave alone , the Prioress kneel long in prayer before the shrine of the 
 Madonna . once , she reach out her right hand to the empty space where 
 Hugh have kneel , strive to feel remembrance of his strong clasp . 
 at length she seek her couch . but sleep refuse to come , and presently she creep back in the white moonlight , and kneeling press her lip to the stone on which Hugh have kneel ; then flee , in shame that our Lady should see such weakness ; and dare not glance toward the shadowy form of the dead Christ , crucify . for with the coming of Love to seek she , Life have come ; and where Life enter , death be put to flight ; even as before the triumphant march of the rise sun , darkness and shadow flee away . 

 yet , even then , our Lady gently smile , and the Babe on her knee look merry . 

 CHAPTER xviii 

 in the CATHEDRAL CRYPT 

 on the day follow , in the afternoon , shortly before the hour of Vespers , a stretcher be carry through the street of Worcester , by four man - at - arm wear the livery of Sir Hugh d'Argent . 

 beside it walk the Knight , with bent head , his eye upon the ground . 

 the body of the man upon the stretcher be cover by a fine linen sheet , over which lie a blue cloak , richly embroider with silver . his head be swathe in a bandage of many fold , partially conceal the face . 

 the little procession pass through the Precincts ; then enter the 
 Cathedral by the great door lead into the nave . 
 here a monk stand , take careful note of all who pass in or out of the building . as the stretcher approach , he step forward with hand upraise . 

 there be a pause in the measured tramp of the bearer ' foot . 

 the Knight lift his eye , and see the monk bar the way , he draw forth a parchment and tender it . 

 " I have the leave of the Lord Bishop , good father , " he say , " to carry this man upon the stretcher daily into the crypt , and there to let he lie before the shrine of Saint Oswald , during the hour of Vespers ; from which daily pilgrimage and prayer , we hope a great recovery and restoration . " 

 at sight of the Lord Bishop 's signature and seal , the monk make deep obeisance , and hasten to call the Sacristan , bid he attend the Knight on his passage to the crypt and give he every facility in place the sick man there where he might most conveniently lie before the holy altar of the bless Saint Oswald . 

 so presently , the stretcher be safely deposit , the man - at - arm stand each against a pillar , and the Knight fold back the covering , in order that the man who lie beneath , might have sight of the altar and the shrine . 

 as the Knight stand gaze through the vista of many column , he find the old Sacristan stand at his elbow . 

 " most worshipful Knight , " say the old man , with deference , " our Lord Bishop 's mandate supersede all rule . be it not so , it would be my duty to clear the crypt before vesper . see you that stairway yonder , beneath the arch ? not many minute hence , up those step will pass the holy nun from the Convent of the White Ladies at Whytstone noble lady all , and of great repute for saintliness . daily they come to Vespers by a secret way ; enter the crypt , they pass across to a wind stair in the wall , and so arrive at a gallery above the choir , from which they can , unseen , hear the chanting of the monk . I must to my duty above . will you undertake , Sir Knight , that your man go not nigh where the White Ladies pass , nor in any way molest they ? " 

 " none shall stir hand or foot , as they pass , nor in any way molest they , " say the Knight . 

 Hugh d'Argent be kneel before the altar , his fold hand rest upon the cross on the hilt of his sword , when the faint sound of a key turning in a distant lock , catch his ear . 

 then up the step and across the crypt pass , in silent procession , the White Ladies of Worcester . 

 there be something ghostly and awe - inspire about those veil figure , move noiselessly among the pillar in the dimly - light crypt ; then vanish , one by one , up the wind stairway in the wall . 

 the Knight do not stir . he stay upon his knee , his hand clasp upon his sword - hilt ; but he follow each silent figure with his eye . 

 the last have barely disappear from view when , from above , come the solemn chant of monk and chorister . 

 this harmony , descend from above , seem to uplift the soul all the more readily , because the sacred word and noble sound reach the listener , unhampere by association with the personality , either youthful or ponderous , of the singer . all that be of the earth remain unseen ; while that which be so near akin to heaven , enter the listening ear . 

 Kneeling in lowly reverence with bow head , the Knight find himself wonder whether the ascending sound reach that distant gallery in the clerestory where the White Ladies knelt , as greatly soften , sweeten , and enrich , as they now come steal down into the crypt . be the heart of those veil worshipper also lift heavenward ; or be already above the music do the ascend voice rather tend to draw they down to earth ? 

 upon which the Knight fall to meditating as to whether that which be high always uplift ; whereas that which be low tend to debase . certainly the upward look betoken hope and joy ; while the downward casting of the eye , be sign of sorrow and despondency . 

 " Levavi oculo meo in monte " chant the monk , in the choir above . 

 he certainly look high when he lift the eye of his insistent desire to the Prioress of the White Ladies . so high do he lift they , and so unattainable be she , that most man would say he might as well ask the silvery moon , sail across the firmament , to come down and be his bride ! 

 he have hold her high , in her maiden loveliness and purity . but now that he have find she , a noble woman , mature , ripen by sorrow rather than harden , yet firm in her determination to die to the world , to deny self , crucify the flesh , and resist the Devil he feel indeed that she walk among the star . 

 yet he could not bring himself to regard she as unattainable . it have ever be his firm belief that a man could win any woman upon whom he wholly set his heart always suppose that no other man have already win she . and this woman have be his own betrothed , when treachery intervene and sunder they . yet that do not now count for much . 

 he have leave a girl ; he have come back to find a woman . that woman have infinitely more to give ; but it would be infinitely more difficult to persuade she to give it . 

 at the close of their interview in her cell , the day before , all hope have leave he . but later , as they pace together in the darkness , hope have revive . 

 the strange isolation in which they then find themselves between locked door a mile apart , earth above , earth beneath , earth all around they , they two alone , entomb yet vividly conscious of glow life have bring she nearer to he ; and when at last the moment of parting arrive and again he face it as final , there have come all unheralded the sudden wonder of her surrender . 

 true , she have afterwards withdraw herself ; true , she have send he from she ; true , he have go , without a word . but that be because no promise could have be so binding , as that silent embrace . 

 he have go from she on the impulse of the sweetness of obey instantly her slight wish ; buoy up by the certainty that no convent wall could long divide lip which have meet and clung with such a passion of mutual need . 

 that evening when , after much adventure , he at length gain the street of the city , he have tread they with the mien of a victor . 

 that night he have sleep as he have not sleep since the hour when his whole life have be embitter by a lie letter and a traitorous tongue . 

 but morning , alas , have bring its doubt ; noon , its dark uncertainty ; and as the hour of Vespers draw near , he have realise , with the helpless misery of despair , that it be madness to expect the Prioress of the White Ladies to break her vow , leave her Nunnery , and fly with he to Warwick . 

 yet he carry out his plan , and keep to his undertaking , though here , in the calm atmosphere of the crypt , holy chanting descend from above , the remembrance still with he of the aloofness of those stately white figure glide between the pillar in the distance , he face the madness of his hope , and the mournful prospect of a life of loneliness . 

 presently he arise , cross the crypt , and take up his position behind a pillar to the right of the exit from the wind stair . 

 the chanting cease . vesper be over . 

 he hear the sound of soft footstep draw nearer . 

 the White Ladies be come . 

 they come . 

 the Knight be not keep long in suspense . the prioress walk first . her face be hide , but her height and carriage reveal she to her lover . she look neither to right nor leave but , turn away from the pillar behind which the Knight stand conceal , cross to the step lead down to the subterranean way , and so pass swiftly out of sight . 

 the Knight stand motionless until all have appear , and have vanish once more from view . 

 one , tall but ungainly , crook of body , and doubtless short of vision , miss her way among the column and pass perilously near to the Knight . with his long arm , he could have clasp she . how old Antony would have chuckle , could she but have know ! " Sister Mary Rebecca embrace by the Knight of the Bloody Vest ? Nay then ; the saint forbid ! " 

 the stretcher , bear by four man - at - arm , pass out from the Cathedral . 

 the Knight walk beside it , with bent head , and eye upon the ground . 

 as it pass through the Precincts , the Lord Bishop himself ride out on his white palfrey , on his way to the Nunnery at Whytstone . 

 the Knight , be downhearte , do not lift his eye . 

 the Bishop look , kindly , upon the stretcher and upon the Knight 's dark face . 

 the Bishop have know Hugh d'Argent as a boy . 

 he grieve to see he thus in sorrow . 

 yet the Bishop smile as he ride on . 

 perhaps he do not put much faith in the efficacy of relic , for so heavily bandage a broken head as that upon the stretcher . 

 for there be a whimsical tenderness about the Bishop 's smile . 

 CHAPTER XIX 

 the BISHOP put on his biretta 

 Symon , Lord Bishop of Worcester , have receive a letter from the Prioress of the White Ladies , pray he for an interview at his leisure , send back at once a most courtly and gracious answer , that he would that same day give himself the pleasure of visit the Reverend Mother , at the Nunnery , an hour after vesper . 

 the great gate be throw open , and the Bishop ride his palfrey into the courtyard . 

 the Prioress herself meet he at the door and , kneeling , kiss his ring ; then lead he through the low hall , where the nun kneel to receive his blessing , and up the wide staircase , to the privacy of her own cell . 

 there she presently unfold to he the history of her difficulty with that wayward little nun , Sister Mary Seraphine . 

 " but the point which I chiefly desire to lay before you , Reverend Father , " conclude the prioress , " be this : if the neighing of a palfrey call more loudly to she than the voice of God ; if her mind be still set upon the thing of the world ; if she profess without a true vocation , merely because she wish to be the central figure of a great ceremony , yet be all the while expect a man to intervene and carry she off ; if all this bespeak her true state of heart , then to my mind there come the question : be she do good , either to herself or to other , by belong to our order ? would she not be well away ? 

 " my lord , I fear I greatly shock you by name such a possibility . but truly I be pursue by the remembrance of that young thing , beat the floor with her hand , and sing a mournful dirge about the crimson trapping of her palfrey . and , alas ! when I reason with she and exhort , she break out , as I have tell you , Reverend Father , into grievous blasphemy for which she be severely deal with by Mother Sub - Prioress , and have since be outwardly amenable to rule and discipline . 

 " but , though she may outwardly conform , how about her inward state ? well I know that our vow be lifelong vow ; all who belong to our order be wed to Heaven ; we be thankful to know that the calm of the Cloister shall be exchange only for the great peace of Paradise . but , suppose a young heart have mistake its vocation ; suppose the voice of an earthly lover call when it be too late ; would it seem right or possible to you , Reverend Father , to grant any sort of absolution from the vow ; tacitly to allow the opening of the cage door , that the little foolish bird might , if it wish , escape into the liberty for which it chafe and sigh ? " 

 the Bishop sit in the spanish chair , draw up near the oriel window , so that he could either gaze at the glory of the distant sunset , or , by slightly turn his head , look on the beautiful but grave face of the prioress , seat before he . 

 while she be speak he watch she keenly , with those bright search eye , so much more youthful than aught else about he . but now that he must make reply , he look away to the sunset . 

 the light shine on the plain gold cross at his breast , and on the violet silk of his cassock . his face , against the background of the black spanish wood , look strangely white and thin ; strong in contour , with a virile strength ; in expression , sensitive as a woman 's . he have remove his biretta , and place it upon the table . his silvery hair roll back from his forehead in silky wave . his be the look of the saint and the scholar , almost of the mystic save for the tender humour in those keen blue eye , gleam like beacon light from beneath the level eyebrow ; eye which have win the confidence of many a man who else have not dare unfold his very human story , to one of such saintly aspect as Symon , Bishop of Worcester . they be turn toward the sunset , as he make answer to the prioress . 

 " the little foolish bird , " say the Bishop and he speak in that gently muse tone , which convey to the mind of the hearer a sense of infinite leisure in which to weigh and consider the subject in hand " the little foolish bird might soon wish herself back in the safety of the cage . on such as she , the cruel hawk of life do love to prey . absorb in the contemplation of her own charm , she see not , until too late , the danger which surround she . such little foolish bird , my daughter , be good in the safe shelter of the cloister . moreover , of what value be they in the world ? none . if Popinjays we d they , they do but hatch out brood of foolish little popinjays . if true man , catch by mere surface beauty , we d they , it can mean naught save heartbreak and sorrow , and deterioration of the race . woman of fine mould " for an instant the Bishop 's eye stray from the sunset " be need , to be the mother of the man who , in the year to come , be to make England great . Nay , rather than let one escape , I would shut up all the little foolish bird in a Nunnery , with our excellent Sub - prioress to administer necessary discipline . " 

 with his elbow rest upon the arm of the chair , the Bishop put his finger together , so that the tip meet most precisely ; then bent his lip to they , and look at the prioress . 

 she , troubled and sick at heart , lift deep pool of silent misery , meet the merry twinkle in the Bishop 's eye , and sit astonish . what be it like ? why it be like the song of a robin , perch on a frosty bough , on Christmas morning ! it be so young and gay ; so jocund , and so hopeful . 

 meet it , the Prioress realise fully , what she have many time half - divine , that the revered and reverend Prelate sit opposite , for all his robe and dignity , his panoply of Church and State , have the heart of a merry schoolboy out on a holiday . 

 for the moment she feel much old than the Bishop , infinitely sadder ; more travel - wear and worldly - wise . 

 then she look at the silver hair ; the firm mouth , with a shrewd curve at either corner ; the thoughtful brow . 

 and then she look at the Bishop 's ring . 

 the Bishop wear a remarkable ring ; not a signet , but a large gem of great value , beautifully cut in many facet , and clear set in massive gold . this precious stone , say to be a chrysoprasus , have be give to the Bishop by a russian prince , in acknowledgment of a great service render he when he come on pilgrimage to Rome . the rarity of these gem arise partly from the fact that the sovereign of Russia have decree that they should be hold exclusively for royal ornament , forbid their use or purchase by people of less degree . 

 but its beauty and its rarity be not the only quality of the precious stone in the Bishop 's ring . the strange thing about it be that its colour varied , accord to the Bishop 's mood and surrounding . 

 when the prioress look up and meet the gay twinkle , the stone in the Bishop 's ring be a heavenly blue , the colour of forget - I - not beside a meadow brook , or the clear azure of the sky above a rosy sunset . but presently he pass his hand over his eye , as if to shut out some bright vision , and to turn his mind to more sober thought ; and , at that moment , the stone in his ring gleam a pale opal , thread with flash of green . 

 the Prioress return to the subject , with studied seriousness . 

 " I do not suppose , Reverend Father , that it be to be of any advantage to the world , that Sister Seraphine should return to it . the advantage be to be to she , and also to this whole community , well rid of the presence of one who find our sacred exercise irksome ; our beautiful Nunnery , a prison ; her cell , a live tomb . she cry out for life . ' I want to live , ' she say , ' I be young , I be gay , I be beautiful ! I want life . ' " 

 " to such as Sister Seraphine , " remark the Bishop , gravely , " life be but a mirror which reflect themselves . other form and face may flit by , in the background ; dimly see , scarcely notice . there be but one face and form occupy the entire foreground . life be , to such , the mirror which minister to vanity . should a husband appear in the picture , he be soon relegate to the background , receive only occasional glance over the shoulder . if child dance into the field of vision , they be petulantly drive elsewhere . tell I ? do Sister Seraphine 's desire for life include any expression of the desire to give life ? " 

 involuntarily the prioress glance at the sweet Babe upon the Virgin 's knee . 

 " no , " she say , very low . 

 " I think not , " say the Bishop . " self - centre , shallow nature be not capable of the sublime passion for motherhood ; partly , no doubt , because they themselves possess no life worth pass on . " 

 the prioress rise quickly and , move to the window , fling open a second casement . it be imperative , at that moment , to hide her face ; for the uncontrollable flood of emotion at her heart , could scarce fail to send a tell - tale wave to disturb the calm of her countenance . 

 Whereupon the Bishop turn , to see at what the Prioress have glance before answer his question . 

 " no , " he muse , as she resume her seat , his eye upon the tree - top beyond the casement , " the Seraphines have not the instinct of motherhood . and the future greatness of our race depend upon those noble woman who be able to pass on to their son and daughter a life which be true , and brave , and worthy ; a life whose foundation be self - sacrifice , whose cornerstone be loyalty , and from whose summit wave the banner of unsullied love of hearth and home . 

 " a woman with the true instinct of motherhood can not see a little child without yearn to clasp it to her bosom . when she find her mate , she think more of be the mother of his child than the object of his devotion , because the self in she be subservient to the maternal instinct for self - sacrifice . these woman be pure as snow , and they hold their man to the high and the good . such woman be need in the world . our Lady knoweth , I speak not lightly , unadvisedly nor wantonly ; but be Seraphine such an one as this , I should say ; ' leave the door on the latch . without permission , yet without reproach let she go . ' " 

 " be Seraphine such an one as that , my lord , " say the prioress , firmly , " then would there be no question of her go . if the cornerstone of character be loyalty , the very essential of loyalty be the keeping of vow . " 

 " quite so , " murmur the Bishop ; " undoubtedly , my daughter . unless , by some strange fatality , those vow be make under a total misapprehension . you tell I Sister Seraphine expect a man to intervene ? " 

 the Bishop sit up , of a sudden keenly alert . his eye , no long humorous and tender , become search and bright young still , but with the fire of youth , rather than its merriment . as he lean forward in his chair , his hand grip his knee . look at his ring the prioress see the stone the colour of red wine . 

 " what if , after all , I can help you in this , " he say . " what if I can throw light upon the whole situation , and find a cause for the little foolish bird 's restless condition , prove to you that she may have hear something more than the mere neighing of a palfrey ! listen ! 

 " a Knight arrive in this city , rather more than a month ago ; a very noble Knight , splendid to look upon ; one of our brave Crusaders . he arrive here in sore anguish of heart . his betrothed have be take from he during his absence from England , wag war against the Turks in Palestine take from he by a most dastardly and heartless plot . he make many inquiry concern this Nunnery and Order , ride north again on urgent business , but return , with a large retinue , five day since . " 

 the Prioress do not stir . she maintain her quiet posture as an attentive listener . but her face grow as white as her wimple , and she fold her hand to steady their trembling . 

 but the Bishop , now eagerly launch , have no interest in pallor , or possible palsy . his vigorous word cut the calm atmosphere . the gem on his finger sparkle like red wine in a goblet . 

 " I know he of old , " he say ; " know he as a high - spirited lad , yet loving , and much beloved . he come to I , in his grief , distraught with anguish of heart , and tell I this tale of treachery and wrong . never do I hear of such a network of evil device , such a tragedy of love heart sunder . and when at last he return to this land , he find that the girl whom he have think false , think he so , have enter a Nunnery . also he seem convinced that she be to be find among our White Ladies of Worcester . now tell I , dear prioress , think you she could be seraphine ? " 

 the Prioress smile ; and truly it be a very creditable smile for a face which might have be carve in marble . 

 " from my knowledge of Sister Mary Seraphine , " she say , " it seem unlikely that for loss of she , so noble a Knight as you describe would be distraught with anguish of heart . " 

 " Nay , there I do not agree , " say the Bishop . " it be ever opposite which attract . the tall we d the short ; the stout , the lean ; the dark , the fair ; the grave , the gay . wherefore my stern Crusader may be break his heart for your foolish little bird . " 

 " I do not think so , " say the prioress , shortly ; then hasten to add : 
 " not that I would presume to differ from you , Reverend Father . 
 Doubtless you be well verse in such matter than i. but if it be 
 as you suppose what measure do you suggest ? how be I to deal with 
 Sister Mary Seraphine ? " 
 the Bishop lean forward and whisper , though not another soul be within hearing ; but at this juncture in the conversation , a whisper be both dramatic and effective . also , when he lean forward , he could almost hear the angry beating of the heart of the prioress . 

 the Bishop hold the Prioress in high regard , and love not to distress she . but he do not think it right that a woman should have such complete mastery over herself , and therefore over other . a fine quality in a man , may be a blemish in a woman . for which reason the Bishop lean forward and whisper . 

 " let she fly , my daughter ; let she fly . if his arm await she , she will not have far to go , nor many danger to face . her lover will know how to guard his own . " 

 " my lord , " say the Prioress , now flush with anger , " you amaze I ! be I to understand that you would have I open the Convent door , so that a renegade nun may escape to her lover ? or perhaps , my lord , it would well meet your idea if I bid the porteress stand wide the great gate , so that this high - spirited Knight may ride in and carry off the nun he desire , in sight of all ! my Lord Bishop ! you rule in Worcester and in the city of the diocese . but I rule in this Nunnery ; and while I rule here , such a thing as this shall never be . " 

 the prioress flash and quiver ; rise to her foot and tower ; fling her arm wide , and pace the floor . 

 " the Knight have bewitch you , my lord , " she say . " you forget the rule of our holy Church . you fail in your trust toward the woman who look to you as their spiritual Father and guide . " 

 the Prioress walk up and down the cell , and each time she pass her chair she wheel , and grip the back with her strong finger , shake it . not be able to shake the Bishop , she need must shake something . 

 " you amaze I ! " she say . " truly , my lord , you amaze I ! " 

 the Bishop put on his biretta . 

 only once before , in his eventful life , have he make a woman as angry as this . very young he be , then ; and the angry woman have seize he by his hair . 

 the Bishop do not really think the prioress would do this ; but it amuse he to fancy he be afraid , and to put on his biretta . 

 then , as he lean back in his chair , and his finger tip meet , the stone in his ring be blue again , and his eye be more than ever the eye of a merry schoolboy out on a holiday . 

 yet , presently , he seek to calm the temp he have raise . 

 " my daughter , " he say , " I do but agree to that which you yourself suggest . do you not ask whether it would seem to I right or possible to grant absolution from her vow , tacitly to allow the opening of the cage door , that the little foolish bird might , if she wish it , escape ? why this exceed indignation , when I do but yield to your argument and fall in with your suggestion ? " 

 " I do not suggest that a lover 's arm be await one of my nun , " say the angry prioress . 

 " you do not mention arm , " reply the Bishop , gently ; " but you most explicitly mention a voice . ' suppose the voice of an earthly lover call , ' you say . and have admit that I be well verse in such matter than you you must forgive I , dear Prioress , if I amaze you far by acquaint you with the undoubted fact , recognise , in the outer world , as beyond dispute , that when a lover 's voice call , a lover 's arm be likely to be wait . earthly lover , my daughter , by no mean resemble those charming cherub which you may have observe on the carve woodwork in our Cathedral . otherwise you might have just a voice , flank by seraphic wing . some such fanciful creation must have be in your mind for Sister Mary Seraphine ; for , until I make mention of the noble Knight who have arrive in Worcester distraught with anguish of heart by reason of his loss , you have decide leaning toward tacitly allow flight . therefore it be not the fact of the broken vow , but the idea of Seraphine wed to the brave Crusader , which so greatly rouse your ire . " 

 the Prioress stand silent . her hot anger cool , envelop in the chill mantle of self - revelation and self - scorn . 

 it seem to she that the gentle word of the Bishop indeed express the truth far more correctly than he know . 

 the thought of Hugh , console himself with some foolish , vain , unworthy , little Seraphine , have sting with intolerable pain . 

 yet , how should she , the cause of his despair , begrudge he any comfort he might find in the love of another ? 

 then , suddenly , the Prioress knelt at the foot of the Bishop . 

 " forgive I , most Reverend Father , " she say . " I do wrong to be angry . " 

 Symon of Worcester extend his hand , and the Prioress kiss the ring . as she withdraw her lip from the precious stone , she see it blood - red and sparkling , as the juice of purple grape in a goblet . 

 the Bishop lay his biretta once more upon the table , and smile very tenderly on the prioress , as he motion she to rise from her knee and to resume her seat . 

 " you do right to be angry , my daughter , " he say . " you be not angry with I , nor with the brave Crusader , nor with the foolish seraphine . your anger , all unconsciously , be arouse by a system , a method of life which be contrary to Nature , and therefore surely at variance with the will of God . I have long have my doubt concern these vow of perpetual celibacy for woman . for man , it be different . the creative power in a man , if deny their natural function , stir he to great enterprise , move he to beget fine phantasy , creation of his brain , child of his intellect . if he stamp not his image on brave son and fair daughter , he leave his mark on life in many other way , both brave and fair . but it be not so with woman ; in the very nature of thing it can not be . methink these nunnery would serve a well purpose be they school from which to send woman forth into the world to be good wife and mother , rather than store - house fill with sad sample of Nature 's great purpose deliberately unfulfilled . " 

 the merry schoolboy look have vanish . the Bishop 's eye be stern and search ; yet he look not on the prioress as he speak . 

 Amazement be writ large than ever , on her face ; but she hold herself well under control . 

 " such view , my lord , if freely express and adopt , would change the entire monastic system . " 

 " I know it , " say the Bishop . " and I would not express they , save to you and to one other , to whom I also talk freely . but the old I grow , the more clearly do I see that system be man - make , and therefore often mistaken , injurious , pernicious . but nature be Divine . those who live in close touch with Nature , who rule their life by Nature 's rule , do not stray far from the divine plan of the Creator . but when man take upon himself to say ' thou shalt , ' or ' thou shalt not , ' quickly confusion enter . a false premise become the starting - point ; and the goal , if it stop short of perdition , be , at good , folly and failure . " 

 the Bishop pause . 

 the eye of the woman before he be dark with sorrow , regret , and the dawning of a great fear . presently she speak . 

 " to say these thing here , my lord , be to say they too late . " 

 " it be never too late , " reply Symon of Worcester . " ' too late ' toll the knell of the coward heart . if we find out a mistake while we yet walk the earth where we make it , it be not too late to amend it . " 

 " think you so , Reverend Father ? then what do you counsel I to do with Seraphine ? " 

 " speak to she gently , and with great care and prudence . say to her much of that which you have say to I , and a little of that which I have say to you , but express in such manner as will be suit to a foolish mind . you and I can hurl brick at one another , my dear prioress , and be the well for the exercise . but we must not fle at little Seraphine aught hard than a pillow of down . empty head , like empty eggshell , be soon break . tell she you have consult I concern her desire to return to the world ; and that I , be lenient , and hold somewhat wide view on this subject than the majority of prelate , also be well acquainted with the mind of his Holiness the Pope concern those who embrace the religious life for reason other than a true vocation , have promise to arrange the matter of a dispensation . but add that there must be no possibility of any scandal connect with the Nunnery . since the Lady Wulgeova , mother of Bishop Wulstan , of blessed memory , take the veil here a century and a half ago , this house have ever be above reproach . you will tacitly allow she to slip away ; and , once away , I will set matter right for she . but nothing must transpire which could stumble or scandalise the other member of the Community . the peculiar circumstance which the Knight make known to I always , of course , without make any mention of the name of Seraphine can hardly have occur in any other case . it be not likely , for instance , that our worthy Sub - Prioress be tear by treachery from the arm of a despairing lover ; and she would undoubtedly share your very limit idea of a lover 's physical quality and requirement ; possibly not even allow he a voice . 

 " now I happen to know that the Knight daily spend the hour of Vespers in the Cathedral crypt , kneel before the shrine of Saint Oswald beside a stretcher whereon lie one of his man , much bandaged about the head , swathe in linen , and cover with a cloak . the Knight have my leave to lay the sick man before the holy relics , daily , for five day . I ask of he what he expect would result from so do . he make answer : ' a great recovery and restoration . ' " 

 the Bishop pause , as if meditate upon the word . then he slowly repeat they , take evident pleasure in each syllable . 

 " a great recovery and restoration , " say the Bishop , and smile . 

 " well ? the blessed relic can do much . they may avail to mend a broken head . could they mend a broken heart ? I know not . that be , of the two , the great miracle . " 

 the Bishop glance at the prioress . 

 her face be avert . 

 " well , my daughter , matter be as they be , you may inform Sister Mary Seraphine that , should she chance to lose her way among the hundred and forty - two column , when pass through the crypt after Vespers , she will find a Knight , who will doubtless know what to do next . if he can contrive to take she safely from the Cathedral and out of the Precincts , she will have to ride with he to Warwick , where a priest will be in readiness to we d they . but it would be well that Sister Mary Seraphine should have some practice in mount and riding , before she go on so adventurous a journey . she may remember the crimson trapping of her palfrey , and yet have forget how to sit he . it be for we to make sure that the Knight 's brave plan for the safe capture of his lady , do not fail for lack of any help which we may lawfully give . " 

 the Bishop stretch out his hand and take up his biretta . 

 " when do the nun last have a Play day ? " he ask . 

 " not a month ago , " reply the prioress . " they make the hay in the river meadow , and carry it themselves . they think it rare sport . " 

 the Bishop put on his biretta . 

 " give they a Play day , dear Prioress , in honour of my visit . tell they I ask that they should have it the day after to - morrow . I will then send you my white palfrey , suitably caparison . Brother Philip , who attend I when I ride , and who have the palfrey well control , shall lead he in . the nun can then ride in turn , in the river meadow ; and our little foolish bird can try her wing , before she attempt the long flight from Worcester to Warwick . " 

 the Bishop rise , cross the cell , and kneel long , in prayer , before the crucifix . 

 when he turn toward the door , the prioress say : " I pray you , give I your blessing , Reverend Father , before you go . " 

 she knelt , and the Bishop extend his hand over her bow head . 

 expect a latin formula , she be almost startled when tender word , in the English tongue , fall softly from the Bishop 's lip . 

 " the Lord bless thee , and keep thee ; and grant unto thee grace and strength to choose and to do the hard part , when the hard part be his will for thee . " 

 after which : " Benedictio Domini sit vobiscum , " say the Bishop ; and make the sign of the cross over the bowed head of the prioress . 

 CHAPTER XX 

 HOLLY and MISTLETOE 

 Symon , Bishop of Worcester , have bid Sir Hugh d'Argent to sup with he at the Palace . 

 it be upon the second day after the Bishop 's conversation with the 
 Prioress in the Convent at Whytstone ; the evening of the Nun 's Play 
 Day , grant in honour of his visit . 
 the Bishop and the Knight sup together , with much stately ceremony , in the great banqueting hall . 

 know the Bishop 's love of the beautiful , and his habit of be punctilious in matter of array and deportment , acquire no doubt during his lengthy sojourn in France and Italy , the Knight have don his fine court suit white satin , embroider with silver ; jewel collar , belt , and shoe ; a small - sword of exquisite workmanship at his side . a white cloak , also richly embroider with silver , hang from his shoulder ; white silk hose set off the shapely length of his limb . the blood - red gleam of the magnificent ruby on his breast , sword - belt , and shoe - buckle , be the only point of colour in his attire . 

 the Bishop 's keen eye note with quiet pleasure how greatly this somewhat fantastically beautiful dress enhance the dark splendour of the Knight 's noble countenance , display his superb carriage , and shew off the supple grace of his limb , which , in his ordinary garb , rather give the idea of massive strength alone . 

 the Bishop himself wear crimson and gold ; and , just as the dark beauty of the Knight be enhance by the fair white and silver of his dress , so do these gorgeous italian robe set off the frail whiteness of the Bishop 's delicate face , the silvery softness of his abundant hair . and just as the collar of ruby gleam like fiery eye upon the Knight 's white satin doublet , so from out the pallor of the Prelate 's countenance the eye shine forth , bright with the fire of eternal , youth , the gay joy of life , the twinkle humour of a shrewd yet kindly wit . 

 they sup at a round table of small size , in the very centre of the huge apartment . it form a point of light and brightness from which all else merge into shadow , and yet deep shadow , until the eye reach the dark panelling of the wall . 

 the light seem to centre in the Knight white and silver ; the colour , in the figure of the Bishop crimson and gold . 

 in and out of the shadow , swift and silent , on sandalled foot , move the lay - brother serve the feast ; watchful of each detail ; quickly supply every need . 

 at length they load the table with fruit ; put upon it fresh flagon of wine , and finally withdraw ; each black - rob figure merge into the black shadow , and vanish in silence . 

 the Bishop 's Chaplain appear in a distant doorway . 

 " Benedicite , " say Symon of Worcester , look up . 

 " Deus , " reply the Chaplain , make a profound obeisance . 

 then he stand erect a grim , austere figure , hard feature , hollow eye , half - shroud within his cowl . 

 he look with sinister disapproval at the distant table , laden with fruit and flagon ; at the Bishop and the Knight , now sit nigh to one another ; the Bishop in his chair of state face the door , the Knight , on a high - back seat at the Bishop 's right hand , half - way round the table . 

 " Holly and Mistletoe , " mutter the Chaplain , as he close the great door . 

 " yea , verily ! Mistletoe and Holly , " he repeat , as he stride to his cell . " the Reverend Father sup with the World , and indulge the Flesh . methink the Devil can not be far off . " 

 nor be he . 

 he be very near . 

 he have look over the Chaplain 's shoulder as he make his false obeisance in the doorway . 

 but he like not the pure white of the Knight 's dress , and he fear the clear light in the Prelate 's eye . so , when the Chaplain close the door , the Devil stay on the outside , and now walk beside the Chaplain along the passage lead to his cell . 

 there be no surer way of secure the company of the Devil , than to make sure he be at that moment busy with another particularly if that other chance to be the most saintly man you know , and merely displease to you , at the moment , because he hath not bid you to sup with he . the Devil and the Chaplain make a night of it . 

 the Bishop 's gentle " Benedicite " spread white wing and fly , like an affrighted dove , over the head of the bow Chaplain , into the chill passage beyond . 

 but , just as the great door be close , it dart in again , circle round the banqueting hall , and come back to rest in the safe nest of the kindly heart which have send it forth . 

 no blessing , truly vitalise , ever cease to live . if the bless be unworthy , it return on swift wing to the blesser . 

 CHAPTER XXI 

 so MUCH for SERAPHINE ! 

 a sense of peace fall upon the banqueting hall , with the closing of the door . all unrest and suspicion seem to have depart . an atmosphere of confidence and serenity pervade the great chamber . it be in the Bishop 's smile , as he turn to the Knight . 

 " at length the time have come when we may talk freely ; and truly , my son , we have much to say . " 

 the Knight glance round the spacious hall , and his look imply that he would prefer to talk in a small chamber . 

 " Nay , then , " say the Bishop . " no situation can be well for a private conversation than the very centre of a very large room . have you not hear it say that wall have ear ? well , in a small room , they may use they to some purpose . but here , we sit so far remove from the wall that , strain their ear as they may , they will hear nothing ; even the very key - hole , open wide its naughty eye , will see naught , neither will the adjacent ear hear anything . we may speak freely . " 

 the Bishop , sign to the Knight to help himself to fruit , move the wine toward he . at his own right hand stand a venetian flagon and goblet of ruby glass , ornament with vine leaf and cluster of grape . the Bishop drink only from this flagon , pour its content himself into the goblet which he hold to the light before he drink from it , enjoy the rich glow of colour , and the beauty of the engraving . his guest sometimes wonder what specially choice kind of wine the Bishop keep for his own , exclusive use . if they ask , he tell they . 

 " the kind use at the marriage feast at Cana in Galilee , when the supply of an inferior quality have fail . this , my friend , be pure water , wholesome , refresh , and not costly . I drink it from glass which give to it the colour of the juice of the grape , partly in order that my guest may not feel chilled in their own enjoyment of more gay and luscious beverage ; partly because I enjoy the emblem . 

 " the gift of circumstance , life , and nature , vary , not so much in themselves , as in the human vessel which contain they . if the heart be a ruby goblet , the humble form of pure love fill it , will assume the rich tint and fervour of romance . if the mind be , in itself , a thing of vivid tint and glow colour , the dull thought within it will take on a lustre , a sparkle , a glow of brilliancy . thus , whensoever man or matter seem to I dull or wearisome , to myself I say : ' Symon ! Thou art this day , thyself , a pewter pot . ' " 

 then the Bishop would fill up his goblet and hold it to the light . 

 " Aye , the good wine ! " he would say . " ' Thou hast keep the good wine until now . ' the water of earth draw by faithful servant , act in unquestione obedience to the command of the blessed Mother of our Lord transmute by the word and power of the Divine Son ; outpoure for other , in love service ; this be ever ' the good wine . ' " 

 the Knight fill his goblet and take some fruit . then , leave both untouched , turn his chair sidewise , that he might the well face the Bishop , cross his knee , lean his right elbow on the table and his head upon his hand , push his finger into his hair . 

 thus , for a while , they sit in silence ; the Knight 's eye search the 
 Bishop 's face ; the Bishop , intent upon the colour of his ruby goblet . 
 at length Hugh d'Argent speak . 

 " I have be through deep water , Reverend Father , since last I sup with you . " 

 the Bishop put down the goblet . 

 " so I suppose , my son . now tell I what you will , neither more nor less . I will then give you what counsel I can . on the one point concern which you must not tell I more than I may rightly know , I will question you . have you contrive to see the woman you love , and lose , and be now seek to regain ? tell I not how , nor when , nor where ; but have you have speech with she ? have you make clear to she the treachery which sunder you ? have you plead with she to remember her early betrothal , to renounce these later vow , and to fly with you ? " 

 the Knight look straight into the Bishop 's keen eye . 

 at first he could not bring himself to answer . 

 this princely figure , with his crimson robe and golden cross , so visibly represent the power and authority of the Church . 

 his own intrusion into the Nunnery , his attempt to win away a holy nun , suddenly appear to he , as the most appalling sacrilege . 

 with awe and consternation in his own , he meet the Bishop 's eye . 

 at first they be merely clear and search , and the Knight sit tongue - tie . but presently there flick into they a look so human , so tender , so completely understanding , that straightway the tongue of the Knight be loose . 

 " my lord , I have , " he say . " all those thing have I do . I have be in heaven , Reverend Father , and I have be in hell " 

 " Sh , my son , " murmur the Bishop . " methink you have be in a place which be neither heaven nor hell ; though it may , on occasion , approximate somewhat nearly to both . how you get there , be a marvel to I ; and how you escape , without create a scandal , an even great wonder . yet I think it wise , for the present , not to know too much . I merely require to be certain that you have actually find your lost betrothed , make she aware of your proximity , your discovery , and your desire . I gather that you have succeed in so do ; for , two day ago , the Prioress herself send to beg a private interview with I , in order to ask whether , under certain circumstance , I could approve the return of a nun to the world , and obtain absolution from her vow . " 

 the ruby on the Knight 's breast suddenly glitter , as if a bound of his heart have cause they all to leap together . but , except for that quick sparkle , he sit immovable , and make no sign . 

 the Bishop have mark the gleam of the ruby . 

 he lift his venetian goblet to the light and observe it carefully , as he continue : " the Prioress a most wise and noble lady , of whom I tell you on the day when you first question I concern the Nunnery have be have trouble with a nun , by name Sister Mary Seraphine . this young and lovely lady have , just lately , hear the world loudly call on her own shewing , through the neighing of a palfrey bring to mind past scene of gaiety . but the prioress suspicione the voice of an earthly lover ; and I , know how reckless and resolute an earthly lover be attempt to invade the Nunnery , we both the Prioress and I draw our own conclusion , and proceed to face the problem with which we find ourselves confront , namely : whether to allow or to thwart the flight of Seraphine . " 

 the Knight , toy with walnut , hold at the moment four in the palm of his right hand . they break with a four - fold crack , which sound but as one mighty crunch . then , all unconscious of what he do , the Knight open his great hand and let fall upon the table , a little heap of crushed nut , shell and white flesh inextricably mixed . 

 the Bishop glance at the small heap . the veiled twinkle in his eye seem to say ; " so much for Seraphine ! " 

 " I know not any lady of that name , " say the Knight . 

 " not by that name , my son . the nun be not know in the Convent by the name they bear before they leave the world . I happen to know that the prioress , before she profess , be Mora , Countess of Norelle . I know this because , year ago , I see she at the Court , when she be a maid of honour to the Queen ; very young and lovely ; yet , even then remarkable for wisdom , piety , and a certain sweet dignity of deportment . sometimes now , when she receive I in the severe habit of her order , I find myself remember the flow of beautiful hair , soft as spin silk , bind by a circlet of gold round the regal head ; the velvet and ermine ; the jewel at her breast . yet do I chide myself for recall thing which these holy woman have renounce , and doubtless would fain forget . " 

 the Bishop strike a silver gong with his left hand . 

 at once a distant door open in the dark panelling and two black - rob figure glide in . 

 " kindle a fire on the hearth , " command the Bishop ; add to his guest : " the evening air strike chilly . also I greatly love the smell of burn wood . it be pungent to the nostril , and refresh to the brain . " 

 the monk hasten to kindle the wood and to fan it into a flame . 

 presently , the fire blaze brightly , the Bishop rise , and sign to the monk to place the chair near the great fireplace . this they do ; and , make profound obeisance , withdraw . 

 thus the Bishop and the Knight , alone once more , be seat in the firelight . as it illumine the white and silver doublet , and glow in the ruby , the Bishop conceive the whimsical fancy that the Knight might well be some splendid archangel , come down to force the Convent gate and carry off a nun to heaven . and the Knight , watch the leap flame flicker on the Bishop 's crimson robe and silvery hair , see the lenient smile upon the saintly face and take courage as he realise how kindly be the heart , fill with most human sympathy , which beat beneath the cross of gold upon the Prelate 's breast . 

 lean forward , the Bishop lift the faggot - fork and move one of the burn log so that a jet of blue smoke , instead of mount the chimney , come out toward they on the hearth . 

 Symon of Worcester sit back and inhale it with enjoyment . 

 " this be refresh , " he say . " this soothe and yet brace the mind . and now , my son , let we return to the question of your own private concern . first , let I ask Hugh , dear lad , as friend and counsellor I ask it be you able now to tell I the name of the woman you desire to we d ? " 

 " Nay , my dear lord , " reply the Knight , " that I can not do . I guard her name , as I would guard mine honour . if as may our Lady be pleased to grant she consent to fly with I , her name will still be mine to guard ; yet then all man may know it , so they speak it with due respect and reverence . but if as may our blessed Lady forbid she withhold herself from I , so that three day hence I ride away alone ; then must I ride away leave no shadow of reproach on her fair fame . her name will be forever in my heart ; but no word of mine shall have leave it , in the mind of any man , link with broken vow , or a forsaken lover . " 

 the Bishop look long and earnestly at the Knight . 

 " that be so , my son , " he say at length , " for want of any well name , I need must call she by the name she bear in the Nunnery , and now speak with you of Sister Mary Seraphine . " 

 Hugh d'Argent frown . 

 " I care not to hear of this Seraphine , " he say . 

 " yet I fear I you must summon patience to hear of Seraphine for a few moment , " say the Bishop , quietly ; ' see that I have here a letter from the prioress herself , in which she send you a message . . . . ah ! I marvel not that you be take by surprise , my dear Knight ; but keep your seat , and let not your hand fly so readily to your sword . to transfix the Reverend Mother 's gracious epistle on your blade 's keen point , would not tend to elucidate her meaning ; nor could it alter the fact that she send you important counsel concern Sister Mary Seraphine . " 

 the Bishop light a wax taper stand at his elbow , draw a letter from the fold of his sash , slowly unfold and hold it to the light . 

 the Knight sit silent , his face in shadow . the leap flame of the fire play on his sword hilt and on the ruby across his breast . 

 as the parchment crackle between the Bishop 's finger , the Knight keep himself well in hand ; but he pray he might not have nee to speak , nor to meet the Bishop 's eye . these the saint be praise be now intent upon the closely write page . 

 the light of the taper illumine the almost waxen whiteness of the gentle face , and gleam upon the Bishop 's ring . the Knight , fix his eye upon the stone , see it the colour of red wine . 

 at last the Bishop begin to speak with careful deliberation , his eye upon the letter , yet tell , instead of read ; a method ofttime madden to an anxious listener , eager to snatch the parchment and master its content for himself ; yet who must perforce wait to receive they , with due patience , from another . 

 " the Prioress relate to I first of all a conversation she have , by my suggestion , with Sister Mary Serephine , in which she tell that lady much of what pass between herself and I when she consult I upon the apparent desire of this nun to escape from the Convent , renounce her vow , and return to her lover and the world her lover who have come to save she . " 

 the Bishop pause . 

 the Knight stir uneasily in his seat . a net seem to be close around he . almost he see himself compel to ride to Warwick in company with this most undesired and undesirable nun , Mary Seraphine . 

 the Bishop raise his eye from the letter and look pensively into the fire . 

 " a most piteous scene take place , " he say , " on the day when Sister Seraphine first hear again the call of the outer world . Most move it be , as tell I by the prioress . the distraught nun lie upon the floor of her cell in an abandonment of frantic weeping . she imitate the galloping of a horse with her hand and foot , a ride of some sort evidently be in her mind . at length she lift a swollen countenance , cry that her lover have come to save she . " 

 the Knight clench his tooth , in despair . almost , he and this fearsome nun have arrive at Warwick , and she be lift a swollen countenance to he that he might embrace it . 

 yet Mora well know that he have not come for any Seraphine ! Mora might deny herself to he ; but she would not foist another upon he . only , alas ! this grave and Reverend Prioress of whom the Bishop speak , hardly seem one with the woman of his desire ; she who , but three evening before , have yield her lip to his , clasp her arm around he ; love , even while she deny he . 

 the Bishop 's eye be again upon the letter . 

 " the prioress , " he say , " with her usual instinctive sense of the helpfulness of outward surrounding , and desiring , with a fine justice , to give Seraphine and her lover every possible advantage , arrange that the conversation should take place in the Nunnery garden , in a secluded spot where they could not be overhear , yet where the sunshine glint , through overhang branch , flecking , in golden patch , the soft turf ; where bird carol , and spread swift wing ; where white cloud chase one another across the blue sky ; in fact , my son , " say the Bishop , suddenly look up , " where all nature sing aloud of liberty and nonrestraint . " 

 the Knight 's eye , frown from beneath a shading hand , be gloomy and full of sombre fury . 

 it matter not to he in what surrounding this preposterous offer , that she should leave the convent and fly with he to Warwick , have be make to seraphine . her swollen countenance would be equally unattractive , whether lift in cell or cloister , or where white cloud chase one another across the blue sky ! 

 the Knight feel as if he be be chase , and by something more to be fear than a white cloud . Grim Nemesis pursue he . this reverend prelate , whom he have deem so wise , be well - nigh witless . yet Mora know the truth . would her kind hand deal he so base a blow ? 

 the Bishop see the brood rage in the Knight 's eye , and he lower his own to the letter , in time to hide their twinkling . 

 even the good and brave of Knights , for have force his way into a Nunnery , press a suit upon a nun , and escape unscathed , deserve some punishment at the hand of the Church ! 

 " which be generous in the Reverend Mother , " say the Bishop , ' since she be incline , upon the whole , to disapprove this offering of liberty to the restless nun . you can well understand that , the responsibility for the good conduct of that entire Community rest upon the prioress , she be bind to regard with disfavour any innovation which might tend to provoke a scandal . " 

 the Bishop do not look up , or he would have see dull despair displace the Knight 's anger . 

 " however she appear faithfully to have lay before Sister Mary Seraphine , my view of the matter , give she to understand that I be inclined to be lenient concern vow make under misapprehension ; also that , when there be not a true vocation , and a worldly spirit chafe against the cloistered life , I regard its presence within the Community as more likely to be harmful to the common weal , than the short - live scandal which might arise if those in power should connive at an escape . " 

 the Knight move impatiently in his seat . 

 " could we arrive , my lord , " he say , " at the Lady Prioress 's message , of which you speak ? " 

 " we be tend thither , my son , " reply the Bishop , unruffled . " curb your impatience . we of the Cloister be will not to move slowly , with measured tread each step a careful following up of the step which go before not with the leap and bound and caper of the laity . in due time we shall reach the message . 

 " well , in this conversation the Prioress appear to have comply with my suggestion , except in the matter of one most important detail , concern which she use her own discretion . I distinctly advise she to tell Seraphine that we be aware of your arrival , and that to my certain knowledge you be in the crypt each afternoon at the hour when the White Ladies pass to and from vesper . in fact , my dear Knight , I even go so far as to suggest to the Reverend Mother to give Sister Mary Seraphine to understand that if she step aside , lose her way among the many pillar , you would probably know what to do next . 

 " but the Reverend Mother write " at last the Bishop begin to read : " ' I feel so sure from your description of the noble Knight who come to you in his trouble , that he can not be the lover of this shallow - hearted little Seraphine , that I deem it wise not to tell she of his arrival , nor to mention your idea , that the woman he seek be to be find in this Nunnery . ' " 

 the smothered sound which break from the Knight be a mixture of triumph , relief , and most bitter laughter . 

 " now that be like the prioress , " say the Bishop ; " thus to use her own judgment , set at naught my superior knowledge of the fact , and flout my authority ! a noble nature , Hugh , and most lovable ; yet an imperious will , and a strength of character and purpose unusual in a woman . have she remain in the world and marry , her husband would have find it somewhat difficult wholly to mould she to his will . yet to possess such a woman would have be worth adventure much . but I must not fret you , dear lad , by talk of the prioress , when your mind be intent upon arrive at the decision of Seraphine . 

 " well , I fear I , I have but sorry news for you . the Reverend Mother write : ' Sister Mary Seraphine express herself as completely satisfied with the cloistered life . she declare that her desire to return to the world have be but a pass phase , of which she be completely purge by the timely discipline of Mother Sub - Prioress , and by the fact that she have be appoint , with Sister Mary Gabriel , to embroider the new altar - cloth for the Chapel . she talk more eagerly about a stitch she be learn from Mary Gabriel , than about any of those by - go memory , which certainly have seem most poignantly revive in she ; and I have no small difficulty in turn her mind from the all - absorb question as to how to obtain the right tint for the pomegranate . my lord , to a mind thus intent upon needle - work for the Altar of God , I could scarce have bring myself to mention the call of an earthly lover , even have I believe your Knight to be seek Seraphine . her heart be now wed to the Cloister . ' " 

 the Bishop look up . 

 " therefore , my son , we must conclude that your secret interview , whenever or wherever it take place , have no effect will bear no last fruit . " the Bishop could not resist this allusion to the pomegranate of Seraphine . 

 but Hugh d'Argent , face to face with the suspend portculli of his fate , trample all such gossamer beneath impatient foot . 

 he moisten his dry lip . 

 " the message , " he say . 

 the Bishop lift the letter . 

 " ' but , ' " he read , " ' if you still believe your noble Knight to be the lover of Seraphine , then I pray you to tell he this from I . no nun worthy of a brave man 's love , would consent to break her vow . a nun who could renounce her vow to go to he , would wrong herself and he , bring no blessing to his home . well an empty hearth , than a hearth where brood a curse . I ask you , my lord , to give this as a message to that noble Knight from I the Prioress of this House and to bid he go in peace , pray for a heart submissive to the will of God . ' " 

 the Bishop 's voice fall silent . he have maintain its quiet tone , yet perforce have have to rise to something of the dignity of this final pronouncement of the prioress , and he speak the last word with deep emotion . 

 Hugh d'Argent lean forward , his elbow on his knee ; then drop his head upon his hand , and so stay motionless . 

 the portculli have fall . its iron spike transfix his very soul . 

 she be his , yet lose to he . 

 this final word of her authority , this speaking , through the Bishop 's mouth , yet with the dignity of her own high office , all seem of set intent , to beat out the last ray of hope within he . 

 as he sit silent , with bow head , wild thought chase through his brain . he be back with she in the subterranean way . he kneel at her foot in the yellow circle of the lantern 's light . her tender hand , her woman 's hand , her firm yet gentle hand , fall on his head ; the finger move , with soothe touch , in and out of his hair . then when his love and longing break through his control come her surrender . 

 ah , when she be in his arm , why do he loose she ? or , when she have unlock the door , and the dim , grey light , like a pearly dawn at sea , steal downward from the crypt , why , like a fool , do he mount the step alone , and leave she stand there ? why do he not fle his cloak about she , and carry she up , whether she would or no ? " why ? " cry the demon of despair in his soul . " ah , why ! " 

 but , even then , his own true heart make answer . he have loose she because he love she too well to hold she to he when she have seem to wish to stand free . and he have go alone , because never would he force a woman to come with he against her will . his very strength be safeguard to her weakness . 

 presently Hugh hear the Bishop fold the prioress 's letter . he lift his head and hold out his hand . 

 the Bishop be slip the letter into his sash . 

 he pause . those eye implore . that outstretched hand demand . 

 " Nay , dear lad , " say the Bishop . " I may not give it you , because it mention the White Ladies by name , the order , and poor little shallow , changeful Seraphine herself , but this much I will do : as you may not have it , none other shall . " with which the Bishop , unfold the prioress 's letter , fling it upon the burn log . 

 together they watch it curl and blacken ; uncurl again , and slowly flake away . long after the rest have fall to ash , this sentence remain clear : " well an empty hearth ; than a hearth where brood a curse . " the flame play about it , but still it remain legible ; white letter , upon a black ground ; then , letter of fire upon grey ash . 

 of a sudden the Knight , seize the faggot - fork , dash out the word with a stroke . 

 " I would risk the curse , " he cry , with passion . " by Pilate 's water , 
 I would risk the curse ! " 
 " I know you would , my son , " say the Bishop , " and , by our Lady 's crown , I would have let you risk it , believe , as I do , that it would end in blessing . but listen , Hugh . in ask what you ask , you scarce know what you do . you need not say ' yea , ' nor ' nay , ' but I incline to think with the Reverend Mother , that the woman you seek be not foolish little Seraphine , turn one way by the neighing of a palfrey , another by the embroidering of a pomegranate . there be woman of fine mould in that Nunnery , any one of whom may be your lost betrothed . but of this we may be sure : whosoever she be , the Prioress know she , and know of whom she write when she send you that message . she have the entire confidence of all in the Nunnery . I verily believe she know they well than do their confessor a saintly old man , but dim . 

 " now , listen to I . I say you know not what you ask . Hugh , my lad , if you have win your betrothed away , you would have have much to learn and much to unlearn . believe I , I know woman , as only a priest of many year ' standing can know they . woman be either bad or good . the bad be bad below man 's understanding , because their badness be not leaven by one grain of honour ; a fact the bad of man will ever fail to grasp . the good be good above man 's comprehension , because their perfect purity of heart causeth the spirit ever to triumph over the flesh ; and their love - instinct be the instinct of self - sacrifice . every true woman be a Madonna in the home , or fain would be , if her man would let she . to such a woman , each promise of a child be an Annunciation ; our Lady 's awe and wonder , whisper again in the temple of her inner being ; for her love have deify the man she love ; and , it seem to she , a child of his and hers must be a holy babe , bear into the world to help redeem it . and so it would be , could she but have her way . but too often the man fail to understand , and so spoil the perfect plan . and she to whom love mean self - sacrifice , sacrifice all even her noble ideal soon than fail a call upon her love . yet I say again , could the Madonna instinct have have full sway , the world would have be redeem ere now to holiness , to happiness , to health . 

 " you look high , my son , by your own shewing . you love high . your love be worthy , for you remain faithful , when you believe you have be betray . let your consolation now be the knowledge that she also be faithful , and that it be a double faithfulness which keep she from respond to the call of your love . seek union with she on the spiritual plane , and some day in the Realm where all noble thing shall attain unto full perfection you may yet give thank that your love be not allow to pass through the perilous pitfall of an earthly union . " 

 the Knight look at the delicate face of the Bishop , with its wistful smile , its charm of extreme refinement . 

 yes ! here speak the Prelate , the idealist , the Mystic . 

 but the Knight be a man and a lover . 

 his dark face flushed , and his eye grow bright with inward fire such as the Bishop could hardly be expect to understand . 

 " I want not spiritual plane , " he say , " nor realm of perfection . I want my own wife , in my own home ; and , could I have win she there , I have not much doubt but that I could have lift she over any perilous pitfall that come in her way . " 

 " true , my son , " say the Bishop , at once gently acquiescent ; for Symon of Worcester invariably yield a point which have be misunderstood . for over - rating a mind with which he converse , this be ever his self - impose penance . " your great strength would be fully equal to lift lady over pitfall . which recall to my mind a scene in this day 's event , which I would fain describe to you before we part . " 

 CHAPTER XXII 

 what BROTHER PHILIP had to tell 

 the Bishop sit back in his chair , smile , as at a mental picture which give he pleasure , couple with some amusement . 

 ignore the Knight 's sullen silence , he begin his story in the cheerful voice which take for grant a willing and an interested listener . 

 " when the Prioress and myself be discuss your hope , my son , and I be urge , in your interest , liberty of flight for Sister Mary Seraphine , I inform the Reverend Mother that the carrying out of your plan , carefully lay in order to keep any scandal concern the White Ladies from reach the city , would involve for Seraphine a ride of many hour to Warwick , almost immediately upon safely reach the Star hostel . this seem as nothing to the lover who , by his own shewing , have ofttime see she ' ride like a bird , all day , on the moor . ' but to we who know the effect of monastic life and how quickly such matter as these become lose art through disuse , this romantic ride in the late afternoon and on into the summer night , loom large as a possible obstacle to the successful flight of Seraphine . 

 " therefore , in order that our little bird might try her wing , regain her seat and mastery of a horse , and rid herself of a first painful stiffness , I persuade the Reverend Mother to grant the nun a Play day , in honour of my visit , promise to send they my white palfrey , suitably caparison , in safe charge of a good lay - brother , so that all nun who please , might ride in the river meadow . you would not think it , " say the Bishop , with a smile , " but the White Ladies dearly love such sport , when it be lawful . they have an aged ass which they gleefully mount in turn , on Play day , in the courtyard and in the meadow . therefore riding be not altogether strange to they , although my palfrey , Iconoklastes , be somewhat of an advance upon their mild ass , Sheba . " 

 the Knight 's sad face have brighten at mention of the beast . 

 " wherefore ' iconoklaste ' ? " he ask , with interest . it strike he as a curious name for a palfrey . 

 " because , " reply the Bishop , ' soon after I have buy he he trample to ruin , in a fit of misplaced merriment , some flower bed on which I have spend much precious time and care , and of which I be inordinately fond . " 

 " Brute , " say the Knight , puzzle , but unwilling to admit it . " methink I should have name he ' Devil , ' for the doing of such diabolic mischief . " 

 " Nay , " say the Bishop , gently . " the Devil would have spar my flower bed . they be a snare unto I . " 

 " and wherefore ' Sheba ' ? " query the Knight . 

 " I name she so , when I give she to the prioress , " say the Bishop , " in reply to a question put to I by the Reverend Mother . the ass be elderly and mild , even then , but a handsome creature , of good breed . the Prioress ask I whether she still have too much spirit to be easily manage by the lay - sister . I answer that her name be ' Sheba . ' " 

 the Bishop pause and rub his hand softly over each other , in gleeful enjoyment of the recollection . 

 but the Knight again look blank . 

 " do that content the prioress ? " he ask ; but chiefly for love of mention her name . 

 " perfectly , " reply the Bishop . " she smile and say : ' that be well . ' and the name stick to the ass , though the Reverend Mother and I alone understand its meaning . " 

 " about the Play Day ? " suggest the Knight , grow restive . 

 " ah , yes ! about the Play Day . the time choose be after noon on this day , in order that the prioress might first accomplish her talk with Seraphine , thus clear the way for our experiment . although write last evening , I have not receive the Reverend Mother 's decisive letter , when iconoklaste set forth ; and , I confess , I look forward with keen interest , to question the lay - brother on his return . as I have tell you , I have doubt concern Seraphine ; but I know the Prioress would see to it that my meaning and intention reach the member of the Community actually concern , be she Seraphine or another ; and I should have light , both on the identity of the lady and on her probable course of action , when report reach I as to which of the nun have take the riding seriously . therefore , with no little interest , I await the return of Iconoklastes , in charge of Brother Philip . " 

 the Bishop lift the faggot - fork and , bend over the hearth , begin to build the log , quicken the die flame . 

 " well ? " cry the Knight , chafing like a charger on the curb . " well , my lord ? and then ? " 

 the Bishop stand the faggot - fork in its corner . 

 " I pause , my son , that you might say : ' wherefore " Philip " ? ' " 

 " the name of man interest I not , " say the Knight , with impatience . 
 " I care but to know the reason for the name of beast . " 
 " quite right , " say the Bishop . " Adam name the beast ; Eve name the man . yet , I would like you to ask ' wherefore " Philip , " ' because the prioress at once put that question , when she hear I call Brother Mark by his new name . " 

 " wherefore ' Philip ' ? " ask the Knight , with avert eye . 

 " because ' Philip ' signifie ' a lover of horse . ' I name the good brother so , when he develop a great affection for all the steed in my stable . 

 " well , at length Brother Philip return , lead the palfrey . I have be rid upon the height above the town , on my comely black mare , Shulamite . " 

 again the Bishop pause , and shoot a merry challenge at Hugh d'Argent ; but realise at once that the Knight could brook no more delay , he hasten on . 

 " rid into the courtyard , just as Philip lead in the palfrey , I bid he first to see to Icon 's comfort ; then come to my chamber and report . before long the lay - brother appear . 

 " now Brother Philip be an excellent teller of story . he do not need to mar they by addition , because his quickness of observation take in every detail , and his excellent memory let nothing slip . he have a faculty for recall past scene in picture , and tell a story as if describe a thing just happen before his mental vision : the sole draw - back to so vivid a memory being , that if the picture grow too mirth provoke , Brother Philip be seize with spasm of the diaphragm , and further description become impossible . on this occasion , I see at once that the good brother 's inner vision teem with picture . I settle myself to listen . 

 " Aye , it have be a wonderful scene , and more merriment , so the lay - sister afterwards tell Brother Philip , than ever know before at any Play Day . 

 " Icon be lead in state from the courtyard , down into the river meadow . 

 " at first the great delight be to crowd round he , pat he , stroke his mane , finger his trapping ; cry out word of ecstatic praise and admiration , and attempt to feed he with all manner of unsuitable food . 

 " Icon , I gather , behave much as most male behave on find themselves the centre of a crowd of admire woman . he paw the ground , and swish his tail ; arch his neck , and look from side to side ; munch cake he do not want , wink a large and roguish eye at Brother Philip ; and finally , ignore all the rest , fix a languorous gaze upon the prioress , she be the only lady present who stand apart , regard the scene , but take no share in the general adulation . 

 " at length the riding begin ; brother Philip keep firm hold on Icon , while the entire party of nun undertake to mount the nun who have elect to ride . each time Brother Philip attempt a description of this part of the proceeding he be at once seize with such spasm in the region of his girdle , that speech become an impossibility ; he could but hold himself helplessly , look at I from out stream eye , until a fresh peep at his mental picture again bend he double . 

 " much as I prefer a story complete , from start to finish , I be constrain to command Brother Philip to pass on to scene which would allow he some possibility of articulate speech . 

 " the sternness of my tone give to the good brother the necessary assistance . in a voice still weak and faltering , but gain firmness as it proceed , he describe the riding . 

 " Most of the nun ride but a few yard , hold in place by so many willing hand that , from a distance , only the noble head of Icon could be see above the move crowd , surmount by the terrified face of the riding nun ; who , hasten to exclaim that her own delight must not cause she to keep other from participation , would promptly fall off into the wait arm hold out to catch she ; at once become , when safely on her foot , the bold encourager of the next aspirant to a seat upon the back of Icon . 

 " Sister Mary Seraphine prove a disappointment . she have be will not to boast so much of her own palfrey , her riding , and her hunting , that the other nun have count upon see her gallop gaily over the field . 

 " the humble and short - live attempt be all make first . then Sister Mary Seraphine , bid the other stand aside , be swing by one tall sister , act accord to her instruction , neatly into the saddle . 

 " she gather up the rein , as to the manner bear , " and bid Brother Philip loose the bridle . but the palfrey , find himself no long hem in by a heated , press crowd , give , for very gladness of heart , a gay little gambol . 

 " Whereupon , Sister Mary Seraphine , almost unseated , shriek to Brother 
 Philip to hold the bridle , rat he soundly for have let go . 
 " he then lead Icon about the meadow , the nun follow in procession ; Sister Seraphine all the while complain ; first of the saddle , which grip she where it should not , leave an empty space there where support be need ; then of the palfrey 's pace ; then of a twist in her garment twice the procession stop to adjust they ; then of the ear of the horse which twitch for no reason , and presently point at nothing a sure sign of frenzy ; and next of his eye , which roll round and be vicious . 

 " at this , Mother Sub - Prioress , long weary of promenade , yet determined not to be leave behind while other follow on , exclaim that if the eye of the creature be vicious , then must Sister Mary Seraphine straightway dismount , and the brute be lead back to the seat where the prioress sit watch . 

 " to this Seraphine gladly agree , and a greatly sober procession return to the top of the field . 

 " but gaiety be quickly restore by the old lay - sister , Mary Antony , who , arm with the Reverend Mother 's permission , insist on mount . 

 " willing hand , miscalculating the exceed lightness of her aged body , lift she high than need be , above the back of the palfrey . Whereupon Mary Antony , part her foot , come down straddle ! 

 " firm as a limpet , she sit thus upon Icon . no effort of the nun could induce she to shift her position . command Brother Philip , see ' the Lord Bishop ' be now safely mount , to lead on and not keep he stand , old Antony ride off in triumph , bless the nun right and leave , as she pass . 

 " never be hear such shriek of merriment ! even Mother Sub - Prioress sink upon a seat to laugh with less fatigue . Sister Seraphine 's fretful complaint be forget . 

 " twice round the field go old Antony , with finger uplifted . Icon step carefully , arch his neck and walk as if he well know that he bear on his back , ninety odd year of brave gaiety . 

 " well , that make of the Play Day a success . but the good of all be yet to come . " 

 the Bishop take up the faggot - fork , and again tend the fire . he seem to find it difficult to tell that which must next be tell . 

 the Knight be breathe quickly . he sit immovable ; yet the ruby on his breast glitter continuously , like so many eager , fiery eye . 

 the Bishop go on , speak rapidly , the faggot - fork still in his hand , his face turn to the fire . 

 " they have lift Mary Antony down , and be crowd round Icon , pat and praise he , when a message come from the Reverend Mother , bid Brother Philip to bring the palfrey into the courtyard ; the nun to remain in the field . 

 " they watch the beautiful creature pace through the archway and disappear , and none know quite what would happen next . Philip hear they discuss it later . 

 " some think the Bishop have send for his palfrey . other , that the Reverend Mother have fear for the safety of the old lay - sister ; or , lest her brave example should fire the rest to be too venturesome . yet all eye be turn toward the archway , vaguely expectant . 

 " and then 

 " they hear the hoof of Icon ring on the flagstone of the courtyard . 

 " they hear the calm voice of the prioress . could it be she who be come ? 

 " out from the archway , into the sunshine , alone and fearless ; the prioress ride upon Icon . on her face be the light of a purposeful radiance . the palfrey step as if proud of the burden he carry . 

 " she smile and would have cry out gaily to the group as she pass . but , with one accord , the nun drop to their knee , with clasped hand , and face uplifted , adoring . always they love she , revere she , and think she beautiful . but this vision of the prioress , whom none have ever see mount , rid forth into the sunshine on the snow - white palfrey , fill their heart with praise and with wonder . 

 " Brother Philip lean against the archway , watch . he know his hand upon the bridle be no long need , from the moment when he see the Reverend Mother gather up the rein in her left hand , lie she right gently on the neck of Icon , and , bending , speak low in his ear . 

 " she sit a horse say Philip as only they can sit , who have ride from childhood . 

 " she walk he round the meadow once , then gently shake the rein , and he break into a trot . 

 " the watch nun , now on their foot again , shriek aloud , with fright and glee . 

 " at the extreme end of the meadow , wheel sharply , she let he out into a canter . 

 " the nun at this be petrify into dumbness . one and all hold their breath ; while Mother Sub - Prioress nobody quite know why turn upon Sister Mary Seraphine , and shake she . 

 " and the next moment the prioress be among they , walk the palfrey slowly , settle her veil , which have stream behind she as she canter , bend to speak to one and another , as she pass . 

 " and the light of new life be in her eye . her cheek glow , she seem a girl again . 

 " rein in Iconoklastes , she pause beside Mother Sub - Prioress and say " 

 the Bishop break off , while he carefully stand the faggot - fork up in its corner . 

 " she pause and say : ' none need remain here long than they will . but , be up and mount , and our Lord Bishop in no haste for the return of his palfrey , it be my intention to ride for an hour . ' " 

 Symon of Worcester turn and look full at the Knight . 

 " and the prioress ride for an hour , " he say . " for a full hour , in the sunshine , on the soft turf of the river meadow , the prioress try she wing . " 

 CHAPTER XXIII 

 the midnight ARRIVAL 

 Hugh d'Argent sit speechless , return the Bishop 's steady gaze . 

 no fear be in his face ; only a great surprise . 

 presently into the eye of both there creep a look which be half - smile , half - wistful sorrow , but wholly trustful ; a look to which , as yet , the Bishop alone hold the key . 

 " so you know , my lord , " say Hugh d'Argent . 

 " yes , my son ; I know . " 

 " since this morning ? " 

 " Nay , then ! since the first day you arrive with your story ; ask such careful question , carelessly . but be not wroth with yourself , Hugh . faithful to the hilt , have you be . only no true lover be ever a diplomat ! matter which mean more than life , can not be dissemble by true heart from keen eye . " 

 " then why all the talk concern Seraphine ? " demand the Knight . 

 " Seraphine , my son , have serve a useful purpose in various conversation . never before , in the whole of her little shallow , selfish life have Seraphine be so disinterestedly helpful . that you sit here just now , think I witless beyond belief , just when I most desire not to appear to know too much , I owe to the swollen countenance of Seraphine . " 

 " my lord , " exclaim the Knight , overcome with shame . " my lord ! how know you " 

 " peace , lad ! Fash not thyself over it . be it not a part of my sacred office to follow in the footstep of my Master and to be a discerner of the thought and intent of the heart ? also , respect , yea , approve your reason for reticence , I would have let you depart not suspect my knowledge of that which you wish to conceal , be it not that we must now face this fact together : since pen that message of apparent finality , the Prioress have try her wing . " 

 a rush of bewildered joy flood the face of the Knight . 

 " Reverend Father ! " he say , " think you that mean hope for I ? " 

 Symon of Worcester consider this question carefully , sit in his favourite attitude , his lip compress against his finger - tip . 

 at length ; " I think it mean just this , " he say . " a conflict , in she , between the mental and the physical ; between reason and instinct ; thought and feeling . the calm , collected mind send you that reason message of final refusal . the sentient body , vibrant with bound life , instinctively prepare itself for the possibility of the ride with you to Warwick . this give equal balance to the scale . but a third factor will be call in , finally to decide the matter . by that she will abide ; and neither you nor I , neither earth nor hell , neither thing past , thing present , nor thing to come , could avail to move she . " 

 " and that third factor ? " question the Knight . 

 " be the Spiritual , " reply the Bishop , solemnly , with uplifted face . 

 " with that , there come over the Knight a sudden sense of compunction . 
 he begin for the first time to see the matter as it must appear to the 
 Bishop and the nun . his own obstinate and determine self - seeking 
 sham he . 
 " you have be very good to I , my lord , " he say humbly . " you have be most kind and most generous , when indeed you have just cause to be angry . " 

 the Bishop lower his eye from the rafter , and bend they in question gaze upon Hugh d'Argent . 

 " Angry , my son ? and wherefore should I be angry ? " 

 " that I should have seek , and should still be seek , to tempt the 
 Prioress to wrong - doing . " 
 the Bishop 's questioning gaze take on a brightness which almost become the light of sublime contempt . 

 " you tempt she ? " he say . " tempt she to wrong - doing ! the man live not , who could succeed in that ! she will not come to you unless she know it to be right to come , and believe it to be wrong to stay . if I think you be tempt she , think you I would stand aside and watch the conflict ? Nay ! but I stand aside and wait while she of purer , clear vision , and walk near Heaven than you or I discern the right , and , choose it , reject the wrong . should she be satisfied that life with you be indeed God 's will for she and I tell you honestly , it will take a miracle to bring this about she will come to you . but she will not come to you unless , in so do , she be choose what to she be the hard part . " 

 " the hard part ! " exclaim the Knight . " you forget , my lord , she love I . " 

 " do I forget ? " reply the Bishop . " have you find I give to forget ? the very fact that she love you , be the heavy factor against you just now . to such woman there come ever the instinctive feeling , that that which would be sweet must be wrong , and the hard path of renunciation the only right one . they climb not Zion 's mount to reach the crown . they turn and wend their way through Gethsemane to Calvary , sure that thus alone can they at last inherit . and what can we say ? be they not follow in the footstep of the Son of God ? I fear my nature turn another way . I incline to follow King David , or Solomon in all his glory , chant glad Songs of Ascent , from the Palace on Mount Zion to the Temple on Mount Moriah . all thing harmonious , in sound , form , or colour , seem to I good and , therefore , right . but long year in Italy have soak I in the worship of the beautiful , inextricably intermingle with the adoration of the Divine . I mistrust mine own judgment , and I fear I " say the Prelate , whose gentle charity have win so many to religion " I greatly fear I , I be far from be christlike . but I recognise the spirit of self - crucifixion , when I see it . and the warning that I give you , be not because I forget , but because I remember . " 

 as the last word fall in solemn utterance from the Bishop 's lip , the silence without be break by the loud clanging of the outer bell ; follow by hurry foot in the courtyard below , the flare of torch shin up upon the casement , and the unbarring of the gate . 

 " it must be close on midnight , " say Hugh d'Argent ; " a strange hour for an arrival . " 

 the banqueting hall , on the upper floor of the Palace , have casement at the extreme end , face the door , which give upon the courtyard . 

 the Knight walk over to one of these casement stand open , kneel upon the high window - seat , and look down . 

 " a horseman have ride in , " he say , " and ride fast . his steed be fleck with foam , and stand with spread nostril , pant . . . . the rider have pass within . . . . your man , my lord , be lead away the steed . " the Knight return to his place . " brave beast ! methink they would do well to mix his warm mash with ale . " 

 Symon of Worcester make no reply . 

 he sit erect , with fold hand , a slight flush upon his cheek , listen for footstep which must be draw near . 

 they come . 

 the door , at the far end of the hall , open . 

 the gaunt Chaplain stand in the archway , make obeisance . 

 " well ? " say the Bishop , dispense with the usual formality . 

 " my lord , your messenger have return , and request an audience without delay . " 

 " bid he enter , " say the Bishop , grip the arm of the chair , and lean forward . 

 the Chaplain , half - turn , beckon with uplifted hand ; then stand aside , as rapid foot approach . 

 a young man , clothe in a brown riding - suit , dusty and travel - stain , appear in the doorway . not pause for any monkish salutation or genuflection , he stride some half - dozen pace up the hall ; then swing off his hat , stop short with his spur together , and bow in soldierly fashion toward the great fireplace . 

 thrust his hand into his breast , he draw out a packet , heavily seal . 

 " I bring from Rome , " he say and his voice ring through the chamber " for my Lord Bishop of Worcester , a letter from his Holiness the Pope . " 

 the Knight spring to his foot . the Bishop rise , a noble figure in crimson and gold , and the dignity of his high office straightway envelop he . 

 in complete silence , he stretch out his right hand for the letter . 

 the dusty traveller come forward quickly , kneel at the Bishop 's foot , and place the missive in his hand . 

 as the Bishop lift the Pope 's letter and , stoop his head , kiss the papal seal , the Knight kneel on one knee , his hand upon his sword - hilt , his eye bent on the ground . 

 so for a moment there be silence . the sovereignty of Rome , stretch a mighty arm across the sea , assert its power in the English hall . 

 then the Bishop place the letter upon a small table at his right hand , seat himself , and sign to both man to rise . 

 " how have it fare with you , Roger ? " he ask , kindly . 

 " be I in time , Reverend Father ? " exclaim the youth , eagerly . " I act on your order . no expense be spar . I charter the good vessel I could find , and have set sail within an hour of gallop into the port . we make a good passage , and be fortunate in secure relay of horse along the route , I be in Rome twenty - four hour soon than we have reckon . I ride in at sunset ; and , your name and seal pass I on everywhere , your letter , my lord , be in the Holy Father 's hand ere the glow have fade from the distant hill . 

 " I be right royally entertain by Cardinal Ferrari ; and , truth to tell , a soft couch and silken quilt be welcome , after many night of rough lodging , in the wayside inn of Normandy and Italy . moreover , have gallop ahead of time , I feel free to take a long night 's repose . 

 " but next morning , soon after the pigeon begin to coo and circle , I be call and bid to hasten . then , while I break my fast with many strange and tasty dish , seat in a marble court , with fountain play and vine o'erhanging , the Cardinal return , he have be summon already to the bedchamber of the Pope , where the reply of his Holiness lay , ready seal . 

 " Whereupon , my lord , I lose no time in set forth , pick up on my return journey each mount there where I have leave it , until I gallop into the port where our vessel wait . 

 " then , alas , come delay , and glad indeed be I , that I have not be tempt to linger in Rome ; for the wind be contrary ; some day pass before we could set sail ; and when at last I prevail upon the mariner to venture , a great storm catch we in mid - channel , threaten to rend the sail to ribbon and , lift we high , hurl we all to perdition . helpless and desperate , for the sailor have lose all control , I vow that if the storm might abate and we come safe to harbour I would when I succeed to my father 's land in Gloucestershire give to the worthy Abbot of an Abbey adjoin our estate , a meadow , concern which he and his monk have long break the tenth commandment and other command as well , a trout stream run through it , and the dear delight of the Abbot be fat trout for supper ; and of the monk , to lie on their belly tickle the trout as they hide in the cool hole under the bank of the stream . but when my father find the monk thus poach , he come up behind they , and up they get quickly or try to ! so , in mid - channel , remember my sin , I remember run to tell my father that if he come quickly he would find the good Brothers flat on their belly , sleeve roll back , head hang over the water , toe well tuck into the turf , deeply intent upon tickling . then I would run by a short cut , hide in the hazel , and watch while my father stalk up through the meadow , catch and belabour the poacher . my derisive young laughter seem now to howl and shriek through the rigging . so I vow that if the storm abate and we come safe to port , the monk should be give that meadow . upon which the storm do abate , and to port we come and what my father will say , I know not ! fear vexation to you , my lord , from this untoward delay , on land I ride as fast as mine own good horse could carry I . be I in time ? " 

 the Bishop smile as he look into the blue eye and open countenance of young Roger de Berchelai , a youth wholly devoted to his service . here be another who remember in picture , and Symon of Worcester love the gallop , and rush , and breeze of the sea , which have sweep through the chamber , in the eager young voice of his envoy . 

 " yes , my son , " say the Bishop . " you have return , not merely in time , but with two day to spare . be there ever fleeter messenger ! indeed my choice be well make and my trust well place . now you must sup and then take a much - need rest , dear lad ; and to - morrow tell I if you have need to spend more than I give you . " 

 raise his voice , the Bishop call his Chaplain ; whereupon that sinister figure at once appear in the doorway . 

 the Bishop give order concern the entertaining of the young Esquire of Berchelai ; then add ; " and let the chapel be light , Father Benedict . so soon as the aurora appear in the east , I shall celebrate mass , in thanksgiving for the blessing of a letter from the Holy Father , and for the safe return of my messenger . I shall not need your presence nor that of any of the brother , save those whose watch it chance to be . . . . Benedicite . " 

 " Deus , " respond Father Benedict , bow low . 

 Young Roger , gay and glad , knelt and kiss the Bishop 's ring ; then , rise , fling back a strand of fair hair which fall over his forehead , and say : " a bath , my lord , would be even more welcome than supper and bed . it sham I to have come in such travel - stain plight into your presence , and that of this noble knight , " with a bow to Hugh d'Argent . 

 " Nay , " say Hugh , smile in friendly response . " travel - stain gain in such fashion , be more to be desire than silk and fine linen . I would I could go to rest this night know I have accomplish as much . " 

 " go and have thy bath , boy , " say the Bishop . " this will give my monk time to tickle , catch , and cook , trout for thy supper ! ah , thou young rascal ! but that field be corban , remember . Sup well , rest well , and the blessing of the Lord be with thee . " 

 the brown riding - suit vanish through the archway . 

 Father Benedict 's lean hand pull the door to . 

 the Bishop and the Knight be once more alone . 

 CHAPTER XXIV 

 the POPE 'S MANDATE 

 the Bishop and Hugh d'Argent be once more alone . it be characteristic of both that they sit for some minute in unbroken silence . 

 then the Bishop put out his hand , take up the packet from Rome , and look at the Knight . 

 Hugh d'Argent rise , walk over to the casement , and lean out into the still , summer night . 

 he could hear the Bishop break the seal of the Pope 's letter . 

 below in the courtyard , all be quiet . the great gate be bar . he wonder whether the steam horse have be well rub down , clothe , and give a warm mash mix with ale . 

 he could hear the Bishop unfold the parchment , which crackle . 

 the moon , in her first quarter , ride high in the heaven . the tower of St. Mary 's church look black against the sky . 

 the Palace stand on the same side of the Cathedral as the main street of the city , in the direct route to the Foregate , the Tithing , and the White Ladies ' Nunnery at Whytstone . how strange to remember , that beneath he lie that mile - long walk in darkness ; that just under the Palace , so near the Cathedral , she and he , pace together , have know the end of their strange pilgrimage to be at hand . yet then 

 he could hear the Bishop turn the parchment . 

 how freely the silvery moon sail in this stormy sky , like a noble face look calmly out , and ever out again , from amid perplexity and doubt . 

 in two night ' time , the moon would be well - nigh full . would he be rid to Warwick alone , or would she be beside he ? 

 as the Bishop have say , he have describe she as rid all day , like a bird , on the moor . yet now he love well to picture her rid forth upon icon into the river meadow , her veil stream behind she ; " on her face the light of a purposeful radiance . " 

 ah , would she come ? would she come , or would she stay ? would she stay , or would she come ? 

 the moon be now hide by a cloud ; but he could see the edge of the cloud silver . 

 if the moon sail forth free , before he have count to twelve , she would come . 

 he begin to count , slowly . 

 at nine , the moon be still hide ; and the Knight 's heart fail he . 

 but at ten , the Bishop call : " Hugh ! " and turn from the casement the Knight answer to the call . 

 the Bishop hold in his hand the Pope 's letter , and also a legal - look document , from which seal depend . 

 " this doth closely concern you , my son , " say the Bishop , with some emotion , and place the parchment in the Knight 's hand . 

 Hugh d'Argent could have master its content by the light of the wax taper burn beside the Bishop 's chair . but some instinct he could not have explain , cause he to carry it over to the table in the centre of the hall , whereon four wax candle still burn . he stand to read the document , with his back to the Bishop , his head bend close to the flame of the candle . 

 once , twice , thrice , the Knight read it , before his bewildered brain take in its full import . yet it be clear and unmistakable a dispensation , sign and seal by the Pope , release Mora , Countess of Norelle , from all vow and promise take and make when she enter the Nunnery of the White Ladies of Worcester , at Whytstone , in the parish of dairy , and later on when she become Prioress of that same Nunnery ; and furthermore state that this full absolution be grant because it have be bring to the knowledge of his Holiness that this noble lady have enter the cloister life owe to a wicked and malicious plot design to wrest her castle and estate from she , and also to part she from a valiant Knight , at that time fight in the Holy Wars , to whom she be betroth . 

 furthermore the deed empower Symon , Bishop of Worcester or any priest he might appoint , to unite in marriage the Knight Crusader , Hugh d'Argent , and Mora de Norelle , sometime prioress of the White Ladies of Worcester . 

 the Knight walk back to the hearth and stand before the Bishop , the parchment in his hand . 

 " my Lord Bishop , " he say , " do I dream ? " 

 Symon of Worcester smile . " Nay , my son . surely no dream of thine be ever sign by his Holiness , nor bore suspend from it the great seal of the Vatican ! the document you hold will be sufficient answer to all question , and will ensure your wife 's position at Court and her stand in the outer world should she elect to re - enter it . 

 " but whether she shall do this , or no , be not a matter upon which the Church would give a decisive or even an authoritative pronouncement ; and the Holy Father add , in , his letter to I , far important instruction . 

 " firstly : that it must be the Prioress 's own wish and decision , apart from any undue pressure from without , to resign her office and to accept this dispensation , free she from her vow . 

 " secondly ; that she must leave the Nunnery and the neighbourhood , secretly ; if it be possible , appear in her new position , as your wife , without much question be raise as to whence she come . 

 " thirdly : that when her absence become know in the Nunnery , I be authorize solemnly to announce that she have be move on by I , secretly , with the knowledge and approval of the Holy Father , to a place where she be require for high service . " 

 the Bishop smile as he pronounce the final word . there be triumph in his eye . 

 the Knight still look as if he feel himself to be dream ; yet on his face be a great gladness of expectation . 

 " and , my lord , " he exclaim joyously , " what news for she ! shall you send it , in the morn , or yourself take it to she ? " 

 the Bishop 's lip be press against his finger - tip . 

 " I know not , " he answer , slowly ; " I know not that I shall either take or send it . " 

 " but , my lord , surely ! it will settle all doubt , solve all question , remove all difficulty " 

 " Tut ! tut ! tut ! " exclaim the Bishop . " good heaven , man ! dare I we d you to a woman you know so little ? not for one instant , into her consideration of the matter , will have enter any question as to what Church or State might say or do . for she the question stand upon simple , truer , line , not involve by rule or dogma : ' be it right for I , or wrong for I ? be it the will of God that I should do this thing ? ' " 

 " but if you tell she , my lord , of the Holy Father 's dispensation and permission ; what will she then say ? " 

 " what will she then say ? " Symon of Worcester softly laugh , as at something which stir an exceeding tender memory . " she will probably say : ' you amaze I , my lord ! indeed , my lord , you amaze I ! his Holiness the Pope may rule at Rome ; you , my Lord Bishop , rule in the city of this diocese ; but I rule in this Nunnery , and while I rule here , such a thing as this shall never be ! ' " 

 the Bishop gently pass his hand the one over the other , as be his habit when a recollection give he keen mental pleasure . 

 " that be what the prioress would probably say , my dear Knight , be I so foolish as to flaunt before she this most priceless parchment . and yet I know not . it may be wise to send it , or to show it without much comment , simply in order that she may see the effect upon the mind of the Holy Father himself , of a full knowledge of the complete fact of the case . " 

 " my lord , " say the Knight , with much earnestness , " how come that full knowledge to his Holiness in Rome ? " 

 " when first you come to I , " reply the Bishop , " with this grievous tale of wrong and treachery , I know that if you win your way with Mora , we must be arm with high authority for the marriage and for her return to the world , or sorrow and much trial for she might follow , with , perhaps , danger for you . therefore I resolve forthwith to lay the whole matter , without loss of time , before the Pope himself . I know the Holy Father well ; his openness of mind , his charity and kindliness ; his firm desire to do justly , and to love mercy . moreover , his friendship for I be such , that he would not lightly refuse I a request . also he would , of his kindness , incline to be guide by my judgment . 

 " wherefore , no soon be all the fact in my possession , those you tell I , those I already know , and those I do for myself deduce from both , than I send for young Roger de Berchelai , whose wit and devotion I could safely trust , give he all he would need for board and lodging , boat and steed , that he might accomplish the journey in the short possible time , and despatch he to Rome with a write account of the whole matter , under my private seal , to his Holiness the Pope . " 

 the Knight stand during this recital , his eye fix in search question upon the Bishop 's face . 

 then : " my lord , " he say , ' such kindness on your part , pass all understanding . that you should have bear with I while I tell my tale , be much . that you should tacitly have allow I the chance to have speech with my betrothed , be more . but that , all this time , while I be give you half - confidence , and she no confidence at all , you should have be work , spending , plan for we , risk much if the Holy Father have take your largeness of heart and breadth of mind amiss ! all this , you do , for Mora and for I ! that you be , as you tell I , a frequent guest in my childhood 's home , hold my parent in warm esteem , might account for the exceed kindness of the welcome you do give I . but this generosity this wondrous goodness I stand amazed , confound ! that you should do so great a thing to make it possible that I should we d the Prioress it pass understanding ! " 

 when Hugh d'Argent cease speaking , Symon of Worcester do not immediately make reply . he sit look into the fire , fingering , with his left hand , the gold cross at his breast , and drumming , with the finger of his right , upon the carve lion 's head which form the arm of his chair . 

 it seem as if the Bishop have , of a sudden , grow restive under the Knight 's gratitude ; or as if some train of thought have awaken within he , to which he do not choose to give expression , and which must be beat back before he allow himself to speak . 

 at length , fold his hand , he make answer to the Knight , still look into the fire , a certain air of detachment wrap he round , as with an invisible yet impenetrable shield . 

 " you overwhelm I , my dear Hugh , with your gratitude . it have not seem to I that my action in this matter would demand either thank or explanation . there be occasion when to do less than our good , would be to sin against all that which we hold most sacred . to my mind , the most useful definition of sin , in the sacred writing , be that of the apostle Saint James , most practical of all the inspire writer , when he say : ' to he that knoweth to do good , and doeth it not , to he it be sin . ' I know quite clearly the ' good ' to be do in this case . therefore no gratitude be due to I for fail to fall into the sin of omission . 

 " also , my son , many who seem to deserve the gratitude of other , would be find not to deserve it , if the entire inward truth of motive could be fully reveal . 

 " with I it be well - nigh a passion that all good thing should attain unto full completeness . 

 " it may be I be well able to give full understanding to your tale because , for love of a woman , I dwell seven year in exile from this land , fear lest my great love for she , which come to I all unsought , should by become know to her lead her young heart , as yet fresh and unawakened , to respond . there be never any question of break my vow ; and I hold not with love - friendship between man and woman , there where marriage be not possible . they be , at good , selfish on the part of the man . they keep the woman from enter into her kingdom . the crown of womanhood be to bear child to the man she love to take her place in his home , as wife and mother . the man who can not offer this , yet stand in the way of the man who can , be a poor and an unworthy lover . " 

 the Bishop pause , unclasp his hand , withdraw his steadfast regard from the fire , and sit back in his chair . the stone in his ring gleam blue , the colour of forget - I - not beside a meadow brook . 

 presently he look at the silent Knight . there be a kindly smile , in his eye , rather than upon his lip . 

 " it may be , my dear Hugh , that this heart discipline of mine of which , by the way , I have never before speak have make I quick to understand the suffering of other man . also it may explain the great desire I always experience to see a truly noble woman come to the full completion of her womanhood . 

 " I return to England not long after your betrothed have enter the cloister life in the Whytstone Nunnery . I be appoint to this see of Worcester , which appointment give I the spiritual control of the White Ladies . my friendship with the Prioress have be a source of interest , pleasure , and true helpfulness to myself and I trust to she also . I think I tell you while we sup that , many year ago , I have know she at the Court when I be confessor to the Queen , and preceptor to her lady . but no mention have ever be make between the Prioress and myself of any previous acquaintance . I doubt whether she recognise , in the frail , white - haired , old prelate who arrive from Italy , the vigorous , bearded priest know to she , in her girlhood 's day , as " the Bishop pause and look steadily at the Knight " as Father Gervaise . " 

 " Father Gervaise ! " exclaim Hugh d'Argent , lift his hand to cross himself as he name the Dead , yet arrest in this instinctive movement by something in those keen blue eye . " Father Gervaise , my lord , perish in a stormy sea . the ship founder , and none who sail in she be see again . " 

 the Knight speak with conviction ; yet , even as he speak , the amazing truth rush in upon he , and strike he dumb . of a sudden he know why the Bishop 's eye have instantly win his fearless confidence . a trust friend of his childhood have look out at he from their dear depth . often he have search his memory , since the Bishop have claim knowledge of he in his boyhood , and have marvel that no recollection of Symon as a guest in his parent ' home come back to he . 

 now in this moment of revelation how clearly he could see the figure of the famous priest , in brown habit , cloak , and hood , a cord at his waist , with tonsured head , full brown beard , and sandalle foot , pace the great hall , stand in the armoury , or climb the Cumberland hill to visit the chapel of the Holy Mount and the hermit who dwelt beside it . 

 as be the way with childhood 's memory , the small , most trivial detail leapt up vivid , crystal clear . the present be forget , the future disregard , in the sudden intimate dearness of that long - ago past . 

 the Bishop allow time for this realisation . then he speak . 

 " true , the ship founder , Hugh ; true , none who sail in she be see again . and , if I tell you that one swimmer , after long buffeting , be fling up on a rocky coast , lie for many week sick unto death in a fisherman 's humble cot , rise at last the frail shadow of his former self , to find that his hair have turn white in that desperate night , to find that none know his name nor his estate , that leave Father Gervaise and his failure at the bottom of the ocean he could shave his beard , and make his way to Rome under any name he please ; if I tell you all this , I trust you with a secret , Hugh , know to one other only , during all these year his Holiness , the Pope . " 

 " Father ! " exclaim the Knight , with deep emotion ; " Father " then , his voice break . he drop on one knee in front of the Bishop , and clasp the band stretch out to he . 

 what strange thing have happen ? one , greatly love and long mourn , have rise from the dead ; yet she who have well love and most mourn he , have herself pass to the Realm of Shadows , and be not here to wonder and to rejoice . 

 " Father , " say Hugh , when he could trust his voice , " in her last word to I , my mother speak of you . I go to her chamber to bid her sleep well , and together we knelt before the crucifix . ' let we repeat , ' whisper my mother , ' those holy word of comfort which Father Gervaise ever bid his penitent to say , as they kneel before the die Redeemer . ' ' mother , ' say I , ' I know they not . ' ' thou wert so young , my son , ' she say , ' when Father Gervaise last be with we . ' ' tell I the word , ' I say ; ' I should like well to have they from thy lip . ' so , lift her eye to the dead Christ , my mother say , with awe and reverence in her voice and a deep gladness on her face : ' he ever liveth to make intercession for we . ' and , in the dawn of the new day , her spirit pass . " 

 the Bishop lay his hand upon the Knight 's bow head . " my son , " he say , " of all the woman I have know , thy gentle mother bear the most beautiful and saintly character . I would there be more such as she , in our british home . " 

 " Father , " say Hugh , brokenly , " know you how much she have to bear ? my father 's fierce feud with all , shut she up at last to utter loneliness . his anger against Holy Church and his contempt of her priest , cost my mother the comfort of your visit . his life - long quarrel with Earl Eustace de Norelle cause that our family , though dwell within a three hour ' ride , be allow no intercourse . never do I enter Castle Norelle until I ride up from the South , with a message for Mora from the king . and , to this day , Mora have never be within the courtyard of my home ! when we be betroth , I dare not tell my parent though Earl Eustace and his Countess both be dead lest my father 's wrath might reach Mora , when I have go . news of his death , chance to I in a far - off land , bring I home . and truly , it be home indeed , at last ! peace and content , where always there have be turbulence and strain . Father , I tell you this because I know my gentle mother fear you do not understand , and that you may have think her love for you have fail . " 

 Symon of Worcester smile . 

 " dear lad , " he say , " I understand . " 

 " ah why , " cry Hugh , with sudden passion , " why should a woman 's whole life be spoil , and other life be darken and make sad , just by the angry , churlish , sullen whim of " 

 " hush , boy ! " say the Bishop , quickly . " you speak of your father , and you name the Dead . something die in the living , each time they speak evil of the Dead . I know your father ; and , though he love I not , yet , to be honest , I must say this of he : Sir Hugo be a good man and true ; upright , and a man of honour . he carry his shield untarnished . if he be fear by his friend , he be also fear by his foe . brave he be and fearless . one thing he lack ; and often , alas , they who lack just one thing , lack all . 

 " Hugo d'Argent know not love for his fellow - man . to be a man , be to earn his frown ; all thing human call forth his disdain . to view the same landscape , breathe the same air , in fact walk the same earth as he , be to stand in his way , and raise his ire . yet in his harsh , vex manner he love his wife , and love his little son . nor have he any self - conceit . he realise in himself his own bad foe . lest we fall into this snare , it be well daily to pray : ' o Lover of Mankind , grant unto I truly to love my fellow - man ; to honour they , until they prove worthless ; to trust they , until they prove faithless ; and ever to expect well of they , than I expect of myself ; to think well of they , than I think of myself . ' let we go through life , my son , search for good in other , not for evil ; we may miss the good , if we search not for it ; the evil , alas , will find we , quite soon enough , unsought . " 

 suddenly Hugh lift his head . 

 " Father , " he say , " the starling ! mind you the starling with the broken wing , which you and I find in the wood and carry home ; and you do set his wing , and tame he , and teach he to say ' hugh ' ? each time I bring he food , you say : ' Hugh ! hugh ! ' and soon the starling , see I come , also say : ' Hugh ! hugh ! ' do you remember , Father ? " 

 " I do remember , " say the Bishop . " I see thee now , come across the courtyard , bread and meat in thy hand a little lad , bareheade in the sunshine , glow with pleasure because the starling run to meet thee , shout ' Hugh ! ' " 

 " then listen , dear Father .   ah , how often have I wish to tell you this !   soon after you be go , that starle rudely teach I a hard lesson . gain strength , one day he leave the courtyard , run through the buttery , and wander in the garden . I follow , whistle and watch . it greatly delight the bird to find himself on turf . there have be rain . the grass be wet . presently a rash worm , glide from its hole , adventure forth . the starling run to the worm , call it ' hugh . ' ' Hugh ! Hugh ! ' he cry , and tug it from the earth . ' Hugh ! hugh ! ' and peck it , where helpless it lie squirm . then , shout ' Hugh ! ' once more , gobble it down . I stand with heavy heart , for I have think that starle love I with a true , personal love , when he run at my approach shout my name . yet now I know it be the food I carry , he call ' Hugh ' ; it be the food , not I , he love . Glad be I when , his wing grow strong , he fly away . it cut I to the heart to hear the worm , the grub , the snail , the caterpillar , all call ' Hugh ' ! " 

 the Bishop smile , then sigh . " poor little eager heart , " he say , " learn so hard a lesson , all alone ! yet be it a lesson , lad , soon or later learn in sadness by all generous heart . . . . and now , leave the past , with all its memory , let we return to the present , and face the uncertain future . also , dear Knight , I must ask you to remember , even when we be alone , that your old friend , Father Gervaise , in his brown habit , lie at the bottom of the ocean ; yet that your new friend , Symon of Worcester , hold you and your interest very near his heart . " 

 the Bishop put out his hand . 

 Hugh seize and kiss it , know this be his farewell to Father 
 Gervaise . 
 then he rise to his foot . 

 the Bishop say nothing ; but an indefinable change come over he . 
 again he extend his hand . 
 the Knight kneel , and kiss the Bishop 's ring . 

 " I thank you , my lord , " he say , " for your great trust in I . I will not prove unworthy . " with this he go back to his seat . 

 the Bishop , lift the faggot - fork , carefully stir and build up the log . 

 " what be we say , my dear Knight , when we stray into a side issue ? ah , I remember ! I be tell you of my appointment to the see of Worcester , and my belief that the Prioress fail to recognise in I , one she have know long year before . " 

 the Bishop put by the faggot - fork and turn from the fire . 

 " I find the promise of that radiant girlhood more than fulfil . she be change ; she shew obvious sign of have pass through the furnace ; but pure gold can stand the fire . the strength of purpose , the noble outlook upon life , the gracious tenderness for other , have mature and develop . even the necessary restriction of monastic life could not modify the grand line both mental , and physical on which Nature have mould she . 

 " I endeavour to think no thought concern she , other than should be think of a holy lady who have take vow of celibacy . yet , see she so fit to have make house home for a man , help he upward , and to have be the mother of a fine race of son and daughter , I feel it grievous that in leave the world for a reason which in no sense could be consider a true vocation , she should have cut herself off from such power and possibility . 

 " so pass the year in the calm service of God and of the Church ; yet always I seem aware that a crisis would come , and that , when that crisis come , she would need I . " 

 the Bishop pause and look at the Knight . 

 Hugh 's face be in shadow ; but , as the Bishop look at he , the ruby on his breast glitter in the firelight , as if some sudden thought have set he strongly quiver . 

 at sight of which , a flash of firm resolve , like the swift drawing of a sword , break o'er the Bishop 's calmness . it be quick and powerful ; it seem to divide asunder soul and spirit , joint and marrow , and to discern the thought and intent of the heart . and before that two - edge blade could sheathe itself again , swiftly the Bishop speak . 

 " therefore , my dear Hugh , when you arrive with your tale of wrong and treachery , all unconsciously to yourself , every word you speak of your betrothed reveal she to the man who have love she while you be yet a youth , with your spur to win , and all life before you . 

 " I see in your arrival , and in the strange tale you tell , a wondrous chance for she of that full development of life for which I know she to be so perfectly fit . 

 " it have seem indeed the irony of fate that , while I have flee and dwelt in exile lest my presence should hold she back from marriage , the treachery of other should have drive she into a life of celibacy . 

 " therefore while , with my tacit consent , you go to work in your own way , I send my messenger to Rome bear to the Holy Father a full account of all , petition a dispensation from vow take owe to deception , and ask leave to unite in the holy sacrament of marriage these long - sunder lover , undertake that no scandal should arise therefrom , either in the Nunnery or in the City of Worcester . 

 " as you have see , my messenger this night return ; and we now find ourselves arm with the full sanction of his Holiness , provide the prioress , of her own free will , desire to renounce the high position she have win in her holy calling , and to come to you . " 

 the quiet voice cease speak . 

 the Knight rise slowly to his foot . at first he stand silent . then he speak with a calm dignity which prove he worthy of the Bishop 's trust . 

 " I greatly honour you , my lord , " he say ; " and be our age and condition other than they be , so that we might fight for the woman we love , I should be proud to cross sword with you . " 

 the Bishop sit look into the fire . a faint smile flicker at the corner of the sensitive mouth . the fight he have fight for the woman he love have be of stern quality than the mere crossing of knightly sword . 

 Hugh d'Argent speak again . 

 " profoundly do I thank you , Reverend Father , for all that you have do ; and even more , for that which you do not do . it be six year after her first sojourn at the Court that I meet Mora , love she , and win she ; and well I know that the sweet love she give to I be a love from which no man have brush the bloom . " 

 Hugh pause . 

 those kindly and very luminous eye be still bent upon the fire . be the Bishop find it hard to face the fact that his life 's secret have now , by his own act , pass into the keeping of another ? 

 Hugh move a pace nearer . 

 " and deeply do I love you , Reverend Father , for your wondrous goodness to she , and for her sake to I . and I pray heaven , " add Hugh d'Argent simply , " that if she come to I , she may never know that she once win the love of so greatly well a man than he who win her . " 

 with which the Knight drop upon one knee , and humbly kiss the hem of the Bishop 's robe . 

 Symon of Worcester be greatly move . 

 " my son , " he say , " we be at one in desire her happiness and high good . for the rest , God , and her own pure heart , must guide her foot into the way of peace . " 

 the Bishop rise , and go to the casement . 

 " the aurora break in the east . the dawn be near . come with I , Hugh , to the chapel . we pray for his Holiness , give thank for his gracious letter and mandate ; we praise for the safe return of my messenger . but we will also offer up devout petition that the Prioress may have clear light at this parting of the way , and that our enterprise may be bring to a happy conclusion . " 

 so , presently , in the dimly - light chapel , the Knight knelt alone ; while , away at the high altar , remote , wrapt , absorb in the supreme act of his priestly office , stand the Bishop , celebrate mass . 

 yet one anxious prayer ascend from the heart of both . 

 and , in the pale dawn of that new day , the woman for whom both the Knight and the Bishop pray , keep vigil in her cell , before the shrine of the Madonna . 

 " Blessed Virgin , " she say ; " thou who lovedst Saint Joseph , be betroth to he , yet didst keep thyself an holy shrine consecrate to the Lord and his need of thee oh , grant unto I strength to put from I this constant torment at the thought of his suffering to whom once I give my troth , and to reconsecrate myself wholly to the service of my Lord . " 

 thus these three knelt , as a new day dawn . 

 and the Knight pray : " give she to I ! " 

 and the Bishop pray : " guide her foot into the way of peace . " 

 and the prioress , with hand cross upon her breast and eye uplifted , say : " cause I to know the way wherein I should walk ; for I lift up my soul unto Thee . " 

 the silver streak of the aurora pal before soar shafts of gold , bright herald of the rise sun . 

 then from the Convent garden trill softly the first note , poignant but pass sweet , of the robin 's song . 

 CHAPTER XXV 

 MARY ANTONY receive the BISHOP 

 the morning after the return from Rome of the Bishop 's messenger , the old lay - sister , Mary Antony , chance to be cross the Convent courtyard , when there come a loud knock on the outer gate . 

 Mary Antony , hastening , thrust aside the buxom porteress , and herself open the guichet , and look out . 

 the Lord Bishop , mount upon his white palfrey , wait without ; 
 Brother Philip in attendance . 
 what a bewildering surprise ! what a fortunate thing , think old Antony , that she should chance to be there to deal with such an emergency . 

 never do the Bishop visit the Nunnery , without send a messenger beforehand to know whether the prioress could see he , state the exact hour of his propose arrival ; so that , when the great door be fling wide and the Bishop ride into the courtyard , the Prioress would be stand at the top of the step to receive he ; Mother Sub - Prioress in attendance in the background ; the other holy lady upon their knee within the entrance ; Mary Antony , well out of sight , yet where peeping be possible , because she love to see the Reverend Mother kneel and kiss the Bishop 's ring , rise to her foot again without pause , make of the whole movement one graceful , deep obeisance . after which , Mary Antony , still peep , greatly love to see the prioress mount the wide , stone staircase with the Bishop ; each shew a courtly deference to the other . 

  one of Mary Antony 's most exalt dream of heaven , be of a place where she should sit upon a jasper seat and see the Reverend Mother and the great Lord Bishop mount together interminable flight of golden stair ; while Mother Sub - Prioress and Sister Mary Rebecca look through black bar , somewhere down below , whence they would have a good view of Mary Antony on her jasper seat , but no glimpse of the golden stair or of the radiant figure which she watch ascend . 

 so much for the usual visit of the Bishop , when everything be in readiness for his reception . 

 but now , all unexpected , the Bishop wait without the gate , and Mary 
 Antony have to deal with this emergency . 
 cry to the porteress to open wide , she hasten to the step . . . . 
 it be impossible to summon the Reverend Mother in time . . . . the 
 Lord Bishop must not be keep wait ! . . . even now the great door 
 be roll back . 
 Mary Antony mount the six step ; then turn in the doorway . 

 the Lord Bishop must be receive . there be nobody else to do it . she would receive the Lord Bishop ! 

 as she see he rid in upon icon , bless the porteress as he pass , she remember how she have ride round the river meadow as the Bishop . now she must play her part as the prioress . 

 so it come to pass that , as he ride up to the door and dismount , fling his rein to Brother Philip , the Bishop find himself confront by the queer little figure of the aged lay - sister , draw up to its full height and obviously uphold by a sense of importance and dignity . 

 as the Bishop reach the entrance , she kneel and kiss his ring ; then try to rise quickly , fail , and clutch at his hand , exclaim : " Devil take my old knee - joint ! " 

 never before have the Bishop be receive with such a formula ! never have his ring be kiss by a lay - sister ! but remember the scene when old Antony ride round the field upon Icon , he understand that she now be play the part of prioress . 

 " good - day , worthy Mother , " he say , as he raise she . " the spirit be willing I know , but , in your case , the knee - joint be weak . but no wonder , for they have do you long service . why , I get up slowly from kneeling , yet my knee be thirty year young than your . . . . nay I will not mount to the Reverend Mother 's chamber until you acquaint she of my arrival . take I round to the garden , and there let I wait in the shade , while you seek she . " 

 greatly elated at the success of her effort , and embolden by his charming condescension , Mary Antony lead the Bishop through the rose - arch ; and , cast a furtive glance at his face from behind the curtain of her veil , venture to hope there be naught afoot which could bring trouble or care to the Reverend Mother . 

 Mary Antony be trot beside the Bishop , down the long walk between the yew hedge , when she give vent to this anxious question . 

 at once the Bishop slacken speed . 

 " not so fast , Sister Antony , " he say . " I pray you to remember mine age , and to moderate your pace . why should you expect trouble or anxiety for the Reverend Mother ? " 

 " Nay , " say Mary Antony , " I expect naught ; I see naught ; I hear naught ! ' twa all mine own mistake , count with my pea . I tell the Reverend Mother so , and set her mind at rest by carry up six pea , say that I have find six and not five in my wallet . " 

 " let we pause , " say the Bishop , " and look at this lily . how lovely be its petal . how tall and white it shews against the hedge . why do you need to set the Reverend Mother 's mind at rest , Sister Antony , by carry up six pea ? " 

 " because , " say the old lay - sister , " when I have count as they return , the twenty holy lady who have go to vesper , yet another pass make twenty - one . upon which I run and report to the Reverend Mother , say in my folly , that I fear the twenty - first be Sister Agatha , return to walk amongst the living , she be over fifty year number with the Dead . yet many a time , just before dawn , have I hear she rap on the cloister door ; aye , many a time tap ! tap ! tap ! but what good would there be in opening to a poor lady you help thrust into her shroud , nigh upon sixty year before ? so ' tap away ! ' say I ; ' tap away , Sister Agatha ! try Saint Peter at the gate of Paradise . Old Antony know well than to let you in . ' " 

 " what say the Reverend Mother when you report on a twenty - first 
 White Lady ? " ask the Bishop . 
 " Reverend Mother bid I begone , while she herself deal with the wraith of Sister Agatha . " 

 " and why do you not go ? " ask the Bishop , quietly . 

 completely take aback , Mary Antony 's ready tongue fail she . she stand stock still and star at the Bishop . her gum begin to rattle and she clap her knuckle against they , horror and dismay in her eye . 

 the Bishop look searchingly into the frightened old face , and there read all he want to know . then he smile ; and , take she gently by the arm , pace on between the yew hedge . 

 " Sister Antony , " he say , and the low tone of his voice fall like quiet music upon old Antony 's perturb spirit ; " you and I , dear Sister Antony , love the Reverend Mother so truly and so faithfully , that there be nothing we would not do , to save she a moment 's pain . we know how noble and how good she be ; and that she will always decide aright , and follow in the footstep of our blessed Lady and all the holy saint . but other there be , who do not love she as we love she , or know she as we know she ; and they might judge she wrongly . therefore we must tell to none , that which we know how the Reverend Mother , alone , deal with that visitor , who be not the wraith of Sister Agatha . " 

 Mary Antony peep up at the Bishop . a light of great joy be on her face . her eye have lose their look of terror , and begin to twinkle cunningly . 

 " I know naught , " she say . " I see naught ; I hear naught . " 

 the Bishop smile . 

 " how many pea be leave in your wallet , Sister Antony ? " 

 " five , " chuckle Mary Antony . 

 " why do you shew six to the Reverend Mother ? " 

 " to set her mind at rest , " whisper the old lay - sister . 

 " to cause she to think that you have hear naught , see naught , and know naught ? " 

 Mary Antony nod , chuckle again . 

 " faithful old heart ! " say the Bishop . " what give thee this thought ? " 

 " our blessed Lady , in answer to her petition , sharpen the wit of old 
 Antony . " 
 the Bishop sigh . " may our blessed Lady keep they sharp , " he murmur , half aloud . 

 " amen , " say Mary Antony with fervour . 

 CHAPTER XXVI 

 love never FAILETH 

 the Bishop await the Prioress on that stone seat under the beech , from which the robin have carry off the pea . 

 he see she come through the sunlit cloister . 

 as she move down the step , and come swiftly toward he , he be conscious at once of an indefinable change in she . 

 have that ride upon Icon set she free from trammel in which she have be hitherto immeshe ? 

 as she reach he , he take both her hand , so that she should not kneel . 

 " already I have be receive with obeisance , my daughter , " he say ; and tell she of old Mary Antony 's quaint little figure , stand to do the honour in the doorway . 

 the prioress , at this , laugh gaily , and in her turn tell the Bishop of the scene , on this very spot , when old Antony display her pea to the robin . 

 " what pea ? " ask the Bishop ; and so hear the whole story of the twenty - five pea and the daily counting , and of the identifying of certain of the pea with various member of the Community . " and a large , white pea , choose for its fine aspect , be myself , " say the prioress ; " and , leave the Sub - Prioress and Sister Mary Rebecca , Master Robin swoop down and fly off with I ! hear cry of distress , I hasten hither , to find Mary Antony denounce the robin as ' Knight of the Bloody Vest , ' and make loud lamentation over my abduction . her imagining become more real to she than reality . " 

 " she hath a faithful heart , " say the Bishop , " and a shrewd wit . " 

 " faithful ? aye , " say the prioress , " faithful and loving . yet it be but lately I have realise , the love , beneath her carefulness and devotion . " the Prioress bend her level brow , look away to the overhang branch of the Pieman 's tree . " how quickly , in these place , we lose the very remembrance of the meaning of personal , human love . we grow so soon accustomed to allow ourselves to dwell only upon the abstract or the divine . " 

 " that be a loss , " say the Bishop . he turn and begin to pace slowly toward the cloister ; " a grievous loss , my daughter . soon than that you should suffer that loss , beyond repair , I would let the daring Knight of the Bloody Vest carry you off on swift wing . well a robin 's nest , if , love be there , than a nunnery full of dead heart . " 

 he hear the quick catch of her breath , but give she no chance to speak . 

 " ' and now abideth faith , hope , love , these three , ' " quote the Bishop ; " ' but the great of these be love . ' " 

 they be move through the cloister . the Prioress turn in the doorway , pause that the Bishop might pass in before she . 

 " this , my lord , " she say , with a fine sweep of her arm , " be the abode of Faith and Hope , and also of that divine Love , which excelleth both Hope and Faith . " 

 " Nay , " say the Bishop , " I pray you , listen . ' love suffereth long , and be kind ; love envieth not ; love vaunteth not itself , be not puff up ; doth not behave itself unseemly ; seeketh not her own ; be not easily provoke , think no evil ; rejoiceth not in iniquity , but rejoiceth in the truth ; beareth all thing , believeth all thing , hopeth all thing , endureth all thing . love never faileth . ' methink , " say the Bishop , in a tone of gentle meditation , as he enter the prioress 's cell , " the apostle be speak of a most human love ; yet he rat it high than faith and hope . " 

 " be you still dwell upon Sister Mary Seraphine , my lord ? " inquire the prioress , and in her voice he hear the sound of a gathering storm . 

 " Nay , my dear prioress , " say the Bishop , seat himself in the spanish chair , and lay his biretta upon the table near by ; " I speak not of self - love , nor do the apostle whose word I quote . I take it , he write of human love , sanctify ; upborne by faith and hope , yet great than either ; just as a bird be great than its wing , yet can not mount without they . we must have faith , we must have hope ; then our poor earthly love can rise from the low level of self - seeking and self - pleasing and take their place among those thing that be eternal . " 

 the Prioress have place her chair opposite the Bishop . she be very pale , and her lip tremble . she make so great an effort to speak with calmness , that her voice sound stern and hard . 

 " why this talk of earthly love , my Lord Bishop , in a place where all earthly love have be renounce and forget ? " 

 the Bishop , see those trembling lip , ignore the hard tone , and answer , very tenderly , with a simple directness which scorn all evasion : 

 " because , my daughter , I be here to plead for Hugh . " 

 CHAPTER XXVII 

 the woman and her CONSCIENCE 

 " for Hugh ? " say the Prioress . and then again , in low tone of incredulous amazement , " for Hugh ! what know you of Hugh , my lord ? " 

 the Bishop look steadfastly at the prioress , and reply with exceed gravity and earnestness : 

 " I know that in break your solemn troth to he , you be break a very noble heart ; and that in leave his home desolate , you be rob he not only of his happiness but also of his faith . man be apt to rate our holy religion , not by its theory , but by the way in which it causeth we to act in our dealing with they . if you condemn Hugh to sit beside his hearth , through the long year , a lonely , childless man , you take the Madonna from his home ; if you take your love from he , I greatly fear lest you should also rob he of his belief in the love of God . I do not say that these thing should be so ; I say that we must face the fact that thus they be . and remember between a man and woman of noble birth , each with a stainless escutcheon , each believe the other to be the soul of honour , a broken troth be no light matter . " 

 " I do not break my troth , " say the prioress , " until I believe that 
 Hugh have break his . I have suffer sore anguish of heart and 
 humiliation of spirit , over the news of his marriage with his cousin 
 Alfrida , ere I resolve to renounce the world and enter the cloister . " 
 " but Hugh do not we d his cousin , nor any other woman , " say the Bishop . " he be true to you in every thought and act , even after he also have pass through sore anguish of heart by reason of your suppose marriage with another suitor . " 

 " I learn the truth but a few day since , " say the prioress . " for seven long year I think Hugh false to I . for seven long year I believe he the husband of another woman , and school myself to forget every memory of past tenderness . " 

 " you be both deceive , " say the Bishop . " you have both pass through deep water . you each owe it to the other to make all possible reparation . " 

 " for seven holy year , " say the prioress , firmly , " I have be the bride of Christ . " 

 " do you love Hugh ? " ask the Bishop . 

 there be silence in the chamber . 

 the Prioress desire , most fervently , to take her stand as one dead to all earthly love and desire . yet each time she open her lip to reply , a fresh picture appear in the mirror of her mental vision , and close they . 

 she see herself , with hand outstretche , clasp Hugh 's as they kneel together before the shrine of the Madonna . she could feel the rush of pulse life flow from his hand to the palm of her , and so upward to her poor numbed heart , make it beat its wing like a cage bird . 

 she feel again the strength and comfort of the strong arm on which she lean , as slowly through the darkness she and Hugh pace in silence , side by side . 

 she remember each time when obedience have seem strangely sweet , and she have love the manly abruptness of his command . 

 she see Hugh , in the ring of yellow light cast by the lantern , kneel at her foot . she feel his hair , thick and soft , between her finger . 

 and then she remember that shudder sob , and the instant breaking down of every barrier . he be her , to comfort ; she be his , to soothe his pain . then the exquisite moment of yield ; the relief of the clasp of his strong arm ; the pass away of the suffering of long year , as she feel his lip on her , and surrender to the hunger of his kiss . 

 then one last picture when loyal to her wish , feel rather than express , he have free she , and pass , without further word or touch , up into that dim grey light like a pearly dawn at sea pass , and be lose to view ; she see herself leave in utter loneliness , the heavy door lock by her own turning of the key , he on one side , she on the other , for ever ; she see herself lie beneath the ground , in darkness and desolation , her face in the damp dust where his foot have stand . 

 " do you love Hugh ? " again demand the Bishop . 

 and the prioress lift eye full of suffering , reproach , and pain , but also full of courage and truth , to his face , and answer simply : " alas , my lord , I do . " 

 the silence thereafter follow be tense with conflict . the Bishop turn his eye to the figure of the Redeemer upon the cross , self - sacrifice personify , while the prioress master her emotion . 

 then : " ' love never faileth , ' " say the Bishop gently . 

 but the prioress have regain command over herself , and the gentle word be to she a challenge . she don , forthwith , the breastplate of holy resolve , and draw her sword . 

 " my Lord Bishop , you have wring from I a confession of my love ; but in so do , you have wring from I a confession of sin . a nun may not yield to such love as Hugh d'Argent still desire to win from I . with long hour of prayer and vigil , have I seek to purge my soul from the stain of a weak yielding even for ' a moment ' to the masterful insistence of this man , who force himself , by the subterfuge of a sacrilegious masquerade , into the sacred precinct of our Nunnery . I know not whom he bribe " continue the prioress , flash an indignant glance of suspicion at the Bishop . 

 " ' love think no evil , ' " murmur Symon of Worcester . 

 " but I do know , that somebody in high authority must have connive at his plotting , or he could not have find himself alone in the crypt at the hour of Vespers , in such wise as to assume our dress and , mingle with the return procession , gain entrance to the cloister . and somebody must still be aid and abet his plan , or he could not be , as he himself tell I he would be , daily in the crypt alone , during the hour when we pass to and from the clerestory . it anger I , my lord , to think that one who should , in this , be on my side , taketh part against I . " 

 " ' be not easily provoke , ' " quote the Bishop . 

 " in fact I be tempt , my lord , " say the prioress , rise to her foot , tall and indignant , " I be almost tempt , my Lord Bishop , to forget the reverence which I owe to your high office " 

 " ' Doth not behave itself unseemly , ' " murmur Symon of Worcester , put on his biretta . 

 the Prioress turn she back upon the Bishop , and walk over to the window . she be so angry that she feel the tear sting beneath her eyelid ; yet at the same time she experience a most incongruous desire to kneel down beside that beautiful and dignified figure , rest her head against the Bishop 's knee , and pour out the cruel tale of conflict , uncertainty and striving , temptation and hard - won victory , which , have lately make up the sum of her night and day . he have be her trust friend and counsellor during all these year . yet now she know he array against she , and she fear he more than she fear Hugh . Hugh wrestle with her feeling ; and , on the plane of the sens , she know she will would triumph . but the Bishop wrestle with her mentality ; and behind his calm gentleness be a strength of intellect which , if she yield at all , would seize and hold she , as steel finger in a velvet glove . 

 she return to her seat , compose but determine . 

 " Reverend Father , " she say , " I pray you to pardon my too swift indignation . to you I look to aid I in this time of difficulty . I grieve for the sorrow and disappointment to a brave and noble knight , a loyal lover , and a most faithful heart . but I can not reward faith with un - faith . if I break my sacred vow in order to give myself to he , I should not bring a blessing to his home . well an empty hearth than a hearth where brood a curse . besides , we never could live down the scandal cause . I should be anathema to all . the Pope himself would doubtless excommunicate we . it would mean endless sorrow for I , and danger for Hugh . on these ground , alone , it can not be . " 

 then the Bishop draw from his sash a fold sheet of vellum . 

 " my daughter , " he say , " when Hugh come to I with his grievous tale of treachery and loss , he refuse to give I the name of the woman he seek , say only that he believe she be to be find among the White Ladies of Worcester . when I ask her name he answer : ' Nay , I guard her name , as I would guard mine honour . if I fail to win she back ; if she withhold herself from I , so that I ride away alone ; then must I ride away leave no shadow of reproach on her fair fame . her name will be for ever in my heart , ' say Hugh , ' but no word of mine shall have leave it , in the mind of any man , link with a broken troth or a forsaken lover . ' I tell you this , my daughter , lest you should misjudge a very loyal knight . 

 " but no true lover be ever a diplomat . Hugh have not talk long with I , before you stand clearly reveal . a few careful question settle the matter , beyond a doubt . Whereupon , my dear Prioress " 

 the Bishop pause . it become suddenly difficult to proceed . the clear eye of the Prioress be upon he . 

 " Whereupon , my lord ? " 

 " Whereupon I realise an early dream of mine seem promise a possible fulfilment . I know Hugh as a lad it be a veritable passion with I that all thing should attain unto their full perfection in short , I send a messenger to Rome , bear a careful account of the whole matter , in a private letter from myself to his Holiness the Pope . last evening , my messenger return , bring a letter from the Holy Father , with this enclose . " 

 the Bishop hold out the fold document . 

 the Prioress rise , take it from he , and unfold it . 

 as she read the opening line , the amazement on her face quickly gather into a frown . 

 " what ! " she say . " the name and rank I resign on enter this 
 order ! who dare to write or speak of I as ' Mora , Countess of 
 Norelle ' ? " 
 " merely his Holiness the Pope , and the Bishop of Worcester , " say the Bishop meekly , in an undertone , not mean the prioress to hear ; and , indeed , she ignore this answer , her word have be an angry ejaculation , rather than a question . 

 but there be bad to come . 

 " dispensation ! " exclaim the prioress . 

 " absolution ! " she cry , a little far on . 

 and at last , read rapidly , in tone of uncontrollable anger and indignation : " ' Empowers Symon , Lord Bishop of Worcester , or any priest he may appoint , to unite in the holy sacrament of marriage the Knight - Crusader , Hugh d'Argent , and Mora de Norelle , sometime prioress of the White Ladies of Worcester . ' Sometime Prioress ? in very truth , they have dare so to write it ! SOMETIME prioress ! it will be well they should understand she be Prioress now not some time or any time , but now and HERE ! " 

 she turn upon the Bishop . 

 " my lord , the Church seem to be bring its power to bear on the side of the World , the Flesh , and the Devil , leave a woman and her conscience to stand alone and battle unaided with the grim force array against she . but you shall see that she know how to deal with any weapon of the adversary which happen to fall into her hand . " 

 upon which the prioress rent the mandate from top to bottom , then across and again across ; fling the piece upon the floor , and set her foot upon they . 

 " thus I answer , " she cry , " your attempt , my lord , to induce the Pope to release I from vow which I hold to be eternally sacred and binding . and if you be bent upon divorce a nun from her Heavenly Union , and make she to become the chattel of a man , you must seek she elsewhere than in the Convent of the White Ladies of Worcester , my Lord Bishop ! " 

 so speak the angry prioress , make the quiet chamber to ring with her scorn and indignation . 

 the Bishop have make no attempt to prevent the tearing of the document . when she fling it upon the floor , place her foot upon the fragment , he merely look at they regretfully , and then back upon her face , back into those eye which flame on he in furious indignation . and in his own there be a look so sorrowful , so deeply wound , and yet withal so tenderly understanding , that it quell and calm the anger of the Prioress . 

 her eye fall slowly , from the serene sadness of that quiet face , to the silver cross , stud with oriental amethyst , at his breast ; to the sash girdle his purple cassock ; to the hand rest on his knee ; to the stone in his ring , from which the rich colour have fade , leave it pale and clear , like a large teardrop on the Bishop 's finger ; to his shoe , with their strange italian buckle ; then along the floor to her own angry foot , tread upon the torn fragment of that precious document , procure , at such pain and cost , from his Holiness at Rome . 

 then , suddenly , the prioress falter , weaken , fall upon her knee , with a despairing cry , clasp her hand upon the Bishop 's knee , and lay her forehead upon they . 

 " alas , " she sob , " what have I do ! in my pride and arrogance , I have speak ill to you , my lord , who have ever shew I most considerate kindness ; and in a moment of ill - judge resentment , I have commit sacrilege against the Holy Father , rend the deed which bear his signature . alas , woe be I ! in strive to do right , I have do most grievous wrong ; in seek not to sin , lo , I have sin beyond belief ! " 

 the Prioress weep , her head upon her hand , clasped and rest upon the Bishop 's knee . 

 Symon of Worcester lay his hand very gently upon that bow head , and as he do so his eye seek again the figure of the Christ upon the cross . the Prioress would have be startle indeed , have she lift her head and see those eye heretofore shrewd , search , kindly , or twinkle and gay , now full of an unfathomable pain . but , sob with her face hide , the Prioress be conscious only of her own suffering . 

 presently the Bishop begin to speak . 

 " we do not mean to overrule your judgment , or to force your inclination , my daughter . if we appear to have do so , the blame be mine alone . this mandate be draw up entirely along the line of my suggestion , owe to my influence with his Holiness , and base upon particular furnish by I . now let I read to you the private letter from the Holy Father to myself , give further important condition . " 

 the Bishop draw forth and unfold the letter from Rome , and very slowly , that each syllable might carry weight , he read it aloud . 

 as the gracious and kindly word fall upon the prioress 's ear , command that no undue pressure should be bring to bear upon she , and insist that it must be entirely by her own wish , if she resign her office and avail herself of this dispensation from her vow , she feel humble to the dust at thought of her own violence , and of the injustice of her angry word . 

 her weeping become so heartbroken , that the Bishop again lay his left hand , with kindly comfort touch , upon her bow head . 

 as he read the Pope 's most particular injunction as to the manner in which she must leave the Nunnery and take her place in the world once more , so as to prevent any public scandal , she fall silent from sheer astonishment , hold her breath to listen to the final clause empower the Bishop to announce within the Convent , when her absence become know , that she have be move on by he , secretly , with the knowledge and approval of the Pope , to a place where she be require for high service . 

 " high service , " say the Prioress , her face still hide . " high service ? can it be that the Holy Father really speak of the return to earthly love and marriage , the pleasure of the world , and the joy of home life , as ' high service ' ? " 

 the grief , the utter disillusion , the dismayed question in her tone , move the Bishop to compunction . 

 " mine be the phrase , to begin with , my daughter , " he admit . " I use it to the Holy Father , and I confess that , in use it , I do mean to convey that which , as you well know . I have long believe , that wifehood and motherhood , if worthily perform , may rank higher in the Divine regard than vow of celibacy . but , in adopt the expression , the Holy Father , we may rest assure , have no thought of undervalue the monastic life , or the high position within it to which you have attain . I should rather take it that he be merely accept my assurance that the new vocation to which you be call would , in your particular case , be high service . " 

 the prioress , lift her head , look long into the Bishop 's face , without make reply . 

 her eye be drown in tear ; dark shadow lie beneath they . yet the light of a high resolve , unconquerable within she , shine through this veil of sorrow , as when the sun , behind it , break through the mist , victorious , chase by its clear beam the baffle fog . 

 see that look , the Bishop know , of a sudden , that he have fail ; that the Knight have fail ; that the all - powerful pronouncement from the Vatican have fail . 

 the woman and her conscience hold the field . 

 have conquer her own love , have master her own natural yearning for her lover , she would overcome with ease all other assailant . 

 in two day ' time Hugh would ride away alone . unless a miracle happen , Mora would not be with he . 

 the Bishop face defeat as he look into those clear eye , fearles even in their sorrowful humility . 

 " oh , child , " he say , " you love Hugh ! can you let he ride forth alone , accompany only by the grim spectre of unfaith and of despair ? his hope , his faith , his love , all centre in you . another Prioress can be find for this Nunnery . no other bride can be find for Hugh d'Argent . he will have his own betrothed , or none . " 

 still kneel , the Prioress throw back her head , look upward , with clasped hand . 

 " Reverend Father , " she say , " I will not go to the man I love , trail break vow , like chain , behind I . there could be no harmony in life 's music . Whene'er I move , where'er I trod , I should hear the constant clanking of those chain . no man can set I free from vow make to God . but " 

 the Prioress pause , look past the Bishop at the gracious figure of the Madonna . she have remember , of a sudden , how Hugh have kneel there , say : " Blessed Virgin . . . help this woman of mine to understand that if she break she troth to I , hold herself from I , now , when I be come to claim she , she send I out to an empty life , to a hearth beside which no woman will sit , to a home forever desolate . " 

 " but ? " say the Bishop , lean forward . " yes , my daughter ? but ? " 

 " but if our bless Lady herself vouchsafe I a clear sign that my first duty be to Hugh , if she absolve I from my vow , make it evident that God 's will for I be that , leave the Cloister , I should we d Hugh and dwell with he in his home ; then I would strive to bring myself to do this thing . but I can take release from none save from our Lord , to whom those vow be make , or from our Lady , who knoweth the heart of a woman , and whose grace hath be with I all through the striving and conflict of the year that be past . " 

 the Bishop sigh . " alas , " he say ; " alas , poor hugh ! " 

 for that our Lady should vouchsafe a clear sign , would have to be a miracle ; and , though he would not have admit it to the prioress , the Bishop believe , in his secret heart , that the age of miracle be past . 

 one so fix in her determination , so persistent in her assertion , so loud in her asseveration , would scarce be likely to hear the inward whispering of divine suggestion . 

 therefore , should our Lady intervene with clear guidance , that intervention must be miraculous . and the Bishop sighing , say : " alas , poor hugh ! " 

 his eye fall upon the fragment of rent vellum on the floor . he hold out his hand . 

 the Prioress gather up the fragment , and place they in the Bishop 's outstretche hand . 

 " alas , my lord , " she say , " you be witness of my grievous sin in thus rend the gracious message of his Holiness . will it please you to appoint I a penance , if such an act can indeed be expiate ? " 

 " the sin , my daughter , as I will presently explain , be scarcely so great as you think it . but , such as it be , it arise from a lack of calmness and of that mental equipoise which sail unruffled through a sea of contradiction . the irritability which result in display of sudden temper be so foreign to your nature that it point to your have pass through a time of very special strain , both mental and physical ; probably overlong vigil and fasting , while you wrestle with this anxious problem upon which so much , in the future , depend . 

 " as you ask I for penance , I will give you two : one which will set right your ill - consider action ; the other which will help to remedy the cause of that action . 

 " the first be , that you place these fragment together and , take a fresh piece of vellum , make a careful copy of this writing which you destroy . 

 " the second be that , in order to regain the usual equipoise of your mental attitude , you ride to - day , for an hour , in the river meadow . my white palfrey , Iconoklastes , shall be in the courtyard at noon . yesterday , my daughter , you ride for pleasure . to - day you will ride for penance ; and incidentally " an irrepressible little smile creep round the corner of the Bishop 's mouth , and twinkle in his eye " incidentally , my daughter , you will work off a certain stiffness from which you must be suffer , after the unwonted exercise . ah I ! " say the Bishop , " that be ever the divine method . punishment should be remedial , as well as deterrent . there be much stiffness of mind of which we must be rid before we can stoop to the portal of God 's ' whosoever ' and , pass through the narrow gate , enter the Kingdom of Heaven as little child . " 

 the Bishop rise , and give his hand to the Prioress raise she to her foot . 

 " my lord , " she say , " as ever you be most kind to I . yet I fear you have be too lenient for my own peace of mind . to have destroy in anger the mandate of his Holiness " 

 " Nay , my daughter , " say the Bishop . " the mandate of his Holiness , inscribe upon parchment , from which hang the great seal of the Vatican , be safely place among my most precious document . you have but destroy the result of an hour 's careful work . I rise betime this morning to make this copy . I should not have allow you to tear it , have not the writing be my own . but I take pain to reproduce exactly the peculiar style of lettering they use in Rome , and you will do the same in your copy . " 

 turn , the Bishop kneel for a few moment in prayer before the Madonna . he could not have explain why , but somehow the only hope for Hugh seem to be connect with this spot . 

 yet it be hardly reassure that , when he lift grave and anxious eye , our Lady gently smile , and the sweet Babe look merry . 

 rise , the Bishop turn , with unwonted sternness , to the prioress . 

 " remember , " he say , " Hugh rid away to - morrow night ; rid away , never to return . " 

 her steadfast eye do not falter . 

 " he have well have ride away five day ago , my lord . he have my answer , and I bid he go . by stay he have but prolong his suspense and my pain . " 

 " yes , " say the Bishop slowly , " he have well have ride away ; or , well still , have never come upon this fruitless quest . " 

 he move toward the door . 

 the Prioress reach it before he . 

 with her hand upon the latch : " your blessing , Reverend Father , " entreat the prioress , rather breathlessly . 

 " Benedicite , " say the Bishop , with uplifted finger , but with eye avert ; and pass out . 

 CHAPTER XXVIII 

 the white STONE 

 Old Mary Antony be at the gate , when the Bishop ride out from the courtyard . 

 thrust the porteress aside , she press forward , stand with anxious face uplifted , as the Bishop approach . 

 he rein in Icon , and , bend from the saddle , murmur : " take care of she , Sister Antony . I have leave she in some distress . " 

 " Hath she decide aright ? " whisper the old lay - sister . 

 " she always decide aright , " say the Bishop . " but she be so make that she will thrust happiness from she with both hand unless our Lady should herself offer it , by vision or revelation . I could wish thy gay little Knight of the Bloody Vest might indeed fly with she to his nest and teach she a few sweet lesson , in the green privacy of some leafy paradise . but I tell thee too much , worthy Mother . keep a silent tongue in that shrewd old head of thine . Minister to she ; and send word to I if I be need . Benedicite . " 

 an hour later , mount upon his black mare , Shulamite , the Bishop ride to the high ground , on the north - east , above the city , from whence he could look down upon the river meadow . 

 as he have do on the previous day , he watch the prioress rid upon 
 Icon . 
 once she put the horse to so sudden and swift a gallop that the Bishop , watch from afar , rein back Shulamite almost on to her haunch , in a sudden fear that Icon be about to leap into the stream . 

 for an hour the Prioress ride , with fly veil , white on the white steed ; a fair marble group , quicken into motion . 

 then , that penance be duly perform , she vanish through the archway . 

 Turning Shulamite , Symon of Worcester ride slowly down the hill , pass southward , and enter the city by Friar 's Gate ; and so to the Palace , where Hugh d'Argent wait . 

 the Bishop lead he , through a postern , into the garden ; and there on a wide lawn , out of earshot of any possible listener , the Bishop and the Knight walk up and down in earnest conversation . 

 at length : " to - morrow , in the early morn , " say the Knight , " I send her tire - woman on to Warwick , with all her effect , keep back only the riding suit . should she elect to come , we must be free to ride without draw rein . even so we shall reach Warwick only something before midnight . " 

 " she tear it up and plant her foot upon it , " remark the Bishop . 

 " I will not give up hope , " say the Knight . 

 " nothing short of a miracle , my son , will change her mind , or move she from her fix resolve . " 

 " then our Lady will work a miracle , " declare the Knight bravely . " I pray ' send she to I ! ' and our blessed Lady smile . " 

 " a sculptured smile , dear lad , be ever there . have you pray ' hold she from I ! ' our Lady would equally have smile . " 

 " Nay , " say the Knight ; " I keep my trust in prayer . " 

 they pause at the parapet overhang the river . 

 " I be successful , " say the Knight , " in deal with Eustace , her nephew . there will be no need to apply to the king . the ambition be his mother 's . now Eleanor be dead , he care not for the Castle . next month he wed an heiress , with large estate , and have no wish to lay claim to Mora 's home . all be now once more as it be when she leave it . her own people be in charge . I plan to take she there when we leave Warwick , rid northward by easy stage . " 

 the Bishop , stoop , pick up a smooth , white stone , and fling it into the river . it fall with a splash , and sink . the water close upon it . it have vanish instantly from view . 

 then the Bishop speak . " Hugh , my dear lad , she think it be the Pope 's own deed and signature , yet she tear it across , and then again across ; fling it upon the ground , and set her foot upon it . I deem it now as impossible that the prioress should change her mind upon this matter , as that we should ever see again that stone which now lie deep on the river - bed . " 

 it be a high dive from the parapet ; and , to the Bishop , watch the spot where the Knight cleave the water , the moment seem hour . 

 but when the Knight reappear , the white stone be in his hand . 

 the Bishop go down to the water - gate . 

 " bravely do , my son ! " he call , as the Knight swam to the step . 
 " you deserve to win . " 
 but to himself he say : " fight man and quick - witted woman will be ever with we , gain their end by strenuous endeavour . but the age of miracle be past . " 

 Hugh d'Argent mount the step . 

 " I shall win , " he say , and shake himself like a great shaggy dog . 

 the Bishop , over whom fall a shower , carefully wipe the glistening drop from his garment with a fine italian handkerchief . 

 " go in , boy , " he say , " and get dry . send thy man for another suit , unless it would please thee well that Father Benedict should lend thee a cassock ! give I the stone . it may well serve as a reminder of that famous sacred stone from which the Convent take its name . methink we have , between we , contrive something of an omen , conclude in thy favour . " 

 presently the Bishop , alone in his library , stand the white stone upon the iron - bind chest within which he have place the Pope 's mandate . 

 " the age of miracle be past , " he say again . " iron no long swim , neither do stone rise from the depth of a river , unless the divine command be supplement by the grip of strong human finger . 

 " stand there , thou little tombstone of our hope . mark the place where lie the Holy Father 's mandate , ecclesiastically all - powerful , yet render null and void by the faithful conscience and the firm will of a woman . God send we more such woman ! " 

 the Bishop sound a silver gong , and when his body - servant appear , point to the handkerchief , damp and crumple , upon the table . 

 " Dry this , Jasper , " he say , " and bring I another somewhat large . 
 these dainty trifle can not serve , when ' tear run down like a river . ' 
 Nay , look not distressed , my good fellow . I do but jest . Yonder wet 
 Knight hath give I a shower - bath . " 
 CHAPTER XXIX 

 the vision of MARY ANTONY 

 on the afternoon follow the Bishop 's unexpected visit to the Nunnery , the Prioress elect to walk last in the procession to and from the Cathedral , place Mother Sub - Prioress first . it be her custom occasionally to vary the order of procession . sometimes she walk thirteenth , with twelve before , and twelve behind she . 

 she have at first incline on this day , after her strenuous time with the 
 Bishop , follow by the hour 's ride upon Icon , not to go to vesper . 
 then her heart fail she , and she go . on these two afternoon this and the morrow Hugh would still be in the crypt . she should not so much as glance toward the pillar at the foot of the wind stairway lead to the clerestory ; yet it would be sweet to feel he to be stand there as she pass ; sweet to know that he hear the same sound as fall upon her ear . 

 to - day , and again on the morrow , she might yield to this yearning for the comfort of his nearness ; but never again , for Hugh would not return . 

 she have wonder whether she dare ask he , by the Bishop , on a give date once a year to attend High Mass in the Cathedral , so that she might know he to be under the same roof , worship , at the same moment , the same blessed manifestation of the Divine Presence . 

 but almost at once she have dismiss the desire , realise that comfort such as this , could be comfort but to the heart of a woman , more likely torment to a man . also that should his fancy incline he to seek companionship and consolation in the love of another , a yearly pilgrimage to Worcester for her sake , would stand in the way of his future happiness . 

 walk last in that silent procession back to the Nunnery , the prioress walk alone with her sadness . her heart be heavy indeed . 

 she have anger her old friend , Symon of Worcester . after be infinitely patient , when he might well have have cause for wrath , he have suddenly take a sterner tone , and depart in a certain aloofness , leave she with the fear that she have lose he , also , beyond recall . 

 thus she walk in loneliness and sorrow . 

 as she pass up the step into the cloister , she note that Mary Antony be not in her accustomed place . 

 slightly wonder , and half unconsciously explain to herself that the old lay - sister have probably for some reason go forward with the Sub - Prioress , the prioress move down the now empty passage and enter her own cell . 

 on the threshold she pause , astonish . 

 in front of the shrine of the Madonna , kneel Mary Antony in a kind of trance , hand clasp , eye fix , lip part , the colour go from her cheek , yet a radiance upon her face , like the after - glow of a vision of exceed glory . 

 she appear to be wholly unconscious of the presence of the Prioress , who recover from her first astonishment , close the door , and come forward lay her hand gently upon the old woman 's shoulder . 

 Mary Antony 's eye remain fix , but her lip move incessantly . 
 bend over she , the prioress could make out disjoint sentence . 
 " Gone ! . . . but it be at our Lady 's bidding . . . . Flown ? ah , gay little Knight of the Bloody Vest ! Nay , it must have be the archangel Gabriel , or maybe Saint George , in shin armour . . . . how shall we live without the Reverend Mother ? but the will of our blessed Lady must be do . " 

 " Antony ! " say the Prioress . " wake up , dear Antony ! you be dream again . you be think of the robin and the pea . I have not go from you ; nor be I go . see ! I be here . " 

 she turn the old face about , and bring herself into Mary Antony 's field of vision . 

 slowly a light of recognition dawn in those fix eye ; then come a cry , as of fear and of a great dismay ; then a gasp sound , a clutching of the air . Mary Antony have fall prone , before the shrine of the Madonna . 

 an hour later she lie upon her bed , whither they have carry she . she have recover consciousness , and partake of wine and bread . 

 the colour have return to her cheek , when the Prioress come in , dismiss the lay - sister in attendance , close the door , and sit down beside the couch . 

 " thou art well , dear Antony , " say the Prioress . " they tell I thy strength have return , and this strange fainting be over . Thou must lie still yet awhile ; but will it weary thee to speak ? " 

 " Nay , Reverend Mother , I should dearly love to speak . my soul be full of wonder ; yet to none save to you , Reverend Mother , can I tell of that which I have see . " 

 " tell I all , dear Antony , " say the prioress . " Sister Mary Rebecca say thy symptom point to a Divine Vision . " 

 Mary Antony chuckle . " for once Sister Mary Rebecca speak the truth , " she say . " have patience with I , Reverend Mother , and I will tell you all . " 

 the Prioress gently stroke the worn hand lie outside the coverlet . 

 Mary Antony look very old in bed . be it not for the bright twinkle eye , she look too old ever again to stand upon her foot . yet how she still bustle upon those same old foot ! how diligently she perform her own duty , and shew to the other lay - sister how they should have perform theirs ! 

 forty year ago , she have choose her nook in the Convent burying - ground . she be even then , among the old member of the Community ; yet most of those who see she choose it , now lie in their own . 

 " she will outlive we all , " say Mother Sub - Prioress one day , sourly ; anger by some trick of Mary Antony 's . 

 " she be like an ancient parrot , " cry Sister Mary Rebecca , anxious to agree with Mother Sub - Prioress . 

 which when Mary Antony hear , she chuckle , and snap her finger . 

 " please God , I shall live long enough , " she say , " to thrust Mother Sub - Prioress into a sackcloth shroud ; also , to crack nut upon the sepulchre of Sister Mary Rebecca . " 

 but none of these remark reach the prioress . she love the old lay - sister , know the aged body hold a faithful and zealous heart , and a mind which , in its quaint simplicity , oft seem to the Prioress like the mind of a little child and of such be the Kingdom of Heaven . 

 " there be no need for patience , dear Antony , " say the Prioress . " I can sit in stillness beside thee , until thy tale be fully tell . begin at the beginning . " 

 the slanting ray of the late afternoon sun , pierce through the narrow window , fall in a golden band of light upon the fold hand , light up the aged face with an almost unearthly radiance . 

 " I be in the cloister , " begin Mary Antony , " await the return from 
 Vespers of the holy Ladies . 
 " I go there betime , because at that hour I be accustomed to hold converse with a little vain man in a red jerkin , who come to see I , when he know I to be alone . I tell he tale such as he never hear elsewhere . to - day I plan to tell he how the great Lord Bishop , arrive unannounced , ride into the courtyard ; and , see old Antony stand in the doorway , mistook she for the Reverend Mother . that be a great moment in the life of Mary Antony , and confer upon her add dignity . 

 " ' so turn out thy toe , and make thy good bow , and behave thee as a little layman should behave in the presence of one who hath be mistake for one hold so high an office in Holy Church . ' 

 " thus , " explain Mary Antony , " have I plan to strike awe into the little red breast of that over - bold robin . " 

 " and come the robin to the cloister ? " inquire the prioress , presently , for Mary Antony lie upon her pillow laugh to herself , nod and bow , and make her finger hop to and fro on the coverlet , as a bird might hop with toe out turn . nor would she be recall at once to the happening of the afternoon . 

 " the great Lord Bishop do address I as ' worthy Mother , ' " she remark ; " not ' Reverend Mother , ' as we address our noble prioress . and this have give I much food for thought . be it well to be worthy and not reverend , or reverend and not worthy ? our large white sow , when she do contrive to have more little pig in her litter , than ever our sow have before ; and , after a long and fruitful life , furnish we with two excellent ham , a boar 's head , and much bacon , be a worthy sow ; but never be she reverend , not even when Mother Sub - Prioress pronounce the blessing over her face , much beautify by decoration grand ivory tusk , and a lemon in her mouth ! never , in life , have she look so fair ; which be indeed , I believe , the case with many . yet , for all her worthiness , she be not reverend . also I have hear tell of a certain Prior , not many mile from here , who , borrow money , never repay it ; who oppress the poor , drive they from the Priory gate ; who maltreat the monk , and be kind unto none , save unto himself . he it seem be reverend but not worthy . while thou , Master Redbreast , art certainly not reverend ; the saint , and thine own conscience , alone know whether thou art worthy . 

 " this , " explain Mary Antony , " be how I have plan to point a moral to that jaunty little worldling . " 

 " they who be reverend must strive to be also worthy , " say the prioress ; " while they who count themselves to be worthy , must think charitably of those to whom they owe reverence . come the robin to thee in the cloister , Antony ? " 

 the old woman 's manner change . she fix her eye upon the prioress , and speak with an air of detachment and of mystery . the very simplicity of her language seem at once to lift the strange tale she tell , into sublimity . 

 " Aye , he come . but not for crumb ; not for cheese ; not to gossip with old Antony . 

 " he stand upon the coping , look at I with his bright eye . 

 " ' well , little vain man ! ' say I. but he move not . 

 " ' well , Master Pieman , ' I say , ' art come to spy on holy lady ? ' but never a flutter , never a chirp , give he . 

 " so grave and yet war - like be his aspect , that at length I say : ' well , Knight of the Bloody Vest ! Hast thou come to carry off again our noble prioress ? ' upon which , instantly , he lift up his voice , and burst into song ; then fly to the doorway , turn and chirping , as if ask I to follow . 

 " greatly marvel at this behaviour on the part of the little bird I love , I forthwith set out to follow he . 

 " along the passage , on swift wing , he fly ; in and out of the empty cell , as if in search of something . ' then , while I be yet some little way behind , he vanish into the Reverend Mother 's cell , and come not forth again . 

 " laugh to myself at such presumption , I follow , say : ' ha , thou Knight of the Bloody Vest ! what doest thou there ? the Reverend Mother be away . what seek thou in her chamber , Knight of the Bloody Vest ? ' 

 " but , reach the doorway , at that moment , I find myself strike dumb by what I see . 

 " no robin be there , but a most splendid Knight , in shin armour , kneel upon his knee before the shrine of our Lady . a blood - red cross be on his breast . his dark head be uplifted . on his noble face be a look of pleading and of prayer . 

 " marvelling , but unafraid , I creep in , and kneel behind that splendid Knight . the look of plead upon his face , incline I also to prayer . his lip move , as I have see at the first ; but while I stand upon my foot , I could hear no word . as soon as I too kneel , I hear the Knight say : ' give she to I ! give she to I ! ' and at last : ' Mother of God , send she to I ! take pity on a hungry heart , a lonely home , a desolate hearth , and send she to I ! ' " 

 Mary Antony pause , fix her eye upon the rosy strip of sky , see through her narrow window . absorb in the recital of her vision , she appear to have forget the presence of the prioress . she pause ; and there be silence in the cell , for the Prioress make no sound . 

 presently the old voice go on , once more . 

 " when the splendid Knight say : ' send she to I , ' a most wondrous thing do happen . 

 " our blessed Lady , lift her head , look toward the door . then raise her hand , she beckon . 

 " no soon do our Lady beckon , than I hear step come along the passage that passage which I know to be empty . the Knight hear they , also ; for his heart begin to beat so loudly that kneel behind I could hear it . 

 " our blessed Lady smile . 

 " then in through the doorway come the Reverend Mother , walk with her head hold high , and sunlight in her eye , as I have ofttime see her walk in the garden in Springtime , when the bird be sing , and a scent of lilac be all around . 

 " she do not see old Mary Antony ; but move straight to where the Knight be kneeling , kneel down beside he . 

 " then the splendid Knight do hold out his hand . but the Reverend Mother 's hand be clasp upon the cross at her breast , and she would not put her hand into the Knight 's ; but lift her eye to our Lady she say : ' Holy Mother of God , except thou thyself send I to he , I can not go . " 

 " and again the Knight say : ' give she to I ! give she to I ! blessed 
 Virgin , give she to I ! ' 
 " and the tear run down the face of old Antony , because both those noble heart be wring with anguish . yet only the merry Babe , peep over the two bow head , see that old Antony be there . 

 " then a wondrous thing do happen . 

 " stoop from her marble throne our Lady lean , and take the Reverend 
 Mother 's hand in her , place it herself in the outstretched hand of the 
 Knight . 
 " at once a sound like many chime of silver bell fill the air , and a voice , so wonderful that I do fall upon my face to the floor , say : 

 " ' take she ; she HATH be ever THINE . I have but kept she for THEE . ' " 

 " when I lift my head once more , the Reverend Mother and the splendid Knight have rise . Heaven be in their eye . her hand be in his . his arm be around she . 

 " as I look , they turn together , pass out through the doorway , and pace slowly down the passage . 

 " I hear their step grow fainter and yet more faint , until they reach the cloister . then all be still . " 

 " then I hear other step arrive . I still kneel on , fearful to move ; because those earthly step be drown the sound of the silver chime which fill the air . 

 " then why , then I see the Reverend Mother , return and return alone . 

 " so I cry out , because she have leave that splendid Knight . and , as I cry , the silver bell fall silent , all grow    dark around I , and I know no more , until I wake up in mine own bed , tend by Sister Mary Rebecca , and Sister Teresa ; with Abigail noisy hussy ! help to fetch and carry . 

 " but when I close mine eye ah , then ! yes , I hear again the sound of silver chime . and some day I shall hear shall hear again that wondrous voice of voice of tenderness , which say : ' take she , she hath be ever ever ' " 

 the old voice which have talk for so long a time , waver , weaken , then of a sudden fall silent . 

 Mary Antony have drop off to sleep . 

 slowly the prioress rise , feel her way , as one blind by too great a light . 

 she stand for some moment lean against the doorpost , her hand upon the latch , watch the furrowed face upon the pillow , gently slumber ; still illumine by a halo of sunset light . 

 then she open the door , and pass out ; close it behind she . 

 as the prioress close the door , Mary Antony open one eye . 

 Yea , verily ! she be alone ! 

 she raise herself upon the couch , listen intently . 

 far away in the distance , she fancy she could hear the door of the Reverend Mother 's chamber shut yes ! and the turning of the key within the lock . 

 then Mary Antony arise , totter over to the crucifix , and , fall on her knee , lift clasped hand to the die Redeemer . 

 " o God , " she say , " full well I know that to lie concern holy thing doth damn the soul forever . but the great Lord Bishop say she would thrust happiness from she with both hand , unless our Lady vouchsafe a vision . gladly will I bear the endless torment of hell fire , that she may know fulness of joy and pleasure for evermore . but , oh , Son of Mary , by the sorrow of our Lady 's heart , by the yearning of her love , I ask that once a year I may come out to sit just for one hour on my jasper seat , and see the Reverend Mother walk , between the great Lord Bishop and the splendid Knight , up the wide golden stair . and some day at last , o Saviour Christ , I ask it of Thy wound , ' thy die love , Thy broken heart , may the sin of Mary Antony her great sin , her sin of thus lie about holy thing be forgive she , because because she love " 

 Old Mary Antony fall forward on the stone . this time , she have really swoon . 

 it take the combined effort of Sister Teresa , Sister Mary Rebecca , and 
 Mother Sub - Prioress , to bring she back once more to consciousness . 
 it add to their anxiety that they could not call the Reverend Mother , she have already send word that she would not come to the evening meal , and must not be disturb , as she purpose pass the night in prayer and vigil . 

 CHAPTER XXX 

 the harder PART 

 Dawn break a silver rift in the purple sky and presently steal , in pearly light , through the oriel window . upon the prioress 's table , lie a beautifully execute copy of the Pope 's mandate . beside it , carefully piece together , the tear fragment of the Bishop 's copy . 

 also , open upon the table , lie the Gregorian Sacramentary , and near to it strip of parchment upon which the Prioress have copy two of those ancient prayer , append to each a careful translation . 

 these be the sixth century prayer which the Prioress have find comfort in copying and translating , during the long hour of her vigil . 

 o God , the Protector of all that trust in Thee , without whom nothing be strong , nothing be holy ; Increase and multiply upon we Thy mercy , that Thou be our ruler and guide , we may so pass through thing temporal , that we finally lose not the thing eternal ; Grant this , o heavenly Father , for Jesus Christ 's sake our Lord . amen . 

 and on another strip of parchment : 

 o Lord , we beseech Thee mercifully to receive the prayer of Thy people who call upon Thee ; and grant that they may both perceive and know what thing they ought to do , and also may have grace and power faithfully to fulfil the same : through Jesus Christ our Lord . amen . 

 then , in that darkest hour before the dawn , she have open the heavy clasp of an even old volume , and copy a short prayer from the Gelasian Sacramentary , under date A.D. 492 . 

 lighten our darkness , we beseech Thee O Lord , and my Thy great mercy defend we from all peril and danger of this night ; for the love of Thy only Son , our Saviour , Jesus Christ . amen . 

 this appear to have be copy last of all . the ink be still wet upon the parchment . 

 the candle have burn down to the socket , and go out . the 
 Prioress 's chair , push back from the table , be empty . 
 as the dawn creep in , it discover she kneeling before the shrine of the Madonna , absorb in prayer and meditation . 

 she have not yet take her final decision as to the future ; but her hesitation be now rather the slow , wondering , opening of the mind to accept an astounding fact , than any attempt to fight against it . 

 not for one moment could she doubt that our Lady , in answer to Hugh 's impassioned prayer , have choose to make plain the Divine will , by mean of this wonderful and most explicit vision to the aged lay - sister , Mary Antony . 

 when , have leave Mary Antony , as she suppose , asleep , the Prioress have reach her own cell , her first adore cry , as she prostrate herself before the shrine , have take the form of the thanksgiving once offer by the Saviour : " I thank Thee , o Father , Lord of Heaven and earth , that Thou hast hide these thing from the wise and prudent , and hast reveal they unto babe . " 

 she and the Bishop have indeed be wise and prudent in their own estimation , as they discuss this difficult problem . yet to they no clear light , no divine vision , have be vouchsafe . 

 it be to this age nun , the most simple so think the prioress the most humble , the most childlike in the community , that the revelation have be give . 

 the Prioress remember the nosegay of weed offer to our Lady ; the game with pea ; the childish pleasure in the society of the robin ; all the many indication that second - childhood have gently come at the close of the long life of Mary Antony ; just as the moon begin as a sickle turn one way and , after come to the full , wane at length to a sickle turn the other way ; so , after ninety year of life 's pilgrimage , Mary Antony be a little child again and of such be the Kingdom of Heaven ; and to such the Divine will be most easily reveal . 

 the Prioress be conscious that she and the Bishop the wise and prudent have so completely arrive at decision , along the line of their own point of view , that their mind be not ready to receive a divine unveiling . but the simple , childlike mind of the old lay - sister , full only of humble faith and love devotion , be ready ; and to she the manifestation come . 

 no shade of doubt as to the genuineness of the vision enter the mind of the prioress . she and the Bishop alone know of the Knight 's intrusion into the Nunnery , and of her interview with he in her cell . 

 before go in search of the intruder , she have order Mary Antony to the kitchen ; and disobedience to a command of the Reverend Mother , be a thing undreame of in the Convent . 

 afterwards , her anxiety lest any question should come up concern the return of a twenty - first White Lady when but twenty have go , be completely set at rest by that which have seem to her old Antony 's fortunate mistake in believe herself to have be mistake . 

 in recount the fictitious vision , with an almost uncanny cleverness , Mary Antony have describe the Knight , not as he have appear in the prioress 's cell , in tunic and hose , a simple dress of velvet and cloth , but in full panoply as a Knight - Crusader . the shin armour and the blood - red cross , fully in keep with the vision , would have preclude the idea of an eye - witness of the actual scene , have such a thought unconsciously suggest itself to the prioress . 

 as it be , it seem beyond question that all the knowledge of Hugh shewn by the old lay - sister , of his person his attitude , his very word , could have come to she by divine revelation alone . that be so , how could the prioress presume to doubt the climax of the vision , when our bless Lady place her hand in Hugh 's , utter the wondrous word : " take she . she hath be ever thine . I have but keep she for thee . " 

 over and over the prioress repeat these word ; over and over she thank our Lady for have vouchsafe so explicit a revelation . yet be she distressed that her inmost spirit fail to respond , acclaim the word as divine . she know they must be divine , yet could not feel that they be so . 

 as dawn creep into the cell , she find herself repeat again and again " a sign , a sign ! Thy will be hide from I ; yet I accept its revelation through this babe . but I ask a sign which shall speak to mine own heart , also ! a sign , a sign ! " 

 she rise and open wide the casement , not of the oriel window , but of one to the right of the group of the Virgin and child , and near by it . 

 she be wear out both in mind and body , yet could not bring herself to leave the shrine or to seek her couch . 

 she remember the example of that reverend and holy man , Bishop Wulstan . she have lately be read , in the Chronicles of Florence , the monk of Worcester , how " in his early life , when appoint to be chanter and treasurer of the Church , Wulstan embrace the opportunity of serve God with less restraint , give himself up to a contemplative life , go into the church day and night to pray and read the Bible . so devoted be he to sacred vigil that not only would he keep himself awake during the night , but day and night also ; and when the urgency of nature at last compel he to sleep , he do not pamper his limb by rest on a bed or covering , but would lie down for a short time on one of the bench of the Church , rest his head on the book which he have use for pray or reading . " 

 the Prioress chance to have read this passage aloud , in the Refectory , two day before . 

 as she stand in the dawn light , overcome with sleep , yet unwilling to leave her vigil at the shrine , she remember the example of this greatly revere Bishop of Worcester , " a man of great piety and dovelike simplicity , one belove of God , and of the people whom he rule in all thing , " dead just over a hundred year , yet ever live in the memory of all . 

 so , remember his example , the Prioress go to her table , and shut the clasp of her treasured gregorian Sacramentary , place it on the floor before the shrine of the Virgin . 

 then , fling her cloak upon the ground , and a silk covering over the book , she sink down , stretch she weary limb upon the cloak and lay her head on the Sacramentary , trust that some of the many sacred prayer therein contain would pass into her mind while she sleep . 

 yet still her spirit cry : " a sign , a sign ! however slight , however small ; a sign mine own heart can understand . " 

 whether she sleep a few moment only or an hour , she could not tell . yet she feel strangely rest , when she be awaken by the sound of a most heavenly song outpoure . it flood her cell with liquid trill , as of little silver bell . 

 the Prioress open her eye , without stir . 

 Sunlight stream in through the open window ; and lo , upon the marble hand of the Madonna , that very hand which , in the vision , have take hers and place it within Hugh 's , stand Mary Antony 's robin , that gay little Knight of the Bloody Vest , pour forth so wonderful a song of praise , and love , and fulness of joy , that it seem as if his little ruffle throat must burst with the rush of joyous melody . 

 the robin sing . our Lady smile . the Babe on her knee look merry . 

 the Prioress lie watch , not dare to move ; her head rest on the 
 Sacramentary . 
 then into her mind there come the suggestion of a test a sign . 

 " if he fly around the chamber , " she whisper , " my place be here . but if he fly straight out into the open , then doth our blessed Lady bid I also to arise and go . " 

 and , scarce have she so think , when , with a last triumphant trill of joy , straight from our Lady 's hand , like an arrow from the bow , the robin shoot through the open casement , and out into the sunny , newly - awaken world beyond . 

 the Prioress rise , fold her cloak , place the book back upon the table ; then kneel before the shrine , take off her cross of office , and lay it upon our Lady 's hand , from whence the little bird have fly . 

 then with bow head , pale face , hand meekly cross upon her breast , the Prioress kneel long in prayer . 

 the breeze of an early summer morn , blow in at the open window , and fan her cheek . 

 in the garden without , the robin sing to his mate . 

 at length the prioress rise , move as one who walk in a strange dream , pass into the inner cell , and seek her couch . 

 the Bishop 's prayer have be answer . 

 the Prioress have be give grace and strength to choose the hard part , believe the hard part to be , in very deed , God 's will for she . 

 and , as she lay her head at last upon the pillow , a prayer from the Gregorian Sacramentary slip into her mind , calm she to sleep , with its message of overrule power and eternal peace . 

 Almighty and everlaste God , who dost govern all thing in heaven and earth ; mercifully bear the supplication of Thy people , and grant we Thy peace , all the day of our life ; through Jesus Christ our Lord . amen . 

 CHAPTER XXXI 

 the call of the curlew 

 for the last time , the Knight wait in the crypt . 

 the man - at - arm , have deposit their burden before the altar , lean each against a pillar , stolid and unobservant , but ready to drop to their knee so soon as the chanting of Vespers should reach the crypt from the choir above . 

 the man upon the stretcher lie motionless , with bandaged head ; yet there be an alert brightness in his eye , and the turn of his head betoken one who listen . a cloak of dark blue , border with silver , cover he , as a pall . 

 Hugh d'Argent stand in the shadow of a pillar face the narrow archway in the wall from which the wind stair lead up to the clerestory . 

 from this position he could also command a view of the step lead up into the crypt from the underground way , and of the ground to be traverse by the White Ladies as they pass from the step to the staircase in the wall . 

 here the Knight keep his final vigil . 

 a strange buoyancy possess he . he seem to have leave his despondence , like a heavy weight , at the bottom of the river . from the moment when , his breath almost exhausted , he have see and grasp the Bishop 's stone , bring it in triumph to the surface , Hugh have feel sure he would win . aye , even before Symon have fling the stone ; when , in reply to the doubt cast by he on our Lady 's smile , the Knight have say : " I keep my trust in prayer , " a joyous confidence have then and there awaken within he . he have stretch out the right hand of his withered faith , and lo , it have prove strong and vital . 

 yet as , in the heavy silence of the crypt , he hear the turning of the key in the lock , his heart stand still , and every emotion hang suspend , as the first veil figure shadowy and ghostlike move into view . 

 it be not she . 

 the Knight 's pulse throb again . his heart pound violently as , keep their measured distance , nine , ten , eleven , white figure pass . 

 then twelfth : a tall nun , almost her height ; yet not she . 

 then thirteenth : oh , bless Virgin ! oh , saint of God ! Mora ! she , herself . never could he fail to recognize her carriage , the regal poise of her head . however veil , however shroud , he could not be mistake . it be Mora ; and that she should be walk in this central position mean that she might with comparative safety , step aside . yet , even this 

 but , at that moment , pass he , she turn her head , and for an instant her eye meet the eye of the Knight look out from the shadow . 

 another moment and she have vanish up the wind stairway in the wall . 

 but that instant be enough . as her eye meet his , Hugh d'Argent know that his betrothed be once more his own . 

 his heart cease pound ; his pulse beat steadily . 

 the calm of a vast , glad certainty enfold he ; a joy beyond belief . yet he know now that he have be sure of it , ever since he come up from the depth of the Severn into the summer sunshine , grasp the white stone . 

 " I keep my trust in prayer . . . . give she to I ! give she to I ! 
 Blessed Virgin , give she to I ! ' a sculptured smile ' ? Nay , my lord . 
 I keep my trust in prayer ! " 
 the solemn chant of the monk , steal down from the distant choir . 
 vesper have begin . 
 the Knight strode to the altar , and kneel for some minute , his hand clasp upon the cross hilt of his sword . 

 then he rise , and speak in low tone to his man - at - arm . 

 " when a thrush call , you will leave the crypt , and guard the entrance from without ; allow none , on any pretext , to pass within . when a blackbird whistle you will return , lift the stretcher , and pass with it , as heretofore , from the Cathedral to the hostel . " 

 next the Knight , return to the altar , bend over the bandaged man upon the stretcher . 

 " Martin , " he say , speak very low , so that his trust foster - brother alone could hear he . " all be well . our pilgrimage be about to end , as we have hop , in a great recovery and restoration . when the call of a curlew sound , leap from the stretcher , leave the bandage beside it ; go to the entrance , guard it from within ; but turn not thy head this way , until a blackbird whistle ; upon which lose thyself among the pillar , let no man see thee , until we have pass out . after which , make thy way out , as good thou canst , and join I at the hostel , enter by the garden and window , without let thyself be see in the courtyard . " 

 the keen eye below the bandage , smile assent . 

 Stooping , the Knight lift the cloak , fasten it to his left shoulder , and draw it around he , hold the great part of it in many fold in his right hand . then he move back into the shadow of the pillar . 

 above , the monk sing Nunc Dimittis . 

 by and by the voice fall silent . 

 vesper be over . 

 careful , shuffle foot be come down the stair within the wall . 

 one by one the white figure reappear . 

 the Knight stand back , rigid , hold his breath . 

 as each nun step from the archway in the wall , on to the floor of the crypt , and move toward the step lead down to the subterranean way , she pass from the view of the nun follow she , who be still one turn up the staircase . it be upon this the Knight have count , when he lay his plain . 

  six 
  Seven 
  Eight 
 bless Saint Joseph ! how slowly they walk ! 

  nine 
  Ten 
  Eleven 
 the Knight grip the cloak and move a step far back into the shadow . 

 Twelve 

 be all the pillar rock ? be the great new Cathedral come down upon his head ? 

 Thirteen 

 the Prioress be beside he in the shadow . 

 she have step aside . 

 the twelfth White Lady be move on , her back toward they . 

 the fourteenth be shuffle down , but have not yet appear . 

 Hugh slip his left arm about the prioress , hold she close to he ; then fling the fold of the cloak completely around she , and over his left shoulder , press her head down upon his breast . 

 thus they stand , motionless ; her face hide , his eye bent upon the narrow archway in the wall . 

 the fourteenth White Lady appear ; evidently note a wide gap than she expect between herself and the distant figure almost at the step , and hasten forward . 

 the fifteenth also hasten . 

 the sixteenth chance to have take the stair more quickly and , appear almost immediately , notice no gap . 

  Seventeen 
  Eighteen 
  Nineteen 
  Twenty 
 not one have turn her head in the direction of the pillar . the procession be move , with stately tread , along its accustomed way . 

 a delicious sense of security envelop Hugh d'Argent . 

 the woman he love be in his arm ; she be his to shield , to guard , to hold for evermore . 

  twenty - one 
  twenty - two 
 she have come to he come to he of her own free will . hold she thus , he remember those wondrous moment at the entrance to the crypt . how hard it have be to loose she and leave she . yet how glad he now be that he have do so . 

  twenty - three 
  twenty - four 
 when all these white figure be go , safely start on their mile - long walk , the door shut and lock behind they then he will fold back the cloak , turn her sweet face up to his , and lie his lip on her . 

 twenty - five 

 praise the holy saint ! the last ! but what an old ferret ! 

 yes ; Mother Sub - Prioress give the Knight a moment of alarm . she peer to right and leave . almost she see the glint of the silver on the blue . almost , yet not quite . 

 sniffing , she pass on , walk as if her foot be angry , each with the other for be before it . she tweak at her veil , as she turn and descend the step . 

 Hugh glow and thrill from head to foot . 

 at last ! 

 almost 

 the sound of a closing door . 

 slowly a key turn , grate in the lock , and be withdraw . 

 then silence . 

 but at sound of the turning key , the woman in his arm shiver , the slow , cold shudder of a soul in pain ; and suddenly he know that in come to he she have choose that which now seem to she the hard part . 

 with the first revulsion of feeling occasion by this knowledge , come a strong impulse to put she from he , to leap down the stairway , force open the heavy door , thrust she into the passage lead to her Nunnery , and shut the door upon she ; then go out himself into the world to seek , in one wild search , every possible form of sin and revelry . 

 but this ungoverned impulse last but for the moment in which his passionate joy , recoil upon himself , strike he a blinding , a bewildering blow . 

 in ten second he have recover . his arm tighten more securely around she . 

 she have come to he . whatever complex emotion might now be stir within she , this fact be beyond question . also , she have come of her own free will . the foot which have dare to stamp upon the torn fragment of the Pope 's mandate , have , with an equal courage , step aside from the way of convention and have bring she within the compass of his arm . 

 he could not put she from he . she be his to hold and keep . but she be his also to shield and guard ; aye , to shield not from outward danger only , but from anything in himself which might cause her pain or perplexity , thus make more difficult her noble act of self - surrender . 

 word speak by the Bishop , in the banqueting hall , come back to he with fuller significance . 

 a joy arise within he , deeply far than the rapture of passion ; the joy of a faithful patience , of a strong man 's mastery over the strong thing in himself , of a lover 's comprehension , by sure instinct , of that which no word , however clear and forcible , could have succeed in make plain . 

 his love arise , a kingly thing , crown by her trust in he . 

 as he fold back the cloak , he stand with eye uplifted to the arched roof above his head . and the vision he see , in the dim pearly light , be a vision of the Madonna in his home . 

 the shelter of the cloak remove , the Prioress look around with startled eye , full of an unspeakable shrinking ; then upward to the face of her lover , and see it transfigure by the light of holy purpose and of a great resolve . 

 but , even as she look , he take his arm from about she , step a pace forward , leave she in the shadow , and whistle thrice the do - it - now call of the thrush . 

 instantly the man - at - arm leapt to their foot , and make quickly for the entrance to the Cathedral from the crypt , stand to hold it from without , against all comer . 

 as their run foot rang on the step , softly there sound through the crypt the plaintive call of the curlew . 

 the man lie upon the stretcher rise , leave his bandage behind ; and , without glance to right or left , pass quickly in and out amongst the forest of column , and be lose to view . the entrance he have to guard from within , be out of sight of the altar . to all intent and purpose , the two who still stand motionless in the shadow , be now alone . 

 then the Knight turn to the prioress , take she right hand with his left , and lead she forward to the altar . 

 there he loose her hand as they kneel side by side ; he clasp his upon the cross hilt of his sword ; she cross her upon her breast . 

 presently the Prioress draw the marriage ring from the third finger of her left hand , and give it to the Knight . 

 divine her desire , he rise , lay the ring upon the altar , then knelt again . 

 then rise , he take the ring , kiss it reverently , and slip it upon the little finger of his own left hand . 

 the sad eye of the prioress , watch he , say to this neither " yea " nor " nay . " 

 rise she wait meekly to know his will for she . the Knight , the blue cloak over his arm , turn to the stretcher , pick up the bandage , then , speak , very low , without look at the prioress . 

 " Lay thyself down thereon , " he say . " I grieve to ask it of thee , 
 Mora ; but there be no other way of take thee hence , unobserved . " 
 the Prioress take two step forward , and stand beside the stretcher . 

 it be many year since she have lie in any human presence . stand , walking , sitting , kneeling , she have be see by the nun ; but lie never . 

 though her cross of office and sacred ring be go , her dignity and authority seem still to belong to she while she stand , stately and tall , upon her foot . 

 she hesitate . the apologetic tone the Knight have use , seem warrant for her hesitancy , and render compliance more difficult . 

 each moment it become more impossible to place herself upon the stretcher . 

 " lie down , " say the Knight , sternly . 

 at the curt word of command , the prioress shudder again ; but , without a word , she lay herself down upon the stretcher , close her eye , and cross her hand upon her breast . so white she be , so still , so rigid ; as Hugh d'Argent , the bandage in his hand , stand look down upon she , she seem the marble effigy of a recumbent prioress , grave upon a tomb ; save that , as the Knight look upon that beautiful , proud face , two burn tear force their way from beneath the closed lid and roll helplessly down the pale cheek . 

 she do not see the look of tender compunction , of adore love , in 
 Hugh 's eye . 
 her shame , her utter humiliation , seem complete . 

 not when she take off her jewel cross , and place it upon our Lady 's hand ; not when she step aside and allow herself to be hide by the cloak ; not even when she remove her ring and hand it to Hugh , do she cease to be prioress of the White Ladies of Worcester ; but when she lay herself down before the shrine of Saint Oswald , full length upon the stretcher , at her lover 's foot . 

 Hugh stoop , and hide the bandage beside she . he could not bring himself to touch or to disguise that lovely head . instead , he cover she completely with the cloak ; say , in deep tone of infinite tenderness : 

 " our Lady be with thee . it will not be for long . " 

 then , shrill through the silent crypt , ring the dear call of the blackbird . 

 CHAPTER XXXII 

 a great RECOVERY and RESTORATION 

 Symon , Bishop of Worcester , attend by his Chaplain , chance to be walk through the precinct on his way from the Priory to the Palace , just as the man - at - arm bear the stretcher come through the great door of the Cathedral . 

 Father Benedict , cowl , and rob completely in black , a head and shoulder tall than the Bishop , walk behind he , a somewhat sinister figure . 

 the Bishop stop . " precede I to the Palace , Father Benedict , " he say . " I wish to have speech with yonder Knight who , I think , come this way . " 

 the Chaplain stand still , make deep obeisance , jerk his cowl more closely over his face , and stride away . 

 the Bishop wait , a radiant figure , in the afternoon sunshine . his silken cassock , his silvery hair , his blue eye , so vivid and search , not only make a spot on which light concentrate , but almost seem themselves to give forth light . 

 the steady tramp of the man - at - arm draw nearer . 

 Hugh d'Argent walk beside the stretcher , head erect , eye shin , his hand upon the hilt of his sword . 

 when the Bishop see the face of the Knight , he move to meet the little procession as it approach . 

 he hold up his hand , and the man - at - arm halt . 

 " good - day to you , Sir Hugh , " say the Bishop . " hath your pilgrimage to the shrine of the bless Saint Oswald work the recovery you hop ? " 

 " Aye , my lord , " reply the Knight , " a great recovery and restoration . 
 we start for Warwick in an hour 's time . " 
 " wonderful ! " say the Bishop . " our Lady and the holy Saint be praise ! but you be wise to keep the patient well cover . however complete the restoration , great care be require at first , and over - exertion must be avoid . " 

 " your blessing for the patient , Reverend Father , " say the Knight , uncovering . 

 the Bishop move nearer . he lay his hand upon the form beneath the blue and silver cloak . 

 " Benedictio Domini sit vobiscum , " he say . then add , in a low tone : " be not afraid , neither be thou dismayed . . . . go in peace . " 

 the two man who love the prioress , look steadily at one another . 

 the man - at - arm move forward with their burden . 

 the Knight smile as he walk on beside the stretcher . 

 the Bishop hasten to the Palace . 

 it be the Knight who have smile , and there be glory in his eye , and triumph in the squaring of his broad shoulder , the swing of his stride , and the proud poise of his head . 

 the Bishop be white to the lip . his hand tremble as he walk . 

 he fear he fear sorely this that they have accomplish . 

 it be one thing to theorize , to speculate , to advise , when the prioress be safe in her Nunnery . it be quite another , to know that she be be carry through the street of Worcester , helpless , upon a stretcher ; that when that blue pall be lift , she would find herself in a hostel , alone with her lover , surround by man , not a woman within call . 

 the heart of a nun be a thing well know to the Bishop , and he tremble at thought of this , which he have help to bring about . 

 also he marvel greatly that the prioress should have change her mind ; and he seek in vain to conjecture the cause of that change . 

 arrive in the courtyard of the Palace , he call for Brother Philip . 

 " saddle I Shulamite , " he say . " also mount Jasper on our fast nag , with saddle - bag . we ride to Warwick ; and must start within a quarter of an hour . " 

 a portion of that time the Bishop spend write in the library . 

 when he be mount , he stoop from the saddle and speak to Brother 
 Philip . 
 " Philip , " he say , " a very noble lady , betroth to Sir Hugh d'Argent , have just arrive at the Star hostel , where for some day he have await she . she rid with the Knight forthwith to Warwick , where they will join I at the Castle . it be my wish to lend Iconoklastes to the lady . therefore I desire thee to saddle the palfrey precisely as he be saddle when he go to the Convent of the White Ladies for their pleasuring and play . lead he , without delay , to the hostel ; deliver he over to the man - at - arm of Sir Hugh d'Argent , and see that they hand this letter at once to the Knight , that he may give it to his lady . lose not a moment , my good Philip . look to see I return to - morrow . " 

 the Bishop gather up the rein , and start out , at a brisk pace , for the Warwick road . 

 the letter he have intrust to Brother Philip , seal with his own signet , be address to Sir Hugh d'Argent . but within be write : 

 will the Countess of Norelle be pleased to accept of the palfrey Iconoklastes as a marriage gift from her old friend Symon Wygorn . 

 CHAPTER XXXIII 

 MARY ANTONY hold the FORT 

 Mary Antony await in the cloister the return of the White Ladies from Vespers . 

 the old lay - sister be not in the mood for gay chatter to the robin , nor even for quaint converse with herself . 

 she sit upon the stone seat , look very frail , and wear a wistful expression , quite unlike her usual alert demeanour . 

 as she sit , she slowly drop the twenty - five pea from her right hand , to she left , and back again . 

 a wonderful thing have happen on that afternoon , just before the White 
 Ladies set forth to the Cathedral . 
 all be assemble in the cloister , when word arrive that the 
 Reverend Mother wish to speak , in her cell , with Sister Mary Antony . 
 Hastening thither she find the Reverend Mother stand , very white and silent , very calm and steadfast , look out from the oriel window . 

 at first she do not turn ; and Mary Antony stand wait , just within the doorway . 

 then she turn , and say : " ah , dear Antony ! " in tone which thrill the heart of the old lay - sister . 

 " come hither , Antony , " she say ; and even as she say it , move to meet she . 

 a few simple instruction she give , concern matter in the refectory and kitchen . then say : " now I must go . the nun wait . " 

 then of a sudden she put her arm about the old lay - sister . 

 " good - bye , my Antony , " she say . " thy love and devotion have be very precious to I . the Presence of the Lord abide with thee in blessing , while we be go . " 

 and , stoop , she kiss she gently on the brow ; then pass from the cell . 

 Mary Antony stand as one that dream . 

 it be so many year since any touch of tenderness have reach she . 

 and now those gracious arm around she ; those serene eye look upon she with love in their regard , and a something more , which her old heart fail to fathom ; those lip , whose every word of command she and the whole Community hasten to obey , leave a kiss upon her brow ! 

 long after the White Ladies have form into procession and leave the cloister , Mary Antony stand as one that dream . then , remember her duty , she hurry to the cloister , but find they empty ; down the step to the crypt passage ; the door be lock on the inside ; the key gone . 

 the procession have start , and Mary Antony have fail to be at her post . the White Ladies have depart uncounted . Mary Antony have not be there to count they . 

 never before have the Reverend Mother send for she when she should have be on duty elsewhere . 

 hasten to remedy her failure , Mary Antony draw the bag of pea from her wallet , open it , and hurrying from cell to cell , take out a pea at each , as she verify its emptiness ; until five - and - twenty pea lie in her hand . 

 so now she wait , her error repair ; yet ever with she then , as she run , and now , as she wait she feel the benediction of the Reverend Mother 's kiss , the sense of her encircle arm , the wonder of her gracious word . 

 " the Presence of the Lord abide with thee in blessing . " 

 yes , a heavenly calm be in the cloister . the Devil have stay away . Heaven seem very near . even that little vain man , the robin , appear to be busy elsewhere . Mary Antony be quite alone . 

 " while we be go . " but they would not now be long . Mary Antony could tell by the shadow on the grass , and the slant of the sunshine through a certain arch , that the hour of return draw near . 

 she would kneel beside the topmost step , and see the Reverend Mother pass ; she would look up at that serene face which have melt into tenderness ; would see the firm line of those beautiful lip 

 suddenly Mary Antony know that she would not be able to look . not just yet could she bear to see the Reverend Mother 's countenance , without that expression of wonderful tenderness . and even as she realise this , the key grate in the lock below . 

 take up her position at the top of the step , the five - and - twenty pea in her right hand , Mary Antony quickly make up her mind . she could not lift her eye to the Reverend Mother 's face . she would count the pass foot . 

 the young lay - sister who carry the light , stump up the step , and set down the lantern with a clatter . she plump on to her knee opposite to Mary Antony . 

 " Sister Mary Rebecca lead to - day , " she chant in a low voice , " and all the way hath step upon my heel . " 

 but Mary Antony take no notice of this information , which , at any other time , would have delight she . 

 Head bow , eye on the ground , she await the pass foot . 

 they come , move slow and sedate . 

 they pass step two by two , out of her range of vision ; move along the cloister , die away in the distance . 

 all have pass . 

 Nay ! not all ? another come ! surely , another come ? 

 Sister Abigail , lift the lantern , rise up noisily . 

 " what wait you for , Sister Antony ? the holy Ladies have by now enter their cell . " 

 Mary Antony lift startled eye . 

 the golden bar of sunlight fall across an empty cloister . 

 a few white figure in the passage , see in the distance through the open door , be vanish , one by one , into their cell . 

 Mary Antony cover she dismay with indignation . 

 " be off , thou impudent hussy ! hold thy noisy tongue and hang thy rattle lantern on a nail ; or , well still , hold thy lantern , and hang thyself , hold it , upon the nail . if I be piously minded to pray here until sunset , that be no concern of thine . be off , I say ! " 

 leave alone , Mary Antony slowly open she right hand , and peer into the palm . 

 one pea lie within it . 

 she go over to the seat and count , with tremble finger , the pea from her left hand . 

 twenty - four ! one holy Lady have therefore not return . this must be report at once to the Reverend Mother . in her excitement , Mary Antony forget the emotion which have so recently possess she . 

 bustle down the step , she draw the key from the door , pause one moment to peep into the dank darkness , listen for run footstep or a voice that call ; then close the door , lock it , draw forth the key , and hurry to the Reverend Mother 's cell . 

 the door stand ajar , just as she have leave it . 

 she knock , but enter without wait to be bid , cry : " oh , Reverend Mother ! twenty - five holy Ladies go to vesper , and but twenty - four have " 

 then her voice die away into silence . 

 the Reverend Mother 's cell be empty . 

 stock - still stand Mary Antony , while her world crumble from beneath her old foot and her heaven roll itself up like a scroll , from over her head , and depart . 

 the Reverend Mother 's cell be empty . 

 it be the Reverend Mother who have not return . 

 " good - bye , my Antony . the Presence of the Lord abide with thee in blessing , while we be go . " ah , go ! never to return ! 

 once again the old lay - sister stand as one that dream ; but this time instead of beatific joy , there be a forlorn pathos in the dreaming . 

 presently a door open , and a step sound , far away in the passage beyond the refectory stair . 

 instantly a look of cunning and determination replace the helpless dismay on the old face . she quickly close the cell door , hang up the crypt key in its accustomed place ; then kneel before the shrine of the Madonna : " Blessed Virgin , " she pray , with clasped hand uplifted ; " be pleased to sharpen once again the wit of old Mary Antony . " 

 rise , she find the key of the Reverend Mother 's cell , pass out , close the door behind she ; lock it , and slip the key into her wallet . 

 the passage be empty . all the nun be spend in prayer and meditation the time until the Refectory bell should ring . 

 Mary Antony appear in the kitchen , only a few minute later than usual . 

 " prepare you the evening meal , " she say to her subordinate . " I care not what the holy Ladies feed upon this even , nor how badly it be serve . Reverend Mother again elect to spend the night in prayer and fast . so Mother Sub - Prioress will spit out a curse upon the viand ; or Sister Mary Rebecca will miaul over they like an old cat that see a tom in every shadow , though all tom have long since flee at her approach . serve at the usual hour ; and let Abigail ring the refectory bell . I be otherwise employ . and remember . Reverend Mother be on no account to be disturb . " 

 the porteress , at the gate , jump well - nigh out of her skin when , turning , she find Mary Antony at her elbow . 

 " Beshrew I , Sister Antony ! " she exclaim . " wherefore " 

 " Whist ! " say Mary Antony . " speak not so loud . now listen , Mary Mark . see you the great Lord Bishop yesterday , a - walk with Mary Antony ? ha , ha ! yea , verily ! ' Worthy Mother , ' his lordship call I . ' Worthy Mother , ' with his hand upon his heart . and into the garden he walk with Mary Antony . wherefore , you ask ? wherefore should the great Lord Bishop walk in the Convent garden with an old lay - sister , who cease to be a comely wench more than half a century ago ? because , Sister Mark , if you need must know , the Lord Bishop be full of anxious fear for the Reverend Mother , and knoweth that Mary Antony , old though she be , be able to tend and watch over she . the Lord Bishop and the Worthy Mother both fear that the Reverend Mother fast too often , and spend too many hour in vigil . the Reverend Father have therefore depute the Worthy Mother to watch in this matter , and to let he know at once if the Reverend Mother imperil her health again , by too lengthy a fast or vigil . and , lo ! this very day , the Reverend Mother purpose not come to the evening meal , and intend spend the whole night in prayer and vigil , before our Lady 's shrine . therefore the Worthy Mother I , myself must start at once to fetch the great Lord Bishop ; and you , Sister Mary Mark , must open the gate and let I be go . " 

 the porteress gaze , round - eyed and amazed . 

 " Nay , Sister Mary Antony , that can I not , without an order from the 
 Reverend Mother herself . and even then , you could not walk so far as 
 to the Lord Bishop 's Palace . I doubt if you would even reach the 
 Fore - gate . " 
 " that I should , and shall ! " cry Mary Antony . " and , if my old leg fail I , many a gallant will dismount and offer I his horse . thus in fine style shall I ride into Worcester city . didst thou not see I bestride the Lord Bishop 's white palfrey on Play Day ? " 

 Sister Mary Mark break into laughter . 

 " Aye , " she say , " my side have but lately cease aching . I pray you , 
 Sister Antony , call not that sight again into my mind . " 
 " then open the door , Mary Mark , and let I go . " 

 " Nay , that I dare not do . " 

 " then , if I fail to do as bid by the great Lord Bishop , I shall tell his lordship that thou , and thine obstinacy , stand in the way of the fulfilment of my purpose . " 

 the porteress waver . 

 " bring I leave from the Reverend Mother , Sister Antony . " 

 " Nay , that can I not , " say Mary Antony , " as any fool might see , when I go without the Reverend Mother 's knowledge to report to the Lord Bishop by his private command . even the Reverend Mother herself obey the command of the Lord Bishop . " 

 Sister Mary Mark hesitate . she certainly have see the Lord Bishop 
 pass under the rose - arch , and enter the garden , in close converse with 
 Sister Mary Antony . yet her trust at the gate be give to she by the 
 Reverend Mother . 
 " see here , Mary Mark , " say Sister Antony . " I must send a message forthwith to Mother Sub - Prioress . you shall take it , leave I in charge of the gate , as often I be leave , by order of the Reverend Mother , when you be bid elsewhere . if , on your return and you need not to hurry you find I go , none can blame you . yet when the Lord Bishop rid in at sunset , he will give you his blessing and , like enough , something besides . " 

 Mary Mark 's hesitation vanish . 

 " I will take your message , Sister Antony , " she say meekly . 

 " go , by way of the kitchen and the refectory stair , to the cell of Mother Sub - Prioress . say that the Reverend Mother purpose pass the night in prayer and vigil , will not come to the evening meal , and desire Mother Sub - Prioress to take her place . also that for no cause whatever be the Reverend Mother to be disturb . " 

 Sister Mary Mark , be thus give a legitimate reason for leave her post and gain the Bishop 's favour without give cause for displeasure to the prioress , depart , by way of the kitchen , to carry Mary Antony 's message . 

 no soon be she out of sight , than Mary Antony seize the key , unlock the great door , pull they apart , and leave they stand ajar , the key in the lock ; then hasten back across the courtyard , pass under the rose - arch , and creep beneath the shelter of the yew hedge , reach the step up to the cloister ; slip unobserved through the cloister door , and up the empty passage ; unlock the Reverend Mother 's cell , enter it , and softly close and lock the door behind she . 

 then in order to make it impossible to yield to any temptation to open the door she withdraw the key , and fling it through the open window , far out into the shrubbery . 

 thus do Mary Antony prepare to hold the fort , until the coming of the 
 Bishop . 
 CHAPTER XXXIV 

 mora DE NORELLE 

 Symon , Bishop of Worcester , chid himself for restlessness . surely for once his mind have lose control of his limb . 

 no soon do he decide to walk the smooth lawn around the Castle , than he find himself mount to the battlement ; and now , though he have instal himself for greatly need repose in a deep seat in the hall chamber , yet here he be , pace the floor , or move from one window to another . 

 by dint of hard riding he have reach Warwick while the sun , though already dip beneath the horizon , still fleck the sky with rosy cloud , and spread a golden mantle over the west . 

 the lord of the Castle be away , in attendance on the king ; but all be in readiness for the arrival of the Bishop , and great preparation have be make for the reception of Sir Hugh d'Argent . his people , have leave Worcester early that morning , be about in the courtyard , as the Bishop ride in . 

 as he pass through the doorway , an elderly woman , buxom , comely , and of motherly aspect , whom he easily divine to be the tire - woman of whom the Knight have speak , come forward to meet he . 

 " Good my lord , " she say , her eagerness allow of scant ceremony , " come Sir Hugh d'Argent hither this night ? " 

 " aye , " reply the Bishop , look with kindly eye upon Mora 's old nurse . " within two hour , he should be here . " 

 " come he alone , my lord ? " ask Mistress Deborah . 

 " Nay , " reply the Bishop , " the Countess of Norelle , a very noble lady to whom the Knight be betroth , rid hither with he . " 

 " the saint be praise ! " exclaim the old woman , and turn away to hide her tear . 

 whilst his body - servant prepare a bath and lay out his robe , the Bishop mount to the rampart and watch the gold fade in the west . he glance at the river below , thread its way through the pasture land ; at the billowy mass of tree ; at the gay parterre , bright with summer flower . then he look long in the direction of the city from which he have come . 

 during his strenuous ride , the slow tramp of the man - at - arm , have sound continually in his ear ; the outline of that helpless figure , lie at full length upon the stretcher , have be ever before his eye . 

 he could not picture the arrival at the hostel , the removal of the covering , the uprising of the Prioress to face life anew , enfold in the arm of her lover . 

 as in a weary dream , in which the mind can make no headway , but return again and yet again to the point of distress , so , during the entire ride , the Bishop have follow that stretcher through the street of Worcester city , until it seem to he as if , before the pall be lift , the long - limbe , graceful form beneath it would have stiffen in death . 

 " a corpse for a bride ! a corpse for a bride ! " the hoof of the black mare Shulamite have seem to beat out upon the road . " alas , poor Knight ! a corpse for a bride ! " 

 the Bishop come down from the battlement . 

 when he leave his chamber an hour later , he have don those crimson robe which he wear on the evening when the Knight sup with he at the Palace . 

 as he pace up and down the lawn , the gold cross at his breast gleam in the evening light . 

 a night - hawk , fly high overhead and look downward as it fly , might have suppose that a great scarlet poppy have leave its clump in the flower - bed , and be promenade on the turf . 

 a steward come out to ask when it would please the Lord Bishop to sup . 

 to the hover hawk , a blackbird seem to have hop out , confront and arrest the promenade poppy . 

 the Bishop say he would await the arrival of Sir Hugh ; but he turn and follow the man into the Castle . 

 and now he sit in the great hall chamber . 

 two hour have pass since his arrival . 

 unless something unforeseen have occur the Knight 's cavalcade must be here before long . he have plan to start within the hour ; and , though the Bishop have ride fast , they could scarcely have take more than an hour long to do the distance . 

 but suppose the prioress have falter at the last , and have beseech to be return to the Nunnery ? would the chivalry of the Knight have stand such a test ? and , have leave in secret , how could she return openly ? would the way through the crypt be possible ? 

 the Bishop begin to wish that he have ride to the Star hostel and await development there , instead of hasten on before . 

 the hall chamber be in the centre of the Castle . its casement look out upon the garden . thus it come about that he do not hear a cavalcade ride into the courtyard . he do not hear the shouting of the man , the ring of hoof on the pave stone , the champing of horse . 

 he sit in a great carve chair beside the fireplace in the hall chamber , force himself to stillness , yet torment by anxiety ; half minded to order a fresh horse and to ride back to Worcester . 

 suddenly , without any warning , the door , lead from the ante - chamber at the further end of the hall , open . 

 frame in the doorway appear a vision , which for a moment lead Symon of Worcester to question whether he dream , so beautiful beyond belief be the woman in a green riding - dress , look at he with starry eye , her cheek aglow , a veil of golden hair fall about her shoulder . 

 oh , Mora , child of delight ! have the exquisite promise of thy girlhood indeed fulfil itself thus ? have the year change thee so little -and yet so greatly ? 

 " the captive exile hasteneth " ; exile , long ago , for thy sake ; seek to be free , yet captive still , catch once and forever in the mesh of that golden hair . 

 oh , Mora , child of delight ! must all this planning for thy full development and perfecting of joy , involve the poignant anguish of thus see thee again ? 

 Symon of Worcester rise and stand , a noble figure in crimson and gold , at the top of the hall . but for the silver moonlight of his hair , he might have be a man in his prime so erect be his carriage , so keen and bright be his eye . 

 the tall woman in the doorway give a little cry ; then move quickly forward . 

 " you ? " she say . " you ! the priest who be to we d we ? you ! " 

 he stand his ground , await her approach . 

 " yes , I , " he say ; " I. " 

 half - way across the hall , she pause . 

 " no , " she say , as if to herself . " I dream . it be not Father 
 Gervaise . it be the Bishop . " 
 she draw nearer . 

 earnestly he look upon she , strive to see in she the Prioress of 
 Whytstone the friend of all these happy , peaceful , blessed year . 
 but the prioress have vanish . 

 Mora de Norelle stand before he , tall by half a head than he , flush by long gallop in the night breeze ; nerve string to breaking point ; eye bright with the great unrest of a headlong leap into a new world . yet the firm sweet lip be there , unchanged ; and , even as he mark they , they quiver and part . 

 " Reverend Father , " she say , " I have choose , even as you pray I might do , the hard part . " she fling aside the riding - whip she carry ; and fold her hand , hold they up before he . " for Christ 's sake , my Lord Bishop , pray for I ! " 

 he take those fold hand in his , gently part they , and hold they against the cross upon his heart . 

 " you have choose rightly , my child , " he say ; " we will pray that grace and strength may be vouchsafe you , so that you may continue , without falter , along the pathway of this fresh vocation . " 

 she look at he with search gaze . the kind and gentle eye of the Bishop meet her without waver ; also without any trace of the fire the keen brightness which have startle she as she stand in the doorway . 

 " Reverend Father , " she say , and there be a strange note of bewildered question in her voice : " I pray you , tell I what you bid penitent to remember as they kneel in prayer before the crucifix ? " 

 the Bishop look full into those starry grey eye bent upon he , and his own do not falter . his mild voice take on a shade of sternness as befit the solemn subject of her question . 

 " I tell they , my daughter , to remember , the sacred wound that bleed and the heart that break for they . " 

 she draw her hand from beneath his , and step back a pace . 

 " the Heart that break ? " she say . " that break ? do heart break ? " she cry . " Nay , rather , they turn to stone . " she laugh wildly , then catch her breath . the Knight have enter the hall . 

 with free , glad step , and head uplifted , Hugh d'Argent come to they , where they stand . 

 " my Lord Bishop , " he say , " you have be too good to we . I send Mora on alone that she might find you here , not tell she who be the prelate who have so graciously offer to we d we , know how much it would mean to she that it should be you , Reverend Father . " 

 " Gladly be I here for that purpose , my son , " reply the Bishop , " have as you know , the leave and sanction of his Holiness for so do . shall we proceed at once to the chapel , or do you plan first to sup ? " 

 " Nay , Father , " say the Knight . " my betrothed have ride far and need food first , and then a good night 's rest . if it will not too much delay your return to Worcester , I would pray you to we d we in the morning . " 

 know how determined Hugh have be , in lay his plan , to be we d at once on reach Warwick , the Bishop look up quickly , wish to understand what have work this change . 

 he see on the Knight 's face that look of radiant peace which the Prioress have see , when first the cloak be turn back in the crypt ; and the Bishop , have pass that way himself , know that to Hugh have come the revelation which come but to the true , lover the deep of all joy , that of put himself on one side , and of thinking , first and only , of the welfare of the beloved . 

 and see this , the Bishop let go his fear , and in his heart thank 
 God . 
 " it be well plan , Hugh , " he say . " I be here until the morning . " 

 at which the Knight turning , stride quickly to the door , and beckon . 

 then back he come , lead by the hand the buxom , motherly old dame , see on arrival by the Bishop . who , when the Lady Mora see , she give a cry , and run to meet she . 

 " Debbie ! " she cry , " oh , Debbie ! let we go home ! " 

 and with that the tension break all on a sudden , and with her old nurse 's arm around she , she sob on the faithful bosom which have be the refuge of her childhood 's woe . 

 " there , my pretty ! " say Deborah , as good she could for her own sob . " there , there ! we be at home , now we be together . come and see the chamber in which we shall sleep , just as we sleep long year ago , when you be a babe , my dear . " 

 so , with her old nurse 's arm about she , she , who have come in so proudly , go gently out in a soft mist of tear . 

 the Bishop turn away . 

 " love never faileth , " he murmur , half aloud . 

 Hugh turn with he , and laugh ; but in his laughter there be no vexation , no bitterness , no unrest . it be the happy laugh of a heart aglow with a hope amount to certainty . 

 " there be two of we the other night , my dear lord , " he say ; " but now old Debbie have appear , methink there be three ! " 

 CHAPTER XXXV 

 in the arbour of golden rose 

 the next day dawn , clear and radiant ; a perfect summer morning . 

 Mora awake soon after five o'clock . 

 notwithstanding the fatigue of the previous day , the strain and stress of heart , and the late hour at which she have at length fall asleep , the mental habit of year overcome the physical need of further slumber . 

 her first conscious thought be for the rope which work over a pulley through a hole in the wall of her cell , enable she from , within to ring the great bell in the passage , thus rouse the entire community . it have be her invariable habit to do this herself . she like the nun to feel that the call to begin a new day come to they from the hand of their prioress . realise the difficulty of early rise , especially after night vigil , it please she that her nun should know that the fact of the bell resound through the Convent prove that the Reverend Mother be already on her foot . 

 yet now , look toward the door , she could see no rope . and what mean those sumptuous tapestry hanging ? 

 she leap from her couch , and gaze around she . 

 why fall her hair about she , as a golden cloud ? that beautiful hair , which in some Orders would have be shorn from her head ; and , in this , must ever be closely braid , cover , and never see . still half - bewilder , she fling it back ; gaze at the unfamiliar , yet well - remember , garment lay ready for her use . 

 sometimes she have have such dream as this dream in which she be back in the world , wear its garment , taste its pleasure , look again upon forbid thing . 

 why should she not now be dream ? 

 then a sound fall upon her ear ; a sound , long forget , yet so familiar that as she hear it , she feel herself a child at home again the soft , contented snoring of old Debbie , fast asleep . 

 Sound be ever more convincing than sight . the blind live in a world of certainty . not so , the deaf . 

 Mora need not to turn and view the comely countenance of her old nurse sleep upon a couch in a corner . at sound of that soft purring snore , she know all she need to know know she be no long prioress , know she have renounce her vow ; know that even now the Convent be wake and wonder , as last night it must have marvel and surmise , and to - morrow would question and condemn ; know that this be her wedding morn ; that this robe of soft white , with jewelled girdle , and jewel circlet to crown her hair , be old Debbie 's choice for she of suitable attire in which to stand beside her bridegroom at the altar . 

 pass into an alcove , she bath and clothe herself , even put on the jewelled band to clasp the shin softness of her hair . Debbie 's will on these point have never be dispute , and truly it matter little to Mora what she wear , since wimple and holy veil be forever lay aside . 

 she pass softly from the chamber , without awaken the old nurse , make her way down a wind stair , out through a postern door , and so into the garden bath in early morning sunshine . 

 seek to escape observation from the castle wall or window , she make her way through a rose - garden to where a high yew hedge surround a bowling - green . at the further end of this seclude place stand a rustic summer - house , now a veritable bower of yellow rose . 

 bend her head , Mora pass through an archway of yew , down three stone step , and so on to the lawn . 

 then , out from the arbour step the Bishop , in his violet cassock and biretta , his breviary in his hand . 

 if this first sight of Hugh 's bride , in bridal array , on her wedding morning , surprise or stir he , he give no sign of unusual emotion . 

 as he come to meet she , his lip smile kindly , and in his eye be that half whimsical , half tender look , she know so well . he might have be rid into the courtyard of the Nunnery , and she stand on the step to receive he , so natural be his greeting , so wholly as usual do he appear . 

 " you be up betime , my daughter , as I guess you would be ; also you have come hither , as I hop you might do . be I the first to wish you joy , on this glad day ? " 

 " the first , " she say . " even my good Deborah sleep through my rising . I wake at the accustomed hour , to ring the Convent bell , and find myself prioress no long , but bride an earthly bride expect to deck herself with jewel for an earthly bridal . " 

 " ' even the ornament of a meek and quiet spirit , which be in the sight of God of great price , ' " quote , the Bishop , a retrospective twinkle in his eye . 

 " alas , my lord , I fear that ornament be never mine . " 

 " yet you must wear it now , my daughter . I have hear it be an ornament greatly admire by husband . " 

 stand in the sunlight , all unconscious of her wondrous beauty , she open startled eye on he ; then drop to her knee upon the turf . " your blessing , Reverend Father , " she say , and there be a wild sob in her voice . " oh , I entreat your blessing , on this my bridal day ! " 

 the Bishop lay his hand upon the bright coronet of her hair , and bless she with the threefold Aaronic blessing ; then raise she , and bade her walk with he across the turf . 

 into the arbour he lead she , beneath a cascade of fragrant yellow rose . there , upon a rustic table be spread a dainty repast new milk , fruit freshly gather , white roll , and most golden pat of butter , the dew of the dairy yet upon they . 

 " come , my daughter , " say Symon of Worcester , gaily . " we of the Church , who know the value of these early hour , let we break our fast together . " 

 " be it magic , my lord ? " she ask , suddenly conscious of unmistakable hunger . 

 " Nay , " say the Bishop , " but I be out a full hour ago . and the dairy wench be up before I . so between we we contrive this simple repast . " 

 so , while the bridegroom and old Deborah still slumber and sleep , the bride and the Bishop break their fast together in a bower of rose ; and his eye be the eye of a merry schoolboy out on a holiday ; and the colour come back to her cheek and she smile and grow light - hearted , as always in their long friendship , when he come to she in this gay mood . 

 yet , presently , when she have eat well , and seem strengthen and refresh , the Bishop lean back in his seat , say with sudden gravity : 

 " and now , my daughter , will you tell I how it have come to pass that you have be lead to feel it right to take this irrevocable step , renounce your vow , and keep your troth to Hugh ? when last we speak together you declare that naught would suffice but a clear sign , vouchsafe you from our Lady herself , make it plain that your high duty be to Hugh , and that Heaven absolve you from your vow . be such a sign vouchsafe ? " 

 " indeed it be , my lord , in wondrous fashion , our Lady choosing as the mouthpiece of her will , by mean of a most explicit and unmistakable revelation , one so humble and so simple , that I could but exclaim : ' Thou hast hide these thing from the wise and prudent , and hast reveal they unto babe . ' " 

 " and who , " ask the Bishop , his eye upon a peach which he be peel with extreme care ; " who , my daughter , be the babe ? " 

 " the old lay - sister , Mary Antony . " 

 " ah , " murmur the Bishop , " an ancient babe . yet truly , a most worthy babe . almost , I should be incline to say , a wise and prudent babe . " 

 " Nay , my Lord Bishop , " cry Mora , with a sharp decision of tone which make it please he to imagine that , should he look up from the peach , he would see the severe line of the wimple and scapulary : " you and I be the wise and prudent , argue for and against , accord to our own theory and reason . but to this babe , our Lady vouchsafe a clear vision . " 

 " tell I of it , " say the Bishop , split his peach and remove the stone which he carefully wash , and slip into his sash . the Bishop always keep peach stone , and plant they . 

 she tell he . she begin at the beginning , and tell he all , to the minute detail ; the full description of Hugh the amazingly correct repetition , in the vision , of the way in which she and Hugh have actually kneel together before the shrine of the bless Virgin , of their very word and action ; and , finally , the sublime and gracious tenderness of our Lady 's pronouncement , clearly hear at the close of the vision , by the old lay - sister : " take she ; she hath be ever thine . I have but keep she for thee . " 

 " what say you to that , Reverend Father ? " exclaim Mora , conclude . 

 " I scarce know what to say , " reply the Bishop . " for lack of anything well , I fall back upon my favourite motto , and I say : ' love never faileth . ' " 

 now , generally , she delight in the exceed aptness of the Bishop 's quotation ; but this time it seem to Mora that his favourite motto bear no sort of relevance . 

 she feel , with a chill of disappointment and a sense of vexation , that the Bishop 's mind have be so intent upon the fruit , that he have not fully take in the wonder of the vision . 

 " it have naught to do with love , my lord , " she say , rather coldly ; " unless you mean the divine lovingkindness of our blessed Lady . " 

 " precisely , " reply the Bishop , lean back in his seat , and at length look straight into Mora 's earnest eye . " the divine lovingkindness of our bless Lady never faileth . " 

 " you agree , my lord , that the vision shed a clear light upon all my perplexity ? " 

 " absolutely clear , " reply the Bishop . " the love which arrange the vision see to that . revelation , my daughter , be useless unless they be explicit . have our Lady merely wave her marble hand , instead of stoop to take yours and place it in that of the Knight , you might have think she be wave he away , and bid you to remain . if her marble hand move at all , it be well that it move in so definite and practical a manner . " 

 " it seem to I , Reverend Father , " say Mora , lean upon the table , her face frame in her hand , and look with knit brow at the Bishop ; " it almost seem to I that you regard the entire vision with a measure of secret incredulity . " 

 " Nay , my daughter , there you mistake . on the contrary I be fully convince , by that which you tell I , that the ancient babe , Mary Antony , be undoubtedly permit to see you and your knightly lover kneeling hand in hand before our Lady 's shrine ; also I praise our bless Lady that by vouchsafe this sight to Mary Antony , and by allow she to hear word which you yourself know to have be in very deed actually speak , your mind have be lead to accept as the divine will for you , this return to the world and union with your lover , which will , I feel sure , be not only for your happiness and his , but also a fruitful source of good to many . yet , I admit " 

 the Bishop pause , and consider ; as if anxious to say just so much , and neither more nor less . continue , he speak slowly , weigh each word . " yet , I frankly admit , I would soon for mine own guidance listen for the Voice of God within , or learn his will from the write Word , than ask for miraculous sign , or act upon the vision of other . 

 " no doubt you read , in the Chronicle I lately lend you , how ' in the year of our Lord eleven hundred and thirty - seven that time of many sorrow , of burning , pillaging , rapine and torture , when the city of York be burn together with the principal monastery ; the city of Rochester be consume ; also the Church of Bath , and the city of Leicester ; when owe to the absence of King Stephen abroad and the mildness of his rule when at home , the baron greatly oppress and ill - use the Church and the people while many be stand at the Celebration of Mass at Windsor , they behold the Crucifix , which be over the altar , move and wring its hand , now the right hand with the left , now the left with the right , after the manner of those who be in distress . ' 

 " this wondrous sight convince those who see it that the crucify 
 Redeemer sympathise with the grievous sorrow of the land . 
 " but no carven crucifix , wring its hand before a gaze crowd , could so deeply convince I of the sympathy of the Redeemer as to sit alone in mine own chamber and read from the book of Isaiah the Prophet : ' surely he hath borne our grief , and carry our sorrow . ' " 

 Mora 's brow clear . 

 " I think I understand , my lord ; and that you should so feel , help I to confess to you a thing which I have scarce dare admit to myself . I find it difficult in mine own soul to attach due weight to our blessed Lady 's word as hear by Mary Antony . mine own test the robin 's flight , straight from the hand of the Madonna to the world without speak with more sense of truth to my heart . I blame myself for this ; but so it be . yet it be the vision which decide I as to my clear path of duty . " 

 " Doubtless , " remark the Bishop , " the medium of Mary Antony take from the solemnity of the pronouncement . there would be a twist of quaintness in even the holy vision , as describe by the old lay - sister . " 

 " Nay , my lord , " say Mora . " truth to tell , it be not so . once fairly start on the telling , she seem lift into a strange sublimity of utterance . I marvel at it , and at the unearthly radiance of her face . at the end , I think she sleep ; but later I hear from the Sub - Prioress that she be find swoon before the crucifix and they have much ado to bring she round . 

 " my lord , my heart fail I when I think to - day of my empty cell , and of the sore perplexity of my nun . how soon will it be possible that you see they and put the matter right , by give the Holy Father 's message ? " 

 " so soon as you be we d , my daughter , I ride back to Worcester . I shall endeavour to reach the Convent before the hour when they leave for vesper . " 

 " may I beg , my lord , that you speak a word of especial kindness to old Antony , whose heart will be sore at my departure ? I have think to bid she be silent concern the vision ; but as she declare the shin Knight be Saint George or Saint Michael , the nun , in their devout simplicity , will doubtless hold the vision to have be merely symbolic of my removal to ' high service . ' " 

 " I will seek old Antony , " say the Bishop , " and speak with she alone . " 

 " Father , " say Mora , with deep emotion , " during all these year , you have be most good to I ; kind beyond word ; patient always . I fear I ofttime try you by be too firmly set on my own will and way . but , I pray you to believe , I ever value your counsel and could scarce have live without your friendship . last night , on first enter the Castle , I fear I speak wildly and act strangely . I be sore overwrought . I come in , out of the night , not know whom I should find in the hall chamber ; and for a moment , my lord , for one wild , foolish moment I take you not for yourself but for another . " 

 " for whom do you take I , my daughter ? " ask the Bishop . 

 " for one of whom you have oft remind I , my lord , if I may say so without offence , see I speak of a priest who be the ideal of my girlhood 's dream . know you , many year ago , one Father Gervaise , hold in high regard at the Court , confessor to the Queen and her lady ? " 

 the Bishop smile , and his blue eye look into Mora 's with an expression of quiet interest . 

 " Father Gervaise ? " he say . " preacher at the Court ? indeed , I know he , my daughter ; and more than know he . Father Gervaise and I have the same grandparent . " 

 " ah , " cry Mora , eagerly , " then that account for a resemblance which from the first have haunt I , make of our friendship , at once , so sweetly intimate a thing . the voice and the eye alone be like but , ah , so like ! Father Gervaise wear a beard , which hide his mouth and chin ; but his blue eye have in they that kindly yet search look , though not merry as yours oft be , my lord ; and your voice have ever make I think of his . 

 " and once just once his eye look at I , across the Castle hall at Windsor , with a deep glow of fire in they ; a look which make I feel call to an altar whereon , if I could but stand the test of fire , I should be forever purify , uplifted , bl as be never earthly maid before , save only our blessed Lady . all that night I dream of it , and my whole soul be fill with it , yet never again do I see Father Gervaise . the next morning he leave the Court , and soon after sail for Spain ; and on the passage thither the ship founder in a great storm , and he , with all on board , perish . hear you of that , my lord ? " 

 " I hear it , " say the Bishop . 

 " all believe it , and mourn he ; for by all he be belove . but never could I feel that he be dead . always for I it seem that he still live . and last night when I enter across the great hall chamber , it seem as if , once more , the eye of Father Gervaise look upon I , with that glow fire in they , which call I to an altar . " 

 the Bishop smile again , and there be in his look a gentle merriment . 

 " you be over - strain , my daughter . when you draw near , you find instead of a ghostly priest with eye of fire , drown many year ago , off the coast of Spain your old friend , Symon of Worcester , who have steal a march on you , by reason of the swift pace of his good mare , Shulamite . " 

 Mora lean forward , and lay her hand on his . 

 " mock not , my friend , " she say . " there be a time when Father Gervaise stand to I for all my heart hold dearest . yet I love he , not as a girl love a man , but rather as a nun love her Lord . he stand to I for all that be noblest and good ; and , above all , for all that be vital and alive in life and in religion ; strong to act ; able to endure . he confess I once , and tell I , when I kneel before the crucifix , to say of he who hang thereon : ' he ever liveth to make intercession for we . ' never have I forget it . and sometimes when I say the sacred word , and , say they , my mind turn to Father Gervaise , an echo seem to whisper to my spirit : ' he , also , liveth . ' " 

 Symon of Worcester rise . 

 " my daughter , " he say , " the sun be high in the heaven . we must not linger here . Hugh will be seek his bride , and Mistress Deborah be wax anxious over the escape of her charge . the morning meal will be ready in the banqueting hall ; after which we must to the chapel , for the marriage . then , without delay , I ride to Worcester to make all right at the Nunnery . let we go . " 

 as Mora walk beside he across the sunny lawn , " Father , " she say , " think you the heart of a nun can ever become again as the heart of other woman ? " 

 CHAPTER xxxvi 

 STRONG to ACT ; able to endure 

 back to Worcester ride the Bishop . 

 Gallop ! Gallop ! along the grassy rid , beside the hard highway . 

 hasten good Shulamite , black and comely still , though fleck with foam . 

 important work lie ahead . every moment be precious . 

 if Mother Sub - Prioress should send to the Palace , mischief will be do , which it will not be easy to repair . 

 if news of the flight of the Prioress reach the city of Worcester , a hundred tongue , spiteful , ignorant , curious , or merely idle , will at once start wag . 

 Gallop , gallop , Shulamite ! 

 how impossible to overtake a rumour , if it have an hour 's start of you . as well attempt to catch up the water which first rush through the sluice - gate , open an hour before you reach the dam . 

 how impossible to remake a reputation once break . before the priceless venetian goblet fall from the table on to the flagged floor , one hand put forth in time might have hinder its fall . but fail that timely hand when , a second later , it lie in a hundred piece , the hand of the whole world be powerless to make it again as it be before it fall . 

 fast , fast , Shulamite ! 

 when the messenger of Mother Sub - Prioress report the absence of the Bishop , he will most certainly be send in haste to Father Benedict , who will experience a sinister joy at the prospect of follow his long nose into the prioress 's empty cell , who will scent out scandal where there be but a fragrance of lily , and tear to piece Mora 's reputation , with as little compunction as a wolf tear a lamb . 

 Gallop , gallop , Shulamite ! if no hand be put forth to save it , between Mother Sub - Prioress and Father Benedict , this crystal bowl will be break into a hundred piece . 

 at length the Bishop draw rein , and walk his mare a mile . he have leave Warwick ten mile behind he . he would soon be half - way to Worcester . 

 he have leave Warwick behind he ! 

 it seem to the Bishop that , ever since he have first know Mora de 
 Norelle , he have always be rid away and leave behind . 
 for her sake he ride away , leave behind the Court , his various office , his grow influence and popularity . 

 for her sake he leave his identity as Father Gervaise at the bottom of the ocean , take up his life again , in Italy , under his other name . 

 for her sake , when he hear that she have enter the convent of the White Ladies , he obtain the appointment to the see of Worcester , leave the sunny land he love , and the prospect of far high preferment there . 

 and now for her sake he ride away from Warwick as fast as steed could carry he , leave she the bride of another , in whose hand he have himself place her , pronounce the Church 's blessing upon their union . 

 rid away leave behind ; leave behind rid away . this be what his love have ever bring he . 

 yet he feel rich to - day , find himself in possession of the certain knowledge that he have be right in judge necessary , that first departure into exile long year ago . 

 for have not Mora tell he little dream to whom she speak that there be a time when he have stand to she for all her heart hold dearest ; yet that she have love he , not as a girl love a man , but rather as a nun love her Lord . 

 but surely a man would need to be divine to be so loved , and to hold such love aright . and , even then , when that other man arrive who would fain woo she to love he as a girl love a man , would her heart be free to respond to the call of nature ? nay . to all intent and purpose , her heart would be a cloistered thing ; yet would she be neither bride of Christ nor bride of man . the fire in his eye would indeed have call she to an altar , and the sacrifice lay thereon would be the full completion of her womanhood . 

 " I do well to pass into exile , " say the Bishop , review the past , as he ride . yet deep in his heart be the comfort of those word she have say : that once he have stand to she for all her heart hold dearest . Mora , the girl , have feel thus ; Mora , the woman , remember it ; and the Bishop , as he think of both , offer up a thanksgiving that neither he nor Father Gervaise have do aught which be unworthy of the ideal of her girlhood 's dream . 

 gather up the rein , he urge Shulamite to a rapid trot . there must be no lingering by the way . 

 Hasten , Shulamite ! even now the sluice - gate may be open . even now the crystal bowl may be slip from its pedestal , presently to lie in a hundred fragment on the ground . 

 Nay , trotting will scarce do . Gallop , gallop , brave black mare ! 

 the city wall be just in sight . 

 well do ! 

           

 not far from the Convent gate , the Bishop chance , by great good fortune , upon Brother Philip , try in the meadow the pace of a young horse , but lately purchase . 

 the Bishop bid the lay - brother ride with he to the Nunnery and , so soon as he should have dismount , lead Shulamite to the Palace stable , carefully feed and tend she ; then bring he out a fresh mount . 

 as they ride forward : " hath any message arrive at the Palace from the 
 Convent , Philip ? " inquire the Bishop . 
 " none , my lord . " 

 " or at the priory ? " 

 " Nay , my lord . but I do hear , at the Priory , a strange rumour " 

 " rumour be rarely worth regard or repeating , Brother Philip . " 

 " true , my lord . yet have so lately aid she to ride upon icon " 

 " ' she ' ? with whom then be rumour make free ? and what saith this 
 Priory rumour concern ' she ' ? " 
 " they say the old lay - sister , Mary Antony , hath flee the Convent . " 

 " Mary Antony ! " exclaim the Bishop , and his voice hold the most extraordinary combination of amazement , relief , and incredulity . " but , in heaven 's name , good brother , wherefore should the old lay - sister leave the Convent ? " 

 " they say she be make her way into the city in search of you , my lord ; but she hath not reach the Palace . " 

 " any other rumour , Philip ? " 

 " Nay , my lord , none ; save that the prioress be distraught with anxiety concern the aged nun , and have command that the underground way to the Cathedral crypt be search ; though , indeed , the porteress confess to have let Sister Mary Antony out at the gate . " 

 " Rumour again , " say the Bishop , " and not a word of truth in it , I warrant . deny it , right and leave , my good Philip ; and say , on my authority , that the Reverend Mother hath most certainly not cause the crypt way to be search . I would I could lay hand on the originator of these foolish tale . " 

 the Bishop speak with apparent vexation , but his heart have bound in the upspring of a great relief . be he after all in time to save with outstretched hand that most priceless crystal bowl ? 

 the Bishop dismount outside the Convent gate . he take Shulamite 's nose into his hand , and speak gently in her ear . 

 then : " lead her home , Philip , " he say , " and surround she with tender care . her brave heart hath do wonder this day . it be for we to see that her body doth not pay the penalty . here ! take her rein , and go . " 

 Mary Mark look out through the wicket , in response to a knocking on the door . she gasp when she see the Lord Bishop , on foot , without the gate . 

 quickly she open , wide , and wider ; hide her buxom form behind the door . 

 but the Bishop have no thought for Mary Mark , nor inclination to play hide - and - seek with a conscience - stricken porteress . 

 avoid the front entrance , he cross the courtyard to the right , pass beneath the rose - arch , along the yew walk , and over the lawn , to the seat under the beech , where two day before he have await the coming of the prioress . 

 here he pause for a moment , look toward the silent cloister , and picture her tall figure , her flow veil and stately tread , advance toward he over the sunny lawn . 

 yet no . even in these surrounding he could not see she now as Prioress . even across the Convent lawn there move to meet he the lovely woman with jewelled girdle , white robe , and coronet of golden hair the bride of Hugh . 

 perhaps this be the hard moment to Symon of Worcester , in the whole of that hard day . 

 it be the one time when he think of himself . 

 " I have lose she ! " he say . " Holy Jesu thou whose heart do break after three hour of darkness and of God - forsake loneliness have pity ! the light of my life be go from I , yet must I live . " 

 overwhelmed by this sudden realisation of loss , wear out in mind and exhaust in body , the Bishop sink upon the seat . 

 Mora be safe with Hugh . that much have be accomplish . 

 for the rest , thing must take their own course . he could do no more go no far . 

 then he hear again her voice in the arbour of golden rose , say , in those low sweet tone which thrill his very soul : " he stand to I for all that be vital and alive , in life and in religion ; strong to act ; able to endure . " 

 during five minute the Bishop sit , eye close , hand firmly clasped . 

 so still he sit , that the little Knight of the Bloody Vest , watching , with bright eye , from the tree overhead , almost make up his mind to drop to the other end of the seat . he be miss Sister Mary Antony , who have not appear at all that morning . this mean neither crumb nor cheese , and the " little vain man " be hungry . 

 but at the end of five minute the Bishop rise , calm and purposeful ; move firmly up the lawn , mount the step , and pass into the cloister . 

 CHAPTER XXXVII 

 what MOTHER SUB - PRIORESS KNEW 

 Mother Sub - Prioress have apply her eye , for the fiftieth time , to the keyhole ; but naught could she see in the prioress 's cell , save a portion of the great wooden cross against the opposite wall . 

 Sister Mary Rebecca , mount upon a stool , attempt to spy through the hole over the rope and pulley by mean of which the Reverend Mother ring the Convent bell . but all Sister Mary Rebecca see , after bump her head upon a beam , and her nose on the wall , owe to the impossibility of get it out of the way of her eye , be a portion of the top of the Reverend Mother 's window . 

 she cry out , as a great discovery , that the curtain be draw back ; upon which , Mother Sub - Prioress , exclaim , tartly , that that have be long ago observe from the garden below , push the stool in her anger , and send Sister Mary Rebecca fly . 

 jump to save herself , she alight heavily on the foot of Sister Teresa , strike Mary Seraphine full in the face with her elbow , and scatter , to right and leave , the crowd around the door . 

 this clear a view for Mother Sub - Prioress straight down the passage and through the big open door , to the cloister ; when , look up to scold Mary Rebecca for take such a leap , to bid Sister Teresa cease writhe , and Mary Seraphine to shriek in her cell with the door shut , if shriek she must Mother Sub - Prioress see the Bishop , alone and unattended , walk toward they from the cloister . 

 " Benedicite , " say the Bishop , as he approach . " I be fortunate in chance to find the whole community assemble . " 

 the Bishop 's uplifted finger bring the nun to their knee ; but they rise at once to their foot again and crowd behind Mother Sub - Prioress as , take a step forward , she hasten to explain the situation . 

 " my Lord Bishop , you find we in much distress . the Reverend Mother be lock into her cell , and we fear that , after a long night of vigil and fast , she hath swoon . we can not get an answer by much knock , and we have no mean of force the door , which be of most massive strength and thickness . " 

 the Bishop look searchingly into the ferrety face of Mother Sub - Prioress , but he see naught there save genuine distress and perplexity . 

 he look at the massive door , and at the excited crowd of nun . he even give himself time to note that the nose and lip of Seraphine be begin to swell , and to experience a whimsical wish that the Knight could see she . 

 then his calm , observant eye turn again to Mother Sub - Prioress . 

 " and why do you make so sure , Mother Sub - Prioress , that the Reverend 
 Mother be indeed within her cell ? " 
 " because we know she to be , " reply Mother Sub - Prioress , as tartly as she dare , when address the Lord Bishop . " permit I , Reverend Father , to recount to you the happening of the last twenty hour . 

 " soon after her return from Vespers , yestereven , the Reverend Mother send word by Mary Antony that she purpose again spend the night in prayer and vigil , and would not be present at the evening meal ; also that she must not , on any account whatever , be disturb . Mary Antony take this message to the kitchen , bid the young lay - sister to prepare the meal without she , say she care not how badly it be serve , see the Reverend Mother would not be there to partake of it . " 

 Mother Sub - Prioress pause to sniff , and to give the other nun an opportunity for ejaculation concern Sister Antony . but their awe of the Lord Bishop , and their genuine anxiety for the old lay - sister , keep they silent . 

 the Bishop stroke his chin , keep the corner of his mouth firmly in place by mean of his thumb and finger . Old Antony be delectably funny when she say these thing herself ; but she be delectably funny , when her remark be repeat by Mother Sub - Prioress . 

 " the old creature , " continue Mother Sub - Prioress , eye the Bishop 's meditative hand suspiciously , " then betook herself to the outer gate , tell the porteress that she have your order , Reverend Father , to report to you if the Reverend Mother again elect to pass a night in vigil and in fast , because you and she you and she forsooth ! be make anxious by the too constant fasting and the too prolonged vigil of the Reverend Mother . Mary Mark very properly refuse to allow the old " 

 " Lay - sister , " interpose the Bishop , sternly . 

 Mother Sub - Prioress gasp ; then make obeisance : " the old lay - sister to leave the convent . Whereupon Sister Antony send Mary Mark to deliver the Reverend Mother 's message to I , bribe she , with the promise of a gift from you , my lord , to leave she the key . when the porteress return , Mary Antony be go , have leave the great door ajar , and the key within the lock . she have not be see since . do she reach the Palace , and speak with you , my lord ? be she now in safety at the Palace ? " 

 " Nay , " say the Bishop gravely . " Sister Mary Antony hath not be see at the Palace . " 

 " alack - a - day ! " exclaim Sister Abigail ; ' she will have fall by the way , and perish ! she be too old to face the world or attempt to reach the city . " 

 " peace , girl ! " command the Sub - prioress . " Thy comment and thy wailing mend not the matter , and do but incense the Lord Bishop . " 

 nothing could have appear less incensed than the Bishop 's benign countenance . but he have speak sternly to Mother Sub - Prioress , therefore she endeavour to put herself in the right by charge he , at the first opportunity , with unreasonable irritation . 

 the Bishop reassure Sister Abigail , with a smile ; then , point toward the closed door : " proceed with your recital , Mother Sub - Prioress , " he say . " you have as yet give I no proof confirm your belief that the prioress be within the cell . " 

 " when the absence of Mary Antony become know , my lord , " continue Mother Sub - Prioress , " we feel it right to acquaint the Reverend Mother with the old lay - sister 's flight . I , myself , knock upon this door ; but the only reply I receive be the continuous low chanting of prayer , from within ; not so much a clear chanting , as a murmur ; and whenever , during the night , nun listen at the door , or venture again to tap , the sound of the Reverend Mother 's voice , recite psalm or prayer , reach they . as you may remember , my lord , the ground upon the other side of the building be on a low level than the cloister lawn . the window of the Reverend Mother 's cell be therefore raise above the shrubbery and it be not possible to see into the chamber . but Sister Mary Rebecca , who go round after dark , note that the Reverend Mother have light her taper and draw her curtain . this morning the light be extinguish , the curtain be draw back , and the casement fling open . moreover at the usual hour for rise , the Reverend Mother ring the bell , as be her custom , to waken the nun rang it from within her cell , by mean of this rope and pulley . " 

 " ah , " say the Bishop . 

 " Sister Abigail , up already , thereupon run to the Reverend Mother 's cell ; and , the bell still swing , tap and ask if she might bring in milk and bread . once more the only answer be the low chanting of prayer . also , Sister Abigail declare , the voice be so weak and faltering , she scarce know it for the Reverend Mother 's . and since then , my lord , there have be silence within the cell , and a sore sense of fear within our heart ; for it be unlike the Reverend Mother to keep her door lock , when the entire community call and knock without . " 

 the Bishop lift his hand . 

 " in that speak you truly , Mother Sub - Prioress , " say he . " also I must tell you without further delay , that the prioress be not within her cell . " 

 " not within her cell ! " exclaim Mother Sub - Prioress . 

 " not within her cell ! " shriek a score of terrified voice , like seagull call to each other , before a gathering storm . 

 " the Prioress leave the Convent yesterday afternoon , " say the Bishop , " with my knowledge and approval ; travel at once , with a sufficient escort , to a place some distance from Worcester , where I also spend the night . I have come to bring you a message from his Holiness the Pope , send to I direct from Rome . . . . the Holy Father bid I say that your prioress have be move on by I , with his full knowledge and approval , to a place where she be require for high service . perhaps I may also tell you , " add the Bishop , look with kindly sympathy upon all the blankly disconcert face , " that this morning I myself perform a solemn rite , for which I hold the Pope 's especial mandate , set apart your late prioress for this high service . she grieve that it be not possible to bid you farewell . she send you love greeting , her thank for loyalty and obedience , and pray that the blessing of the Lord may ever be with you . " 

 the Bishop cease speak . 

 at first there be an amazed silence . 

 then the unexpected happen . Mother Sub - Prioress , without any warning , break into passionate weeping . 

 never before have Mother Sub - Prioress be know to weep . the sight petrify the Convent . yet somehow all know that she weep because , in the hard old nut which do duty for her heart , there be a kernel of deep love for their noble prioress . 

 the other nun weep , because Mother Sub - Prioress wept . 

 the sobbing become embarrassing in its completeness . wheresoever the 
 Bishop look he be confront by a weeping nun . 
 suddenly Mother Sub - Prioress dry her eye , hold herself once more in control . it have just occur to she that the Bishop 's word could not be take against the evidence of all their sens ! on that very morning , at five o'clock the Convent call to rise have be ring from within the prioress 's cell ! 

 so Mother Sub - Prioress dry her eye , punish her nose for share in the general breakdown , and look with belligerent eye at the Bishop , say : " if the Reverend Mother be not within her cell , perhaps it will please you , my lord , to inform the Convent who be within it ! " 

 " that point , " say the Bishop , " can speedily be settle . " 

 he take from his girdle the prioress 's master - key , hand over to he before he leave Warwick . 

 fit it into the lock , he open the door of the cell , and enter , follow by the Sub - Prioress and a crowd of palpitating , eager nun . 

 a few pace from the door the Bishop pause , sign to Mother Sub - Prioress to come forward , but restrain , with uplifted hand , those who press in behind she . 

 the chamber be very still . 

 the chair of the prioress be empty . 

 but , before the shrine of the Madonna , there lie , stretch upon the floor , the unconscious form of the old lay - sister , Mary Antony . 

 CHAPTER XXXVIII 

 the BISHOP KEEPS VIGIL 

 Old Mary Antony lie die . 

 the Bishop have not allow she to be carry from the cell of the 
 Prioress , to her own . 
 he have command that the Reverend Mother 's couch be move from the inner room and place before the shrine of the Virgin . on this lie Mary Antony , while the Bishop himself keep watch beside she . 

 the evening light come in through the open casement , illumine the calm old face , from which the soothe hand of death be already smooth the wrinkle . 

 five hour have pass since they find she . 

 it have take long to restore she to consciousness ; and so soon as she awake to her surrounding , and recognise Mother Sub - Prioress , and the many face around she , she relapse into silence , refuse to answer any question , yet keep her eye anxiously fix upon the door . 

 see which , Sister Teresa slip from the room and run secretly to tell the Lord Bishop , who have pay but a brief visit to the Palace and be now pace the lawn below the cloister . 

 the Bishop come at once ; when , see he enter , Mary Antony give a cry , strive to raise herself from the pillow . 

 move to the bedside , the Bishop lay his hand upon the shake hand , which have be clasp at sight of he . 

 an eager question be in the eye lift to his . 

 the Bishop bend over the couch . 

 " yes , " he say , and smile . 

 the anxious look fade . the eye close . a triumphant smile illumine the die face . 

 turn , the Bishop ask a few whisper question of the Sub - Prioress . 

 Mary Antony have take a sip of wine , but seem to find it impossible to partake of food . she have be so long without , that now nature refuse it . 

 " undoubtedly she be die , " say Mother Sub - Prioress , not unkindly , but in the matter - of - fact tone of one to whom the hard outline of a fact be unsoftene by the atmosphere of imagination or of sympathy . 

 " I know it , " say the Bishop , in low tone . " therefore be I come to confess our sister and to administer the final rite and consolation of the Church . I have with I all that be need . you may now withdraw , and leave I to watch alone beside Sister Mary Antony . " 

 " we send for Father Peter , " begin Mother Sub - Prioress , " but she pay no heed to any of his question , neither would she " 

 the Bishop take one step toward Mother Sub - Prioress , with uplifted hand , point to the door . 

 Mother Sub - Prioress hasten out . 

 the Bishop follow she into the passage , where a waiting crowd of nun create that atmosphere of excited tension , which seize certain mind at the near approach of death . 

 " I bid you all to go to your cell , " say the Bishop , " there to spend the next hour in earnest prayer for the pass soul of this aged nun who , during so long a time , have live and work in this convent . let every door be close . I keep the final vigil alone . when I need help I shall ring the Convent bell . " 

 Immovable in the passage stand the Bishop , until every figure have vanish ; every door have close . 

 then he re - enter the prioress 's cell , and shut the door . 

 he place the holy oil on the step , before the shrine of the Madonna , just where old Antony have kneel when she have pray our blessed Lady to be pleased to sharpen her old wit . 

 then he draw forth a tiny flask of rare italian workmanship , let fall a few drop from it into a spoonful of wine , and firmly pour the liquid between the old lay - sister 's part lip . 

 one anxious moment ; then he hear she swallow . 

 at that , the Bishop draw the prioress 's chair to the side of the couch , and sit down to await event . 

 in a few moment the stertorous breathing cease , the open mouth close . Mary Antony sigh thrice , as a little child that have weep before sleeping sigh in its sleep . 

 then she open her eye , and fix they on the Bishop . 

 " Reverend Father " she begin , then chuckle , gleefully . her voice have come back , and with it a great activity of brain , though the hand upon the coverlet seem to belong to someone else , and she hop they would not rise up and strike she . her foot , she could not feel at all ; but , see that she be most comfortably lie there where she well love to be , why should she require foot ? foot be such tired thing . one rest well without they . 

 " speak low , " say the Bishop , bend forward . " speak low , dear Sister Antony ; partly to spare thy strength ; and partly because , though I have send all the White Ladies to their cell , our good Mother Sub - Prioress , in her natural anxiety for thy welfare , may be outside the door , even now . " 

 Mary Antony chuckle . 

 " if we could but thrust a nail through into her ear , " she whisper . 
 then suddenly serious , she put the question which already her eye have 
 ask : " do I succeed in keep from they the flight of the Reverend 
 Mother , until you arrive , Reverend Father ? " 
 " yes , faithful heart , wise beyond all expectation , you do . " 

 again Mary Antony chuckle . 

 " I lock they out , " she say , with a knowing wink , " but I also take they in . yea , verily , I take they in ! score of time they call I ' Reverend Mother . ' ' open the door , I humbly pray you , Reverend Mother , ' plead Mother Sub - Prioress at the keyhole . ' dixi : Custodiam via meas , ' chant Mary Antony , in a beauteous voice ! . . . ' open , open , Reverend Mother ! ' besought a multitude without . ' quid multiplicati sunt gui tribulant I ! ' intone Mary Antony , within . . . . ' Most dear and Reverend Mother , ' croon Sister Mary Rebecca , at midnight , ' I have something of deep importance to say ' ' dixit insipien , ' be Mary Antony 's appropriate response . eh , and Sister Mary Rebecca , think none could observe she , have already be round , in the moonlight , and attempt to climb a tree . all the Reverend Mother 's window be closely curtain ; but old Antony have her eye to a crack , and the sight of Sister Mary Rebecca climbing , make all the other tree to shake with laughter , but be not a sight to be describe to the great Lord Bishop . . . . Nay , then ! " with a startled cry " why doth this knot finger rise up and shake itself at I ? " 

 the Bishop take the worn old hand , now stone cold , lay it back upon the quilt , and cover it with his own . 

 the drug he have administer have indeed revive the power , but the over - excite brain be inclined to wander . 

 he recall it with a name which he know would act as a potent spell . 

 " would you have news of the Prioress , Sister Antony ? " 

 instantly the eye grow eager . 

 " be she safe , Reverend Father ? be she well ? Hath she take happiness to she with both hand , not thrust it away ? " 

 " happiness hath take she by both hand , " say the Bishop . " this morning I blest her union with a noble knight to whom she be betroth before she come hither . " 

 " I know , " whisper old Antony ecstatically . " I hear it all , I and my meat chopper , hide in there ; I and my meat chopper not willing to let the Reverend Mother face danger alone . and I do thrust the handle of the chopper between my gum , that I might not cry ' bravely do ! ' when the noble Knight and his man - at - arm fling a rope over a strong bough , and hang that clerkly fellow somewhat lean and out at elbow . oh , ah ? it be bravely do ! I hear it all ! I see it all ! " 

 then the joy fade ; a look of shame and grief come into the old face . 

 " but have thus see and hear have lead I into grievous sin , Reverend Father . alas , I have lie about holy thing , sin , I fear I , beyond forgiveness , though indeed I do it , mean to do well . may I tell you all , Reverend Father , that you may judge whether in that which I do , I act accord to our blessed Lady 's will and intention , or whether the deceitfulness of mine own heart have lead I into mortal sin ? " 

 the Bishop look anxiously at the sun dip slowly in the west . the effect of the drug he have give should last an hour , if care be take of this spurious strength . he judge a quarter of that time to have already speed . 

 " tell I from the beginning , without reserve , dear Antony , " he say . " but speak low , for my ear only . remember possible listener outside the door . " 

 so presently the whole tale be tell , with many a quaint twist of old Antony 's . and the Bishop 's heart melt to tenderness as she whisper the story , and he realise the greatness of the devotion which have go forward , without a thought of self , in the bold endeavour to bring happiness to the Prioress she love , yet the anxious conscience , which now tremble at the thought of that which the fearless heart have do . 

 " I lie about holy thing ; I put word into our bless Lady 's mouth ; I say she move her hand . but you do tell I , Reverend Father , that the Reverend Mother be so make that unless there be a vision or revelation from our Lady , she would thrust away her happiness with both hand . and there would not have be a vision if old Antony have not contrive one . yet I fear I , for the sin of that contrive , I shall never find forgiveness ; my soul must ever stay in torment . " 

 tear course down the wrinkle cheek . 

 the Bishop kneel beside the bed . 

 " Dear Antony , " he say . " listen to I . ' perfect love casteth out fear , because fear hath torment . ' you have love with a perfect love . you need have no fear . trust in the love of God , in the precious blood of the Redeemer , which cleanseth from all sin , in the understand tenderness of our Lady , who knoweth a woman 's heart . you mean to do right ; and if , honestly intend to do well , you use the wrong mean , divine love , judge you by your intention , will pardon the mistake . ' if we confess our sin , he be faithful and just to forgive we our sin , and to cleanse we from all unrighteousness . ' think no more of yourself , in this . Dwell solely on our Lord . silence your own fear , by repeat : ' he be faithful and just . ' " 

 " think you , Reverend Father , " quaver the pathetic voice , " that they will sometimes let old Antony out of hell for an hour , to sit on her jasper seat and see the Reverend Mother walk up the golden stair , with the splendid Knight on one side and the great Lord Bishop on the other ? " 

 " Sister Mary Antony , " say the Bishop , clearly and solemnly , " there be no place in hell for so faithful and so love a heart . you shall go straight to your jasper seat ; and because , with the Lord , one day be as a thousand year , and a thousand year as one day , your eye will scarce have time to grow use to the great glory , before you see the Reverend Mother come , walk between the two who have faithfully love she ; and you , who have also love she faithfully , will also mount the golden stair , and together we all shall kneel before the throne of God , and understand at last the full meaning of those word of wonder : GOD be LOVE . " 

 a look of ineffable joy light up the die face . 

 " straight to my jasper seat , " she say , " to watch to wait " 

 then come the sudden fading of the spurious strength . the Bishop put out his hand and reach for the holy oil . 

           

 the golden sunset light flood the chamber with radiance . 

 the Bishop still watch beside the couch . 

 have rally sufficiently to make she last confession , short and simple as a child 's ; have receive absolution and the last sacred rite of the Church , Mary Antony have slip into a peaceful slumber . 

 the Bishop have to bend over and listen , to make sure that she still breathe . 

 suddenly she open her eye and look full into his . 

 " do you we d the Reverend Mother to the splendid Knight ? " she ask , and her voice be strong again and natural , with the little chuckle of curiosity and humour in it , as of old . 

 " this morning , " answer the Bishop , " I wed they . " 

 " do he kiss she ? " ask old Antony , with an indescribable twinkle of gleeful enjoyment , though those twinkle eye seem the only live thing in the old face . 

 " Nay , " say the Bishop . " they who truly kiss , kiss not in public . " 

 " ah , " whisper Mary Antony . " yea , verily ! I know that to be true . " 

 she lift wander finger and , after much groping , touch her forehead , with a happy smile . 

 not know what else the action could mean , the Bishop lean forward and make the sign of the cross on her brow . 

 Mary Antony give that peculiar little chuckle of enjoyment , which have always mark her pleasure when the very learn make mistake . it give she so great a sense of cleverness . 

 after this the light fade from the old eye , and the Bishop have begin to think they would not again open upon this world , when a strange thing happen . 

 there be a flick of wing , and in , through the open window , fly the robin . 

 first he perch on the marble hand of the Madonna . then , with a joyful chirp , drop straight to the couch on which lie Mary Antony . 

 at sound of that chirp , Mary Antony open her eye , and see she much love little bird hop gaily on the coverlet . 

 " hey , thou little vain man ! " she say . " ah , naughty Master Pieman ! art come to look upon old Antony in her bed ? the great Lord Bishop will have thee hang . " 

 the robin hop nearer , and peck gently at the hand which so oft have feed he , now lie helpless on the quilt . 

 a look of exquisite delight come into the old woman 's eye . 

 " ah , my little Knight of the Bloody Vest , " she whisper , " dost want thy cheese ? wait a minute , while old Antony search in her wallet . " 

 she sit up suddenly , as if to reach for something . 

 then a startled look come into her face . she stretch out appeal hand to the Bishop . 

 instantly he catch they in his . 

 " fear not , dear Antony , " he say . " all be well . " 

 the robin , spread his wing , fly out at the window . and the love spirit of Mary Antony go with he . 

 the Bishop lay the wear - out body gently back upon the couch , close the eye , and fold the hand upon the breast . 

 then he walk over to the window , and stand look at the golden rampart of that sunset city , glow against the delicate azure of the evening sky . 

 great loneliness of soul come to the Bishop , stand thus in the empty cell . 

 the Prioress have go ; the robin have go ; Mary Antony have go ; and the Bishop greatly wish that he might go , also . 

 presently he turn to the prioress 's table . she have send to the Palace the copy she have make , and the copy she have mend , of the Pope 's mandate . but she have leave upon the table the strip of parchment upon which she have inscribe , on the night of her vigil , copy and translation of ancient prayer from the Sacramentaries . the Bishop gather these up , read they as he stand . two he slip into his sash , but the third he take to the couch and place beneath the fold hand . 

 " take this with thee to thy jasper seat , dear faithful heart , " he say ; " for truly it be give unto thee to perceive and know what thing thou ought to do , and also to have grace and power faithfully to fulfil the same . " 

 the peaceful face , grow beautiful with that solemn look of eternal youth which death bring , even to the aged , seem to smile , as the precious parchment pass into the keeping of those fold hand . 

 the Bishop kneel long in prayer and thanksgiving . at length , with uplifted face , he say : " and grant , o my God , that I too may be faithful , unto the very end . " 

 then he rise , and ring the Convent bell . 

 CHAPTER XXXIX 

 the " SPLENDID knight " 

 on the step of Warwick Castle stand the Knight and his bride . 

 their eye still linger on the archway through which the noble figure of Symon , Bishop of Worcester , mount upon his black mare , Shulamite , have just disappear from view . 

 the marriage have take place in the Castle chapel , half an hour before , with an astonishing amount of pomp and ceremony . priest and acolyte have appear from unexpected place . Madonna lily , on graceful stem , gleam white in the shadow of the sacred place . solemn music rise and fall ; the deep roll of the gregorian chant , begin with a low hum as of giant bee in a vast field of clover ; swell , in full - throate unison , a majestic volume of sound which ring against the rafter , wake echo in the clerestory ; then rumble back into silence . 

 stand beneath the sacred canopy , the bridal pair lift their eye to the high altar and see , amid a cloud of incense , the Bishop , in gorgeous vestment , descend the step and come toward they . 

 to Mora , at the time , and afterwards in most thankful remembrance , the wonder of that which follow lie in the fact that where she have dread an inevitable sense of sacrilege in give to another that which have be already consecrate to God , the Bishop so word the service as to make she feel that she could still be spiritually the bride of Christ , even while fulfil her troth to Hugh ; also that , in accept the call to this new Vocation , she be not fall from her old estate , but rather rise above it . 

 as the word be speak which make she a wife , it seem as if the Bishop gently wrap she about with a fresh mantle of dignity that dignity which have fall from she in those moment of humiliation when , at Hugh 's bidding she lay herself down upon the stretcher . 

 the Bishop voice the Church with a pomp and power which could not be withstand ; and when , in obedience to his command Hugh grasp she right hand with his right hand , and the Bishop lay his own on either side of their clasp hand , and pronounce they man and wife , it seem indeed as if a divine touch unite they , as if a divine voice ratify their vow and sanctify their union . 

 Mora have never before see the man so completely merge in his high office . 

 and , when all be over , even as he mount Shulamite and ride away , he ride out of the courtyard with the air of a Knight Templar rid forth - to do battle in a Holy War . 

 it seem to Mora that she have bid farewell to her old friend of the kindly smile , the merry eye , and the ready jest , in the early hour of that morning , as together they leave the arbour of the golden rose . 

 there remain therefore but one man to be consider : the ' splendid Knight " of old Antony 's vision ; the lover who have pursue she into her Nunnery ; woo she in her own cell , unabashe by the dignity of her office ; master her will ; force her numbed heart to awaken , disturb by the thrill of an unwilling tenderness ; move she to passion by the poignant anguish of a parting , which she regard as inevitably final ; win the Bishop over , to his side , and , through he , the Pope ; and finally , by the persistence of his pleading , move our blessed Lady to vouchsafe a vision on his behalf . 

 this be the ' splendid Knight " against whom the star in their course have most certainly not fight . principality and power have all be for he ; against he , just a woman and her conscience , and he have win . 

 when , at their first interview in her cell , in reply to her demand : " why be you not with your wife ? " he have answer : " I be with my wife ; the only wife I have ever want , the only woman I shall ever we d , be here " she stand ready to strike with ivory and steel , at the first attempt upon her inviolable chastity , and could afford to smile , in pity derision , at so empty a boast . 

 but now ? if he say : " my wife be here , " and choose to seize she with possessive grasp , she must meekly fold her hand upon her breast , and say : " even so , my lord . I be yours . deal with I as you will . " 

 as the Bishop 's purple cloak and the hind quarter of his noble black mare , disappear from view , the crowd which hitherto have surround the bridal pair , also vanish , as if at the wave of a magic wand . thus for the first time , since those tense moment in the Cathedral crypt , Mora find herself alone with Hugh . 

 she be not young enough to be embarrassed ; but she be old enough to be afraid ; afraid of he , and afraid of herself ; afraid of his masterful nature and imperious will , which have always incline to break rather than bend anything which stand in his way ; and afraid of something in herself which leapt up in response to this fierce strength in he , yearn to be master , hungry to yield , wishful to obey ; yet which , if yield to , would lay her spirit in the dust , and turn the awakened tenderness in her heart to scorn of herself , and anger against he . 

 so she fear as she stand in the sunshine , watch the now empty archway through which her sole remain link with Convent life have vanish ; conscious , without look round , that Debbie , who have be curtsey behind she , be there no long ; that Martin Goodfellow , who have hold Shulamite 's bridle while the Bishop mount , have disappear in one direction , the rest of the man in another ; intensely conscious that she and Hugh be now alone ; and fear , she shiver again , as she have shiver in the crypt ; then , of a sudden , know that she have do so , and , with a swift impulse of shame and contrition , turn and look at Hugh . 

 he be indeed the ' splendid Knight " of Mary Antony 's vision ! he have don for his bridal the dress of white and silver , which he have last put on when he sup at the Palace with the Bishop . this set off , with strike effect , his dark head and the noble beauty of his countenance ; and Mora , who chiefly remember he as a handsome youth , graceful and gay , realise for the first time his splendour as a man , and the change work in he by all he have face , endure , and overcome . 

 in the crypt , the day before , and during the hour which follow , she have scarce let herself look at he ; and he , though always close beside she , have keep out of her immediate range of vision . 

 since that infolding clasp in the crypt when he have fling the cloak about she , not once have he touch she , until the Church just now bid he , with authority , to take she right hand , with his . 

 her mind fly back to the happening of the previous day . with the lightning rapidity of retrospective thought , she pass again through each experience from the moment when the call of the blackbird sound in the crypt . the helpless horror of be lift by unseen hand ; the slow , swing progress , to the accompaniment of the measured tread of the man - at - arm ; the stifle darkness , air and light shut out by the heavy cloak , and yet the clear consciousness of the moment when the stretcher pass from the Cathedral into the sunshine without ; the sudden pause , as the Bishop meet the stretcher , and then as she lie helpless between they Symon 's question and Hugh 's reply , with their subtlety of hidden meaning , which fill she with impotent anger , shew as it do the completeness of the Bishop 's connivance at Hugh 's conspiracy . then Hugh 's request , and the Bishop 's hand lay upon she , the Bishop 's voice uplifted in blessing . then once again the measured tramp , tramp , and the steady swing of the stretcher ; but now the man 's heel ring on cobble , and voice seem everywhere ; cheery greeting , snatch of song , chance word concern a bargain or a meeting , a light jest , a coarse oath ; and , all the while , the steady , tramp , tramp , and the ring of Hugh 's spur . 

 she grow faint and it seem to she she be about to die beneath the cloak , and that when at length Hugh remove it , it would prove a pall beneath which he would find a dead bride . 

 " dead bride ! dead bride ! " sound the tramping footstep . and all the way she be haunt by the belief , assail her confused sens in the darkness , that the spirit of Father Gervaise have meet the stretcher ; that his be the voice which murmur low and tenderly ; " be not afraid , neither be thou dismayed . go in peace . " 

 with this have come a horror of the outer world , a wild desire for the safety and shelter of the Cloister , and an absolute physical dread of the moment when the covering cloak should be remove , and she would find herself alone with her lover ; and , on rise from the stretcher , be seize by his arm . 

 yet when , have be tilt up step , she be conscious of the silence of passage and soon the even more complete quiet of a room ; when the stretcher be set down , and the bearer ' foot die away , Hugh 's deep voice say gently : " change thy garment quickly , my beloved . there be no time to lose . " but he lay no hand upon the cloak , and his footstep , also , die away . 

 then push back the heavy fold and sit up , she have find herself alone in a bedchamber , everything she could need lay ready to her hand ; while , upon the bed , lie her green riding - dress , discard forever , eight year before ! 

 her mind refuse to look back upon the half - hour that follow . 

 she see herself next appear in the doorway at the top of a flight of eight step , lead down into the yard of the hostelry , where a cavalcade of man and horse wait ; while Icon , the Bishop 's beautiful white palfrey , be be lead to and fro , and Hugh stand with an open letter in his hand . 

 as she hesitate in the doorway , gaze down upon the waiting , restive crowd , Hugh look up and see she . into his eye flash a light of triumphant joy , of adore love and admiration . she have avoid look at her own reflection ; but his face , as he come up the step , mirror her loveliness . it have cost she such anguish of soul to divest herself of her sacred habit and don these gay garment belong to a life long leave behind , that his evident delight in the change , move she to an unreasonable resentment . also that sudden blaze of love in his dark eye , dazzle her heart , even as a burst of sunshine might dazzle one use to perpetual twilight . 

 she take the Bishop 's letter , with avert eye ; read it ; then move swiftly down the step to where Icon wait . 

 " Mount I , " she say to Martin Goodfellow , as she pass he ; and it be Martin who swing she into the saddle . 

 then she tremble at what she have do , in yield to this impulse which make her shrink from Hugh . 

 as the black mane of his horse draw level with Icon 's head , and side by side they ride out from the courtyard , she fear a thunder - cloud on the Knight 's brow , and a sullen silence , as the good she could expect . but calm and cheerful , his voice fall on her ear ; and glance at he furtively , she still see on his face that light which dazzle her heart . yet no word do he speak which all might not have hear , and not once do he lay his hand on her . each time they dismount , she see he sign to Martin Goodfellow , and it be Martin who help she to alight . 

 all this , in rapid retrospect , pass through Mora 's mind as she stand alone beside her splendid Knight , miserably conscious that she have shiver , and that he know it ; and fearful lest he divine the shrinking of her soul away from he , away from love , away from all for which love stand . alas , alas ! why do this man this most human , ardent , love man hang all his hope of happiness upon the heart of a nun ? would it be possible that he should understand , that eight year of cloistered life can not be renounce in a day ? 

 Mora look at he again . 

 the stern profile might well be about to say : " Shudder again , and I will do to thee that which shall give thee cause to shudder indeed ! " 

 yet , at that moment he speak , and his voice be infinitely gentle . 

 " yonder rid a true friend , " he say . " one who have learn love 's deep lesson . " 

 " what be love 's deep lesson ? " she ask . 

 he turn and look at she , and the fire of his dark eye be drown in tenderness . 

 " that true love mean self - sacrifice , " he say . " come , my beloved . let we walk in the gardens , where we can talk at ease of our plan for the day to come . " 

 CHAPTER XL 

 the heart of a NUN 

 Hugh and Mora pass together through the great hall , along the armoury , down the wind stair and so out into the garden . 

 the Knight lead the way across the lawn and through the rose garden , toward the yew hedge and the bowling - green . 

 Old Debbie , look from her casement , think they beautiful beyond word as she watch they cross the lawn she in white and gold , he in white and silver ; his dark head tower above her fair one , though she be uncommon tall . and , fall upon her knee , old Debbie pray to the Angel Gabriel that she might live to hold in her arm , and rock to sleep upon her bosom , sweet babe , both fair and dark : " fair little maid , " she say , " and fine , dark boy , " explain to Gabriel that which she think would be most fit . 

 meanwhile Hugh and Mora , walk a yard apart all unconscious of these family plan , be so anxiously make for they at an upper casement bend their tall head and pass under the arch in the yew hedge , cross the bowling - green , and enter the arbour of the golden rose . 

 Hugh lead the way ; yet Mora gladly follow . the Bishop 's presence seem to abide here , in comfort and protection . 

 all sign of the early repast be go from the rustic table . 

 Mora take her seat there where in the early morning she have sit ; while 
 Hugh , not know he do so , pass into the Bishop 's place . 
 the sun shine through the golden rose , hang in cluster over the entrance . 

 the sense of the Bishop 's presence so strongly pervade the place , that almost at once Mora feel constrain to speak of he . 

 " Hugh , " she say , " very early this morning , long before you be awake , the Bishop and I break our fast , in this arbour , together . " 

 the Knight smile . 

 " I know that , " he say . " in his own characteristic way the Bishop tell it I . ' my son , ' he say , ' you have reverse the sacred parable . in your case it be the bride - groom who , this morning , slumber and sleep . ' ' true , my lord , ' say I. ' but there be no foolish virgin about . ' ' nay , verily ! ' reply the Bishop . ' the two virgin awake at that hour be pre - eminently wise : the one , make as the sun rise most golden pat of butter and crusty roll ; the other , rise early to partake of they with appetite . truly there be no foolish virgin about . there be but one foolish prelate . ' " 

 she , who so lately have be Prioress of the White Ladies , flush with indignation at the word . 

 " Wherefore say he so ? " she inquire , severely . " he , who be always wise than the wise . " 

 Hugh note the heighten colour and the ready protest . 

 " perhaps , " he suggest , speak slowly , as if choose his word with care , " the Bishop 's head , be so wise , reveal to he , in himself , a certain foolishness of heart . " 

 Mora strike the table with her hand . 

 " Nay then , verily ! " she cry . " head and heart alike be wise ; and unlike other man the Bishop 's head rule his heart . " 

 " and a most noble heart , " , the Knight say , with calmness ; neither wince at the blow upon the table , nor at the " unlike other man , " fling out in challenge . 

 then , fold his arm upon the table , and look searchingly into the face of his bride : " tell I , " he say , " during all these year , have this friendship with Symon of Worcester mean much to thee ? " 

 something in his tone arrest Mora . she answer , with an equal earnestness : " yes , Hugh . it have do more for I than can well be tell . it have keep live and grow in I much that would otherwise have be stunt or dead ; an ever fresh flow of thought , where , but for he , would have be a stagnant pool . my sad heart might have grow bitter , my nature too austere , particularly when advancement to high office bring with it an inevitable loneliness , have it not be for the interest and charm of his visit and missive ; his constant gift and kindness . there be about he a light - hearted gaiety , a whimsical humour , a joy in life , which can not fail to wake responsive gladness in any heart with which he come in contact . and mingle with his shrewd wisdom , his wide knowledge of man and matter , there be ever a tender charity , which think no evil , always believe in good and hop for the good ; a love which never fail ; a kindness which make one ashamed of harbour hard or revengeful thought . " 

 Hugh make no reply . he sit with his eye fix upon the beautiful face before he , now glow with enthusiasm . he wait for something more . and presently it come . 

 " also , " say Mora , slowly : " a very precious memory of my early day at Court , when as a young maiden I attend on the Queen , be keep alive by a remarkable likeness in the Bishop to one who be , as I learn this morning for the first time , actually near of kin to he . do you remember , Hugh , long year ago , that I speak to you of Father Gervaise ? " 

 " I do remember , " say the Knight . 

 she lean her elbow on the table , frame her face in her hand , and look straight into his eye . 

 " Father Gervaise be more to I than I then tell you , Hugh . " 

 " what be he to thee , Mora ? " 

 " he be the Ideal of my girlhood . for a time , I think of he by day , I dream of he by night . no word of his have I ever forget . many of his saying and precept have influence , and still deeply influence , my whole life . in fact , Hugh , I love Father Gervaise ; not as a woman love a man ah , no ! but , rather , as a nun love her Lord . " 

 " I see , " say the Knight . " but you be not then a nun , Mora . " 

 " no , I be not then a nun . but I have be a nun since then ; and that be how I can well describe my love for the Queen 's confessor . " 

 " long after , " say the Knight , " you be betroth to I ? " 

 " yes , Hugh . " 

 " how do you love I , Mora ? " 

 across the rustic table they look full into each other 's eye . Tragedy , stalk around that rose - cover arbour , draw very near , and they know it . almost , his grim shadow come between they and the sunshine . 

 then the Knight smile ; and with that smile rush back the flood - tide of remembrance ; remembrance of all which their young love have mean , of the sweet promise it have hold . 

 his eye still hold her , she smile also . 

 the golden rose cluster in the entrance sway and nod in the sunlight , as a gently rise breeze fan they to and fro . 

 " Dear Knight , " she say , softly , a wistful tenderness in her voice , " I suppose I love you , as a girl love the man who have win she . " 

 " Mora , " say Hugh , " I have something to tell thee . " 

 " I listen , " she say . 

 " my wife so wholly , so completely , do I love thee , that I would not consciously keep anything from thee . so deeply do I love thee , that I would soon any wrong or sin of mine be know to thee and by thee forgive , than that thou shouldest think I one whit well than I be . " 

 he pause . 

 her eye be tender and compassionate . often she have listen , with a patient heart of charity , to the tedious , morbid , self - centre confession of kneeling nun , who watch with anxious eye for the sign which would mean that they might clutch at the hem of her robe and press it to their lip in token that they be forgive . 

 but she have have no experience of the sin of man . what have the ' splendid Knight " upon his conscience , which must now be tell she , in this sunny arbour , on the morning of their bridal day ? 

 her heart throb painfully . alas , it be still the heart of a nun . it would not be control . must she hear wild tale of wickedness and shame , of which she would but partly understand the meaning ? 

 oh , for the calm of the Cloister ! oh , for the sheltered purity of her quiet cell ! 

 yet his eye , still meet her , be clear and fearless . 

 " I listen , " she say . 

 " Mora , not long ago a wondrous tale be tell I of a man 's great love for thee a man , noble than I , in that he master all selfish desire ; a love high than mine , in that it put thy welfare , in all thing , first . hear this tale , I fail both myself and thee , for I say : ' I pray heaven that , if she come to I , she may never know that she once win the love of so greatly well a man than i. ' but , since I clasp thy hand in mine , and the Bishop , lay his on either side , give thee to be my wife , I have know there would be no peace for I if I fear to trust thee with this knowledge , because that the man who love thee be a well man than the man who , by God 's mercy and our Lady 's grace , have win thee . " 

 as the Knight speak thus , the grey eye fix on his face grow wide with wonder ; soft , with a great compunction ; yet , at the corner , shew a little crinkle in which the Bishop would instantly have recognise the sign of approach merriment . 

 be this then a sample of the unknown sin of man ? nothing here , surely , to cause the least throb of apprehension , even to the heart of a nun ! but what strange tale have reach the ear of this most dear and loyal Knight ? she lean a little near to he , speak in a tone which be music to his heart . 

 " Dear Knight of mine , " she say , " no tale of a man 's love for I can have be a true one . yet be I glad that , deem it true , and feeling as it be your first impulse to feel , you now tell I quite frankly what you feel , thus put from yourself all sense of wrong , while give I the chance to say to you , that none more noble than this faithful Knight can have love I ; for , save a few Court page , mostly popinjays , and Humphry of Camforth , of whom the less say the well , no other man hath love I . " 

 more kindly she look on he than she yet have look . she lean across the table . 

 by reach out his arm he could have catch her lovely face between his hand . 

 her eye be merry . her lip smile . 

 greatly tempt be the Knight to agree that , save himself , and Humphry of Camforth , of whom the less say the well , none save Court popinjay have love she . yet in his heart he know that ever between they would be this fact of his knowledge of the love of Father Gervaise for she , and of the noble renunciation inspire by that love . he have no intention of betray the Bishop ; but Mora 's own explanation , make it quite clear that she would not be likely to suspect the identity of the Bishop with his suppose cousin , Father Gervaise , seem to the Knight to remove the one possible reason for concealment . he be willing to risk present loss , rather than imperil future peace . 

 with an effort which make his voice almost stern : " the tale be a true one , " he say . 

 she draw back , regard he with grave eye , her hand fold before she . 

 " tell I the tale , " she say , " and I will pronounce upon its truth . " 

 " year ago , Mora , when you be a young maiden at the Court , attend on the Queen , you be most deeply love by one who know he could never ask you in marriage . that be so , so noble be his nature and so unselfish his love , that he would not give himself the delight of see you , nor the enjoyment of your friendship , lest , be so strong a thing , his love even though unexpresse should reach and stir your heart to a response which , might hinder you from feel free to give yourself , when a man who could offer all seek to win you . therefore , Mora , he leave the Court , he leave the country . he go to foreign land . he think not of himself . he desire for you the full completion which come by mean of wed love . he fear to hinder this . so he go . " 

 her face still express incredulous astonishment . 

 " his name ? " she demand , await the answer with part lip , and widely - open eye . 

 " Father Gervaise , " say the Knight . 

 he see she slowly whiten , till scarce a vestige of colour remain . 

 for some minute she speak no word ; both sit silent , Hugh ruefully face his risk , and incline to repent of his honesty . 

 at length : " and who tell you this tale , " she say ; " this tale of the love of Father Gervaise for a young maid , half his age ? " 

 " Symon of Worcester tell it I , three night ago . " 

 " how come the Bishop to know so strange and so secret a thing ? and know it , how come he to tell it to you ? " 

 " he have it from Father Gervaise himself . he tell it to I , because his remembrance of the sacrifice make so long ago in order that the full completion of wifehood and motherhood might be thine , have always incline he to a wistful regret over thy choice of the monastic life , with its resultant celibacy ; lead he , from the first , to espouse and far my cause . in wed we to - day , methink the Bishop feel he be at last secure the consummation of the noble renunciation make so long ago by Father Gervaise . " 

 with a grow dread at his heart , Hugh watch the increase pallor of her face , the hard line of the lip which , but a few moment before , have part in such gentle sweetness . 

 " alas ! " he exclaim , " I should not have tell thee ! with my clumsy desire to keep nothing from thee , I have spoil an hour which else might have be so perfect . " 

 " you do well to tell I , dear Knight of mine , " she say , a ripple of tenderness pass across her stern face , as swiftly and gently as the breeze stir a cornfield . " nor be there anything in this world so perfect as the truth . if the truth open an abyss which plunge I into hell , I would soon know it , than attempt to enter Paradise across the flimsy fabric of a lie ! " 

 her voice , as she utter these word , have in it the ring which be will not to petrify wrong - doer of the feebler kind among her nun . 

 " Dear Knight , have the Bishop not forestall I when he name his palfrey , truly I might have find a fine new name for you ! but now , I pray you of your kindness , leave I alone with my fall image for a little space , that I may gather up the fragment and give they decent burial . " 

 with which her courage break . she stretch her clasped hand across the table and lay her head upon her arm . 

 Despair seize the Knight as he stand helpless , look down upon that proud head lay low . 

 he long to lay his hand upon the golden softness of her hair . 

 but her shoulder shake with a hard , tearless sob , and the Knight flee from the arbour . 

 as he pace the lawn , on which the Bishop have promenade the evening before , Hugh curse his rashness in speak ; yet know , in the heart of his heart , that he could not have do otherwise . Mora 's word concern truth , give he a background of comfort . even so have he ever himself feel . but would it prove that his honesty have indeed shatter his chance of happiness , and her ? 

 a new name ? . . . what might it be ? . . . what the mischief , have the 
 Bishop name his palfrey ? . . . Sheba ? Nay , that be the ass ! 
 Solomon ? Nay , that be the mare ! yet how come a mare to be name 
 Solomon ? 
 in his disturbed mental state it irritate he unreasonably that a mare should be call after a king with seven hundred wife ! then he remember " black , but comely , " and arrive at the right name , Shulamite . of course ! not Solomon but Shulamite . he have read that love - poem of the unnamed eastern shepherd , with the Rabbi in the mountain fastness . the Rabbi have point out that the word use in that description signify ' sunburned . " the lovely Shulamite maiden , expose to the eastern sun while tend her kid and keep the vineyard , have tan a ruddy brown , beside which the daughter of Jerusalem , enclose in King Solomon 's scented harem , look pale as wilt lily . remember the glossy coat of the black mare , Hugh wonder , with a momentary sense of merriment , whether the Bishop suppose the maiden of the " Song of Songs " to have be an Ethiopian . 

 then he remember " Iconoklastes . " yes , surely ! the palfrey be iconoklaste . now wherefore give the Bishop such a name to his white palfrey ? 

 stride blindly about the lawn , of a sudden the Knight step full on to a flower - bed . at once he seem to hear the Bishop 's gentle voice : " I name he Iconoklastes because he trample to ruin some flower - bed on which I spend much time and care , and of which I be inordinately fond . " 

 ah ! . . . that be it ! the destroyer of fair bloom and blossom , of bud of promise ; of the loveliness of a tend garden . . . . be this then what he seem to Mora ? he , who have force she to yield to the insistence of his love ? . . . in her chaste Convent cell , she could have remain true to this ideal love of her girlhood : and , now that she know it to have be call forth by love , could have receive , mentally , its full fruition . also , in time she might have discover the identity of the Bishop with Father Gervaise , and long year of perfect friendship might have prove a solace to their sunder heart , have not he the trampler upon flower - bed rudely intervene . 

 and yet Mora have be betroth to he , her love have be his , long after Father Gervaise have leave the land . 

 how could he win she back to be once more as she be when they part on the castle battlement eight year before ? 

 how could he free himself , and she , from these intangible , ecclesiastical entanglement ? 

 he be remind of his difficulty when he try to walk disguised in the dress of the White Ladies , and find his stride impede by those trail garment . he remember the relief of wrench they off , and step clear . 

 why not now take the short , quick road to mastery ? 

 but instantly that love which seeketh not its own , the strange new sense so recently awaken in he , lay its calm touch upon his throb heart . until that moment in the crypt the day before , he have love Mora for his own delight , seek she for his own joy . now , he know that he could take no happiness at the cost of one pang to she . 

 " she must be teach not to shudder , " cry the masterfulness which be his by nature . 

 " she must be give no cause to shudder , " amend this new , loyal tenderness , which now rule his every thought of she . 

 presently , return to the arbour , he find she seat , her elbow on the table , her chin cup in her hand . 

 she have be weep ; yet her smile of welcome , as he enter , hold a quality he have scarce expect . 

 he speak straight to the point . it seem the only way to step clear of immeshe trammel . 

 " Mora , it cut I to the heart that , in strive to be honest with you , I have all unwittingly trample upon those flower - bed in which you long have tend fair blossom of memory . also I fear this knowledge of a nobler love , make it hard for you to contemplate life link to a love which seem to you less able for self - sacrifice . " 

 she gaze at he , wide - eye , in sheer amazement . 

 " Dear Knight , " she say , " true , I be disillusioned , but not in aught that concern you . you trample on no flower - bed of mine . my shattered idol be the image of one whom I , with deep reverence , love , as a nun might love her Guardian Angel . to learn that he love I as a man love a woman , and that he have to flee before that love , lest it should harm I and himself , change the hallowed memory of year . this morning , three name stand to I for all that be high , noblest , good : Father Gervaise , Symon of Worcester , and Hugh d'Argent . now , the Bishop and yourself alone be leave . fail I not , Hugh , or I shall be bereft indeed . " 

 the Knight laugh , joyously . the relief at his heart demand that much vent . " then , if I fail thee , Mora , there would be but the Bishop ? " 

 " there would be but the Bishop . " 

 " I will not fail thee , my beloved . and I fear I must have put the matter clumsily , concern Father Gervaise . as the Bishop tell it to I , there be naught that be not noble . it seem to I it should be sweet to the heart of a woman to be so loved . " 

 " hush , " she say , sternly . " you know not the heart of a nun . " 

 he do not reason far . it be enough for he to know that the shatter image she have bury be not the ideal of his love and her , or the hope of future happiness together . 

 " time fly , dear heart , " he say . " may I speak to thee of immediate plan ? " 

 " I listen , " she answer . 

 Hugh stand in the entrance , among the yellow rose , lean against the doorpost , his arm fold on his breast , his foot cross . 

 at once she be remind of the scene in her cell , when he have take up that attitude while still garb as a nun , and she have say : " I know you for a man , " and , in her heart have add : " and a strong man , surely , than Mary Seraphine 's Cousin Wilfred ! " 

 " we ride on to - day , " say the Knight , " if you feel able for a few hour in the saddle , to the next stage in our journey . it be a hostel in the forest ; a poor kind of place , I fear ; but there be one good room where you can be make comfortable , with Mistress Deborah . I shall sleep on the hay , without , amongst my man . some must keep guard all night . we ride through wild part to reach our destination . " 

 he pause . he could not hold on to the matter of fact tone in which he have start . when he speak again , his voice be low and very tender . 

 " Mora , I be take thee first to thine own home ; to the place where , long year ago , we love and part . there , all be as it be . Thy people who love thee and have flee , have be find and bring back . seven day of journeying should bring we there . I have send man on before , to arrange for each night 's lodging , and make sure that all be right . arrive at thine own castle , Mora , we shall be within three hour ' ride of mine that home to which I hope to bring thee . until we enter there , my wife , although this morning most truly we d , we will count ourselves but betroth . once in thy home , it shall be leave to thine own choice to come to mine when and how thou wilt . the step now take that of leave the Cloister and come to I have perforce to be do quickly , if do at all . but , now it be safely accomplish , there be no further need for haste . the wing of my swift desire shall be dipt to suit thine inclination . " 

 Hugh pause , look upon she with a half - wistful smile . she make no answer ; so presently he continue . 

 " I have plan that , each day , Mistress Deborah , with the baggage and a good escort , shall go by the most direct route , and the good road . thus thou and I will be free to ride as we will , visit place we have know of old and which it may please thee to see again . to - day we can ride out by Kenilworth , and so on our first stage northward . Martin will take Mistress Deborah on a pillion behind he . should she weary of travel so , she can have a seat in the cart with the baggage . but they tell I she travel bravely on horseback . we will send they on ahead of we , and on arrival all will be in readiness for thee . if this weather hold , we shall ride each day through a world of sunshine and beauty ; and each day 's close , my wife , will find we one day nearer home . do this please thee ? have I think of all ? " 

 rise , she come and stand beside he in the entrance to the arbour . 

 a golden rose , dip from above , rest against her hair . 

 her eye be soft with tear . 

 " so perfectly have you think and plan , dear faithful Knight , that I think our blessed Lady must have guide you . as we ride out into the sunshine , I shall grow use to the great world once more ; and you will have patience and will teach I thing I have perhaps forget . " 

 she hesitate ; half put out her hand ; but his not meet they , fold they on her breast . 

 " Hugh , it seem hard that I should clip your splendid wing ; but oh , Hugh ! think you the heart of a nun can ever become again as the heart of other woman ? " 

 " heaven forbid ! " say the Knight , fervently , think of Eleanor and 
 Alfrida . 
 and , as leave the arbour they walk together over the lawn , she smile , remember , how that morning the Bishop have answer the same question in precisely the same word . whatever Father Gervaise might have say , the Bishop and the Knight be agree ! 

 yet she wish , somewhat wistfully , that this most dear and loyal 
 Knight have take her hand when she hold they out . 
 she would have like to feel the strong clasp of his upon they . 

 possibly our Lady , who knoweth the heart of a woman , have guide the 
 Knight in this matter also . 
 CHAPTER XLI 

 what the BISHOP REMEMBERED 

 Symon , Bishop of Worcester , sit in his library , in the cool of the day . 

 he be weary , with a weariness which surpass all his previous experience of weariness , all his imagining as to how weary , in body and spirit , a man could be , yet continue to breathe and think . 

 with some , extreme fatigue lead to restlessness of body . not so with the Bishop . the more tired he be , the more perfectly still he sit ; his knee cross , his elbow on the arm of his chair , the finger of both hand press lightly together , his head rest against the high back of the chair , his gaze fix upon the view across the river . 

 as he look with unseee eye upon the wide stretch of meadow , the distant wood and the soft outline of the Malvern hill , he be think how good it would be never again to leave this quiet room ; never to move from this chair ; never again to see a human being ; never to have to smile when he be heart - sick , or to bow when he feel ungracious ! 

 those who know the Bishop well , often speak together of his wondrous vitality and energy , their favourite remark be : that he be never tired . they might with more truth have say that they have never know he to appear tired . 

 it have long be a rule in the Bishop 's private code , that weariness , either of body or spirit , must not be shewn to other . the more tired he be , the more ready grow his smile , the more alert his movement , the more gracious his response to any call upon his sympathy or interest . 

 he never sigh in company , as do Father Peter when , have sup too well off jolly of salmon , roast venison , and raisin pie , he be fain to let indigestion pass muster for melancholy . 

 he never yawn in Council , either gracefully behind his hand , as do the lean Spanish Cardinal ; or openly and unashamed , as do the round and rosy Abbot of Evesham , display to the fascinated gaze of the brother in stall opposite , a cavernous throat , a red and healthy tongue , and a particularly fine set of tooth . 

 moreover the Bishop would as soon have think of carry a garment from the body of a plague - stricken patient into the midst of a family of healthy child , as of enter an assemblage with a jade countenance or a languorous manner . 

 therefore : " he be never weary , " say his friend . 

 " he knoweth not the meaning of fatigue , " agree his acquaintance . 

 " there be no merit in labour which be not in anywise a burden , but , rather , a delight , " pronounce those who envy his power . 

 " he be possess , " sneer his enemy , " by a most energetic demon ! 
 be that demon exorcise , the Bishop would collapse , exhausted . " 
 " he be fill , " say his admirer , " by the Spirit of God , and be thus so energized that he can work incessantly , without experience ordinary human weakness . " 

 and none know that it be a part of his religion to Symon of Worcester , to hide his weariness from other . 

 yet once when , in her chamber , he sit talk with the prioress , she have rise , of a sudden , say : " you be tired , Father . rest there in silence , while I work at my missal . " 

 she have pass to the table ; and the Bishop have sit resting , just as he be sit now , save that his eye could then dwell on her face , as she bend , absorb , over the illumination . 

 after a while he have ask : " how know you that I be tired , my dear 
 prioress ? " 
 without lift her eye , she have make answer : " because , my Lord 
 Bishop , you twice smile when there be no occasion for smile . " 
 another period of restful silence , while she work , and he watch she working . then he have remark : " my friend say I be never tired . " 

 and she have answer : " they would speak more truly if they say that you be ever brave . " 

 it have amaze the Bishop to find himself thus understand . moreover he could scarce put on his biretta , so crowned be his head by the laurel of her praise . also this have be the only time when he have wonder whether the Prioress really believe Father Gervaise to be at the bottom of the ocean . it be ever an astonishment to a man when the unerring intuition of a woman be bring to bear upon himself . 

 now , in this hour of his overwhelming fatigue , he recall that scene . close his eye on the distant view , and open they upon the enchant vista of memory , he speedily see that calm face , with its chastened expression of fine self - control , bend above the page she be illuminate . he see the severe line of the wimple , the fold of the flow veil , the delicate movement of the long finger , and yes ! rest upon her bosom the jewelled cross , sign of her high office . 

 thus look back , he vividly recall the extraordinary restfulness of sit there in silence , while she work . no word be need . her very presence , and the fact that she know he to be weary , rest he . 

 he look again . but now the fold of the wimple and veil be go . 
 a golden circlet clasp the shin softness of her hair . 
 the Bishop open tired eye , and fix they once again upon the landscape . 

 he suppose the long ride on two successive day have exhaust he physically ; and the strain of securing and ensure the safety and happiness of the woman who be dearer to he than life , have react now in a mental lassitude which seem unable to rise up and face the prospect of the lonely year to come . 

 the thought of she as now with the Knight , do not cause he suffer . his one anxiety be lest anything unforeseen should arise , to prevent the full fruition of their happiness . 

 he have never love she as a man love the woman he would we d ; at least , if that side of his love have attempt to arise , it have instantly be throttle and fling back . 

 it seem to he that , from the very beginning he have ever love she as Saint Joseph must have love the maiden intrust to his keep his , yet not his ; call , in the inspire dream , " Mary , thy wife " ; but so call only that he might have the right to guard and care for she she who be shrine of the Holiest , o'ershadowe by the power of the Highest ; Mother of God , most blessed Virgin forever . 

 it seem to the Bishop that his joy in watch over Mora , since his appointment to the see of Worcester , have be such as Saint Joseph could well have understand ; and now he have accomplish the supreme thing ; and , in so do , have leave himself desolate . 

 on the afternoon of the previous day , so soon as the body of the old lay - sister have be remove from the prioress 's cell , the Bishop have gather together all those thing which Mora specially value and which she have ask he to secure for she ; mostly his gift to she . 

 the Sacramentaries , from which she so often make copy and translation , now lie upon his table . 

 his tired eye dwelt upon they . how often he have watch the firm white finger open those heavy clasp , and slowly turn the page . 

 the book remain ; yet her presence be go . 

 his weary brain repeat , over and over , this obvious fact ; then begin a hypothetical reversal of it . suppose the book have go , and her presence have remain ? . . . presently a catalogue form itself in his mind of all those thing which might have go , unmissed , unmourned , if her dear presence have remain . . . . before long the Palace . . . the City . . . the Cathedral itself . . . all have swell the list . . . . he be alone with Mora and the sunset ; . . . and the battlement of glory be the radiant wall of heaven ; . . . and soon he and she be walk up old Mary Antony 's golden stair together . . . . 

 Hush ! . . . " so he giveth his beloved sleep . " 

           

 the Bishop have but just return from lay to rest , in the burying - ground of the Convent , the wear - out body of the aged lay - sister . 

 when he have signify that he intend himself to perform the last rite , Mother Sub - Prioress have venture upon amazed expostulation . 

 such an honour have never , in the history of the Community , be accord even to the canonesse , much less to a lay - sister . surely Father Peter or the Prior ? have it be the prioress herself , why then 

 few can remember the petrifying effect of a flash of sudden anger in the kindly eye of Symon of Worcester . Mother Sub - Prioress will never forget it . 

 so , with as much pomp and circumstance as if she have be Prioress of the White Ladies , old Mary Antony 's humble remain be lay in that plot in the Convent burying - ground which she have choose for herself , half a century before . 

 much sorrow be shewn , by the entire Community . the great loss they have sustain by the mysterious passing of the Prioress from their midst , weigh heavily upon they ; and seem , in some way which they could not fathom , to be connect with the death of the old lay - sister . 

 as the solemn procession slowly wend its way from the Chapel , along the Cypress Walk , and so , across the orchard , to the burying - ground , the tear which run down the chastened face of the nun , be as much a tribute of love to their late prioress , as a sign of sorrow for the loss of Mary Antony . the little company of lay - sister sob without restraint . Sister Abigail , so often call " noisy hussy " by old Antony , fully , on this final occasion , justify the name . 

 as the procession be re - form to leave the grave , Sister Mary Seraphine feel that the moment have now arrive , old Antony be dispose of , when she might suitably become the centre of attention , and be carry , on the return journey . she therefore fall prone upon the ground , in a fainting fit . 

 the Bishop , his chaplain , the priest and acolyte , pause uncertain what to do . 

 Sister Teresa , and other nun , would have hasten to raise she , but the command of Mother Sub - Prioress rang sharp and clear . 

 " let her lie ! if she choose to remain with the Dead , it be but small loss to the living . " 

 and with hand devoutly cross upon her breast , ferret face peer to right and leave from out the curtain of her veil , Mother Sub - Prioress move forward at the head of the nun . 

 the Bishop 's procession , which have waver , continue to lead the way ; solemn chanting begin ; and , as the Bishop turn into the Cypress Walk he see the fly figure of Mary Seraphine run among the tree in the orchard , try to catch up , and to take her place again , unnoticed , among the rest . 

 the Bishop smile , remember his many talk with the Prioress concern Seraphine , and the Knight 's dismay when he fear they be foist the wayward nun upon he . 

 then he sigh as he realise that the control of the Convent have now pass into the able hand of Mother Sub - Prioress ; and that , in these unusual circumstance , the task of select and appoint a new prioress , fall to he . 

 perhaps his conversation on this subject , first with the Prior , and later on with Mother Sub - Prioress , partly account for his extreme fatigue , now that he find himself at last alone in his library . 

 but the reward of those " whose strength be to sit still , " have come to the Bishop . 

 soon after he fix his eye upon the Gregorian and Gelasian 
 Sacramentaries , his eyelid gently begin to droop . Sleep be already 
 upon he when he decide to let the Palace , the City , yea , even the 
 Cathedral go , if he might but keep the prioress . and as he walk with 
 Mora up the golden stair , his mind be at rest ; his weary body sleep . 
 a very few minute of sleep suffice the Bishop . 

 he awake as suddenly as he have fall asleep ; and , as he awake , he seem to hear himself say : " Nay , Hugh . none save the old lay - sister , Mary Antony . " 

 he sit up , wonder what this sentence could mean ; also when and where it have be speak . 

 as he wonder , his eye fall upon the white stone which he have fling into the Severn , and which the Knight , diving from the parapet , have retrieve from the river bed . the stone seem in some way connect with this chance sentence which have repeat itself in his brain . 

 the Bishop rise , walk over to his deed chest , take the white stone in his hand and stand motionless , his eye fix upon it , wrap in thought . then he pass out on to the lawn , and pace slowly to and fro between the archway lead from the courtyard , to the parapet overlook the river . 

 yes ; it be here . 

 he have ride in on Shulamite , from the height above the town , whence he have watch the Prioress ride in the river meadow . 

 he have find Hugh d'Argent await he , and together they have pace this lawn in earnest conversation . 

 Hugh have be anxious to hear every detail of his visit to the Convent and the scene in the prioress 's cell when he have shew her the copy of the Pope 's mandate , just receive from Rome . in speak of the possible development which might take place in the course of the next few hour , Hugh have ask whether any in the Convent , beside Mora herself , know of his presence in Worcester , or that he have manage to obtain entrance to the cloister by the crypt passage , to make his way disguise to Mora 's cell , and to have speech with she . 

 the Bishop have answer that none know of this , save the old lay - sister Mary Antony , who be wholly devoted to the prioress , make shrewd by ninety year of experience in outwit her superior , and could be completely trust . 

 " how come she to know ? " the Bishop seem to remember that the Knight have ask . and he have make answer that he have as yet no definite information , but be inclined to suspect that when the Prioress have bid the old woman begone , she have slip into some place of concealment from whence she have see and hear something of what pass in the cell . 

 to this the Knight have make no comment ; and now , walk up and down the lawn , the white stone in his hand , the Bishop could not feel sure how far Hugh have take in the exact purport of the word ; yet well he know that sentence which pass almost unnoticed when hear with a mind preoccupy , be apt to return later on , with full significance , should anything occur upon which they shed a light . 

 this then be the complication which have bring the Bishop out to pace the lawn , recall each step in the conversation , there where it have take place . 

 soon or later , Mora will tell her husband of Mary Antony 's wondrous vision . if she reach the conclusion , uninterrupted , all will be well . the Knight will realise the importance of conceal the fact of the old lay - sister 's knowledge by non - miraculous mean of his presence in the cell , and his suit to the prioress . but should she preface her recital by remark that none in the Community have knowledge of his visit , the Knight will probably at once say : " Nay , there you be mistaken ! I have it from the Bishop that the old lay - sister , Mary Antony , know of it , have stay hide where she see and hear much that pass ; yet be very faithful , and more than common shrewd , could so say the Bishop be most completely trust . " 

 Whereupon irreparable harm would be do ; for , at once , Mora would realise that she have be deceive ; and her peace of mind and calm of conscience would be disturb , if not completely overthrow . 

 one thing seem clear to the Bishop . 

 Hugh must be warn . probably no harm have as yet be do . the vision be so sacred a thing to Mora , that week might elapse before she speak of it to her husband . 

 with as little delay as possible Hugh must be put upon his guard . 

 CHAPTER XLII 

 the WARNING 

 Alert , determined , all trace of lassitude depart , the Bishop return to the library , lay the stone upon the deed chest , sit down at a table and write a letter . he have make up his mind as to what must be say , and not once do he pause or hesitate over a word . 

 while still write , he lift his left hand and strike upon a silver gong . 

 when his servant enter , the Bishop speak without raise his eye from the table . 

 " Request Brother Philip to come here , without loss of time . " 

 when the Bishop , have sign his letter , lay down the pen , and look up , Brother Philip stand before he . 

 " Philip , " say the Bishop , ' select a trustworthy messenger from among the stable man , one possess of wit as well as muscle ; mount he on a good beast , supply he with whatsoever he may need for a possible six day ' journey . bring he to I so soon as he be ready to set forth . he must bear a letter , of much importance , to Sir Hugh d'Argent ; and , see that I know only the Knight 's route and stop place , on his northward ride , but not his time of starting , which may have be yesterday or may not be until to - morrow , my messenger must ride first to Warwick , which if the Knight have leave , he must then follow in his track until he overtake he . " 

 " my lord , " say Brother Philip , " the sun be set and the daylight fade . the messenger can not now reach Warwick until long after nightfall . would it not be safe to have all in readiness , and let he start at dawn . he would then arrive early in the day , and could speedily overtake the most worshipful Knight who , rid with his lady , will do the journey by short stage . " 

 " Nay , " say the Bishop , " the matter allow of no delay . Mount he so well , that he shall outdistance all danger . he must start within half an hour . " 

 Brother Philip , bow low , withdraw . 

 the Bishop bend again over the table , and read what he have write . glance quickly through the opening greeting , he consider carefully what follow . 

  " this come to you , my son , by messenger , rid in urgent haste , because the advice herein contain be of extreme importance . 

 " on no account let Mora know that which I tell you here , four day since , as we pace the lawn ; namely : that the old lay - sister , Mary Antony , be aware of your visit to the Convent , and have , from some place of concealment , see and hear much of what pass in Mora 's cell . how far you realise this , when I make mention of it , I know not . you make no comment . it matter little , then ; but have now become a thing of extreme importance . 

 " on that morning , find the old lay - sister know more than any suppose , and be wholly devoted to the prioress , I have chance to remark to she as I ride out of the courtyard that the Reverend Mother would thrust happiness from she with both hand unless our Lady herself offer it , by vision or revelation . 

 " Whereupon , my dear Knight , that faithful old heart use wit she have pray our Lady to sharpen , contrive a vision of her own devising , so wondrously contrive , so excellently devised , that Mora not dream of old Antony 's secret knowledge could not fail to believe it true . in fact , my son , you may praise heaven for an old woman 's wit , for , as you will doubtless some day hear from Mora herself , they give you your wife ! 

 " but beware lest any chance word of yours lead Mora to suspect the genuineness of the vision . it would cost she her peace of mind . it might cost you her presence . 

 " meanwhile the aged lay - sister die yesterday , after have mystify the entire Community by lock herself into the prioress 's cell , and remain there , from the time she find it empty when the nun return from Vespers , until I arrive on the following afternoon . she thus prevent any questioning concern Mora 's flight , and avert possible scandal . but the twenty - four hour without food or drink cost the old woman her life . a faithful heart indeed , and a most shrewd wit ! 

 " some day , if occasion permit , I will recount to you the full story of 
 Mary Antony 's strategy . it be well worth the hearing . 
 " I trust your happiness be complete ; and her , Hugh , her ! 

 " but we must take no risk ; and never must we forget that , in deal with Mora , we be deal with the heart of a nun . 

 " therefore , my son , be wary . Heaven grant this may reach you without delay , and in time to prevent mischief . " 

 when the messenger , fully equip for his journey , be bring before the Bishop by Brother Philip , this letter lie ready , seal , and address to Sir Hugh d'Argent , at Warwick Castle in the first place , but fail there , to each successive stop place upon the northward road , include Castle Norelle , which , the Bishop have gather , be to be reach on the seventh day after leave Warwick . 

 so presently the messenger swing into the saddle , and ride out through the great gate . in a leathern wallet at his belt , be the letter , and a good sum of money for his need on the journey ; and in his somewhat stolid mind , the Bishop 's very simple instruction simple , yet give with so keen a look , transfix the man , that it seem to the honest fellow he have receive they from the point of a blue steel blade . 

 he be to ride to Warwick , without draw rein ; to wake the porter at the gate , and the seneschal within , no matter at what hour he arrive . if the Knight be still at the Castle , the letter must be place in his hand so soon as he leave his chamber in the morning . but have he already go from Warwick , the messenger , after food and rest for himself and his horse , be to ride on to the next stage and , if needful , to the next , until he overtake Sir Hugh and deliver into his own hand , with as much secrecy as possible , the letter . 

 the Bishop pass along the gallery , after the messenger have leave the library , mount to the banquet hall and watch he ride away , from that casement , overlook the courtyard , from which Hugh have look down upon the arrival of Roger de Berchelai , bring the letter from Rome . 

 a great relief fill the mind of the Bishop as he hear the clattering hoof of the fast nag in his stable , ring on the pave stone without , and die away in the distance . 

 a serious danger would be avert , if the Knight be warn in time . 

 the Bishop pray that his letter might reach Hugh 's hand before Mora be move to speak to he of Mary Antony 's vision . 

 he blame himself bitterly for not have soon recall that conversation on the lawn . how easy it would have be , after hear Mora 's story in the arbour , to have give Hugh a word of caution before leave Warwick . 

 just after sunset , one of the Bishop 's man , who have remain behind at Warwick , reach the Palace , bring news that the Knight , his Lady , and their entire retinue , have ride out from Warwick in the afternoon of the previous day . 

 the Bishop chafe at the delay this must involve , yet rejoice at the prompt beginning of the homeward journey , have secretly fear lest Hugh should find some difficulty in persuade his bride to set forth with he . 

 after all , they be but two day ahead of the messenger who , by fast riding , might overtake they on the morrow . Mistress Deborah , even on a pillion , should prove a substantial impediment to rapid progress . 

 but , alas , before noon on the day follow , Brother Philip appear in haste , with an anxious countenance . 

 the messenger have return , footsore and exhaust , bruised and wound , with scarce a rag to his back . 

 in the forest , while still ten mile from Warwick , overtake by the darkness , he have meet a band of robber , who have take his horse and all he possess , leave he for dead , in a ditch by the wayside . be but stunned and badly bruise , when he come to himself he think it well to make his way back to Worcester and there report his misadventure . 

 the Bishop listen to this luckless tale in silence . 

 when it be finish he say , gently : " my good Philip , thou art prove right , and I , wrong . have I be guide by thee , I should not have lose a good horse , nor which be of great importance at this juncture twenty - four hour of most precious time . " 

 Brother Philip make a profound obeisance , look deeply ashamed of his own superior foresight and wisdom , and miserably wishful that the Reverend Father have be right , and he , wrong . 

 " however , " continue the Bishop , after a moment of rapid thought , " I must forgo the melancholy luxury of meditate upon my folly , until after we have take prompt measure , so far as may be , to put right the mischief it have work . 

 " this time , my good Philip , you shall be the bearer of my letter . take with you , as escort , two of our man more , if you think needful . Ride straight from here , by the most direct route to Castle Norelle , the home of the noble Countess , lately wed to Sir Hugh . I will make you a plan of the road . 

 " if , when you reach the place , Sir Hugh and his bride have arrive , ask to have speech with the Knight alone , and put the letter into his own hand . but if they be yet on the way , ride to meet they , by a road I will clearly indicate . only be careful to keep out of sight of all save the Knight or his body - servant , Martin Goodfellow . 

 " the letter deliver , and the answer in thy hand , return , to I as speedily as may be , without overpresse man or steed . how soon canst thou set forth ? " 

 " within the hour , my lord , " say Brother Philip , joyfully , cure of his shame by this call to immediate service ; " with an escort of three , that we may ride by night as well as by day . " 

 " good , " say the Bishop ; and , as the lay - brother , bow low , hasten from the chamber , Symon of Worcester draw toward he write material , and pen afresh his warning to the Knight ; not at such length as in the former missive , but make very clear the need for silence concern Mary Antony 's previous knowledge of his visit to the Nunnery , lest Mora should come to doubt the genuineness of the vision which have bring she to her great decision , and which in very truth have be wholly contrive by the love heart and nimble wit of Mary Antony . 

 so once again the Bishop stand at the casement in the banqueting hall ; and , look down into the courtyard , see faithful Philip , with an escort fully armed , ride out at the Palace gate . 

 no time have be lose in repair the mistake . yet there be heavy foreboding at the Bishop 's heart , as he pace slowly down the hall . 

 greatly he fear lest this twenty - four hour ' delay should mean mischief wrought , which could never be undo . 

 pass into the chapel , he kneel long before the shrine of Saint Joseph pray , with an intense fervour of petition , that his warning might reach the Knight before any word have pass his lip which could shake Mora 's belief in that which be to she the sole justification for the important step she have take . 

 the Bishop pray and fast ; fast , pray , and keep vigil . and all the night through , in thought , he follow Brother Philip and his escort as they ride northward , through the forest , up the glen , and over the moor , make direct for Mora 's home , to which she and Hugh be travel by a more roundabout way . 

 CHAPTER xliii 

 MORA mount to the battlement 

 the moonlight , shin in at the open casement , illumine , with its clear radiance , the chamber which have be , during the year of her maidenhood , Mora de Norelle 's sleep apartment . 

 it hold many treasure of childhood . every familiar thing within it , whisper of the love and care of those long pass into the realm of silence and of mystery ; a noble father , slay in battle ; a gentle mother , unable to survive he , the call to she of the spirit of her Warrior , be more compelling than the need of the beautiful young daughter , to whom both have be devote . 

 the chamber seem to Mora full of tender and poignant memory . 

 how many girlish dream have be dream while her healthy young body rest upon that couch , after wild gallop over the moor , or a long day 's climbing among the rocky hill , search for rare fern and flower to transplant into her garden . 

 in this room she have mourn her father , with her strong young arm wrap around her weeping mother . 

 in this room she have weep for her mother , with none to comfort she , save the faithful nurse , Deborah . 

 to this room she have flee in wrath , after the scene with , her half - sister , Eleanor , who have try to despoil she of her heritage the noble Castle and land leave to she by her father , and confirm to she , with succession to her father 's title , by the King . these Eleanor desire for her son ; but neither bribe nor cajolery , threat , nor cruel insinuation , have avail to induce Mora to give up her rightful possession the home of her childhood . 

 before the effect of this storm have pass , Hugh d'Argent have make his first appearance upon the scene , rid into the courtyard as a King 's messenger , but also make himself know to the young Countess as a near neighbour , heir to a castle and land , not far distant , among the Cumberland hill . 

 with both it have be love at first sight . his short and ardent courtship have , unbeknown to he , require not so much to win her heart , as to overcome her maidenly resistance , render stubborn by the consciousness that her heart have already range itself on the side of her lover . 

 when at last , vanquish by his eager determination , she have yield and become betrothed to he , it have seem to she that life could hold no sweet joy . 

 but he , hard to content , ever headstrong and eager , already have take the cross , and be now call at once to join the King in Palestine , beg for immediate marriage that he might take she with he to the Court of the new Queen , to which his cousin Alfrida have already be summon ; or , if he must leave she behind , at least leave she , not affiance maid , but wed wife . 

 here Eleanor and her husband have interpose ; and , assume the position of natural guardian , have refuse to allow the marriage to take place . this necessitate the consent of the King , which could not be obtain , he be in the Holy Land ; and Hugh have no wish to make application to the Queen - mother , then act regent during the absence of the king ; or to allow his betroth to be bring again into association with the Court at Windsor . 

 Mora secretly glad to keep yet a little long the sweet bliss of betrothal , with its promise of unknown yet deep joy to come resist Hugh 's attempt to induce she to defy Eleanor , flout her wrongful claim to authority , and we d he without obtain the Royal sanction . steep in the bliss of have take one step into an unimagined state of happiness , she feel no necessity or inclination hurriedly to take another . 

 yet when , uphold by the ecstasy of those final moment together , she have let he go , as she watch he ride away , a strange foreboding of come ill have seize she , and a restless yearning , which she could not understand , yet which she know would never be still until she could clasp his head again to her breast , feel his crisp hair in her finger , and know he safe , and her own . 

 this chamber then have witness long hour of prayer and vigil , as she kneel at the shrine in the nook between the casement , beseech our Lady and Saint Joseph for the safe return of her lover . 

 then come the news of Hugh 's suppose perfidy ; and from this chamber she have go forth to hide her broken heart in the sacred refuge of the Cloister ; to offer to God and the service of Holy Church , the life which have be rob of all natural joy by the faithlessness of a man . 

 and this have happen eight year ago , as man count time . but as nun count it ? and lover ? a lifetime ? a night ? 

 it have seem indeed a lifetime to the Prioress of the White Ladies , during the first day of her return to the world . but to the woman who now kneel at the casement , drink in the balmy sweetness of the summer night , look with soft yearn eye at the well - remember landscape flood in silvery moonlight , it seem a night . 

 a night since she stand on the battlement , her lover 's arm about she . 

 a night since she say : " thou wilt come back to I , Hugh . . . . my love will ever be around thee as a silver shield . " 

 a night since , as the last word he should hear from her lip , she have say : " Maid or wife , God know I be all thine own . Thine , and none other 's , forever . " 

 of all the memory connect with this chamber , the clear to - night be of the hungry ache at her heart , when Hugh have go . it have seem to she then that never could that ache be still , until she could once again clasp his head to her breast . she know now that it never have be still . dull , ignore , deny ; call by other name ; but still never . 

 on this night it be as sweetly poignant as on that other night eight year ago , when she have slowly descend to this very room , from the moonlit battlement . 

 yet to - night she be maid and wife . moreover Hugh be here , under this very roof . yet have he bid she a grave good - night , without so much as touch her hand . yet his dark eye have say : " I love thee . " 

 Kneeling at the casement , Mora review the day since they ride forth from Warwick . 

 it have be a wondrous experience for her she , who have be Prioress of the White Ladies thus to ride out into the radiant , sunny world . 

 Hugh be ever beside she , watchful , tender , shield she from any possible pain or danger , yet claim nothing , ask nothing , for himself . 

 one night , not be assure of the safety of the place where they lodge , she find afterwards that he have lie all night across the threshold of the chamber within which she and Debbie sleep . 

 another night she see he pace softly up and down beneath her window . 

 yet when each morning come , and they begin a new day together , he greet she gaily , with clear eye and unclouded brow ; not as one chill or disappoint , or vex to be keep from his due . 

 and oh , the wonder of each new day ! the glory of those ride over the mossy softness of the woodland path , where the sunlight fall , in dancing patch , through the thick , move foliage , and shy deer peep from the bracken , with soft eye and gentle movement ; out on to the wild liberty of the moor , where Icon , snuff the fresher air , would stretch his neck and gallop for pure joy at have leave cobbled street and pave courtyard far behind he . and ever they ride northward , and home draw nearer . look back upon those long hour spend alone together , Mora realise how simply and easily she have grow use to be with Hugh , and how entirely this be due to his unselfishness and tact . he talk with she constantly ; yet never of his own feeling regard she . 

 he tell she of his adventure in Eastern land ; of the happening in England during the past eight year , so far as he have be able to learn they ; of his home and property ; of her , and of the welcome which await she from her people . 

 he never speak of the Convent , nor of the eventful day through which he and she have so recently pass . 

 so successfully do he dominate her mind in this , that almost it seem to she she too be return home after a long absence in a foreign land . 

 her mind awake to unrestrained enjoyment of each hour , and to the keen anticipation of the traveller homeward bind . 

 each day spend in Hugh 's company seem to wipe out one , or more , of the intervene year , so that when , toward evening , on the seventh day , the grey turret of her old home come in sight , it might have be but yesterday they have part , on those same battlement , and she have watch he ride away , until the firwood from which they be now emerge , have hide he from view . 

 kneeling at her casement , her mind seem lose in a whirlpool of emotion , as she review the hour of their arrival . the road up to the big gate every tree and hillock , every stock and stone , love and familiar , recall childish joy and sorrow , adventure and enterprise . then the pass in through the gate , the familiar face , the glad greeting ; zachary white - haired , but still rosy and stalwart at the foot of the step ; and , in the doorway , just where loneliness might have grip she , old Debbie , look as if she have never be away , wait with open arm . so this be the moment foresee by Hugh when he have plan an early start , that morning , for Mistress Deborah , and a more roundabout ride for she . 

 she turn , with an impulsive gesture , hold out to he her left hand , that he might cross the threshold with she . but the Knight be stoop to examine the right forehoof of her palfrey , she have fancy Icon have trod tenderly upon it during the last half - mile ; so she pass in alone . 

 afterwards she overheard old Debbie say , in her most scold tone : " she do stretch out her hand to you , Sir Hugh , and you see it not ! " but the Knight 's deep voice make courteous answer : " there be no look or gesture of her , however slight , good Mistress Deborah , which doth escape I . " and at this her heart thrill far more than if he have meet her hand , responsive ; know that thus he do faithfully keep his pledge to she , and that he could so keep it , only by never relax his stern hold upon himself . 

 yet almost she begin to wish he less stern and less faithful , so much do she long to feel for one instant the strong clasp of his arm about she . by his rigid adherence to his promise , she feel herself punish for have shudder . why have she shudder ? . . . would she shudder now ? this wonderful first evening have quickly pass , in go from chamber to chamber , walk in the garden , and sup with Hugh in the dining - hall , wait on by Mark and Beaumont , with Zachary to supervise , pour the wine , and stand behind her chair . 

 then a final walk on the terrace ; a grave good - night upon the stair ; and , at last , this time of quiet thought , in her own chamber . 

 she could not realise that she be wed to Hugh ; but her heart awake to the fact that truly she be betroth to he . and she be happy deeply happy . 

 leave the casement , she kneel before the shrine of the Virgin there where she have put up so many impassioned prayer for the safe return of her lover . 

 " Blessed Virgin , " she say , " I thank thee for send I home . " 

 Years seem to roll from she . she feel herself a child again . she long for her mother 's understanding tenderness . fail that , she turn to the sweet Mother of God . 

 the image before which she knelt , shew our Lady standing , tall and fair and gracious , the Infant Saviour , seat upon her left hand , her right hand hold he lean against she , his baby arm outstretche . neither the Babe nor his Mother smile . each look grave and somewhat sad . 

 " home , " whisper Mora . " bless Virgin I thank thee for send I home . " 

 " Nay , " answer a voice within she . " I send thee not home . I give thee to he to whom thou didst belong . he hath bring thee home . what say the vision ? ' take she . she be thine own . I have but keep she for thee . ' " 

 yet Hugh know naught of this gracious message know naught of the vision which have give she to he . until to - night she have feel it impossible to tell he of it . now she long that he should share with she the wonder . 

 she seek her couch , but sleep would not come . the moonlight be too bright ; the room too sweetly familiar . moreover it seem but yesterday that she have part from Hugh , in such an ecstasy of love and sorrow , up on the battlement . 

 a great desire seize she to mount to those battlement , and to stand again just where she have stand when she bid he farewell . 

 she rise . 

 among the garment put ready for her use , chance to be the robe of sapphire velvet which she have wear on that night . 

 she put it on ; with jewel at her breast and girdle . then , with the mantle of ermine fall from her shoulder , and her beautiful hair cover she as a veil , she leave her chamber , pass softly along the passage , find the wind stair , and mount to the rampart . 

 as she step out from the turret stairway , she exclaim at the sublime beauty of the scene before she ; the sleep world at midnight , bath in the silvery light of the moon ; the shadow of the fir , lie like black bar across the road to the Castle gate . 

 " there I watch he ride away , " she say , with a sweep of her arm toward the road , " watch , until the dark wood swallow he . and here " with a sweep toward the turret " here , we part . " 

 she turn ; then catch her breath . 

 lean against the wall with fold arm , stand Hugh . 

 CHAPTER XLIV 

 " I love THEE " 

 Mora stand , for some moment , speechless ; and Hugh do not stir . they face one another , in the weird , white light . 

 at last : " do you make I come ? " she whisper . 

 " Nay , my beloved , " he answer at once ; " unless constant thought of thee , could bring thee to I . I picture thee peacefully sleep . " 

 " I could not sleep , " she say . " it seem to I our Lady be not pleased , because , dear Knight , I have fail , in all these day , to tell you of her wondrous and especial grace which send I to you . " 

 " I have wonder , " say the Knight ; " but I know there would come a time when I should hear what cause thy mind to change . that it be a thing of much import , I feel sure . the Bishop counsel I to give up hope . but I have beseech our Lady to send thee to I , and I could not lose my trust in prayer . " 

 " it be indeed our bless Lady who send I , " say Mora , very softly . " Hugh , dare I stay and tell you the whole story , here and now ? what if we be discover , alone upon the rampart , at this hour of the night ? " 

 Hugh could not forbear a smile . 

 " Dear Heart , " he say , " we shall not be discover . and , if we be , methink we have the right to be together , on the rampart , or off they , at any hour of the day or night . " 

 a low wooden seat run along beneath the parapet . 

 Mora sit down and motion the Knight to a place beside she . 

 " sit here , Hugh . then we can talk low . " 

 " I listen well standing , " say the Knight ; but he come near , put one foot on the seat , lean his elbow on his knee , his chin in his hand , and stand look down upon she . 

 " Hugh , " she say , " I withstand your pleading ; I withstand the Bishop 's argument ; I withstand the yearning of my own poor heart . I tear up the Pope 's mandate , and set my foot upon it . I say that nothing could induce I to break my vow , unless our Lady herself give I a clear sign that my high duty be to you , thus absolve I from my vow , and make it evident that God 's will for I be that I should leave the Cloister , and keep my early troth to you . " 

 " and give our Lady such a sign ? " ask the Knight , his dark eye fix on Mora 's face . 

 she lift it , white and lovely ; radiant in the moonlight . 

 " well than a sign , " she say . " our Lady vouchsafe a wondrous vision , in which her own voice be hear , give command and consent . " 

 the Knight , cross himself , drop upon his knee , lift his eye heavenward in fervent praise and adoration . he raise to his lip a gold medallion , which he wear around his neck , contain a picture of the Virgin , and kiss it devoutly ; then overcome by emotion , he cover his face with his hand and kneel with bow head , recite in a low voice , the Salve Regina . 

 Mora watch he , with deep gladness of heart . this fervent joy and devout thanksgive differ so greatly from the half - incredulous , whimsically amused , mental attitude with which Symon of Worcester have receive her recital of the miracle . Hugh 's reverent adoration fill she with happiness . 

 presently he rise and stand beside she again , expectant , eager . 

 " tell I more ; nay , tell I all , " he say . 

 " the vision , " begin Mora , " be give to the old lay - sister , Mary 
 Antony . " 
 " Mary Antony ? " query Hugh , with knitted brow . " ' the old lay - sister , Mary Antony ' ? why do I know that name ? I seem to remember that the Bishop speak of she , as we walk together in the Palace garden , the day follow the arrival of the messenger from Rome . methink the Bishop say that she alone know of my intrusion into the Nunnery ; but that she , be faithful , could be trust . " 

 " Nay , Hugh , " answer Mora , " you mistake . it be I who tell you so , even before I know you be the intruder , while yet address you as Sister Seraphine 's ' Cousin Wilfred . ' I say that you have be thwart in your purpose by the faithfulness of the old lay - sister , Mary Antony , who never fail to count the White Ladies , as they go , and as they return , and who have report to I that one more have return than go . afterward I be greatly perplex as to what explanation I should make to Mary Antony ; when , to my relief , she come and confess that her be the mistake , she have count wrongly . Glad indeed be I to let it rest at that ; so neither she , nor any in the Convent , know aught of your entrance there or your visit to my cell . the Bishop , you , and I , alone know of it . " 

 " then I mistake , " say the Knight . " but I feel certain I have hear the name , and that the owner thereof have some knowledge of my movement . now , I pray thee , dear heart , tell I all . " 

 so sit there on the rampart of her old home , the stillness of the fragrant summer night all around , Mora tell from the beginning the wondrous history of the trance of Mary Antony , and the blessed vision then vouchsafe to she . 

 the Knight listen with glow eye . once he interrupt to exclaim : " oh , true ! most true ! more true than thou canst know . leave alone in thy cell , I kneel to our Lady , say those very word : ' Mother of God , send she to I ! take pity on a hungry heart , a lonely home , a desolate hearth , and send she to I . ' I be alone . only our Lady whom I besought , hear those word pass my lip . " 

 again Hugh kneel , kiss the medallion , and lift to heaven eye luminous with awe and worship . 

 continue , Mora tell he all , even to each detail of her long night vigil and her prayer for a sign which should be give direct to herself , so soon grant by the arrival and flight of the robin . but this fail to impress Hugh , wholly absorb in the vision , and unable to see where any element of hesitation or of uncertainty could come in . hear it from Mora , he be spar the quaint turn which be bind to be give to any recital , however sacred , hear direct from old Mary Antony . 

 the Knight be a crusader . many a fight he have fight for that cause represent the high of christian ideal . also , he have be a pilgrim , and have visit innumerable holy shrine . for year , his soul have be steep in religion , in that Land where true religion have its birth , and all within he , which be strong and most manly , have respond with a simplicity of faith , yet with a depth of ardent devotion , which make his religion the most vital part of himself . this it be which have give he a noble fortitude in bear his sorrow . this it be which now give he a noble exultation in accept his great happiness . it fill he with rapture , that his wife should have be give to he in direct response to his own earnest petition . 

 when at length Mora stand up , stretch her arm above her head and straighten her supple limb : 

 " my beloved , " he say , " if the vision have not be give , wouldst thou not have come to I ? should I have have to ride away from Worcester alone ? " 

 stand beside he , she answer , tenderly : 

 " Dear Hugh , my most faithful and loyal Knight , be here and oh so glad to be here how can I say it ? yet I must answer truly . but for the vision , I should not have come . I could not have break my vow . no blessing would have follow have I come to you , trail break vow , like chain behind I . but our Lady herself set I free and bid I go . therefore I come to you ; and therefore be I here . " 

 " tell I again the word our Lady say , when she put thy hand in mine . " 

 " our Lady say : ' take she . she hath be ever thine . I have but keep she for thee . ' " 

 then she pal , her heart begin to beat fast , and the colour come and go in her cheek ; for he have come very near , and she could hear the sharp catch of his breath . 

 " Mora , my beloved , " he say , " every fibre of my being cry out for thee . yet I want thy happiness before my own ; and , above and beyond all else , I want the Madonna in my home . even at our Lady 's bidding I can not take thee . not until thine own sweet lip shall say : ' take I ! I have be ever thine . ' " 

 she lift her eye to his . in the moonlight , her face seem almost unearthly , in its pure loveliness ; and , as on that night so long ago , he see her eye , bright than any jewel , shin with love and tear . 

 " dear man of mine , " she whisper , " to - night we be betroth . but to - morrow I will ride home with thee . to - morrow shall be indeed our bridal day . I will say all I will say anything I will say everything thou wilt ! Nay , see ! the dawn be break in the east . call it ' to - day ' to - DAY , dear Knight ! but now let I flee away , to fathom my strange happiness alone . then , to sleep in mine own chamber , and to awake refresh , and ready to go with thee , Hugh , when and where and how thou wilt . " 

 the Knight fold his arm across his breast . 

 " go , " he say , softly , " and our Lady be with thee . our spirit to - night have have their fill of holy happiness . I ask no high joy than to watch the breaking of the day which give thee to I , know thee to be safely sleep in thy chamber below . " 

 " I love thee ! " she whisper ; and flee . 

 Hugh d'Argent watch the dawn break a silver rift in the purple sky . 

 his heart be fill with indescribable peace and gladness . 

 it mean far more to he that his bride should have come to he in obedience to a divine vision , than if his love have master her will , and she have yield despite her own conscience . 

 also he know that at last his patient self - restraint have win its reward . the heart of a nun fear he no long . the woman he love be as wholly his as she have ever be . 

 as the sun begin to gild the horizon , fleck the sky with little rosy cloud , Hugh turn into the turret archway , go down the step , and seek his chamber . no soon be he stretch upon his couch , than , for very joy , he fall asleep . 

 but beyond the dark fir wood , and over the hill on the horizon , four horseman , have ride out from a wayside inn before the dawn , watch , as they ride , the widening of that silver rift in the sky , and the golden tint , herald the welcome appearance of the sun . 

 so soundly sleep Hugh d'Argent that , three hour later , be do not wake when a loud knock on the outer gate rouse the porter ; nor , though his casement open on to the courtyard , do he hear the noisy clatter of hoof , as Brother Philip , with his escort of three mount man , ride in . 

 not until a knocking come on his own door do the Knight awake and , leap from his bed , see as in a strange , wild dream Brother Philip , dusty and haggard , stand on the threshold , the Bishop 's letter in his hand . 

 CHAPTER XLV 

 the song of the THRUSH 

 the morning sun already pour into her room , when Mora open her eye , wake suddenly with that complete wide - awakeness which follow upon profound and dreamless slumber . 

 even as she wake , her heart say : " our bridal day ! the day I give myself to Hugh ! the day he lead I home . " 

 she stretch herself at full length upon the couch , her hand cross upon her breast , and let the delicious joy of her love sweep over she , from the sol of her foot to the crown of her head . 

 the world without lay bath in sunshine ; her heart within be flood by the radiance of this new and perfect realisation of her love for Hugh . 

 she lie quite still while it envelop she . 

 ten day ago , our Lady have give she to Hugh . 

 eight day ago , the Bishop , voice the Church , have do the same . 

 but to - day she she herself be go to give herself to her lover . 

 this be the true bridal ! for this he have wait . and the reward of his chivalrous patience be to be , that to - day , of her own free will she would say ; " Hugh , my husband , take I home . " 

 she smile to remember how , rid forth from the city gate of Warwick , she have plan within herself that , once safely establish in her own castle , she would abide there day , week , perhaps even , month ! 

 she stretch her arm wide , then fling they above her head . 

 " take I home , " she whisper . " Hugh , my husband , take I home . " 

 a thrush in the coppice below , whistle in liquid note : " do it now ! 
 do it now ! do it now ! " 
 laugh joyously , Mora leapt from her bed and look out upon a sunny summer 's day , hum with busy life , fragrant with scent of flower , thrill with song of bird . 

 " what a bridal morn ! " she cry . " all nature say ' awake ! arise ! ' yet I have sleep so late . I must quickly prepare myself to find and to greet my lover . " 

 " do it now ! " sing the thrush . 

 half an hour later , fresh and fragrant as the morn , Mora leave her chamber and make her way to the great staircase . 

 hearing shout in the courtyard , and the trampling of horse ' foot , she pause at a casement , and look down . 

 to her surprise she see the well - remember figure of Brother Philip , mount ; with he three other horseman wear the Bishop 's livery , and Martin Goodfellow lead Hugh 's favourite steed , ready saddle . 

 much perplexed , she pass down the staircase , and out on to the terrace where she have bid they to prepare the morning meal . 

 from the terrace she look into the banqueting hall , and her perplexity grow ; for there Hugh d'Argent , booted and spur , ready for a journey , stride up and down . 

 for two turn she watch he , note his knit brow , and the heavy forward thrust of his chin . 

 then , lift his eye as he swing round for the third time , he see she , outside in the sunlight ; such a vision of loveliness as might well make a man 's heart leap . 

 he pause in his rapid walk , and stand as if root to the spot , make no move toward she . 

 for a moment , Mora hesitate . 

 " do it now ! " sing the thrush . 

 CHAPTER XLVI 

 " how shall I let THEE GO ? " 

 Mora pass swiftly into the banqueting hall . 

 " Hugh , " she say , and come to he . " Hugh , my husband , this be our bridal day . will you take I to our home ? " 

 his eye , as they meet her , be full of a dumb misery . 

 then a fierce light of passion , a look of wild recklessness , flash into they . he raise his arm , to catch she to he ; then let they fall again , glance to right and leave , as if seek some way of escape . 

 but , see the amazement on her face , he master , by a mighty effort , his emotion , and speak with calmness and careful deliberation . 

 " Alas , Mora , " he say , " it be a hard fate indeed for I on this day , of all day , to be compel to leave thee . but in the early morn there come a letter which oblige I , without delay , to ride south , in order to settle a matter of extreme importance . I trust not to be go long than nine day . you , be safely establish in your own home , amongst your own people , I can leave without anxious fear . moreover , Martin Goodfellow will remain here represent I , and will in all thing do your bidding . " 

 " from whom be this letter , Hugh , which take you from I , on such a day ? " 

 " it be from a man well know to I , dwell in a city four day ' journey from here . " 

 " why not say at once : ' it be from the Bishop , write from his Palace in the city of Worcester ' ? " 

 Hugh frown . 

 " how know you that ? " he ask , almost roughly . 

 " my dear Knight , hear much champing of horse in my courtyard , I look down from a casement and see a lay - brother well know to I , and three other horseman wear the Bishop 's livery . what can Symon of Worcester have write which take you from I on this day , of all day ? " 

 " that I can not tell thee , " he make answer . " but he write , without much detail , of a matter about which I must know full detail , without loss of time . I have no choice but to ride and see the Bishop , face to face . it be not a question which can be settle by write nor could it wait the passing to and fro of messenger . believe I , Mora , it be urgent . naught but exceed urgency could force I from thee on this day . " 

 " have it to do with my flight from the Convent ? " she ask . 

 he bow his head . 

 " will you tell I the matter on your return , Hugh ? " 

 " I know not , " he answer , with face avert . " I can not say . " then with sudden violence : " oh , my God , Mora , ask I no more ! see the Bishop , I must ! speak with he , I must ! in nine day at the very most , I will be back with thee . Duty take I , my beloved , or I would not go . " 

 her mind respond instinctively to the word " duty , " " go then , dear Knight , " she say . " settle this business with Symon of Worcester . I have no desire to know its purport . if it concern my flight from the Convent , surely the Pope 's mandate be all - sufficient . but , be it what it may , in the hand of my faithful Knight and of my trust friend , the Bishop , I may safely leave it . I do but ask that , the work accomplish , you come with all speed back to I . " 

 with a swift movement he drop on one knee at her foot . 

 " send I away with a blessing , " he say . " bless I before I go . " 

 she lay her hand on the bow head . 

 " alas ! " she cry , " how shall I let thee go ? " 

 then , push her finger deeply into his hair and bend over he , with infinite tenderness : " how shall thy wife bless thee ? " she whisper . 

 he catch his breath , as the fragrance of the newly gather rose at her bosom reach and envelop he . 

 " bless I , " he say , hoarsely , " as the Prioress of the White Ladies use to bless her nun , and the Poor at the Convent gate . " 

 " Dear Heart , " she say , and smile . " that seem so long ago ! " then , as with bent head he still wait , she steady her voice , lift her hand from off he ; then lay they back upon his head , with reverent and solemn touch . " the Lord bless thee , " she say , " and keep thee ; and may our blessed Lady , who hath restore I to thee , bring thee safely back to I again . " 

 at that , Hugh raise his head and look up into her face , and the misery in his eye stir her tenderness as it have never be stir by the vivid love - light or the soft depth of passion she have heretofore see in they . 

 her lip part ; her breath come quickly . she would have catch he to her bosom ; she would have kiss away this unknown sorrow ; she would have smother the pain , in the sweetness of her embrace . 

 but bend swiftly he lift the hem of her robe and touch it with his lip ; then , rise , turn and leave she without a word ; without a backward look . 

 he leave she stand there , alone in the banqueting hall . and as she stand listen , with beat heart , to the sound of his voice raise in command ; to the quick movement of his horse 's hoof on the pave stone , as he swing into the saddle ; to the opening of the gate and the riding forth of the little cavalcade , a change seem to have come over she . she cease to feel herself a happy , yield bride , a traveller in distant land , after long journeying , once more at home . 

 she seem to be again prioress of the White Ladies . the calm finger of the Cloister fasten once more upon her pulsing heart . the dignity of office develop she . 

 and wherefore ? 

 be it because , when her lip have bend above he in surrender tenderness , her husband have choose to give she the sign of reverent homage accord to a prioress , rather than the embrace which would have seal her surrender ? 

 or be it because he have ask she to bless he as she have be will not to bless the Poor at the Convent gate ? 

 or be it the unconscious action of his mind upon her , he be suddenly call to face some difficulty which have arise , concern their marriage , or the Bishop 's share in her departure from the Nunnery ? 

 the clang of the closing gate sound in her ear as a knell . 

 she shiver ; then remember how she have shiver at sound of the turning of the key in the lock of the crypt - way door . how great the change work by eight day of love and liberty . she have shudder then at be irrevocably shut out from the Cloister . she shudder now because the arrival of a messenger from the Bishop , and something indefinable in Hugh 's manner , have cause she to look back . 

 she stand quite still . none come to seek she . she seem to have turn to stone . 

 it be not the first time this look back have have a petrifying effect upon a woman . she remember Lot 's wife , go forward lead by the gentle pressure of an angel 's hand , yet look back the moment that pressure be remove . 

 she have go forward , lead by the sweet angel of our Lady 's gracious message . why should she look back ? rather would she act upon the sacred precept : " forget those thing which be behind , and reach forth unto those thing which be before " this , say the apostle Saint Paul , be the one thing to do . undoubtedly now it be the one and only thing for she to do ; leave all else which might have to be do , to her husband and to the Bishop . 

 " this one thing I do , " she say aloud ; " this one thing I do . " and move forward , in the strength of that resolve , she pass out into the sunshine . 

 " do it now ! " sing the thrush , in the rowan - tree . 

 CHAPTER XLVII 

 the BISHOP be TAKEN UNAWARES 

 Symon of Worcester , seat before a table in the library , ponder a letter which have reach he the evening before , bring by a messenger from the Vatican . 

 it be a call to return to the land he love well ; the land of sunshine and flower , of soft speech and courteous way ; the land of heavenly beauty and seraphic sound ; and , moreover , to return as a Cardinal of Holy Church . 

 his acceptance or refusal must be pen before night . the messenger expect to start upon his return journey early on the morrow . 

 should he go ? or should he stay ? 

 be all now well for Mora ? or do she yet need he ? 

 surely never have Cardinal 's hat hang poise for such a reason ! how little would the Holy Father dream that a question affect the happiness or unhappiness of a woman could be a cause of hesitancy . 

 presently , with a quick movement , the Bishop lift his head . the library be far remove from the courtyard ; but surely he hear the clatter of horse ' hoof upon the raving stone . 

 he have hardly hop for Brother Philip 's return until after sunset ; yet with fast riding 

 if the Knight 's answer be in all respect satisfactory if Mora 's happiness be assure why , then 

 he sound the silver gong . 

 his servant enter . 

 " what horseman have just now ride into the courtyard , Jasper ? " 

 " my lord , Brother Philip have this moment return , and with he " 

 " bid Brother Philip to come hither , instantly . " 

 " may it please you , my lord " 

 " naught will please I , " say the Bishop , " but that my command be obey without parley or delay . " 

 Jasper 's obeisance take he through the door . 

 the Bishop bend over the letter from Rome , shade his face with his hand . 

 he could scarcely contain his anxiety ; but he do not wish to give Brother Philip occasion to observe his tremulous eagerness to receive the Knight 's reply . 

 he hear the door open and close , and a firm tread upon the floor . it strike he , even then , that the lay - brother have not be will not to enter his presence with so martial a stride , and he wonder at the ring of spur . but his mind be too intently set upon Hugh d'Argent 's letter , to do more than unconsciously notice these thing . 

 " thou art quickly return , my good Philip , " he say , without look round . " Thou have do well than my swift expectation . didst thou give my letter thyself into the hand of Sir Hugh d'Argent , and hast thou bring I back an answer from that most noble Knight ? " 

 wherefore do Brother Philip make no reply ? 

 wherefore do his breath come sharp and short not like a stout lay - brother who have hurry ; but , rather , like a desperate man who have clench his tooth to keep control of his tongue ? 

 the Bishop wheel in his chair , and find himself look full into the face of Hugh d'Argent Hugh , haggard , dusty , travel - stain , with eye , long stranger to sleep , regard he with a sombre intensity . 

 " you ! " exclaim the Bishop , surprise out of his usual gentle calm . 
 " you ? here ! " 
 " yes , I , " say the Knight , " I ! do it surprise you , my Lord Bishop , that I should be here ? would it not rather surprise you , in view of that which you see fit to communicate to I by letter , that I should fail to be here and here as fast as horse could bring I ? " 

 " naught surprise I , " say the Bishop , testily . " I have live so long in the world , and have to do with so many crazy fool , that human vagary no long have power to surprise I . and , by our Lady , Sir Knight , I care not where you be , so that you have leave safe and well , her peace of mind undisturbed , the woman whom I act as mouthpiece of the Pope and Holy Church give , not two week ago , into your care and keeping . " 

 the Knight 's frown be thunderous . 

 " it might be well , my Lord Bishop , to leave our blessed Lady 's name out of this conversation . it hath too much be put to shameful and treacherous use . Mora be safe and well . how far her peace of mind can be leave undisturbed , I be here to discover . I require , before aught else , the entire truth . " 

 but the Bishop have have time to recover his equanimity . he rise with his most charming smile , both hand out - stretch in gracious welcome . 

 " Nay , my dear Knight , before aught else you require a bath ! truly it offend my love of the beautiful to see you in this dusty plight . " he strike upon the gong . " also you require a good meal , serve with a flagon of my famous italian wine . you do well to come here in person , my son . if naught hath be say to Mora , no harm be do ; and together we can doubly safeguard the matter . I rejoice that you have come . but the strain of rapid travelling , when anxiety drive , be great . . . . jasper , prepare a bath for Sir Hugh d'Argent in mine own bath - chamber ; cast into it some of that fragrant and refreshing powder send to I by the good brother of Santa Maria Novella . while the noble Knight bathe , lie out in the ante - chamber the complete suit of garment he be wear on the day when the sudden fancy seize he to have a swim in our river . I conclude they have be duly dry and press and lay by with sweet herb ? . . . good . that be well . now , my dear Hugh , allow Jasper to attend you . he will give his whole mind to your comfort . send word to Brother Philip , Jasper , that I will speak with he here . " 

 the Bishop accompany the Knight to the door of the library ; watch he stride along the gallery , silent and sullen , in the wake of the hastening Jasper ; then turn and walk slowly back to the table , smile , and gently rub his hand together as he walk . 

 he have gain time , and he have successfully regain his sense of supremacy . take wholly by surprise , he have not feel able to cope with this gaunt , dusty , desperately determined Knight . but the Knight would leave more than mere travel stain behind , in the scented water of the bath ! he would reappear clothe and in his right mind . a good meal and a flagon of italian wine would far improve that mind , mellow it and render it pliable and easy to convince ; though truly it pass comprehension why the Knight should need convincing , or of what ! even more incomprehensible be it , that a man wed to Mora , not two week since , should of his own free will elect to leave she . 

 the Bishop turn . 

 Brother Philip stand in the doorway , bow low . 

 " come in , my good Philip , " say the Bishop ; " come in , and shut the door . . . . I must have thy report with full detail ; but , time be short , I would ask thee to begin from the moment when the battlement of Castle Norelle come into view . " 

 CHAPTER xlviii 

 a strange chance 

 on the fourth day of her husband 's absence , Mora climb to the battlement to watch the glory of a most gorgeous sunset . 

 also she love to find herself again there where she and Hugh have spend that wonderful hour in the moonlight , when she have tell he of the vision , and afterwards have give he the promise that on the morrow he should take she to his home . 

 she pause in the low archway at the top of the wind stair , remember how she have turn a moment there , to whisper : " I love thee . " ah , how often she have say it since : " dear man of mine , I love thee ! come back to I safe ; come back to I soon ; I love thee ! " 

 that he should have have to leave she just as her love be ready to respond to his , have cause that love to grow immeasurably in depth and intensity . 

 also she now realise , more fully , his fine self - control , his chivalrous consideration for she , his noble unselfishness . from the first , he have be so perfect to she ; and now her one desire be that , if her love could give it , he should have his reward . 

 ah , when would he come ! when would he come ! 

 she could not keep from shade her eye and look along the road to the point where it leave the fir wood , though this be but the fourth day since Hugh 's departure the day on which , by fast riding and long hour , he might arrive at Worcester and the ninth be the very early she dare hope for his return . 

 how slowly , slowly , pass the day . yet they be full of a quiet joy and peace . 

 from the moment when she have step out into the sunshine , resolve to go steadily forward without look back , she have throw herself with zest and pleasure into investigate and arrange her house and estate . 

 also , on the second day an idea have come to she with her first wake thought , which she have promptly put into execution . 

 take Martin Goodfellow with she she have ride over to Hugh 's home ; have find it , as she expect , greatly need a woman 's hand and mind , and have set to work at once on those change and arrangement most need , so that all should be in readiness when Hugh , return , would take her home . 

 under her direction the chamber which should be hers be put into perfect order ; her own thing be transport thither , and all be make so completely ready , that at any moment she and Hugh could start , without need of baggage or attendant , and ride together home . 

 this chamber have two door , the one lead down a flight of step on to a terrace , the other opening directly into the great hall , the central chamber of the house . 

 Mora love to stand in this doorway , look into the noble apartment , with its huge fireplace , massive carve chair on either side of the hearth , weapon on the wall , trophy of feat of arm , all those thing which make it home to Hugh , and to remember that of this place he have say in his petition to our Lady : " take pity on a lonely home , a desolate hearth . . . and send she to I . " 

 no long should it be lonely or desolate . Aye , and no long should his faithful heart be hungry . 

 on this day she have be over for the third time , rid by the road , because she and Martin both carry package of garment and other thing upon their saddle ; but return by a short way through the wood , silent and mossy , most heavenly cool and green . 

 this journey have serve to complete her happy preparation . so now , should Hugh arrive , even at sunset , and be wishful to ride on without delay , she could order the saddling of Icon , and say : " I be ready , dear Knight ; let we go . " 

 she stand on the Castle wall , gaze at the blood - red banner of the sunset , flame from the battlement of a veritable city of gold ; then , shade her eye , turn to look once again along the road . 

 and , at that moment , out from the dark fir wood there ride a horseman , alone . 

 for one moment only do her heart leap in the wild belief that Hugh have return . the next instant she know this could not be he ; even before her eye make out a stranger . 

 she watch he leave the road , and turn up the wind path which lead to the Castle gate ; see the porter go to the grating in answer to a loud knock without ; see he fetch old Zachary , who in his turn send for Martin Goodfellow ; upon which the gate be open wide , and the stranger ride into the courtyard . 

 Whereupon Mora think it time that she should descend from the battlement and find out who this unexpected visitor might be . 

 at the head of the great staircase , she meet Martin . 

 " Lady , " he say , " there wait a man below who urgently desire speech with Sir Hugh . learn from we that the Knight hath ride south , and be like to be away some day long , he beg to have word with you , alone ; yet refuse to state his business or to give his name . Master Zachary greatly hopeth that it may be your pleasure that we bid the fellow forthwith depart , tell he if he so will to ride back in six day ' time , when the worshipful Knight , whom he desire to see , will have return . " 

 Mora knit her brow . it do not please she that Zachary and Martin 
 Goodfellow should arrange together what she should do . 
 " describe he , Martin , " she say . " what manner of man be he ? " 

 " Swarthy , " say Martin , " and soldierly ; somewhat of a dare - devil , but on his good behaviour . zachary and I would suggest " 

 " I will see he , " say Mora , begin to descend the stair . " I will see he in the banqueting hall , and alone . you , Martin , can wait without , enter on the instant if I call . tell Zachary to bid they prepare a meal of bread and meat , with a flagon of wine , or a pot of good ale , which I may offer to this traveller , should he need refreshment . " 

 she be stand in the banqueting hall , on the very spot where Hugh have kneel at their parting , when the swarthy fellow , soldierly , yet somewhat of a dare - devil , enter . 

 Most certainly he be on his good behaviour . he doff his cap at first sight of she , advance a few pace , then stand still , bow low ; come forward a few more pace , then bow again . 

 she speak . 

 " you wish to see my husband , Friend , and speak with he ? he be away and hardly can return before five day , at soon . be your business with Sir Hugh such as I can pass on to he for you , by word of mouth ? " 

 she hop those bold , dark eye do not perceive how she glow to speak for the first time , to another , of Hugh as her husband . 

 he answer , and his word be blunt ; his manner , frank and soldierly . 

 " most noble Lady , fail the Knight , whom I have ride far to find , my business may most readily be tell to you . 

 " year ago , on a syrian battle - field it be my good fortune , in the thick of the fray , to find myself side by side with Sir Hugh d'Argent . the Infidels strike I down ; and , sorely wound , I should have be at their mercy , have not the noble Knight , see I fall , wheel his horse and , rid back , hewn his way through to I , scatter mine assailant right and leave . then , help I to mount behind he , gallop with I back to camp . Whereupon I swear , by the holy Cross at Lucca , that if ever the chance come my way to do a service to Sir Hugh of the Silver Shield , I would travel to the world 's end to do it . 

 " ten night ago , I chance to be rid through a wood somewhere betwixt Worcester and Warwick . a band of lawless fellow come by , I and my steed draw off the path , take cover in a thicket . but a solitary horseman , rid from Worcester , fail to avoid they . within sight of my hiding - place he be set upon , make to dismount , strip and bid to return on foot to the place from whence he come . I could do naught to help he . we be two , to a round dozen . the robber take the money from his wallet . within it they find also a letter , which they fling away as worthless . I mark where it fall , close to my hiding - place . 

 " when the affray be over , their victim have flee and the lawless band ride off , I come forth , pick up the letter and slip it into mine own wallet . so soon as the sun rise I draw forth the letter , when , to my amaze , I find it address to my brave rescuer , the Knight of the Silver Shield and Azure Pennant . it appear to be of importance as , fail Warwick Castle , six halting place , all on the northward road , be name on the outside ; also it be mark to be deliver with most urgent haste . 

 " it seem to I that now have come my chance , to do this brave Knight service . therefore have I ride from place to place , follow ; and , after some delay , I find myself at length at Castle Norelle , only to hear that he to whom I purpose to hand the letter have ride south by another road . thus be my endeavour to serve he render fruitless . " 

 " Nay , Friend , " say Mora , much move by this recital . " not fruitless . give I the letter you have thus rescue and faithfully attempt , to deliver . my husband return in five day . I will then hand he the letter and tell he your tale . most grateful will he be for your good service , and move by your loyal remembrance . " 

 the swarthy fellow draw from his wallet a letter , heavily seal , and inscribe at great length . he place it in Mora 's hand . 

 her clear eye dwelt upon his countenance with search interest . it be wonderful to she to see before she a man whose life Hugh have save , so far away , on an eastern battle - field . 

 " in my husband 's name , I thank you , Friend , " she say . " and now my people will put before you food and wine . you must have rest and refreshment before you again set forth . " 

 " I thank you , no , " reply the stranger . " I must ride on , without delay . I bid you farewell , Lady ; and I do but wish the service , which a strange chance have enable I to render to the Knight , have be of great importance and have hold more of risk or danger . " 

 he bow low , and depart . a few moment later he be rid out at the gate , and make for the northward road . 

 have Brother Philip chance to be at hand , he could not have fail to note that the swarthy stranger be mount upon the fast nag in the Bishop 's stable . 

 for a life of lawlessness , rapine , and robbery , do not debar a man from keep an oath swear , out of honest gratitude , in clean , well day . 

 leave alone , Mora pass on to the terrace and , in the clear light , examine this soiled and much inscribed missive . 

 to her amazement she recognise the well - know script of Symon , Bishop of Worcester . how many a letter have reach her hand address in these neat character . 

 yet Hugh have leave she , and go upon this ride of many day to Worcester in order to see the Bishop , because he have receive a letter tell he , without sufficient detail , a matter of importance . probably the letter she now hold in her hand should have reach he first . Doubtless have he receive it , he need not have go . 

 ponder this matter , and almost unconscious that she do so , Mora break the seal . then pause , even as she begin to unfold the parchment , question whether to read it or to let it await Hugh 's return . 

 but not long do she hesitate . it be upon a matter which closely concern she . that much Hugh have admit . it might be imperative to take immediate action concern this first letter , which by so strange a mishap have arrive after the other . unless she master its content , she could not act . 

 ascend the turret stairway , Mora step again on to the battlement . 

 the golden rampart in the west have fade ; but a blood - red banner still float above the horizon . the sky overhead be clear . 

 sit upon the seat on which she have sit while tell Hugh of old Mary Antony 's most blessed and wondrous vision , Mora unfold and read the Bishop 's letter . 

 CHAPTER XLIX 

 twice deceive 

 the blood - red banner have droop , dip , and vanish . 

 the sky overhead have deepen to purple , and open starry eye upon the world beneath . each time the silent woman , alone upon the battlement , lift a sorrowful face to the heaven , yet another bright eye seem to spring wide and gaze down upon she . 

 at length the whole expanse of the sky be stud with star ; the planet hang luminous ; the moon , already wan , rise large and golden from behind the fir , grow small and more silvery as she mount higher . 

 Mora cover her face with her hand . the summer night be too full of scented sweetness . the star sing together . the moon ride triumphant in the heaven . in this her hour of darkness she must shut out the brilliant sky . she let her face sink into her hand , and bow her head upon her knee . 

 blow after blow have fall upon she from the Bishop 's letter . 

 first that the Bishop himself be plot to deceive she , and seem to take Hugh 's connivance for grant . 

 then that she have be hoodwink by old Mary Antony , on the evening of Hugh 's intrusion into the Nunnery ; that this hoodwinking be know to the Bishop , and appear but to cause he satisfaction , temper by a faint amusement . 

 then the overwhelming news that Mary Antony 's vision have be an imposition , devise and contrive by the almost uncannily shrewd wit of the old woman ; and that the Bishop advise the Knight to praise heaven for those wit , and to beware lest any chance word of his should lead her Mora to doubt the genuineness of the vision , and to realise that she have be hocus , hoodwink , outwit ! in fact the Bishop and her husband be to become , and to continue indefinitely , party to old Antony 's deception . 

 she now understand the full significance of the half - humorous , half - sceptical attitude adopt by the Bishop , when she recount to he the history of the vision . no wonder he have call Mary Antony a " most wise and prudent babe . " 

 but even as her anger rise , not only against the Bishop , but against the old woman she have love and trust and who have so deceive she , she come upon the news of the death of the aged lay - sister and the account of her devoted fidelity , even to the end . 

 Mary Antony living , be often a pathetic figure ; Mary Antony dead , disarm anger . 

 and , after all , the old lay - sister and her spurious vision fade into insignificance in view of the one supreme question : what course would Hugh take ? would he keep silence and thus tacitly become a party to the deception ; or would he , at all cost , tell she the truth ? 

 it be evidence of the change her love have work in she , that this one point be so paramount , that until it be settle , she could not bring herself to contemplate other issue . 

 she remember , with hopeful comfort , his scrupulous honesty in the matter of Father Gervaise . yet wherefore have he go to consult with the Bishop unless he intend to fall in with the Bishop 's suggestion ? 

 not until she at last seek her chamber and knelt before the shrine of the Madonna , do she realise that her justification in leave the Convent be go , if there have be no vision . 

 " Blessed Virgin , " she plead , with clasped hand uplifted ; " I , who have be twice deceive trick into enter the Cloister , and trick into leave it I beseech thee , by the sword which pierce through thine own soul also , grant I now a vision which shall be , in very deed , a vision of truth . " 

 CHAPTER L 

 the SILVER SHIELD 

 the Bishop sit at the round table in the centre of the banqueting hall , sip water from his purple goblet while the Knight din . 

 they be not alone . Lay - brethren , with sandalled foot , move noiselessly to and fro ; and Brother Philip stand immovable behind the Reverend Father 's chair . 

 the Bishop discourse pleasantly of many thing , watch Hugh the while , and bless the efficacy of the bath . it have , undoubtedly , cleanse away much beside travel - stain . 

 the thunder - cloud have lift from the Knight 's brow ; his eye , though tired , be no long sombre ; his manner be more than usually courteous and deferential , as if to atone for the defiant brusquerie of his first appearance . 

 he listen in absolute silence to the Bishop 's gentle flow of conversation ; but this be a trait the Bishop have observe in he before ; and , after all , a lapse into silence could be easily understand when a man have travel far , on meagre fare , and find himself seat at a well - spread board . 

 yet the Knight eat but sparingly of the good cheer , so lavishly provide ; and the famous italian wine , he scarce touch at all . 

 the meal over , the Bishop dismiss Brother Philip and the attendant monk , and , rise , go to his chair near the hearth , motion the Knight to the one opposite . 

 thus they find themselves seat again as they have sit on the night of the arrival of the Pope 's messenger ; save that now no fire burn upon the hearth ; no candle be light on the table . instead , the summer sunshine pour in through open casement . 

 " well , my dear Hugh , " say the Bishop , ' suppose you now tell I the reason which bring you hither . it must surely be a matter of grave importance which could cause so devoted a lover and husband to leave his bride , and go a five day ' journey from she , within two week of the bridal day . " 

 " I have come , my lord , " say the Knight , speak slowly and with evident effort , " to learn from your lip the entire truth concern that vision which cause the Prioress of the White Ladies to hold herself free to renounce her vow , leave her Nunnery , and give herself in marriage where she have be betroth before enter the Cloister . " 

 " Tut ! " say the Bishop . " the White Ladies have no prioress . Mother Sub - Prioress doth exercise the function of that office until such time as the Prior and myself shall make a fresh appointment . we be not here to talk of prioress , my son , but of that most noble and gracious lady who , by the blessing of God and our Lady 's especial favour , be now your wife . see to it that you continue to deserve your great good fortune . " 

 the Knight make no protest at the mention of our Lady ; but his left hand move to the medallion hang by a gold chain from his neck , cover it and clasp it firmly . 

 the Bishop pause ; but find that the Knight have relapse into silence , continue : 

 " so you wish the entire history of the inspire devotion of the old lay - sister , Mary Antony may God rest her soul . " both man cross themselves devoutly , as the Bishop name the Dead . " shall I give it you now , my son , or will you wait until the morrow , when a good night 's rest shall fit you well to enjoy the recital ? " 

 " my lord , " say Hugh , " ere this sun set , I hope to be many mile on my homeward way . " 

 " in that case , " say the Bishop , " I must tell you this moving story , without further delay . " 

 so , begin with her custom of count the White Ladies by mean of the dry pea , the Bishop give the Knight the whole history of Mary Antony 's share in the happening in the Nunnery on the day of his intrusion , and those which follow ; lay especial stress on her devotion to Mora , and her constant prayer to our Lady to sharpen her old wit . 

 the Bishop have undoubtedly intend to introduce into the recital somewhat more of mysticism and sublimity than the actual fact warrant . but once launch thereon , his sense of humour could not be deny its full enjoyment in this first telling of the entire tale . full justice he do to the pathos , but he also shake with mirth over the ludicrous . as he quote Mary Antony , the old lay - sister 's odd manner and movement could be see ; her mumbling lip , and cunning wink . and here be Mother Sub - Prioress , ferret - faced and peer ; and here Sister Mary Rebecca , long - nosed , flat - footed , eager to scent out and denounce wrong doing . and at last the Bishop tell of his talk with Mora in the arbour of golden rose ; and lo , there be Mora , devout , adoring , wholly believe . " Thou hast hide these thing from the wise and prudent and hast reveal they unto babe " ; and here , the Bishop himself , half amuse , half incredulous : " an ancient babe ! truly , a most wise and prudent babe . " then the scene outside the prioress 's cell when the Bishop unlock the door ; the full confession and the touching death of old Mary Antony . 

 to it all the Knight listen silently , shade his face with his right hand . 

 " therefore , my son , " conclude Symon of Worcester , " when on a sudden I remember our conversation on the lawn , and that I have tell you of my belief that the old lay - sister know of your visit to the Convent and have see you in Mora 's cell , I hasten to send you a warning , lest you should , unwittingly , mention this fact to Mora , and raise a doubt in her mind concern the genuineness of the vision , thus destroy her peace , and threaten her happiness and your own . hath she already tell you of the vision ? " 

 still shield his face the Knight speak , very low : 

 " the evening before the messenger arrive , bring your letter , my lord , Mora tell I of the vision . " 

 " say you aught concern my word to you ? " 

 " so soon as she mention the name of Mary Antony , I say that I seem to recall that you , my lord , have tell I she alone know of my visit to the Convent . but Mora at once say nay , that it be she herself who have tell I so , even while I stand undiscovered in her cell ; but that afterward the lay - sister have confess herself mistaken . this seem to I to explain the matter , therefore I say no more ; nor do I , for a moment , doubt the truth and wonder of the vision . " 

 " for that , the saint be praise , " say the Bishop . " then no harm be do . you and I , alone , know the entire story ; and you and I , who would safeguard Mora 's happiness with our life , must see to it that she never have cause for misgiving . " 

 Hugh d'Argent lift his head , and look full at the Bishop . 

 " my lord , " he say , " have there be no vision , no message from our Lady , no placing by she of Mora 's hand in mine , think you she would have leave the Nunnery and come to I ? " 

 " Nay , dear lad , that I know she would not . on that very morning , as I tell you , she set her foot upon the Pope 's mandate , and would accept no absolving from her vow . Naught would suffice , say she , but a direct vision and revelation from our Lady herself . " 

 " but , " say the Knight , slowly , " be there a vision , my lord ? be there a revelation ? be there a speak message or a give sign ? " 

 the Bishop meet the earnest eye , full of a deep searching . he stir uneasily ; then smile , wave a deprecatory hand . 

 " between ourselves , my dear Hugh though even so , it be not well to be too explicit between ourselves of course nothing well miraculous happen , beyond the fact that our Lady most certainly sharpen the wit of old Antony . therefore be it , that you undoubtedly owe your wife to those same wit , and may praise our Lady for sharpen they . " 

 then it be that the Knight rise to his foot . 

 " and I refuse , " he say , " to owe my wife to sacrilege , fraud , and falsehood . " 

 the Bishop lean forward , grip with both hand the arm of his chair . his face be absolutely colourless ; but his eye , like blue steel , seem to transfix the Knight , who could not withdraw his regard from those keen point of light . 

 the Bishop 's whisper , when at length he speak , be more alarming than if he have shout . 

 " Fool ! " he say . " ungrateful , unspeakable fool ! what mean you by such word ? " 

 " call I fool if you will , my Lord Bishop , " say the Knight , ' so long as I give not mine own conscience cause to call I knave . " 

 " what mean you by such word ? " persist the Bishop . " I mean , my lord , that if the truth open out an abyss which plunge I into hell , I would soon know it than attempt to enter Paradise across the flimsy fabric of a lie . " 

 now during many day , Symon of Worcester have work incessantly , suffer much , accomplish much , surrender much , lose much . perhaps it be hardly to be wonder at , that , at this juncture , he lose his temper . 

 " by Saint Peter 's key ! " he cry , " I care not , Sir Knight , whether you drop to hell or climb to Paradise . but it be my business to see to it that you do not disturb the peace of mind of the woman you have we d. therefore I warn you , that if you ride from here set upon so do , you will not reach your destination alive . " 

 the Knight smile . the film of weariness lift as if by magic from his eye , and they shine bright and serene . 

 " I can not draw my sword upon threat , my Lord Bishop ; but let those threat take human shape , and by Saint George , I shall find pleasure in render a good account of they . with this same sword I once do hew my way through a score of Saracens . think you a dozen Worcester cut - throat could keep I from reach my wife ? " 

 something in the tone with which the Knight speak these final word calm the Bishop ; something in the glance of his eye quell the angry Prelate . in the former he recognise a depth of love such as he have not hitherto believe possible to Hugh d'Argent ; in the latter , calm courage , nay , a serene joy at the prospect of danger , against which his threat and fury could but break themselves , even as stormy wave against the granite rock of the Cornish coast . 

 the Bishop possess that somewhat rare though valuable faculty , the ability to recognise instantly , and instantly to accept , the inevitable . also when he have make a false move , he know it , and be prepare to counteract it almost before his opponent have perceive the mistake . 

 so rarely be the Bishop angry , that his anger now affect he physically , with a sickening sense of faintness . with closed eye , he lean his head against the back of the chair . his face , always white and delicate , now appear as if carve in ivory . his lip fall apart , but no breath issue from they . except for a slight twitching of the eyelid , the Bishop 's countenance be lifeless . 

 startled and greatly alarmed , Hugh look around for some mean whereby he might summon help , but could see none . 

 hasten to the table , he pour wine into the venetian goblet , bring it back , and moisten the Bishop 's lip . then kneel on one knee loose the cold finger from their grip . 

 presently the Bishop open his eye no long point of blue steel , but soft and dreamy like a mist of bluebell on distant hill . he look , with unseee gaze , into the anxious face on a level with his own ; then turn his eye slowly upon the ruby goblet which the Knight have lift from the floor and be try to hold to his lip . 

 wave it away , the Bishop slip the finger and thumb of his left hand into his sash , and draw out a small gold box of exquisite workmanship , set with emerald . 

 at this he gaze for some time , as if uncertain what to do with it ; then touch a spring and as the lid fly open , sit up and take from the box a tiny white tablet . this he drop into the wine . 

 the Knight , watch with anxious eye , see it rapidly dissolve as it sink to the bottom . 

 but all consciousness of the tablet , the wine , or the kneeling Knight , appear to have instantly fade from the Bishop 's mind . he lie back gaze dreamily at a banner which , for no apparent reason , stir and waft to and fro , as it hang from an oaken beam , high up among the rafter . 

 " wherefore doth it waft ? " murmur the Bishop , thereby add greatly to the Knight 's alarm . " wherefore ? wherefore ? wherefore doth it waft ? " 

 " drink this , Reverend Father , " urge the Knight . " I implore you , my dear lord , raise yourself and drink . " 

 " methink there must be a draught , " muse the Bishop . 

 " yea , truly , " say the Knight , " of your famous italian wine . Father , I pray you drink . " 

 " among the rafter , " say the Bishop . but he sit up , take the goblet from the Knight 's hand , and slowly sip its content . 

 almost at once , a faint tinge of colour shewed in his cheek and on his lip ; his eye grow bright . he smile at the Knight , as he place the empty goblet on the table beside he . 

 " ah , my dear Hugh , " he say , extend his hand ; " it be good to find you here . let we continue our conversation , if you be sufficiently rest and refresh . I have much to say to you . " 

 in the reaction of a great relief , Hugh d'Argent seize the extended hand and fervently kiss the Bishop 's ring . 

 it be the reverent homage of a loyal heart . Symon of Worcester , as with a Benedicite he graciously acknowledge it , suffer a slight twinge of conscience ; almost as unusual an experience as the ebullition of temper . he take up the conversation exactly at that point to which it well suit he to return , namely , there where he have make the first false step . 

 " therefore , my dear Hugh , I have now give you in detail the true history of the vision , make it clear that we owe it , alas ! to earthly devotion , rather than to Divine interposition though indeed the one may well be the mean use by the other . it remain for we to consider , and to decide upon , the good line to take with Mora in order to safeguard most surely her peace of mind , and permanently to secure her happiness . " 

 " I have consider , Reverend Father , " say the Knight , simply ; " and I have decide . " 

 " what have you decide to do , my son ? " question Symon of Worcester , in his smooth tone . 

 " to make know to Mora , so soon as I return , the entire truth . " 

 the Bishop cast his eye upward , to see whether the banner still wave . 

 it do . 

 undoubtedly there must be a current of air among the rafter . 

 " and what effect do you suppose such a communication will have , my son , upon the mind of your wife ? " 

 " I be not call to face supposition , Reverend Father ; I be simply confront by fact . " 

 " precisely , my son , precisely , " reply the Bishop , press his finger - tip together , and raise they to his lip . " yet even while deal with cause , it be well sometimes to consider effect , lest they take we wholly unawares . do you realise that , as your wife feel justify in leave the Nunnery and wedding you , solely by reason of our Lady 's miraculously accord permission , when she learn that that permission be not miraculous , she will cease to feel justified ? " 

 " I greatly fear it , " say the Knight . 

 " do you yourself now consider that she be not justify ? " 

 " Nay ! " answer the Knight , with sudden vehemence . " always , since I learn how we have be trick by her sister , I have hold she to be rightfully mine . Heaven know , when she make she vow , that I be faithful , and she therefore still my betrothed . Heaven allow I to discover the truth , and to find her alive , and still unwe . to my thinking , no divine pronouncement be require ; and when the Holy Father 's mandate arrive bring the Church 's sanction , why then indeed naught seem to stand between we . but Mora think otherwise . " 

 a tiny gleam come into the Bishop 's eye ; an exceedingly refine edition of the look of cunning which use to peep out of old Mary Antony 's . 

 " have you ever hear tell , my son , that two negative make an affirmative ? think you not that , in something the same way , two deception may make a truth . Mora be deceive into enter the convent , and deceive into leave it ; but from out that double deception arise the great truth that she have , in the sight of Heaven , be all along your . the first deception negative the second , and the positive fact alone remain that Mora be wed to you , be yours to guard and shield from sorrow ; and those whom God hath join together , let no man put asunder . " 

 Hugh d'Argent pass his hand across his brow . 

 " I trust the matter may appear thus to Mora , " he say . 

 the banner still waft , gently . the Bishop give himself time to ponder whence that draught could come . 

 then : " it will not so appear , " he say . " my good Hugh , when your wife learn from you that she be trick by Mary Antony , she will go back in mind to where she be before the spurious vision , and will feel herself to be still prioress of the White Ladies . " 

 " I have so feel she , since the knowledge reach I , " agree the Knight . 

 the efficacy of the soothe drug take by the Bishop be strained to its utmost . 

 " and what then do you propose to do , my son , with this wed prioress ? do you expect she to remain with you in your home , content to fulfil her wifely duty ? " 

 " I fear , " say the Knight sadly , " that she will leave I . " 

 " and I be certain she will leave you , " say the Bishop . 

 " it be largely this fear for the future which bring I at once to you , my lord . if Mora desire , as you say , to consider herself as she be , before she be trick into leave the convent , will you arrange that she shall return , unquestione , to her place as Prioress of the White Ladies of Worcester ? " 

 " impossible ! " say the Bishop , shortly . " it be too late . we can have no Madonna group in Nunneries , save those carven in marble or stone . " 

 to which there follow a silence , last many minute . 

 then the Knight say , with effort , speak very low : " it be not too late . " 

 instantly the keen eye be search his face . a line of crimson leapt to the Bishop 's cheek , as if a whip - lash have be draw across it . 

 presently : " Fool ! " he whisper , but the word savour more of pity tenderness than of scorn . alas ! be there ever so knightly a fool , or so foolish a knight ! " what be the trouble , boy ? Didst find that after all she love thee not ? " 

 " Nay , " say Hugh , quickly , " I thank God , and our Lady , that my wife love I as I never dream that such as I could be love by one so perfect in all way as she . but at first all be so new and strange to she . it be wonder enough to be out in the world once more , free to come and go ; to ride abroad , look on man and thing . I put her welfare first . . . . Nay , it be easy , love she as I love , also greatly desire the high and the good . Father , I want what you speak of as the Madonna in the home . therefore ' twa I who make the plan we agree that , the wedding having of necessity be so hurried , the courtship should follow , and we would count ourselves but betroth , even after reach Castle Norelle , for just so many day or week as she should please ; until such time as she herself should tell I she be wishful that I should take her home . but each day of the ride northward have be more perfect than that which go before ; each hour of each day , sweet than the preceding . thus it come to pass that on the very evening of our arrival at Mora 's home , after part for the night at the door of her chamber , we meet again on the battlement , where year before we have say farewell ; and there , seat in the moonlight , she tell I the wonder of our Lady 's grace in the vision ; and , afterwards , in word of perfect tenderness , the even great wonder of her love , and that she be ready on the morrow to ride home with I . so we part in a rapture so deep and pure , that sleep come , for very joy of it . but early in the morning I be waken by a rapping at my door , and there stand Brother Philip , hold your letter , Reverend Father . " 

 " alas ! " say the Bishop . " would that I have know she would have whereby to explain away thy memory of that which I have say . " 

 yet the Bishop speak perfunctorily ; he speak as one who , even while speak , mus upon other matter . for , within his secret soul , he be fight the hard temptation yet face by he , in the whole history of his love for Mora . 

 by rapid transition of mind , he be back on the seat in the garden of the White Ladies ' Nunnery , leave there by Mary Antony while she go to fetch the Reverend Mother . he be look up the sunny lawn toward the cloister , from out the shade of the great beech tree . presently he see the prioress come , tall and stately , her cross of office gleam upon her breast , her sweet eye alight with welcome . and at once they be talk as they always talk together he and she each word alive with its very full meaning ; each think spring to meet the thought which match it . 

 next he see himself again on that same seat , look up the lawn to the sunlit cloister ; realise that never again would the Prioress come to greet he ; face for the first time the utter loneliness , the irreparable loss to himself , of that which he have accomplish for Hugh and Mora . 

 the Bishop 's immeasurable loss have be Hugh 's infinite gain . and now that Hugh seem bent upon risk his happiness , the position be reverse . would not his loss , if he persist , be the Bishop 's gain ? 

 how easy to meet she on the road , a few mile from Worcester ; to proceed , with much pomp and splendour , to the White Ladies ' Nunnery ; to bid they throw wide the great gate ; to ride in and , then and there , reinstate Mora as Prioress , announce that the high service upon which the Holy Father have send she have be duly accomplish . picture the joy in the bereaved community ! but , above and beyond all , picture what it would mean to have she there again ; to see she , speak with she , sit with she , when he would . no more loneliness of soul , no more desolation of spirit ; and Mora 's conscience at rest ; her mind content . 

 but at that , be that it concern the woman he love , the true soul of he speak up , while his imaginative reason fall silent . 

 never again could the woman who have tell Hugh d'Argent , in word of perfect tenderness , the wonder of her love , and that she be ready on the morrow to ride home with he , be content in the calm of the Cloister . 

 if Hugh persist in this folly of frankness and disturb her peace , she might leave he . 

 if the Bishop make the way easy , she might return to the Nunnery . 

 but all the true life of she would be leave behind with her lover . 

 she would bring to the Cloister a lacerated conscience , and a broken heart . 

 surely the two man who love she , if they thrust away all thought of self , and think only of she , could save she this anguish . 

 at once the Bishop resolve to do his part . 

 " my dear hugh , " he say , " you do well to come to I in order to consult over these plan before take the irrevocable step which should set they in motion . I , alone , could reinstate your wife as Prioress of the White Ladies ; moreover my continued presence here would be essential , to secure her comfort in that reinstatement . and I shall not be here . I be shortly leave Worcester , leave this land and return to my beauteous Italy . the Holy Father have be pleased to tell I privately of high preferment shortly to be offer I . I have to - day decide to accept it . I return to Italy a Cardinal of Holy Church . " 

 Hugh rise to his foot and bow . an immense scorn blaze in his eye . 

 " my Lord High Cardinal , I congratulate you ! that a cardinal 's hat should tempt you from your cathedral , from this noble english city , from your people who love you , from the land of your birth , may perhaps be understand . but that , for the sake of Church preferment , however high , you should willingly depart , leave Mora in sorrow , Mora in difficulty , Mora need your help " 

 the Knight pause , amazed . the Bishop , who seldom laugh aloud , be laugh . yet no ! the Bishop , who never weep , seem near to weeping . 

 the scale fall from Hugh 's eye , even before the Bishop speak . he realise a love as great as his own . 

 " ah , foolish lad ! " say Symon of Worcester ; " bent upon thine own way , and easy to deceive . when I speak of go , I say it for her sake , hop the prospect of my absence might hold you from your purpose . but now truly be I convince that you be bent upon risk your own happiness , and imperille her . therefore will I devise some mean of detain the Holy Father 's messenger , so that my answer need not be give until two week be past . you will reach Mora , at long , five day from this . as soon as she decide what she will do , send word to I by a fast messenger . should she elect to return to the Nunnery , state when and where , upon the road , I be to meet she . her habit as prioress , and her cross of office , I have here . the former you return to I , from the hostel ; the latter I find in her cell . you must take they with you . if she return , she must return fully rob . if , on the other hand , she should decide to remain with you ; if as may God grant she be content , and require no help from I , send I this news by messenger . I can then betake myself to that fair land to which I first go for her sake ; leave for her sake , and to which I shall most gladly return , if her need of I be over . the time I state allow a four day ' margin for vacillation . " 

 " my lord , " say the Knight , humbly , " forgive the wrong I do you . 
 forgive that I take in earnest that which you mean in jest ; or rather , 
 I do truly think , that which you hop would turn I from my purpose . 
 alas , I would indeed that I might rightly be turn therefrom . " 
 " Hugh , " say the Bishop , eagerly , " you deem she justify in come to you , apart from any vision . " 

 " true , " reply the Knight , " but I can not feel justified in take she , and all she would give I , know she give it , with a free heart , because of her faith in the vision . moment of pure joy would be cloud by my secret shame . be aware of the deception , I too should be deceive she ; I , whom she love and trust . " 

 " to withhold a truth be not to lie , " assert the Bishop . 

 " my lord , " reply Hugh d'Argent , rise to his foot and stand erect , his hand upon his sword , " I can not reason of these thing ; I can not define the difference between withhold a truth and state a lie . but when mine Honour sound a challenge , I hear ; and I ride out to do battle against myself , if need be ; or , if it must so be , against another . on Eastern battle - field , in Holy War , I win a name know throughout all the camp , know also to the enemy : ' the Knight of the Silver Shield . ' our name be Argent , and we ever have the right to carry a pure silver shield . but I win the name because my shield be always bright ; because not once in battle do it fall in the dust ; because it never be allow to tarnish . so bright it be , that as I ride , bear it before I , reflect the ray of the sun , it dazzle and blind the enemy . my lord , I can not tarnish my silver shield by connive at falsehood , or keep silence when mine Honour bid I speak . " 

 look at the gallant figure before he , the Bishop 's soul respond to the noble word , and he long to praise they and applaud . but he think of Mora 's peace of mind , Mora 's awakened heart and dawn happiness . for her sake he must make a final stand . 

 " my dear hugh , " he say , " all this talk , of a silver shield and of the challenge of honour , be well enough for the warrior on the battle - field . but the lover have to learn the hard lesson ; he have to give up Self , even the self which hold honour dear . when you polish your silver shield , keep it so bright , what see you reflect therein ? why , your own proud face . even so , now , you fear the faint tarnish on your sense of honour , but you will keep that silver shield bright at Mora 's expense , rid on proudly alone in your glory , reflect the sun , dazzle all beholder , while your wife who love and trust you , Mora , who tell you the sweet wonder of her love in word of deep tenderness , lie desolate in the dark , with a shattered life , and a broken heart . hugh , I would have you think of the treasure of her golden heart , rather than of the brightness of your own selfish , silver shield . " 

 " selfish ! " cry the Knight . " selfish ! be it selfish to hold honour dear ? be it selfish to be ashamed to deceive the woman one love ? have I , who have so striven in all thing to put her welfare first , be selfish towards my wife in this hour of crisis ? " 

 he sit down , heavily ; lean his elbow on his knee , and drop his head into his hand . 

 this attitude of utter dejection fill the Bishop with thankfulness . be he , in the very moment when he have give up all hope of win , about to prove the victor ? 

 " perilously selfish , my dear Hugh , " he say . " but , thank Heaven , no harm have yet be do . listen to I and I will shew you how you may keep your honour safely untarnishe , yet withhold from Mora all knowledge which might cause her disquietude of mind , thus secure her happiness and your own . " 

 CHAPTER LI 

 two NOBLE HEARTS GO different way 

 on that same afternoon , an hour before sunset , the two man who love 
 Mora face one another , for a final farewell . 
 the Bishop have say all he have to say . without interruption , his word have flow steadily on ; eloquent , logical , conciliatory , persuasive . 

 at first he have talk to the top of the Knight 's head , to the clench hand , to the arm outstretche across the table . 

 he have wonder what thought be at work beneath the crisp thickness of that dark hair . he have wish the rigid attitude of tense despair might somewhat relax . he have use the most tell inflexion of his persuasive voice in order to bring this about , but without success . he have wish the Knight would break silence , even to rage or to disagree . to that end he have cast as a bait an intentional slip in a statement of fact ; and , later on , a palpable false deduction in a weighty argument . but the Knight have not rise to either . 

 after a while Hugh have lift his head , and lean back in his chair ; fix his eye , in his turn , upon the banner hang from the rafter . 

 it have cease to wave gently to and fro . probably Father Benedict have close the trap - door , conceal behind an upright beam , through which he be will not to peer down into the banqueting hall below , in order to satisfy himself that all be well and that the Reverend Father need naught . 

 let it be here record that this exceed vigilance , on the part of Father Benedict , meet with but scant reward . for , have deduce a draught , and its reason , from the slight stirring of the banner during his conversation with the Knight , the Bishop give certain secret instruction to Brother Philip , with the result that the next time the Chaplain peer down upon a private conference he find , at its close , the door by which he have gain access to the roof chamber bar on the outside , and , force it , he be in no well case , the ladder which connect it with another disuse chamber below have be remove . thereafter Father Benedict watch the Bishop , and his guest , partake of three meal , before he could bring himself to make known his predicament , and beg to be release . and , even then , the Bishop be amazingly slow in locate the place from which issue the agitated voice implore assistance . several brother be summon to help ; so that quite a little crowd stand gaze up at the pallid countenance of Father Benedict , frame in the trap - door as , lie upon his very empty stomach , he call down reply to the Bishop 's question ; vainly strive to give a plausible reason for the peculiar situation in which he be discover . 

 but , to return to the interview which bring about this later development . 

 the Knight have lift his head , yet have still remain silent and impassive . 

 where at length the Bishop have pause , await comment of some kind , 
 Hugh d'Argent , remove his eye from the rafter , have ask : 
 " when , my lord , do you propose to meet the prioress , should my wife , upon learn the truth , elect to return to the Nunnery ? " 

 thus have the Bishop be force to realise that the flow of his eloquence , the ripple of his humour , the strong current of his argument , the gentle lapping of his tenderness , the breaker of his threat , and the thunderous billow of his denunciation , have alike expend themselves against the rock of the Knight 's unshakable resolve , and leave it stand . 

 Whereupon , in silence , the Bishop have rise , and have lead the way to the library . 

 here they now face one another in final farewell . 

 each know that his loss would be the other 's gain ; his gain , the other 's irreparable loss . 

 yet , at that moment , each think only of Mora 's peace of soul . they do but differ in their conception of the way in which that peace might well be preserve and maintain . 

 " I must take her cross of office , my Lord Bishop , " say the Knight , with decision . 

 the Bishop go to a chest , stand in one corner of the room , open it , and bent over it , his back to Hugh d'Argent ; then , slip his hand into his bosom draw therefrom a cross of gold gleam with emerald . shut down the massive lid of the chest , he return , and place the cross in the outstretched hand of the Knight . 

 " I entrust it to you , my dear Hugh , only on one condition : that it shall without fail return to I in two week ' time . should you decide to tell your wife the true history of the vision , I must see this cross of office upon her breast when I meet her rid back to Worcester , once more Prioress of the White Ladies . if , on the other hand , wise counsel prevail , and you decide not to tell she , you must , by swift messenger , at once return it to I in a seal packet . " 

 " I shall tell she , " say the Knight . " if she elect to leave I , you will see the cross upon her breast , my lord . if she elect to stay , you shall receive it by swift messenger . " 

 " she will leave you , " say the Bishop . " if you tell she , she will leave you . " 

 " she love I , " say the Knight ; and he say it with a tender reverence , and such a look upon his face , as a man wear when he speak of his faith in God . 

 " Hugh , " say the Bishop , sadly ; " Hugh , my dear lad , you have but little experience of the heart of a nun . the more she love , the more determined will she be to leave you , if you yourself give her reason to think her love unjustified . the very thing which be now a cause of bliss will instantly become a cause for fear . she will flee from joy , as all pure heart flee from sin ; because , owe to your folly , her joy will seem to she to be sinful . my son ! " the Bishop stretch out his hand ; a passion of appeal be in his voice " God and Holy Church have give you your wife . if you tell she this thing , you will lose she . " 

 " I must take with I the dress she leave behind , " say the Knight , ' so that , should she decide to go , she may ride back fully rob . " 

 the Bishop go again to the chest , raise the heavy lid , and lift out the white garment roll together . at sight of they both man fall silent , as in presence of the dead ; and the Knight feel his heart grow cold with apprehension , as he receive they from the Bishop 's hand . 

 they pass together through the doorway lead to the river terrace , and so down the lawn , under the arch , and into the courtyard . 

 there Brother Philip wait , mount , while another lay - brother hold the Knight 's horse . 

 as they come in sight of the horse : " Philip will see you a few mile on your way , " say the Bishop . 

 " I thank you , Father , " reply the Knight , " but it be not needful . the good Brother have have many long day in the saddle . " 

 " it be most needful , " say the Bishop . " let Philip ride beside you until you have pass through the Monk 's Wood , and be well on to the open ground beyond . there , if you will , you may bid he turn back . " 

 " be this to ensure the safety of the Worcester cut - throat , my lord ? " 

 the Bishop smile . 

 " possibly , " he say . " Saracens may be hew in piece , with impunity . but we can not allow our Worcester lad rashly to ride to such a fate . also , my dear Hugh , you carry thing of so great value that we must not risk a scuffle . these be troublous time , and danger lurk around the city . three mile from here you may dismiss Brother Philip , and ride forward alone . " 

 arrive at the horse , the Knight put away safely , that which he carry , into his saddle - bag . then he drop on one knee , bar his head for the Bishop 's blessing . 

 Symon of Worcester give it . then , bending , add in low tone : " and may God and the bless saint aid thee to a right judgment in all thing . " 

 " amen , " say Hugh d'Argent , and kiss the Bishop 's ring . 

 then he mount ; and , without one backward look , ride out through the 
 Palace gate , closely follow by Brother Philip . 
 CHAPTER LII 

 the ANGEL - child 

 Symon of Worcester turn , walk slowly across the courtyard , make his way to the parapet above the river , and stand long , with bent head , watch the rapid flow of the Severn . 

 his eye rest upon the very place where the Knight have cleave the 
 water in his impulsive dive after the white stone , make , by the 
 Bishop 's own word , to stand to he for his chance of win the 
 prioress . 
 yet should that sudden leap be describe as " impulsive " ? the Bishop , ever a stickler for accuracy in descriptive word , consider this . 

 Nay , not so much " impulsive " as " prompt . " even as the warrior who , have test his trusty sword , know its readiness in the scabbard and the strength of his own right arm , draw , on the instant , when surprise by the enemy . prompt , not impulsive . a swift action , base upon an assured certainty of power , and a steadfast determination , of long standing , to win at all cost . 

 the Bishop 's hand rest upon the parapet . the stone in his ring hold neither blue nor purple light . its colour have pal and fade . it shine as the Prioress have once see it shine like a large tear - drop on the Bishop 's finger . 

 Deep dejection be in the Bishop 's attitude . with the riding away of the Knight , something strong and vital seem to have pass out of his life . 

 a sense of failure oppress he . he have not succeed in bend Hugh d'Argent to his will , neither have he rise to a frank appreciation of the loyal chivalry which would not enjoy happiness at the expense of honour . 

 while his mind refuse to accept the Knight 's code , his soul yearn to rise up and acclaim it . 

 yet , work to the last for Mora 's peace of mind , he have maintain his tone of scornful disapproval . 

 he would never again have the chance to cry " hail ! " to the Silver Shield . the deft finger of his sophistry have strive to loosen the Knight 's shin armour . how far they have succeed , the Bishop could not tell . but , as he watch the swiftly move river , he find himself wish that his task have be to strengthen , rather than to weaken ; to gird up and brace , rather than subtly to unbuckle and disarm . yet by so do , would he not have be ensure his own happiness , bring back the joy of life to his own heart , at the expense of the two whom he have give to be each other 's in the name of the Divine Trinity ? 

 if Hugh persist in his folly , he would lose his bride , yet would the Bishop meet and reinstate the Prioress with a clear conscience , have strive to the very last to dissuade the Knight . 

 if , on the other hand , Hugh , grow wise as he ride northward , decide to keep silence , why then the sunny land he love , and the Cardinal 's office , for Symon , Bishop of Worcester . 

 but meanwhile , two week of uncertainty ; and the Bishop could not abide uncertainty . 

 he turn from the river and begin to pace the lawn slowly from end to end , his head bent , his hand clasp behind he . 

 each time he reach the wall between the garden and the courtyard , he find himself confront by two rose tree , a red and a white , climb so near together that their branch intertwine , crimson bloom rest their rich petal against the fragrant fairness of their white neighbour . 

 presently these rose become symbolic to the Bishop the white , of the fair presence of the prioress ; the red , of the high honour await he in Rome . 

 he be seize by the whimsical idea that , be he to close his eye , beseech the bless Saint Joseph to guide his hand , take three step forward , and pluck the first blossom his finger touch , he might put an end to this tiresome uncertainty . 

 but he smile at the childishness of the fancy . it savour of the old lay - sister , Mary Antony , play with her pea and confide in her robin . moreover the Bishop never do anything with his eye shut . he would have sleep with they open , have not nature decreed otherwise . 

 once again he pace the full length of the lawn , his hand clasp behind his back , his eye look beyond the river to the distant hill . 

 " will she come , or shall I go ? shall I depart , or will she return ? " 

 as he turn at the parapet , a voice seem to whisper with insistence : 
 " a white rise for her pure presence in the Cloister . a red rise for 
 Rome . " 
 and , as he reach the wall again , the bright eye of a little maiden peep at he through the archway . 

 he stand quite still and look at she . 

 never have he see so lovely an elf . a sunbeam have make its home in each lock of her tumbled hair . her little brown face have the soft bloom of a ripe nectarine ; her eye , the timid glance of a startle fawn . 

 the Bishop smile . 

 the bright eye lose their look of fear , and sparkle responsive . 

 the Bishop beckon . 

 the little maid steal through the archway ; then , gain courage fly over the turf , and stand between the Bishop and the rose . 

 " how cam thou here , my little one ? " question Symon of Worcester , in his soft tone . 

 " the big gate stand open , sir , and I run in . " 

 " and what be thy name , my little maid ? " 

 " verity , " whisper the child , shyly , blush to speak her own name . 

 " ah , " murmur the Bishop . " Hath Truth indeed come in at my open gate ? " 

 then , smile into the little face lift so confidingly to his : " dost thou want something , Angel - child , that I can give thee ? " 

 one little bare , brown foot rub itself nervously over the other . 
 five little brown , bare toe wriggle themselves into the grass . 
 " be not afraid , " say the Bishop . " ask what thou wilt and I will give it thee , unto the half of my kingdom . yea , even the head of Father Benedict , in a charger . " 

 " a rose , " say the child , eagerly ignore the proffered head of Father 
 Benedict and half the Bishop 's kingdom . " a rise from that lovely tree ! 
 their pretty face look at I over the wall . " 
 the Bishop 's lip still smile ; but his eye , of a sudden , grow grave . 

 " Blessed Saint Joseph ! " he murmur beneath his breath , and cross himself . 

 then , bend over the little maid , he lay his hand upon the tumbled curl . 

 " truly , my little verity , " he say , " thou shalt gather thyself a rose , and thou shall gather one for I . I leave thee free to make thy choice . see ! I clasp my hand behind I thus . then I shall turn and walk slowly up the lawn . so soon as my back be turn , pluck thou two rose . fly with those little brown foot after I , and place one of the rose whichever thou wilt in my hand . then run home thyself , with the other . farewell , little Angel - child . may the blessing of Bethlehem 's purple hill be ever thine . " 

 the Bishop turn and pace slowly up the lawn , head bent , hand clasp behind he . 

 the small bare foot make no sound on the turf . but before the Bishop be half - way across the lawn , the stem of a rose be thrust between his finger . as they close over it , a gay ripple of laughter sound behind he , fade fleetly into the distance . 

 the Angel - child have make her choice , and have fly with her own rose , leave the Bishop 's destiny in his clasp hand . 

 without pause or look round , he pace onward , gaze for a while at the sparkling water ; then beyond it , to the distant wood through which the Knight be rid . 

 presently he turn , still with his hand behind he , pass to the garden - door , leave stand wide , and enter the library . 

 but not until he kneel before the shrine of Saint Joseph do he move forward his right hand , and bring into view the rose place therein by Verity . 

 it be many year since the Bishop have weep . he have not think ever to weep again . yet , at sight of the rose , pluck for he by the Angel - child , something give way within he , and he fall to weep helplessly . 

 Saint Joseph , bearded and stalwart , seem to look down with compassion upon the bow head with its abundant silvery hair . 

 even thus , it may be , have he himself weep when , after his time of hard mental torture , the Angel of the Lord appear unto he , say : " fear not . " 

 after a while the Bishop leave the shrine , go over to the deed chest , and lay the rose beside the white stone . 

 " there , my dear Hugh , " he murmur ; " thy stone , and my rose . truly they look well together . each represent the triumph of firm resolve . yet mine will shortly fade and pass away ; while thine , dear lad , will abide forever . " 

 the Bishop seat himself at his table , and sound the silver gong . 

 a lay - brother appear . 

 " Benedicite , " say the Bishop . " Request Fra Andrea Filippo at once to come hither . I must have speech with he , without delay . " 

 CHAPTER LIII 

 on the HOLY MOUNT 

 on the ninth day since Hugh 's departure , the day when fast riding might make his return possible before nightfall , Mora rise early . 

 at the hour when she have be will not to ring the Convent bell , she be walk swiftly over the moor and climb the heather - clothe hill . 

 she have remember a little chapel , high up in the mountain , where dwelt a holy Hermit , hold in high repute for his saintliness of life , his wisdom in the giving of spiritual counsel , and his skill in minister to the sick . 

 it have come to Mora , as she pray and ponder during the night , that if she could make full confession to this holy man , he might be able to throw some clear beam of light upon the dark tangle of her perplexity . 

 this hope be strongly with she as she walk . 

 " lighten my darkness ! lead I in a plain path ! " be the cry of her bewildered soul . 

 it seem to she that she have two issue to consider . first : the question as to whether Hugh , guide by the Bishop , would keep silence ; thus make himself a party to her deception . secondly : the position in which she be place by the fact that she have leave the Convent , owe to that deception . but , for the moment the first issue be so infinitely the great , that she find herself thrust the second into the background , allow herself to be conscious of it merely as a question to be face later on , when the all - important point of Hugh 's attitude in the matter should be settle . 

 she walk forward swiftly , one idea alone possess she : that she hasten toward possible help . 

 she do not slacken speed until the chapel come into view , its grey wall glisten in the morning light , a clump of feathery rowan tree beside it ; at its back a mighty rock , fling down in bygone century from the mountain which tower behind it . from a deep cleft in this rock spring a young oak , dip its fresh green to the roof of the chapel ; all around it , in every crack and cranny , parsley fern , hare - bell on delicate , sway stalk , foxglove tall and straight , and glorious bunch of purple heather . 

 nearby be the humble dwelling of the Hermit . the door stand ajar . 

 softly approach , Mora lift her hand , and knock . 

 no voice reply . 

 the sound of her knock do but make evident the presence of a vast solitude . 

 push open the door , she venture to look within . 

 the Hermit 's cell be empty . the remain of a frugal meal lie upon the rough wooden table . also an open breviary , much thumbed and worn . at the further end of the table , a little pile of medicinal herb heap as if shake hastily from the wallet which lie beside they . probably the holy man , even while at an early hour he break his fast , have be call to some sick bedside . 

 Mora turn from the doorway and , shade her eye , scan the landscape . 

 at first she could see only sheep , slowly move from tuft to tuft as they nibble the short grass ; or goat , jump from rock to rock , and suddenly disappear in the high bracken . 

 but soon , on a distant ridge , she perceive two figure and presently make out the brown robe and hood of the Hermit , and a little , barefoot peasant boy , run to keep up with his rapid stride . they vanish over the crest of the hill , and Mora alone in this wild solitude realise that many hour might elapse ere the Hermit return . 

 this check to the fulfilment of her purpose , instead of disappoint she , flood her heart with a sudden sense of relief . 

 the interior of the Hermit 's cell have recall , so vividly , the austerity of the cloistered life . 

 the Hermit 's point of view would probably have be so completely from within . 

 it would have be impossible that he should comprehend the wonder the grow wonder of these day , since she and Hugh ride away from Warwick , culminate in that exquisite hour on the battlement when she have tell he of the vision , whisper her full surrender , and yet he faithful and patient even then have touch she only with his glow eye . 

 how could a holy Hermit , dwell alone among great silent hill , realise the tremendous force of a strong mutual love , the glow , the gladness , the deep , sweet unrest , the call of soul to soul , the throb of heart , fill the purple night with the soft beat of angel ' wing ? 

 how could a holy Hermit understand the shock to Hugh , how fathom the madden torment of suspense , the abyss of hope defer , into which the Bishop 's letter must have plunge he , come so soon after he have say : " I ask no high joy , than to watch the breaking of the day which give thee to my home " ? but the breaking of the day have bring the stern necessity which take he from she . 

 yet why ? how much be in that second letter ? be it less detailed than the first ? have Hugh ride south to learn the entire truth ? or have he ride south to arrange with the Bishop for her complete and permanent deception ? 

 stand on this mountain plateau the morning breeze blow about she , the sun mount triumphant in the heaven " as a bridegroom come out of his chamber , " and all around the scent of heather , the hum of bee , the joyful trill of the soar lark ; her own body bound with life after the swift climb it seem to Mora impossible that Hugh should withstand the temptation to hold to his happiness , at all cost . and how could a saintly Hermit judge he as mercifully as she the woman who love he know that he should be judge ? 

 she feel thankful for the good man 's absence , yet baffle in her need for help . 

 look back toward the humble dwelling , she perceive a rough device of carve lettering on a beam over the doorway . she make out latin word , and go near she , who for year have work so continuously at copying and translating , read they without difficulty . 

 " with HIM , in the HOLY MOUNT , " be inscribe across the doorway of the 
 Hermit 's dwelling . 
 Mora repeat the word , and again repeat they ; and , as she do so there steal over she the sense of an Unseen Presence in this solitude . 

 " with he , in the Holy Mount . " 

 she turn to the chapel . over that doorway also be carven letter . 
 move close , she look up and read they . 
 " and when they had lift up their eyes , they see no MAN , SAVE JESUS only . " 

 Mora open the door and enter the tiny chapel . at first , come in from the outer brightness it seem dark ; but she have leave the door stand wide , and light pour in behind she . 

 then she lift up her eye and see ; and see , understand the meaning of the legend above the entrance . 

 in that little chapel be one figure , and one figure only . no picture saint be there . no image of our Lady . no crucifix hang on the wall . 

 but , in a niche above the altar , stand a wondrous figure of the Christ ; not die , not dead ; not glorify and ascend ; but the Christ as very man , walk the earth in human form , yet calmly , unmistakably , triumphantly Divine . the marble form be carve by the same hand as the Madonna which the Bishop have bring from Rome , and place in Mora 's cell at the Convent . it have be his gift to his old friend the Hermit . at first sight of it , Mora remember hear it describe by the Bishop himself . then the beauty of the sculpture take hold upon she , and she forget all else . 

 it live ! the face wear a look of search tenderness ; on the lip , a smile of love comprehension ; in the out - stretch hand , an attitude of infinite compassion . 

 Mora fall upon her knee . instinctively she recall the earnest injunction of Father Gervaise to his penitent that , when kneeling before the crucifix , they should repeat : " he ever liveth to make intercession for we . " and , strangely enough , there come back with this the remembrance of the wild voice of Mary Seraphine , shrieking , when tell to contemplate the die Redeemer : " I want life not death ! " 

 here be life indeed ! here be the Saviour of the world , in mortal guise , the Word make manifest . 

 Mora lift her eye and read the word , illumine in letter of gold around the arch of the niche , gleam in the sunlight above the patient head of the Man Divine . 

 " in all point tempt like as we be , yet without SIN . " 

 and higher still , above the arch : 

 " a great high priest . . . . PASSED into the HEAVENS . " 

 in the silence and stillness of that utter solitude , she who have so lately be prioress of the White Ladies kneel and worship . 

 the Unseen Presence draw nearer . 

 she close her eye to the sculptured form . 

 the touch of her Lord be upon her heart . 

 she have pray in her cell that his pierce foot nail to the wood might become as dear to she as the Baby foot on the Virgin Mother 's knee . in her anguish of cloistered sorrow , that prayer have be grant . 

 but out in the world of live man and thing , she need more . she need Feet that walk and move , pass in and out of house and home ; pause by the hearth ; go to the wedding feast ; move to the fresh closed grave ; foot that have sample the dust of life 's highway ; foot that have trod rough place , yet never trip nor stumble . 

 " tempt in all point . " . . . then here be one who could understand Hugh 's hard temptation ; who could pity , if Hugh fall . here be one who would comprehend the breaking of her poor human heart if , love Hugh as she now love , she yet must leave he . 

 " a great High Priest . " . . . what need of any other priest , while " with he in the Holy Mount " ? pass into the heaven , yet ever live to make intercession for we . 

 deep peace steal into her heart , as she kneel in absorb communion in this sacred place , where , for the first time , in her religious life , she have find herself with " Jesus only . " 

 " ah , bless Lord ! " she cry at length , " Thou who know the heart of a man , and canst divine the heart of a woman , grant unto I this day a true vision ; a vision which shall make clear to I , without any possibility of doubt , what be Thy will for I . " 

 CHAPTER LIV 

 the unseen presence 

 the world be a new and a wonderful world as , leave the chapel , Mora turn her step homeward . she have be will not to regard temptation itself as sinful , but now this sacred fact " in all point tempt like as we be " seem to sanctify the state of be tempt , provide she could add the three triumphant word : " yet without sin . " 

 as she walk , with springy step , down the grassy path among the heather , the Unseen Presence move beside she . 

 it seem strange that she should have find in the world this sweet secret of the Perpetual Presence , which have evade she in the Nunnery . often when her duty have take she elsewhere in the Convent , or during the walk through the underground way on the return from the Cathedral , or even when walk for refreshment in the Convent garden , she would yearn for the holy stillness of the chapel , or to be back in her cell that she might kneel at the shrine of the Virgin and there realise the adorable purity of our bless Lady 's heart ; or , prostrate herself before the crucifix , gaze upon those pierce foot , then slowly lift her eye to the other sacred wound , and force her mind to realise and her cold heart to receive the mighty fact that the Divine Redeemer thus hang and suffer for her sin . 

 transport of realisation have come to she in her cell , or when she keep vigil in the Convent chapel , or when from the height of the cathedral clerestory she gaze down upon the High Altar , the lighted candle , the swing censer , and hear the chanting of the monk , and the tinkle of the silver bell . but these transport have result from her own determination to realise and to respond . the mental effort over , they fade , and her heart have seem cold than before , her spirit more dead , her mind more prone to apathy . the great the effort to force herself to apprehend , the more complete have be the reaction of non - realisation . 

 but now , in this deep wonder of new experience , there be no effort . she have but wait with every inlet of she be open to receive . and now the power be a Real Presence within , reveal an equally real Presence without . the Risen Christ move beside she as she walk . her eye be no long holden that she should not know he , for the promise Presence of the Paracletos fill she , unveil her spiritual vision , whisper within her glow heart ; " it be the Lord ! " 

 " which Voice we hear , " write Saint Peter , " when we be with he in the Holy Mount . " she , too , have first hear it there ; but , as she descend , it be with she still . the song of the bird , the rush of the stream , the breeze in the pine , the bee on the wing , all Nature seem to say : " it be the Lord ! " 

 Sorrow , suffering , disillusion might await she on the plain ; but , with the Presence beside she , and the Voice within , she feel strong to face they , and to overcome . 

 noon find she in her garden , calm and serene ; yet wonder , with quicken pulse , whether at nightfall or even at sunset , Hugh would ride in ; and what she must say if , give some other reason for his journey to Worcester , he deceive she as other have deceive ; fail she as other have fail . 

 and wonder thus , she rise and move with slow step to the terrace . 

 for a while she stand ponder this hard question , her eye lift to the distant hill . 

 then something impel she to turn and glance into the banqueting hall , and there on the spot where he have kneel that she might bless he at part stand Hugh , his arm fold , his eye fix upon she , wait till she should see he . 

 CHAPTER LV 

 the heart of a woman 

 for a space , through the casement , they look into one another 's eye ; she , stand in the full glory of the summer sunshine , a radiant vision of glow womanhood ; he , in the shade of the banqueting - hall , gaunt and travel - stain , yet in his eye the light of that love which never faileth . but , even as she look , those dark eye waver , shift , turn away , as if he could not bear any long to gaze upon she in the sunlight . 

 an immense pity fill Mora 's heart . she know he be go to fail she ; yet the pathos of that failure lie in the fact that it be the very force of his love which render the temptation so insuperable . 

 swiftly she pass into the banqueting hall , go to he where he stand , put up her arm about his neck , and lift her lip to his . 

 " I thank God , my beloved , " she say , " that he hath bring thee in safety back to I . " 

 Hugh 's arm , fling around she , strain she to he . but he keep his head erect . the muscle of his neck be like iron band under her finger . she could see the cleft in his chin , the firm curve of his lip . his eye be turn from she . 

 she long to say : " Hugh , the Bishop 's first letter , lose on its way , hath reach my hand . already I know the true story of the vision . " 

 yet instead she cling to his neck , cry : " kiss I , Hugh ! kiss I ! " 

 she could not rob her man of his chance to be faithful . also , if he be go to fail she , it be well he should fail and she know it , than that she should forever have the torment of question : " have I not speak , would he have keep silence ? " 

 yet , while he be still her , his honour untarnished , she long for the touch of his lip . 

 " kiss I , " she whisper again , not know how ten - fold more hard she thus make it for he . 

 but loose his arm from around she , he take her face between his hand , look long into her eye , with such a yearning of hunger , grief , and regret , that her heart stand still . then , just as , render dizzy by his nearness , she close her eye , she feel his lip upon her own . 

 for a moment she be conscious of nothing save that she be his . 

 then her mind fly back to the last time they have stand , thus . again the underground smell of damp earth seem all about they ; again her heart be tear by love and pity ; again she seem to see Hugh , pass up from the darkness into that pearly light which come steal down from the crypt and she realise that this second kiss hold also the anguish of parting , rather than the rapture of reunion . 

 before she could question the meaning of this , Hugh release she , gently loose her hand from about his neck , and lead she to a seat . 

 then he thrust his hand into his breast , and when he draw it forth she see that he hold something in his palm , which gleam as the light fall upon it . 

 stand before she , his eye bent upon that which lie in his hand , 
 Hugh speak . 
 " Mora , I have to tell thee a strange tale , which will , I greatly fear , cause thee much sorrow and perplexity . but first I would give thee this , send to thee by the Bishop with his most love greeting ; who also bid I say that if , after my tale be tell , thy choice should be to return to Worcester , he himself will meet thee , and welcome thee , conduct thee to the Nunnery and there reinstate thee prioress of the White Ladies , with due pomp and high honour . I tell thee this at once to spare thee all I can of shock and anguish in the hearing of that which must follow . " 

 Kneeling before she , Hugh lay her jewelled cross of office on her lap . 

 " my wife , " he say simply , speak very low , with bent head , " before I tell thee more I would have thee know thyself free to go back to the point where first thy course be guide by the vision of the old lay - sister , Mary Antony . therefore I bring thee thy cross of office as Prioress of the White Ladies . " 

 she laugh aloud , in the great gladness of her relief ; in the rapture of her pride in he . 

 " how can thy wife be prioress of the White Ladies ? " she cry , and catch his head to her breast , there where the jewelled cross use to lie , rain tear and kiss on his hair . 

 for a moment he yield , speak , with his face press against she , word of love beyond her imagining . 

 then he regain control . 

 " oh , hush , my beloved ! " he say . " hold I not ! let I go , or our Lady knoweth I shall even now fail in the task which lie before I . " 

 " our Lord , who knoweth the heart of a man , " she say , " hath make my man so strong that he will not fail . " 

 but she let he go ; and rise , the Knight stand before she . 

 " the letter bring to I by Brother Philip , " he begin , " tell I something of that which I be about to tell thee . but I could not speak of it to thee until I know it in full detail , and have consult with the Bishop concern its possible effect upon thy future . hence my instant departure to Worcester . that which I now shall tell thee , I have , in each particular , from the Bishop in most secret conversation . he and I , alone , know of this matter . " 

 then with his arm fold upon his breast , his eye fix upon the sunny garden , beyond the window , deep sorrow , compunction , and , at time , awe in his voice , Hugh d'Argent recite the entire history of the pretended vision ; begin with the hiding of herself of old Antony in the inner cell , her anxiety concern the Reverend Mother , confide to the Bishop ; his chance remark , result in the old woman 's cunningly devise plan to cheat the prioress into accept happiness . 

 and , as he tell it , the horror of the sacrilege fall as a dark shadow between they , eclipse even the radiance of their love . upon which be no long blind , Mora clearly perceive the other issue which she be call upon to face : if our Lady 's sanction miraculously give to the step she have take in leave the Nunnery have after all not be give , what justification have she for remain in the world ? 

 presently Hugh reach the scene of the full confession and death of the old lay - sister . he tell it with reverent simplicity . none of the Bishop 's flash of humour have find any place in the Knight 's recital . 

 but now his voice , of a sudden , fall silent . the tale be tell . 

 Mora have sit throughout lean forward , her right elbow on her knee , her chin rest in the palm of her right hand ; she leave toy with the jewelled cross upon her lap . 

 now she look up . 

 " Hugh , you have make no mention of the Bishop 's opinion as regard the effect of this upon myself . do he advise that I be tell the entire truth ? " 

 the Knight hesitate . 

 " Nay , " he admit at length , see that she must have an answer . " the Bishop have , as you indeed know , from the first consider our previous betrothal and your sister 's perfidy , sufficient justification for your release from all vow make through that deception . arm with the Pope 's mandate , the Bishop see no need for a divine manifestation , nor do he , from the first , believe in the vision of this old lay - sister . yet , know you set great store by it , he fear for your peace of mind , should you learn the truth . " 

 " do he command you not to tell I , Hugh ? " 

 " for love of you , Mora , out of tender regard for your happiness , the 
 Bishop counsel I not to tell you . " 
 " he would have have you to become a party , with himself , and old Mary 
 Antony , in my permanent deception ? " 
 Hugh be a loyal friend . 

 " he would have have I to become a party , with himself , in secure your permanent peace , Mora , " he say , sternly . 

 she love his sternness . so much do she adore he for have triumph where she have make sure that he would fail , so much do she despise herself for have judge he so poorly , rat he so low , that she could have kneel upon the floor and clasp his foot ! yet must she strive for wisdom and calmness . 

 " then how come you to tell I , Hugh , that which might well imperil not only my peace but your own happiness ? " 

 " Mora , " say the Knight , " if I have do wrong , may our blessed Lady pardon I , and comfort you . but I could not take my happiness know that it come to I by reason of a deception practise upon you . our love must have its root in perfect truthfulness and trust . also you and I have together accept the vision as divine . I have kneel in your sight and praise our blessed Lady for this especial grace vouchsafe on my behalf . but now , know it to have be a sacrilegious fraud , every time you speak with joy of the special grace , every time you bless our Lady for her love - kindness , I , by my silence , give mute assent , should have commit sacrilege afresh . aye , and in that wondrous moment which you promise should soon come , when you would have say : ' take I ! I have be ever thine . our Lady hath keep I for thee ! ' mine honour would have be smirch forever have I , keep silence , take advantage of thy belief in word which that old nun have herself invent , and put into the mouth of the bless Virgin . the Bishop hold I selfish because I put mine honour before my need of thee . he say I see naught but mine own proud face , in the bright mirror of my silver shield . but " the Knight hold his right hand aloft , and speak in solemn tone " methink I see there the face of God , or the near I know to his face ; and , behind he , I see thy face , mine own beloved . I need must put this , which I owe to honour and to our mutual trust , before mine own content , and utter need of thee . I should be sham , do I do otherwise , to call thee wife of mine , to think of thee as mistress of my home , and of my heart the Queen . " 

 Mora 's hand have seek the Bishop 's letter ; but now she let it lie conceal . she could not dim the noble triumph of that moment , by any revelation of her previous knowledge . have Hugh fail , she must have produce the first letter . Hugh have prove faithful , it might well wait . 

 a long silence fall between they . Mora , finger the cross , look on it with unseee eye . to Hugh it seem that this token of her high office be become to she a thing of first importance . 

 " the dress be also here , " he say . 

 " what dress ? " she question , start . 

 he point to where he have lay it : her white habit , scapulary , wimple , veil and girdle ; the dress of a Prioress of the Order of the White Ladies . 

 she turn her startled eye upon it . then quickly look away . 

 " do you yourself think a vision need , in order that I might be justify in leave the Convent , Hugh ? " 

 " Nay , then , " he cry , " always from the first I hold thee mine in the sight of Heaven . " 

 " be you of opinion that , the vision be prove no vision , I should go back ? " 

 " no ! " say the Knight ; and the word fall like a blow from a battle - axe . 

 " do the Bishop expect that I shall return ? " 

 " yes , " reply the Knight , groan within himself that she should have chance to change the form of her question . 

 " he would so expect , " muse Mora . " he would be sure I should return . he remember my headstrong temper , and my imperious will . he remember how I tear the Pope 's mandate , place my foot upon it . he know I say how that naught would suffice I but a divine vision . also he knoweth well the heart of a nun ; and when I ask he if the heart of a nun could ever become as the heart of other woman , he do most piously ejaculate : ' heaven forbid ? ' " 

 little crinkle of merriment show faintly at the corner of her eye . 
 the Bishop would have see they , and smile responsive . but the sad 
 Knight see they not . 
 " Mora , " he say , " I leave thee free . I hold thee to no vow make through falsehood and fraud . I rate thy peace of mind before mine own content ; thy true well - being , before mine own desire . leave thee free , dear heart , I must leave thee free to choose . love thee as I love thee , I can not stay here , yet leave thee free . my anguish of suspense would hamper thee . therefore I purpose now to ride to my own home . Martin will ride with I . but tomorrow he will return , to ask if there be a message ; and the next day , and the next . the Bishop allow four day for hesitation . if thy decision should be to return to the Nunnery , his command be that thou ride the last stage of the journey fully rob , wear thy cross of office . he himself will meet thee five mile this side of Worcester , and rid in , with much pomp and ceremony , will announce to the Community that , the high service to which his Holiness send thee , be accomplish " 

 " Accomplished , Hugh ? " 

 the Knight smile , wearily . " I quote the Bishop , Mora . he will explain that he now reinstate thee as Prioress of the order . the entire Community will , he say , rejoice ; and he himself will be ever at hand to make sure that all be right for thee . " 

 " these plan be well and carefully lay , Hugh . " 

 " they who love thee have see to that , Mora . " 

 " who will ride with I from here to Worcester ? " 

 " Martin Goodfellow , and a little band of thine own people . a swifter messenger will go before to warn the Bishop of thy coming . " 

 " and what of thee ? " she ask . 

 " of I ? " repeat the Knight , as if at first the word convey to he no meaning . " oh , I shall go forth , seek a worthy cause for which to fight ; pray God I may soon be count worthy to fall in battle . " 

 she press her clasped hand there where his face have rest . 

 " and if I find I can not go back , Hugh ? if I decide to stay ? " 

 he swing round and look at she . 

 " Mora , be there hope ? the Bishop say there be none . " 

 " Hugh , " she make answer slowly , speak with much earnestness , ' shall 
 I not be give a true vision to guide I in this perplexity ? " 
 " our Lady grant it , " he say . " if you decide to stay , one word will bring I back . if not , Mora this be our final parting . " 

 he take a step toward she . 

 she cover her face with her hand . 

 in a moment his arm would be round she . she could not live through a third of those farewell kiss . she have not yet face out the second question . but vision or no vision if he touch she now , she would yield . 

 " go ! " she whisper . " ah , for pity 's sake , go ! the heart of a nun might endure even this . but I ask thy mercy for the heart of a woman ! " 

 she hear the sob in his throat , as he kneel and lift the hem of her robe to his lip . 

 then his step across the floor . 

 then the ring of horse ' hoof upon the pave stone . 

 she be tremble from head to foot , yet she rise and go to the window overlook the courtyard . 

 Mark be shut the gate . Beaumont hold a neglect stirrup cup , and laugh as he drain it himself . Zachary , stout and pompous , be mount the step . 

 Hugh , her husband Hugh , faithful beyond belief Hugh , her dear Knight of the Silver Shield have ride off alone , to the home to which he so greatly long to take she ; alone , with his hopeless love , his hungry heart , and his untarnished honour . 

 turn from the window she gather up the habit of her order and , clasp her cross of office , mount to her bedchamber , there to face out in solitude the hard question of the second issue . 

 CHAPTER LVI 

 the true vision 

 to her bedchamber go Mora she who have be Prioress of the White Ladies bear in her arm the full robe of her order , and in her hand the jewelled cross of her high office . she go , expect to spend hour in doubt and prayer and question before the shrine of the Virgin . but , as she push open the door and enter the sunlit chamber , on the very threshold she be meet by a flash of inward illumination . surely every question have already be answer ; the second issue have be decide , while the first be yet wholly uncertain . 

 she have say she must have a divine vision . have she not this very day be grant a two - fold vision , both human and divine ; the Divine , stoop in unspeakable tenderness and comprehension to the human ; the human , upborne on the mighty pinion of pure love and stainless honour in a self - sacrifice which lift it to the Divine ? 

 in the lonely chapel on the mountain , she have see her Lord . not as the Babe , herald by angel , worship by eastern shepherd , adore by Gentile king , throne on his mother 's knee , wise - eyed and God - like , stretch omnipotent baby hand toward this mysterious homage which be his due ; accept , with baby omniscience , the gold , the frankincense , the myrrh , which typify his mission ; nor as the Divine Redeemer nail helpless to the cross of shame ; dead , that the world might live . these have be the vision of her cloistered year . 

 but in the chapel on the mountain she have see he as the human Jesus , tempt in all point like as we be , his only visible halo the " yet without sin , " which set upon his brow in youth and manhood the divine seal of perfect purity , and in his eye the clear shining of uninterrupted intercourse with Heaven . 

 as she have leave the chapel , turn from the sculptured figure which have help she to this realisation , she have become wondrously aware of the Unseen Presence of the Christ , close beside she . " as see he who be invisible " she have come down from the mount , conscious that he go on before . she seem to be follow those bless footstep over the heather of her native hill , even as the disciple of old follow they through the cornfield of Judea , and over the grassy slope of Galilee . yet conscious also that he move beside she , with hand outstretche in case her spirit trip ; and that , should a hide foe fle shaft from an ambush in the rear , even there that Unseen Presence would be behind she as a shield . " Lo I be with you always , even unto the end of the world . " 

 strong in this most human vision of the Divine , she have come down from the Holy Mount , prepare to face the dumb demon she dread , the silent acquiescence in deception , which threaten to tear her happiness , bruise her spirit , and cast into the fire and into the water to destroy they , those treasure which her heart have lately learn to hold so dear . 

 prepare for this , she come ; and lo , Heaven grant she the second vision . she see deep into the heart of a true man 's faithfulness ; an example of chivalry , of profound reverence for holy thing , which sham her doubt of he ; a self - sacrifice which lift the great human love , to which she , in her cloistered sanctity , have picture herself as stoop , far above she , to the ideal of the divine . be not this indeed a Vision of Truth ? 

 cross the room , Mora lay the robe she carry upon the couch . while mount the stair she have plan , in the secret of her own chamber , to clothe herself in they once again , to hang her jewelled cross about her neck , and thus once more Prioress of the White Ladies to kneel at our Lady 's shrine , and implore guidance in this final decision . but now , she lay they gently down upon the bed . 

 she could not stand fast in this new liberty , with the heavy fold of that white habit entangle her foot in a yoke of bondage . 

 the heart , fill with a love so full of glow tenderness for her Knight of the Silver Shield prove worthy , could not beat beneath a scapulary . nor could she cross of office lie where his dear head have rest . 

 she stand before the shrine . the Madonna look gravely upon she . the holy Babe gaze with omniscient eye , hold forth tiny hand of omnipotence . 

 even so have they look in her hour of joy , when she have kneel in a transport of thanksgiving . 

 even so have they look in her hour of anguish , when she have pour out her despair at have be twice deceive . 

 yet help have not come , until she have lift her eye unto the hill . 

 she turn from the shrine , go swiftly to the open casement , and stand look over the green tree top , to the heavenly blue beyond , fleck by swift move cloud . 

 she , who have now learn to " look . . . at the thing that be not see , " could not find help through gaze on carven image . 

 thought of our Lady seem more living and vital while she keep her eye upon the fleecy whiteness of those tiny cloud , or watch a flight of mountain bird , silver - wing in the sunshine . 

 what be the one command record as have be give , by the bless 
 Mother of our Lord , to man ? " Whatsoever he saith unto you , do it . " 
 and what be his last injunction to his Church on earth ? " go ye into 
 all the world and preach glad tiding to every creature . . . . and lo , 
 I be with you always . " 
 Mora could not but know that she have come forth into her world bring the glad tiding of love requite , of comfort , and of home . 

 by virtue of this promise the foot of the risen Christ would move beside she " all the day . " 

 it seem to she , that if she go back now into her convent cell , she would nail those bless foot to the wood again . in slay this new life within herself , she would lose forever the sense of live companionship , retain only the religion of the Crucifix . enough , perhaps , for the cloistered life . but this life more abundant , demand that grace should yet more abound . 

 a great apostolic injunction sound , like a clarion call , from the store chancel of her memory . " as ye have therefore receive Christ Jesus the Lord , so walk ye in he . " 

 she fling wide her arm . a sense of all - pervade liberty , a complete freedom from all bondage of spirit , soul , or body , leapt up responsive to the call . 

 " I will ! " she say . " without any further fear or faltering , I will ! " 

 she pass to the couch , fold the robe she have wear so long , and lay they away in an empty chest . 

 this do , she take her cross of office , and go down to the terrace . 
 her one thought be to reach Hugh with as little delay as possible . 
 she could not leave that noble heart in suspense , a moment long than 
 she need . 
 the sun be still high in the heaven . by the short way through the wood , she could reach the castle long before sunset . 

 she owe Hugh much . yet there be another to whom she also owe a debt ; how much she owe to he , this day 's new light have shew she . she would go forward to her joy with a free heart if she give herself time to discharge , by acknowledgment and thank , the great debt she owe to her old and faithful friend , Symon , Bishop of Worcester . 

 she send for her steward . 

 " Zachary , " she say , " Sir Hugh have ride on before . I follow by the short way through the forest , and shall not return to - night . bid they saddle my white palfrey , Icon . I shall be ready to start within an hour . but first I must despatch to Worcester , a packet of importance . Bid two of the man , who ride with we from Worcester , prepare to mount and return thither . if they start in an hour 's time , they can be well on their way , and make a safe lodging , before nightfall . " 

 she pass into the library , lay the cross before she on the table , and begin her letter to the Bishop . 

 straight from her hand to his , that letter go ; straight from her heart to his , that letter speak ; and Symon 's comfort in it , lie largely in the knowledge that she be alone when she write it , alone when she seal it , and that none in this world , save they two , will ever know exactly what the woman , whom he have love so purely and serve so faithfully , say to he in this letter . 

 Bare fact , however , may be give . 

 she tell he , as briefly as might be , of that morning 's great experience ; of Hugh 's return , and noble self - effacement ; of the clear light she have receive , and the decision to which she have come ; and of how she be now go forward , with a free heart , to her great happiness . 

 and then , in glow word , she tell he all she owe to his faithful , patient friendship , to the teaching of long year , the trend of which have always be life , light , liberty ; a wide outlook , a fearless judgment , a clear knowledge of God , base on inspire writing ; and , above all , belief in those word , often on his lip , always in his heart : " love never faileth . " 

 " truly , my dear lord , " she write , " your love " Nay , it may not be quote ! 

 she tell he how his teaching , follow along the same line as that of Father Gervaise year before , have prepare her mind for this revelation of the ever - live Saviour . 

 " now the mystery be unveil to I also , " she write , " I realise that you know it all along ; and that , have I but be more teachable , Reverend Father , you could have teach I more . oh , I pray you , take heart of grace , and teach these great truth to other . " 

 she bless he for his faithfulness in strive to make she see her duty to Hugh , and her life 's true vocation . 

 she bless he for her great happiness , yet thank he for his care in send her cross of office , thus make all easy in order that , have her conscience so required , she could have safely return . she herewith send he the cross , and beg that he would keep it , remember when he chance to look upon it 

 she also beg he to forgive she the many time when she have try his patience , and be herself impatient of his wise counsel and control . 

 and , finally , she sign herself 

 Mora hold the cross to her lip , then place it within the letter , fold the packet , seal it with her own seal , address it with full direction , and call for the messenger . 

 thus , fully four day before he have look to have it , the answer for which he wait , reach the Bishop 's hand . as he open it , and perceive the gleam of gold and emerald , he glance across to the deed chest , where lie the Knight 's white stone . 

 the rise beside it have not yet fade . it might have be pluck and place in the water that morning , so fair it bloom a red , red rose . ah , Verity ! Little Angel Child ! 

           

 it be say in sunny Florence in the year that follow , and , later on , it be remark in Rome , that if the Lord High Cardinal kind of man be try almost beyond bear , if even his calm patience seem in danger of ruffle , or if he be weary , or sad , or dishearten , he have a way of slip his hand into the bosom of his scarlet robe , as if he gently finger something that lie against his heart . 

 Whereupon at , once his brow grow serene again , his blue eye kindly and bright , his lip smile that patient smile which never fail ; and , as he draw forth his hand , the stone within his ring , though pale before , glow deep red , as juice of purple grape in a goblet . 

 CHAPTER LVII 

 " I choose TO RIDE alone " 

 Mora escape from the restrain arm of old Debbie , and appear at the top of the step lead down to the courtyard . 

 frame in the doorway , in her green riding dress , she stand for a moment , survey the scene before she . 

 the two man bind for Worcester , bear her packet to the Bishop , have just ride out at the great gate . through the gate , still stand open , she could see they guide their horse down the hill and take the southward road . 

 the porter be attempt to close the gate , but a stable lad hinder he , point to Icon , whom a groom be lead , ready saddle , to and fro , before the door ; Icon , with proudly arch neck and swishing tail , as conscious of his snowy beauty as when , in the river meadow at Worcester , he find himself the centre of an admire crowd of nun . 

 at sight of his flow mane , powerful forequarter , and high stepping action , Mora be irresistibly remind of the scene in the courtyard at the Nunnery , when the Bishop ride in on his favourite white palfrey , she stand at the top of the step to receive he . never again would she stand so , to receive the Bishop ; never again would Icon proudly carry he . the Bishop have give she to Hugh and Icon to she . a faint sense of compunction stir within she . perhaps at that moment she come near to realise something of what both gift have cost the Bishop . 

 bend her head , she look across the courtyard and under the gateway . the messenger be rid fast . even as she look , they disappear into the pine wood . 

 her letter to Symon be well on its way . she remember with comfort and gladness certain thing she have write in that letter . 

 then as the pine wood swallow the messenger with a joyous bound of reaction her whole mind turn to Hugh . 

 three step below she , a page wait , hold a dagger which she have be will not to wear , when rid in the forest . she have send it out to be sharpen . she take it from he , test its point , slip it into the sheath at her belt , smile upon the boy , descend the remain step , and lay her hand upon Icon 's mane . 

 then it be that Mistress Deborah 's agitated signal from within the doorway , take effect upon old Zachary . 

 come forward , he bar his white head , and adventure a humble expostulation . 

 " my lady , " he say , " it be not safe nor well that you should ride alone . a few moment ' delay will suffice Beaumont to saddle a horse and be ready to attend you . " 

 she mount before she make answer . 

 she keep her imperious temper well in hand , strive to remember that to old Debbie and Zachary she seem but the child they have love and watch over from infancy , of a sudden grown old . they have not know the Prioress of the White Ladies . 

 bend from the saddle , her hand on Icon 's mane : 

 " I go to my husband , Zachary , " she say , " and I choose to ride alone . " 

 then gather up the rein , she turn Icon toward the gate and so ride across the courtyard , look , neither back to where Mistress Deborah alternately wring her hand and shake her fist at Zachary ; nor to right or leave , where Mark and Beaumont , stand with doff cap wait till she should have pass , to yield to the full enjoyment of Mistress Deborah 's gesture , and of Master Zachary 's discomfiture . 

 she ride forth look straight before she , over the pointed ear of Icon . she be rid to Hugh , and , they who stand by must not see the love - light in her eye . 

 Grave and serene , her head hold high , she pace the white palfrey through the gate . and if the porter mark a wondrous shin in her eye well , the sun begin to slant its ray , and she ride straight toward the west . 

 Zachary mount the step and hasten across the hall , follow by 
 Deborah . 
 Mark thereupon enact Mistress Deborah , and Beaumont , Master Zachary ; while the page sit down on the step to laugh . 

 the porter clang to the gate . 

 the day 's work be do . 

 CHAPTER LVIII 

 the warrior heart 

 as Mora turn off the highway , and press Icon deep into the glade , she cry over and over aloud , for there be none to hear : " I go to my husband , and I choose to ride alone . " 

 how wondrous it seem , this go to he ; a second giving , a deep surrender , a fuller yielding . 

 when she go to he in the crypt , her body have recoil , her spirit have shrunk , sham , humble , and unwilling . her mind alone , govern by her will , have drive she along the path of her resolve , hold she upon the stretcher , until too late to cry out or to return . 

 now how different ! free as air , alone , uncoerced , even unexpected , she leave her own home , and her own people , to ride , unattended , straight to the arm of the man who have win she . 

 a wild joy seize and shake she . 

 the soft , mysterious glade , beneath vast , leafy dome , seem enchant ground . the hoof of Icon thud softly on the moss . the stillness seem alive with whisper life . rabbit sit still to peep , then whisk and run . great bird rise suddenly , on whir wing . tiny bird , fearless , stay on their twig and sang . 

 there be scurry among fern and rock , tell of bright , watchful eye ; of life , safeguard itself , unseen . yet all these varied sound , Nature disturb in the shady haunt which be her rightful home , do but emphasize the vast stillness , the utter solitude , the complete remoteness from human dwelling - place . 

 shin through part bough and slowly move leaf , the sunlight fall , in golden bar or shift yellow patch , on the glade . 

 the joy which thrill his rider , seem to communicate itself to Icon . he gallop over the moss on the broad ride , and would scarce be restrain when pass between great rock , or turn sharply into an unseen way . 

 Mora ride as in a dream . " I ride to my husband , " she cry to the forest , " and I choose to ride alone ! " and once she sing , in an irrepressible burst of praise : " Jesu dulsis memoria ! " then , when she fall silent : " Dulsis ! dulsis ! " carol unseen chorister in leafy clerestory overhead . and each time Icon hear her voice , he lay back his ear and canter fast . 

 not far from her journey 's end , the way lie through a deep gorge in the very heart of the pine wood . 

 here the sun 's ray could scarce penetrate ; the path become rough and slippery ; a hidden stream ooze up between loose stone . 

 Icon pick his way , with care ; yet even so , he slip , recover , and slip again . 

 with a sudden rush , some wild animal , huge and heavy , go crash through the undergrowth . 

 stealthy footstep seem to keep pace with Icon 's , high up among the tree trunk . 

 yet this valley of the shadow hold no terror for the woman whose heart be now so blissfully at rest . 

 have leave behind forever the dark vale of doubt and indecision , she mount triumphant on the wing of trust and certainty . 

 " I ride to my husband , " she whisper , as if the word be a charm which might bring the sense of his strong arm about she , " and I choose to ride alone . " 

 with a gentle caress on the arch of his snowy neck , and with soft word in the anxiously point ear , she encourage the palfrey to go forward . 

 at length they round a great grey rock jut out into the path , and the upward slope of a mossy glade come into view . 

 with a whinny of pleasure , Icon lay back his ear and break into a swift canter . 

 up the glade they fly ; out into the sunshine ; clear into the open . 

 here be the moor ! here the highroad , at last ! and there in the distance , the grey wall of Hugh 's castle ; the portal of home . 

           

 it be the Knight 's trust foster - brother , Martin Goodfellow , amazed , yet smile a glad welcome , who hold Icon 's bridle as Mora dismount in the courtyard . 

 she fondle the palfrey 's nose , lay her cheek against his neck . for the moment it become imperative that she should hide her happy eye even from this faithful fellow , in whom she have learn to place entire confidence . 

 " Icon , brave and beautiful ! " she whisper . " Thou hast carry I here where I long to be . Thy foot be well - nigh as swift as my desire . " 

 then she turn , speak quickly and low . 

 " Martin , where be my husband ? where shall I find Sir Hugh ? " 

 " my lady , " say Martin , " I see he last in the armoury . " 

 " the armoury ? " she question . 

 " a chamber opening out of the great hall , face toward the west , with step lead down into the garden . " 

 " even as my chamber ? " 

 " the armoury door face the door of your chamber , Countess . the width of the hall lie between . " 

 " can I reach my chamber without enter the hall , or pass the armoury window ? I would rid I of my travel - stain , before I make my presence know to Sir Hugh . " 

 " pass round to the right , and through the buttery ; then you reach the garden and the step up to your chamber from the side beyond the armoury . " 

 " good . tell no one of my presence , Martin . I have here the key of my chamber . have Sir Hugh ask for it ? " 

 " Nay , my lady ; nor guess how often we ride hither . we reach the castle scarce two hour ago . the Knight bath , and change his dusty garment ; then din alone . after which he go into the armoury . " 

 " when do you see he last , Martin ? " 

 " two minute ago , lady . I come this moment from the hall . " 

 " what be he do , Martin ? " 

 Martin Goodfellow hesitate . he know something of love , and as much as an honest man may know , of woman . he shrewdly suspicione what she would expect the Knight to be do . he be sorely tempt to give a fancy picture of Sir Hugh d'Argent , in his lovelorn loneliness . 

 he look into the clear eye bent upon he ; glance at the firm hand , arrest for a moment in its caress of Icon 's neck ; then decide that , though the truth might probably be unexpected , a lie would most certainly be unwise . 

 " truth to tell , " say Martin Goodfellow , " Sir Hugh be test his armour , and sharpen his battle - axe . " 

 as Mora pass into the dim coolness of the buttery , she be conscious of a very definite sense of surprise . she have picture Hugh in his lonely home , nurse his hungry heart , beside his desolate hearth . she have see herself come softly behind he , lay a tender hand upon those bow shoulder ; then , as he lift eye in which dull despair would quickly give place to wonder joy , say : " Hugh , I be come home . " 

 but now , as she pass through the buttery , Mora have to realise that yet again she have fail to understand the man she love . 

 it be not in he , to sit and brood over lose happiness . if she fail he finally , he be ready in this , as in all else , to play the man , go straight on , unhindered by vain regret . 

 once again her pride in he , in that he be fine than her own conception , quicken her love , even while it humble she , in her own estimation , to a place at his foot . 

 a glory of joy be on her face as , make her way through to the terrace , now bath in sunset light , she pass up to the chamber she have prepare during Hugh 's absence . 

 all be as she have leave it . 

 fasten the door by which she have enter from the garden , she noiselessly open that which give on to the great hall . 

 the hall be dark and deserted , but the door into the armoury stand ajar . 

 a shaft of golden sunshine stream through the half - open door . 

 she hear the clang of armour . she could not see Hugh , but even as she stand in her own doorway , look across the hall , she hear his voice , singing , as he work , snatch of the late song of Blondel , the King 's Minstrel . 

 with beat heart , Mora turn and close her door , make it fast within . 

 CHAPTER LIX 

 the MADONNA in the home 

 Hugh d'Argent have polish his armour , put a keen edge on his battle - axe , and rub the rust from his sword . 

 the torment of suspense , the sicken pain of hope defer , could be well bear , while he turn his mind on future battle , and his muscle to vigorous action . 

 of the way in which the cup of perfect bliss have be snatch from his very lip , he could not trust himself to think . 

 his be the instinct of the fighter , to bend his whole mind upon the present , prepare for the future ; not waste energy in useless reconsideration of an accomplished past . 

 he have act as he have feel bind in honour to act . gain or loss to himself have not be the point at issue . even as , in the hot fight with the Saracens , slay or be slay might incidentally result from the action of the moment , but the possession of the Holy Sepulchre be the true object for which each warrior who have take the cross , draw his sword or swing his battle - axe . 

 be honour , hold unsullied , to prove in this case , the tomb of his life 's happiness ? three day of suspense , during which Mora consider , and he and the Bishop wait . on the third day , would Love arise victorious , purify by suffering , clothe in raiment of dazzle whiteness ? would there be Easter in his heart , and deep peace in his home ? or would his beloved wind herself once more in cerement , would the seal of the Vatican be set upon the stone of monastic rule and regulation , make it fast , secure , inviolable ? would he , turn sadly from the Zion of hope fulfil , be walk in dull despair to the Emmaus of an empty home , of a day far spend , hold no promise of a bright dawn ? 

 but , even as his mind dwelt on the symbolism of that sacred scene , the Knight remember that the two who walk in sadness do not long walk alone . one , step silently , come up with they ; know all , yet ask tenderest question ; the Master , whom they mourn , himself draw near and go with they . 

 it seem to Hugh d'Argent that if so real a presence as that , could draw near to he and to Mora at this sad parting of the way , if their religion do but hold a thing so vital , then might they have a true vision of Life , which should make clear the reason for the long year of suffering , and point the way to the glory which should follow . then , be bless , not merely by the Church and the Bishop but by the Christ himself he who at Cana grant the good wine when the earthly vintage fail the wedding feast they might leave behind forever the empty tomb of hope frustrate , and return together , with exceed joy , to the Jerusalem of joy fulfil . 

 Hugh lay down his sword , rise , stretch himself , and stand look full into the golden sunset . 

 he could not account for it , but somehow the darkness have lift . the sense of loneliness be go . an Unseen Presence seem with he . the thought of prayer throb through his helpless spirit , like the uplift beat of strong white wing . 

 " o God , " he say , " thou seemest to I as a stranger , when I meet Thee on mine own life 's way . I know Thee as Babe divine ; I know Thee , crucify ; I know Thee risen , and ascend in such cloud of glory as hide Thee from mine earthbound sight . but , if Thou hast draw near along the rocky footpath of each day 's common happening , then have mine eye indeed be holden , and I know Thee not . " 

 Hugh stand motionless , his eye on the glory of the sunset battlement . and into his mind there come , as clearly as if that moment utter , the word of Father Gervaise : " he ever liveth to make intercession for we . " 

 the Knight raise his right arm . " oh , if Thou livest , " he say , " and living , know ; and know , carest ; grant I a sign of Thy nearness a Vision of Life and of Love , which shall make clear this mist of uncertainty . " 

 turn back to his work , so great a load seem lift from his heart , that he find himself sing as he put a keener edge on his weapon . 

 presently he go over to the corner where stand the silver shield . Hitherto he have keep his eye turn from it . it call up thought which he have strive to beat back . now , he set to work and polish it until its surface shine clear as a mirror . 

 and as he work , he think within himself : " what say the Bishop ? that I see reflect in my silver shield naught save mine own proud face ? but I tell my wife that I see there the face of God , or the near I know to his face ; and , behind he , her face the face of my beloved ; for , have I not put reverence and honour first , my very love for she would have be tarnish . " 

 Hugh stand the silver shield at such an angle as that it reflect the sunset , yet as he kneel upon one knee before it he could not see his own reflection . 

 the sun , round and blood red , almost dip below the horizon , shine out in crimson glory from the deep heart of the silver . 

 Hugh remember two verse of a hebrew poem which the Rabbi use to recite at sunset . " the Lord God be a Sun and Shield : the Lord will give Grace and Glory ; no good thing will he withhold from they that walk uprightly . o Lord of Hosts , bless be the man that trusteth in Thee . " 

 his eye upon the shield , his hand clasp around his knee , Hugh say , softly : " the face of God , my beloved , or the near I know to his face : and behind he , thy face " 

 and then his voice fall of a sudden silent ; his heart beat in his throat , his finger grip his knee ; for something move softly in the shin surface , and there look out at he from his own silver shield , the face of the woman he love . 

 how long he kneel and gaze without stir , Hugh could not tell . at that moment life pause suspend , and he cease to be conscious of time . but , at length , press nearer , his own dark head appear in the shield , and above he , bend toward he , Mora , shimmer in soft white , as on her wedding morn , her hand outstretche , her eye full of a tender yearning , gaze into his . 

 " the Vision for which I pray ! " cry the Knight . " o , my God ! be this the sign of Thy nearness ? be this a promise that my wife will come to I ? " 

 he hide his face in his hand . 

 a gentle touch fall lightly on his hair . 

 " not a promise , Hugh , " come a tender whisper close behind he . " a sign of God 's nearness ; a proof of mine . Hugh , my own dear Knight , lift up your head and look . your wife have come home . " 

 leap to his foot , he turn ; still dazzle , incredulous . 

 no shadowy reflection this . his wife stand before he , fair as on her wedding morning , a jewel circlet clasp the golden glory of her hair . but his eye see only the look in her . 

 yet he keep his distance . 

 " Mora ? " he whisper . " Home ? to stay ? hath a true vision then be grant thee ? " 

 " oh , Hugh , " she answer , " I have see deep into the heart of a true man . I have see myself unworthy , in the light of thy great loyalty . I have see all other fail , but my Knight of the Silver Shield stand faithful . I have be shew this by so strange a chance , that I humbly take it to be the Finger of God point out the pathway of his will . my pride be in the dust . my self - will lie slain . but my love for thee have become as great a thing as the heart of a woman may know . Thy faithfulness sham my poor doubt of thee . the richness of thy giving , beggar my yearning to bestow . yet now at last thy wife can come to thee without a doubt , without a tremor , all hesitancy go , all she be , and all she have , quite simply , thine . oh , Hugh , thine own to do with as thou wilt . all these year keep for thee . take I ah ! . . . oh , Hugh , thy strength ! be this love , or be there some deep , more rapturous word ? oh , dear man of mine , how strong must have be the flood - gate , if this be the pen - up force behind they ! " 

 he carry she to the hearth in the great hall , and place she in the chair in which his mother use to sit . 

 then , his arm still around she , he kneel before she , lift his face in which the dark eye glow with a deep light than passion 's transient fire . 

 " the Madonna ! " he say . " the Madonna in my home . " 

 he stoop and lift the hem of her robe to his lip . 

 " not as prioress , " he say , " but as my adore wife . " 

 again he stoop and press it to his lip . 

 " not as Reverend Mother to a score of nun , " he say , " but as " 

 she catch his head between her hand , hide his glow eye against her breast . 

 presently : " and do thy people come with thee , my sweetheart ? and how could a three hour ' ride be accomplish in this bridal array ? oh , Heaven help I , Mora ! thou art so beautiful ! " 

 " hush , " she say , " thou dear , foolish man ! Heaven hath help thee through bad strait than that ! Nay , I ride alone , and in my riding dress of green . arrive here , I change , in mine own chamber , to these marriage garment . " 

 " in thine own chamber ? " he look at she , with bewildered eye . 
 " here here , in thine own chamber , Mora ? " 
 the mother in she thrill with tenderness , as she bend and look into those bewildered eye . for once , she feel old than he , and wiser . the sense of inexperience fall from she . for very joy she laugh as she make answer . 

 " Dear Heart , " she say , " I could scarce come home unless I have a chamber to which to come ! Martin shew I which have be thy mother 's , and daily in thine absence he and I ride over , and other with we , bring all thing needful , thus make it ready , against thy return . " 

 " ready ? " he say . " against my return ? " 

 she lay her lip upon his hair . 

 " I hope it will please thee , my lord , " she say . " come and see . " 

 she make for to rise , but with masterful hand he hold she down . his great strength must have some outlet , lest it should overmaster the gentleness of his love . also , perhaps , the primitive instinct of wild warrior forefather arise , of a sudden , within he . 

 " I must carry thee , " he say . " not a step thither shalt thou walk . thine own foot bring thee to the crypt ; other bear thee thence . Thy palfrey carry thee home ; thy palfrey bore thee here . but to our chamber , my wife , I carry thee , alone . " 

 she would soon have go on her own foot ; but her joy this day , be to give he all he wish , and as he wish it . 

 as he bend above she , she slip her arm around his neck . " then carry I , dear Heart , " she say , " but do not let I fall . " 

 he laugh ; and as he swing she out of the seat , and stride across the great hall to where the western glow still gleam from the doorway of his mother 's chamber , she know of a sudden , why he have wish to carry she . his great strength give he such easy mastery ; help she to feel so wholly his . 

 on the threshold of the chamber he pause . 

 bend his face to her , he touch her lip with exceed gentleness . then speak in her ear , deep and low . " say again what thou didst say ten night ago when we part in the dawning , on the battlement . " 

 " I love thee , " she whisper , and close her eye . 

 then Hugh pass within . 

 CHAPTER LX 

 the convent BELL 

 the slanting ray of the set sun lay , in golden band , upon the flag of the Convent cloister . 

 complete silence reign . 

 the White Ladies have return from vesper . each , in the solitude of her own cell , be spend , in prayer and meditation , the hour until the Refectory bell should ring . 

 the great door into the cloister stand wide . 

 Mother Sub - Prioress appear in the far distance , move down the passage . as she pass between the long line of closed door , she turn her face quickly from side to side , pause occasionally to listen , ear lay against the panelling . 

 presently she step from the cool shadow into the sunny brightness of the cloister . 

 she do not blink , as old Mary Antony use to blink . her small eye peer from out her veil as sharply in sunshine as in shadow . 

 yet be there something curiously furtive about Mother Sub - Prioress , when she enter the cloister . listen at the door in the cell passage , she have be merely official , act with a precise celerity which bespoke long practice . now she hesitate ; look around as if to make sure she be not observe , and obviously hold , with her left hand , something conceal . 

 move along the cloister , she seat herself upon the stone slab in the archway overlook the lawn and the pieman 's tree ; then draw forth from beneath her scapulary , the worn leathern wallet which have belong to the old lay - sister , Mary Antony . 

 at the same moment there come a gentle flick of wing , and the robin alight on the stone cop , not three foot from the elbow of Mother Sub - Prioress . 

 very bright - eye , and tall on his leg , be Mary Antony 's little vain man . with his head on one side , he look inquiringly at Mother Sub - Prioress ; and Mother Sub - Prioress , from out the curtain of her veil , frown back at he . 

 there be a solemn quality in the complete silence . no naughty tale of baker ' boy or pieman . no gay chirp of expectation . receive cheese from Mother Sub - Prioress , bestow for conscience ' sake , partook of the nature of a sacred ceremony . yet the robin have come for his cheese , and the Sub - Prioress have come to give it to he . 

 presently she slowly open the wallet , take therefrom some choice morsel , and strew they on the coping . 

 " here , bird , " she say , grimly ; " I can not let thee miss thy cheese because the foolish old creature who teach thee to look for it , come this way no more . take it and begone ! " 

 this be the daily formula . 

 the " jaunty little layman , " undismaye though the look be austere , and the voice , forbid hop gaily near , peck eagerly . no gap mouth now wait his return . his nestling be grow and fly . at last he could afford to feast himself . 

 Mother Sub - Prioress turn she back upon the coping and star at the archway opposite . she have no wish to see the bird 's enjoyment . 

 then a strange thing happen . 

 have peck up all he want , the robin turn his bright eye upon the motionless figure , seat so near he , wrap in the aloofness of an impenetrable silence . 

 except in her die moment , Mary Antony 's much love little bird have never adventure near to she than to hop along the coping , peck at her finger when , to test his boldness , she reach out and with they cover the cheese . 

 yet now , with a gentle flick of wing , lo , he alight on the knee of Mother Sub - Prioress ! then , while she scarce dare breathe , for wonder and amaze , hop to her arm and peck gently at her veil . 

 whereupon something break in the cold heart of Mother Sub - Prioress . tear run slowly down the thin face . she would not stir nor lift her hand to wipe they away , and they fall in heavy drop upon her fold finger . 

 at length she speak , in a break whisper . 

 " oh , thou little wing thing , " she say , " who so easily could'st fly from I ! dost thou use those wing of liberty to draw yet near ? in this place of high wall and narrow cell , they who have not full freedom , use to the full what freedom they possess , to turn , at my approach and fly from I . not one if she could choose , would choose to come to I . . . . be there any honour so great as that of be fear by all ? be there any loneliness so great as by all to be hat ? that honour , little bird , be mine ; also that loneliness . who then hath send thee thus to essay to take both from I ? " 

 heavy tear continue to fall upon the clasp hand ; the worn face be distort by mental suffering . the frozen soul of Mother Sub - Prioress have melt , the iron of self - knowledge be enter into it , cause the dull ache of a pain unspeakable . yet she dare not sob , lest the heaving of her bosom should frighten away the little bird perch so lightly on her arm . 

 this evidence of the trust in she of a little live thing , be the one rope to which Mother Sub - Prioress clung in those first moment , during which the black water of remorse and despair pass over her head a rope make of frail enough strand , God know : bright eye alert , small cling foot , a pair of fold wing . yet do the frailest thread of love and trust , make a safe rope to which to cling when shipwreck threaten the heart , than the iron chain of obligation and duty . 

 presently a sordid doubt seize upon Mother Sub - Prioress . have the robin finish the cheese , and come to she thus , merely to ask for more ? 

 very slowly she venture to turn her head , until the stone cop at her elbow come into her range of vision . 

 then a glow of pride and happiness warm her heart . three four five fragment remain ! not for greed or favour have this little wild thing of his own free will draw near . 

 for what , then ? . . . 

 Mother Sub - Prioress whisper the answer ; and as she whisper it , her tear fall afresh ; but now they be tear without bitterness ; a healing fount seem to well up within her soften heart . 

 for love ? yea , verily ! for love of she , those small brown wing have bring he near , those bright eye be unafraid . 

 " for love of I , " she whisper . " for love of I . " 

 when at length he chirp and fly , she still sit motionless , listen as he sing his evening song high up in the pieman 's tree . 

 then she rise and sweep the untouched fragment back into the wallet . 
 there be triumph in the action . 
 " for love ! " she say . " not of that which I bring and give , but of that which he think I to be . " 

 slowly she leave the cloister , move , with bent head , until she reach the open door of the empty chamber which have be the Reverend Mother 's . 

 before long this chamber would be her . at noon she have receive word from the Bishop that it be his intention to appoint she to be prioress , for the year which yet remain of the Reverend Mother 's term of office . 

 she have experience a sinister pleasure in be thus promote to this high office by the Bishop , owe to the certainty that have the usual election by ballot take place , her name would not have be inscribe by a single member of the Community . 

 yet now , in this strangely soften mood , she begin wistfully to desire that there might be look of pleasure and satisfaction on at least a few face , when the announcement should be make on the morrow . 

 Mother Sub - Prioress pass into the cell , and close the door . 

 she be draw , by the glow of the sunset , to the oriel window . but on her way thither she find herself unexpectedly arrest before the marble group of the Virgin and Child . 

 Mother Sub - Prioress never could see a naked babe without experience a feeling of irritation against those who have fail to provide it with suitable clothing . possibly this be why she have hurriedly look the other way if her eye chance to fall upon the beautiful sculpture in the prioress 's cell . 

 now , for the first time , she really see it . 

 she stand and gaze ; then knelt , and try to understand . 

 the tenderness reach her heart and shake it . the encircle arm , the love breast , the watchful mother - eye ; the exquisite human love , call forth by the necessity , the dependence , the helplessness of a little child . 

 and be there not soul equally helpless , and heart just as dependent upon sympathy and tenderness ? 

 the Prioress have understand this , and have rule by love . 

 but Mother Sub - Prioress have ever prefer the brier and the burning . 

 she recall a conversation she have have a day or two before with the Prior and the Chaplain , when they come to consult with she concern the future of the Community , and her possible appointment . in speak of the late prioress , the Prior have say : " she ever seem as one apart , who walk among the star ; yet full , to overflow , of the milk of human kindness and the gracious balm of sympathy . " he have then ask Mother Sub - Prioress if she feel able to follow in her step . to which Mother Sub - Prioress , vex at the question , have answer , tartly : Nay ; that she know no milky Way ! Whereupon Father Benedict , a sudden gleam of approval on his sinister face , have interpose , address the Prior : " Nay , verily ! our excellent Sub - prioress know no milky Way ! she be the bri , which hath sharply teach the tender flesh of each . she be the bed of nettle from which the most weary move on to rest elsewhere . she be the fearsome burning , from which the frightened brand do snatch themselves ! " 

 these word , speak in approbation , have be mean to please ; and at first she have be flatter . then the look upon the kind face of the Prior , have give she the sense of be shut up with Father Benedict in a fearsome purgatory of their own make nay rather , in a hell , where pity , mercy , and love - kindness be unknown . 

 perhaps this be the hour when the change of mind in Mother Sub - Prioress really have its beginning , for Father Benedict 's terrible yet true description of her method and her rule , now come forcefully back to she . 

 put out a trembling hand , she touch the little foot of the Babe . 

 " give I tenderness , " she say , and an agony of supplication be in her voice ; also a rain of tear soften the hard line of her face . 

 our blessed Lady smile , and the sweet Babe look merry . 

 Mother Sub - Prioress pass to the window . the sun , round and blood red , as at that very moment reflect in Hugh d'Argent 's shield , be just about to dip below the horizon . when next it rise , the day would have dawn which would see her Prioress of the White Ladies of Worcester . 

 she turn to the place where the Prioress 's chair of state stand empty . during the walk to and from the Cathedral , she have plan to come alone to this chamber , and seat herself in the chair which would so soon be her . but now a new humbleness restrain she . 

 fall upon her knee before the empty chair , she lift clasped hand heavenward . 

 " o God , " she say , " I be not worthy to take her place . my heart be hard and cold ; my tongue be ofttime cruel ; my spirit be censorious . but I have learn a lesson from the bird and a lesson from the Babe ; and that which I know not teach Thou I . create in I a new heart , o God , and renew a right spirit within I . Grant unto I to follow in her gracious step , and to rule , as she rule , by that love which never faileth . " 

 then , stoop to the ground , she kiss the place where the foot of the prioress have be will not to rest . 

 the sun have set behind the distant hill , when Mother Sub - Prioress rise from her knee . 

 an unspeakable peace fill her soul . she have pray , by name , for each member of the Community ; and as she pray , a gift of love for each have be grant to she . 

 ah , would they make discovery , before the morrow , that instead of the bri have come up the myrtle tree ? 

 with this hope fill her heart , Mother Sub - Prioress hasten along the passage , and ring the Convent bell . 

           

 and at that moment , Mora stand within her chamber , look over terrace , valley , and forest to where the sun have vanish below the horizon , leave behind a deep orange glow , pal above to clear blue where , like a lamp just light , hang luminous the evening star . 

 Hugh 's arm be still wrap about she . as they stand together at the casement , she lean upon his heart . his strength envelop she . his love infuse a wondrous sense of well - being , and of home . 

 yet of a sudden she lift her head , as if to listen . 

 " what be it , " question Hugh , his lip against her hair . 

 " hush ! " she whisper . " I seem to hear the Convent bell . " 

 his arm tighten their hold of she . 

 " Nay , my beloved , " he say . " there be no place for echo of the 
 Cloister , in the harmony of home . " 
 she turn and look at he . 

 her eye be soft with love , yet luminous with an inward light , that moment kindle . 

 " Dear Heart , " she say hasten to reassure he , for an anxious question be in his look " I have come home to thee with a completeness of glad giving and surrender , such as I do not dream could be , and scarce yet understand . but Hugh , my husband , to one who have know the calm and peace of the Cloister there will always be an inner sanctuary in which will sound the call to prayer and vigil . I be not less thine own nay , rather I shall ever be free to be more wholly thine because , as we first stand together in our chamber , I hear the Convent bell . " 

 one look she give , to make sure he understand ; then swiftly hide her face against his breast . 

 Hugh speak his answer very low , his lip close to her ear . 

 but his eye with that light in they , which her happy heart scarce yet dare see again be lift to the evening star .