through the Postern Gate 

 a romance in seven day 



 by 

 Florence L. Barclay 


 Author of 
 " the Rosary , " " the Mistress of Shenstone , " 
 " the following of the Star , " etc 



 London and New York 
 G. P. Putnam 's Sons 
 1912 




 146th Thousand 



 Made and print in Great Britain by 
 the Camelot Press Limited , 
 Southampton . 



 to 
 MY mother 




 content 


 the first day 

 the story of little BOY BLUE 


 the second DAY 

 MISS CHARTERIS TAKES CONTROL 


 the third day 

 the boy INVADES the KITCHEN 


 the fourth day 

 CHRISTOBEL signs her name 


 the FIFTH DAY 

 guy CHELSEA take CONTROL 


 the sixth day 

 MISS ANN have " MUCH to say " 


 AN INTERLUDE 

 " AS a dream , when one awaketh " 


 the seventh DAY 

 the stone be roll away 




 the first day 

 the story of little BOY BLUE 

 " but it be not your niece ! it be always you I want , " say the Boy . 

 he lie back , in a deep wicker chair , under the old mulberry - tree . he have take the precaution of deposit his cup and saucer on the soft turf beneath his chair , because he know that , under the stress of sudden emotion , china especially the good china have a way of fly off his knee . and there be no question as to the exquisite quality of the china on the dainty tea - table over which Miss Christobel Charteris preside . 

 the Boy have watch she pour the tea into those pretty rose - leaf cup , nearly every afternoon during the golden two week just over . he know every movement of those firm white hand , so soft , yet so strong and capable . 

 the Boy use to stand beside she , ready to hand Mollie 's cup , as punctiliously as if a dozen girl have be sit in the old garden , wait to be quickly serve by the only man . 

 the Boy enjoy be the only man . also he have quite charming manner . he never allow the passing of bread - and - butter to interfere with the flow of conversation ; yet the bread - and - butter be always within reach at the precise moment you want it , though the Boy 's bright eye be fix just then in keenest interest on the person who happen to be speak , and not a point of the story , or a word of the remark , be miss either by he or by you . 

 he use to watch the Aunt 's beautiful hand very closely ; and at last , every time he look at they , his brown eye kiss they . the boy think this be a delightful secret know only to himself . but one day , when he be bend over she , hold his own cup while she fill it , the Aunt suddenly say : " do not ! " it be so startling and unexpected , that the cup almost fly out of his hand . the boy might have say : " do not   what ? " which would have put the Aunt in a difficulty , because it would have be so very impossible to explain . but he be too honest . he at once do not , and feel a little shy for five minute ; then recover , and hug himself with a fearful joy at the thought that she have know his eye have kiss she dear beautiful hand ; then steal a look at her calm face , so completely unmove in its classic beauty , and think he must have be mistake ; only what on earth else could she have say " do not ! " about , at that moment ? 

 but Mollie be there , then ; so no explanation be possible . now at last , thank goodness , Mollie have go , and his own seven day have begin . this be the first day ; and he be go to tell she everything . there be absolutely nothing he would not be able to tell she . the delight of this fairly sweep the boy off his foot . he have keep on the curb so long ; and he be not use to curb of any kind . 

 he lie back , his hand behind his head , and watch the Aunt 's kind face , through half - close lid . his brown eye be shin , but very soft . when the Aunt look at they , she quickly look away . 

 " how could you think the attraction would be go ? " he say . " it be always you , I want , not your niece . good heaven ! how can you have think it be Mollie , when it be you you , just only you , all the time ? " 

 the Aunt raise her beautiful eyebrow and look he straight in the face . 

 " be this a proposal ? " she ask , quietly . 

 " of course it be , " say the boy ; " and jolly hard it have be , have to wait two whole week to make it . I want you to marry I , Christobel . I dare say you think I a cheeky young beggar to suggest it , point blank . but I want you to give I seven day ; and , in those seven day , I be go to win you . then it will seem to you , as it do to I , the only possible thing to do . " 

 his brown eye be wide open now ; and the glory of the love shin out from they dazzle she . she look away . 

 then the swift colour sweep over the face which all Cambridge consider classic in its stern strong beauty , and she laugh ; but rather breathlessly . 

 " you amazing boy ! " she say . " do you consider it right to take away a person 's breath , in this fashion ? or be you try to be funny ? " 

 " I have no design on your breath , " say the boy ; " and it be my misfortune , but not my fault , if I seem funny . " then he sit forward in his chair , his elbow on his knee , and both brown hand hold out towards she . " I want you to understand , dear , " he continue , earnestly , " that I have say only a very little of all I have to say . but I hope that little be to the point ; and I jolly well mean it . " 

 the Aunt laugh again , and swing the toe of her neat brown shoe ; a habit she have , when try to appear more at ease than she feel . 

 " it be certainly to the point , " she say . " there can be no possible doubt about that . but be you aware , dear boy , that I have be assiduously chaperon you and my niece , during the past two week ; and watch , with the affectionate interest of a middle - aged relative , the course of true love run with satisfactory and unusual smoothness ? " 

 the Boy ignore the adjective and innuendo , and go straight to the point . he always have a way of ignore all side issue or carefully introduce irrelevancy . it make he a difficult person to deal with , if the principal weapon in your armoury be elaborate argument . 

 " why do you say ' do not ' ? " ask the Boy . 

 the Aunt fall at once into the unintentional trap . she drop she calmly amuse manner and answer hurriedly , while again the swift colour flood her face : " boy dear , I hardly know . it be something you do , which , for a moment , I could not quite bear . something pass from you to I , too intimate , too sweet , to be quite right . I say ' do not , ' as involuntarily as one would say ' do not ' to a threatened blow . " 

 " it be not   a blow , " say the Boy , tenderly . " it be a kiss . every time I look at your dear beautiful hand , lift the silver teapot , I kiss it . do not   you feel it be a kiss ? " 

 " no ; I only feel it be unusual ; something I could not understand ; and I do not like it . therefore I say ' do not . ' " 

 " but you admit it be sweet ? " persist the Boy . 

 " exactly , " reply the Aunt ; " quite incomprehensibly sweet . and I do not like thing I can not comprehend ; especially with amazing boy about ! " 

 " do not   you know it be love ? " ask the Boy , softly . 

 " no , " reply the Aunt , emphatically ; " most certainly , I do not . " 

 the boy get up , and come and kneel beside the arm of her chair . 

 " it be love , " he say , his lip very close to the soft wave of her hair . 

 " go back to your seat at once , " say the Aunt , sternly . 

 the boy go . 

 " and where do poor Mollie come in , in all this ? " inquire the Aunt , with some asperity . 

 " Mollie ? " say the Boy , complacently . " oh , Mollie understand all right . she love Phil , you know ; intend to stick to he , and know you will back she . the last part of the time , I bring her note from Phil , every day . do not   be angry , dear . you would have do it yourself , if Mollie and Phil have get hold of you , and implore you to be a go - between . you remember the day we invade the kitchen to see how Martha make those little puffy bun you know the explosive ? you pinch they in the middle , and they burst into hundred and thousand of little piece . jolly thing for a stiff stand - up - in - a - crowd - and - all - hold - your - own - cup kind of drawing - room party ; what we use to call ' a Perpendicular ' in my Cambridge day . I suppose they still keep up the name . Fancy those little bun explode all over the place ; and when you try to pick up the fragment , they go into simply million of crumb , between your agitated finger and anxious thumb ! " 

 the Boy slap his knee in intense enjoyment , and momentarily lose the thread of the conversation . the Aunt 's mind be not sufficiently detach to feel equal to a digression into peal of laughter over this vision of the explosive bun . she want to find out how much Mollie know . when the boy have finish rock backwards and forwards in his chair , she suggest , tentatively : " you go to the kitchen ? " 

 " oh , yes , " say the Boy , recover . " we go to the kitchen to watch Martha make they , and to get the recipe . you see Mollie want they for her father 's clerical ' at home . ' oh , I say fancy ! the archdeacon and curate , the rector and vicar , all stand in a solemn crowd on the Bishop 's good velvet - pile carpet ; then Mollie , so demure , hand round the innocent - looking little bun ; and , hey presto ! the pinching begin , and the explosion , and the hopeless attempt to gather up the fragment ! " 

 the boy nearly go off again ; but he suddenly realize that the Aunt be not amuse , and pull himself together . 

 " well , we stop on the way to the kitchen for mutual confidence . it be not easy , bound as we be by you on the one side , and Martha on the other . we have to whisper . I dare say you think we be kiss behind the door , but we jolly well be not ! she tell I about Phil ; and I tell she oh , I tell she something of what I be try to tell you . just enough to make she understand ; so that we could go ahead , and play the game fair , all round . she be awfully glad , because she say : ' I have long fear my dear beautiful Aunt would marry an ichthyosaurus . ' I ask she what the what the I mean , what on earth the meaning of that be ? and she say : ' an old fossil . ' " 

 again the swift flush sweep over the calm face . but this time the Aunt go off , intentionally , on a side issue . 

 " I have hear you say ' what the deuce ' before now , boy . but I be glad you appear to realize , judge by your laboured effort to suppress they , that these expression shock I . " 

 she look at he , quizzically , through half - close lid ; but the boy be wholly earnest . 

 " well , you see , " he say , " I be try most awfully hard to be , in every respect , just what you would wish the man who love you should be . " 

 " oh , you dear boy , " say Christobel Charteris , a flood of sudden feeling soften her face ; " I must make you understand that I can not possibly take you seriously . I shall have to tell you a story no one have ever hear before ; a tender little story of a long - ago past . I must tell you the story of my little boy Blue . wait here a few moment , while I go indoor and give order that we be not to be disturb . " 

 rise , she pass up the lawn to the little white house . the Boy 's eye follow she , note with pride and delight the tall athletic figure , fully develop , gracious in its ample line , yet graceful in the perfect swing of the well - poise walk . during all his college year he have know that walk ; admire that stately figure . he have be in the set which call she " Juno " and " the Goddess " ; which crowd to the club if there be a chance of watch her play tennis . and now , during two wonderful week , he have be admit , a welcome guest , to this little old - world oasis , bound by high red - brick wall , where she dwelt and rule . quiet , sunny , happy hour he have spend in the hush of the old garden , stroll up and down the long narrow velvet turf , beneath the spread tree , from the green postern gate in the right - hand corner of the bottom wall , to the flight of stone step lead up to the garden - door of the little white house . 

 the boy know , by now , exactly what he want . he want to marry Christobel Charteris . 

 he must have be rather a brave boy . he look very youthful and slim as he lie back in his chair , watch the stately proportion of the woman on whom he have set his young heart ; very slight and boyish , in his silver - grey suit , with lavender tie , and buttonhole of viola . the boy be very particular about his tie and buttonhole . they always match . this afternoon , for the first time , he have arrive without a buttonhole . in the surprise and pleasure of his unexpected appearance , the Aunt have move quickly down the sunlit lawn to meet and greet he . 

 Mollie have depart , early that morning . her final word at the railway station , as her impish little face smile farewell from the window of her compartment , have be : " mind , Auntie dear , no mistake about Guy Chelsea ! he be a charming fellow ; and thank you ever so much for give I such a good time with he . but you can report to Papa , that Guy Chelsea , and his beautiful property , and his prospective peerage , and his fifty thousand a year , and his motor - car , and his flying - machine , be absolutely powerless to tempt I away from my allegiance to Phil . beside , it so happen , Guy himself be altogether in love with some one else . " 

 the train have begin to move at the word " you can report to papa , " Mollie finish the remainder of the sentence in a scream crescendo , hold on to her hat with one hand , and wave a tiny lace pocket - handkerchief , emphatically , with the other . even then , the Aunt lose most of the sentence , and disbelieve the rest . the atmosphere of love have be so unmistakable during those two week ; the superabundant overflow have even reach herself more than once , with an almost startling thrill of emotion . 

 the boy have be so full of vivid , glow joie - de - vivre , radiate fun and gaiety around he . 

 in their set of tennis , play on her own court across the lane at the bottom of the garden , when she could beat he easily be he handicap by partnership with Mollie ; but in genuine single , when Mollie have tactfully collapse on to a seat and declare herself exhaust , his swift agility counterbalance her magnificent service , and they be so evenly match that each game prove a keen delight 

 in the quiet tea beneath the mulberry tree , where the incomprehensible atmosphere of unspoken tenderness gild the light word and laughter , as sunlight touch leaf and flower to gold 

 at the cosy dinner , to which they sometimes ask he , sit in the garden afterwards in the moonlight ; when he would tell they thrill tale of aviation , describe his initial flight , hairbreadth escape ; the joy of rapid soaring ; the danger of cross - current , broken propeller , or twisted steering - gear 

 on all these occasion , the boy with his enthusiasm , his fun , and his fire have be the life of the happy trio . 

 during those evening , in the moonlight , when he start off on airship , one heart stand still very often while the boy talk ; but it stand still , silently . it be Mollie who clasp her hand and implore he never to fly again ; then , in the next breath , beg he to take she as a passenger , on the first possible occasion . 

 happy day ! but Mollie be the attraction ; therefore , with Mollie 's departure , they would naturally come to an end . 

 the Boy have not ask if he might come again ; and , for the moment , she forget that the boy rarely ask for what he want . he usually take it . 

 she have a lonely luncheon ; spend the afternoon over letter and account , pick up the dull thread of thing lay aside during the gay holiday time . 

 it be not the Professor 's day for call . she be alone until four . then she go out and sit under the mulberry . the garden be very quiet . the bird ' hour of silence be barely over . 

 Jenkins , the butler , have be send into the town , so Martha bring out tea ; as ample , as carefully arrange , as ever ; and cup for two ! 

 " why two cup , Martha ? " query Miss Charteris , languidly . 

 " maybe there will be a visitor , " say Martha in grim prophetic tone . then her hard old face relax and crease into an unaccustomed smile . " maybe there be a visitor , " she add , softly ; for at that moment the postern gate bang , and they see the Boy come up the garden , in a shaft of sunlight . 

 the Aunt walk quickly to meet he . his arrival be so unexpected ; and she have be so lonely , and so dull . 

 " how nice of you , " she say ; " with the Attraction go . but Martha seem to have have a premonition of your coming . she have just bring out tea , most suggestively arrange for two . how festive you be , boy ! why this wedding attire ? be you come from , or go to , a function ? no ? then do not   you want tennis after tea a few good hard set ; just we two , unhandicapped by our dear little Mollie ? " 

 " no , " say the boy ; " talk , please , to - day ; just we two , unhandicapped by our dear little Mollie . talk please ; not tennis . " 

 he pause beside the border , full of mauve and purple flower . " how jolly those little what - d'-you - call-'ems look , in the sunshine , " he say . 

 then the Aunt notice that he wear no buttonhole , and that his tie be lavender . she pick four of her little viola , and pin they into his coat . 

 " boy dear , " she say , " you be a dandy in the matter of tie and buttonhole ; only it be so essentially you , that one rather enjoy it . but this be the first day I have know you to arrive without one , and have nee to fall back upon my garden . " 

 " it be a first day , " say the Boy , drop into step with she , as she move toward the mulberry tree . " it start a new rťgime , in the matter of buttonhole , and other thing . I be go to have seven day , and this be the first . " 

 " really ? " smile the Aunt , amuse at the boy 's intense seriousness . " I be flattered that you should spend a portion of ' the first day ' with I . let we have tea , and then you shall tell I why seven day ; and where you mean to pass they . " 

 the boy be rather silent during tea . the Aunt , try to read his mind , think at first that he regret his flannel , and the chance of tennis ; then that he be miss Mollie . whereupon the Aunt repeat her remark that it be nice of he to come , now the Attraction be no long there . 

 this give he the cue for which he wait . his cup be empty , and safely on the grass . the floodgate of the Boy 's pen - up love and longing burst open ; the unforgettable word , " it be always you I want , " be speak ; and now he wait for she , under the mulberry tree . she have something to tell he ; but , whatever it might be , it could not seriously affect the situation . he have tell she that be the great essential . he would win she in seven day . already she know just what he want a big step for the first day . he look up , and see she come . 

 she have regain her usual calm . her eye be very kind . she smile at the boy , gently . 

 she take her seat in a low basket - work chair . he have leapt to his foot . she motion he to another , just opposite her . she be feel rather queenly . unconsciously her manner become somewhat regal . the boy enjoy it . he know he be bent upon win a queen among woman . 

 " I be go to tell you a story , " she say . 

 " yes ? " say the Boy . 

 " it be about my little boy Blue . " 

 " yes ? " 

 " you be my little boy Blue . " 

 " I ? " 

 " yes ; twenty year ago . " 

 " then I be six , " say the Boy , quite unperturbed . 

 " we be stay at Dovercourt , on the east coast . our respective family have know each other . I use to watch you play on the shore . you be a very tiny little boy . " 

 " I dare say I be quite a nice little boy , " say the Boy , complacently . 

 " indeed you be ; quite sweet . you wear white flannel knicker , and a little blue coat . " 

 " I dare say it be quite a nice little coat , " say the Boy , " and I hope my womenfolk have the tact to call it a ' blazer . ' " 

 " it be a dear little coat I should say ' blazer , ' " say the Aunt ; " and I call you my ' little boy Blue . ' you also have a blue flannel cap , which you wear stuck on the back of your curl . I speak to you twice , little boy Blue . " 

 " do you ? " he say , and his brown eye be tender . " then no wonder I feel I have love you all my life . " 

 " ah , but wait until you hear my story ! the first time I speak to you , it happen thus . your nurse sit high up on the beach , in the long line of nurse , gossip and do needlework . you take your little spade and bucket , and march away , all by yourself , to a breakwater ; and there you build a splendid sand castle . I sit on the breakwater , high up , and watch you . you take immense pain ; you overcome stupendous difficulty ; and every time your little cap fall off , you pick it up , dust off the sand with the sleeve of your little blue coat , and stick it on the back of your curly head again . you be very sweet , little boy Blue . I can see you now . " 

 the Aunt pause , and let her eye dwell upon the Boy in appreciative retrospection . if he feel this something of an ordeal , he certainly show no sign of it . not for a moment do his face lose its expression of delighted interest . 

 " presently , " continue the Aunt , " your castle and courtyard finish , you make a little cannon in the centre of the courtyard , for defence . then you look around for a cannon - ball . this be evidently a weighty matter , and indeed it turn out to be such . you stand your spade against the breakwater ; place your bucket beside it ; readjust your little cap , and trot off almost to the water 's edge . your conception of the size of your castle and cannon must have become magnify with every step of those small sturdy foot , for , arrive at the water , you find a huge round stone nearly as large as your own little head . this satisfy you completely , but you soon find you could not carry it in your hand . you spend a moment in anxious consideration . then you take off your little blue coat , spread it upon the sand , roll the cannon - ball upon it , tie the sleeve around it , pick up the hem and the collar , hoist the heavy stone , and proceed slowly and with difficulty up the shore . every moment it seem as if the stone must fall , and crush the bare toe of my little boy Blue . so I fly to the rescue . 

 " ' little boy Blue , ' I say , ' may I help you to carry your stone ? ' 

 " you pause , and look up at I . I doubt if you have breath to answer while you be walk . your little face be flushed and damp with exertion ; the blue cap be almost off ; you have sand on your eyebrow , and sand on your little straight nose . but you look at I with an expression of indomitable courage and pride , and you say : ' fank ; but I always do my own cawwying . ' with that you start on , and I fall behind rebuffed ! " 

 " surly little beast ! " ejaculate the Boy . 

 " not at all , " say the Aunt . " I will not   have my little boy Blue call name ! he show a fine independence of spirit . now hear what happen next . 

 " little Boy Blue have almost reach his castle , with his somewhat large , but otherwise suitable , cannon - ball , when his nurse , glance up from her needlework , perceive he stagger along in his shirt - sleeve , and also see the use to which he be put his flannel coat . she throw aside the blue over - all she be make , rush down the shore , call my little boy Blue every uncomplimentary compound noun and adjective which enter her irate and flurried mind ; seize the precious stone , unwound the little jacket , fling the stone away , shake out the sand and seaweed , and straighten the twisted sleeve . then she proceed to shake the breath out of my little Boy Blue be already rather breathless little body ; put on the coat , jerk he up the shore , and plump he down with his back to the sea and his castle , to sit in disgrace and listen , while she tell the assemble nurse what a ' bear himp of hevil ' he be ! I could have slay that woman ! and I know my little boy Blue have no dear mother of his own . I want to take he in my arm , smooth his tumbled curl , and comfort he . and all this time he have not utter a sound . he have just explain to I that he always do his own carrying , and evidently he have learn to bear his childish sorrow in silence . I watch the little disconsolate blue back , usually so gaily erect , now round with shame and woe . then I bethink I of something I could do . I make quite sure he be not peep round . then I go and find the choose stone , and it be heavy indeed ! I carry it to the breakwater , and deposit it carefully within the courtyard of the castle . then I sit down behind the breakwater , on the other side , and wait . I feel sure little boy Blue would come back for his spade and bucket . 

 " presently the nurse grow tired of bully he . the strength of his quiet non - resistance prove great than their superior number and brute force . also his intelligent little presence be , undoubtedly , a check upon their gossip . so he be tell he might go ; I conclude , on the understanding that he should ' be a good boy ' and carry no more ' nasty heavy stone . ' I see he rise and shake the dust of the nurse ' circle off his little foot ! then he push back his curl , and , without look to the right or to the left , trot straight to his castle . I wonder he do not glance , however hopelessly , in the suppose direction of the desire stone . but , no ! he come gaily on ; and the light of a great expectation shine in his brown eye . 

 " when he reach the breakwater , and find his castle , there safely in the courtyard repose the mighty cannon - ball . he stand still a moment , look at it ; and his cheek go very pink . then he pull off his little cap , and turn his radiant face up to the blue sky , fleck with fleeting white cloud . and ' Fank de Lord , ' say my little boy Blue . " 

 there be unconceale tear in the Aunt 's kind eye , and she control her quiet voice with difficulty . but the glory of a great gladness have come over the boy . without as yet explain itself in word , it ring in his voice and laughter . 

 " I remember , " he say . " why , of course I remember ! not you , bad luck ; but be lug up the shore , and fear I have lose my cannon - ball . and , you know , as quite a tiny chap , I have form a habit of pray about all my little want and woe . I sometimes think , how amuse the angel must have be when my small petition arrive . there be a scarecrow , in a field , I pray for , regularly , every night , for week . I have be strike by the fact that it look lonely . then I seriously upset the theology of the nursery , by pass through a course of persistent and fervent prayer for Satan . it appear as an obvious logical conclusion to my infant mind : that if the person who accord to nurse spend all his time in go about make everybody naughty , could himself become good , all naughtiness would cease . also , that anybody must be consider as ' past pray for , ' be an idea which nearly break my small heart with rage and misery , when it be first crudely force upon I . I think the arch - fiend must have turn away , silent and nonplussed , if he ever chance to pass by , while a very tiny boy be kneel up in his crib , plead with tearful earnestness : ' please God , bless poor old Satan ; make he good an ' happy ; an ' take he back to heaven . ' but it use to annoy nurse considerably , when she come into the same prayer , with barely a comma between . " 

 " oh , my little boy Blue ! " cry the Aunt . " why be I not your mother ! " 

 " thank goodness , you be not ! " say the Boy , imperturbably . " I do not   want you for a mother , dear . I want you for my wife . " 

 " so you have pray about the stone ? " remark the Aunt , hurriedly . 

 " yes . while seat there in disgrace , I say : ' please God , let an angel find my cannon - ball , which howwid old nurse fwowe away . an ' let the angel cawwy it safe to the courtyard of my castle . ' and I be not at all surprised to find it there ; merely very glad . so you see , Christobel , you be my guardian angel twenty year ago . no wonder I feel I have know and love you , all my life . " 

 " wait until you hear the rest of my story , little boy Blue . but I can testify that you be not surprised . your brown eye be simply shin with faith and expectation , as you trot down the shore . but who say you might call I ' Christobel ' ? " 

 " no one , " reply the boy . " I think of it myself . it seem so perfect to be able to say it on the first of my seven day . and , if you consider , I have never call you ' Miss Charteris . ' you always seem to I much too splendid to be ' Miss ' anything . one might as well say ' Miss Joan of Arc ' or ' Miss Diana of the Ephesians . ' but of course I will not   call you ' Christobel ' if you would rather not . " 

 " you quite absurd boy ! " say the Aunt , laugh . " call I anything you like just for your seven day . but you have not yet tell I the meaning or significance of these seven day . " 

 the Boy sit forward , eagerly . 

 " it be like this , " he say . " I have always love the story of how the army of Israel march round Jericho during seven day . it appeal to I . the well - garrison , invincible city , with its high wall and bar gate . the silent , determined army , march round it , once every day . apparently nothing be happen ; but , in reality , their faith , enthusiasm , and will - power be undermine those mighty wall . and on the seventh day , when they march round seven time to the blast of the priestly trumpet ; at the seventh time , the ordeal of silence be over ; leave be give to the great silent host to shout . so the ram ' horn sound a loud blast than ever ; and then , with all the pen - up enthusiasm bear of those seven day of silent marching , the people shout ! down fall the wall of Jericho , and up the conqueror go , right into the heart of the citadel .... I be prepared to march round in silence , during seven day ; but on the seventh day , Jericho will be take . " 

 " I be Jericho , I conclude , " remark the Aunt , dryly . " I can not say I have particularly notice the silence . but that part of the programme would be decidedly dull ; so we will omit it , and say , from the first : ' little boy Blue , come blow I your horn ! ' " 

 " I shall blow it all right , on the seventh day , " say the Boy , " and when I do , you will hear it . " 

 he get up , come across , and kneel by the arm of her chair . 

 " I shall walk right up into the heart of the citadel , " he say , " when the gate fly open , and the wall fall down ; and there I shall find you , my Queen ; and together we shall ' inherit the kingdom . ' o dear unconquered Citadel ! o beautiful , golden kingdom ! do not   you wish it be the seventh day now , Christobel ? " 

 his mouth look so sweet , as he bend over she and say " Christobel , " with a queer little accent on the final syllable , that the Aunt feel momentarily dizzy . 

 " go back to your chair , at once , boy , " she whisper . 

 and he go . 

 neither speak a word , for some minute . the boy lie back , watch the mysterious moving of the mulberry leave . the triumphant happiness in his face be a rather breathless thing to see . it make you want to hear a great orchestra burst into the Hallelujah Chorus . 

 the Aunt watch the boy , and wonder whether she must tell he about the Professor , before the seventh day ; and what he would say , when she do tell he ; and how Jericho would feel when the army of Israel , with silent trumpet and banner droop , march disconsolate away , leave its wall still stand ; its gate still bar . poor wall , suppose to be so mighty ! already they be tremble . if the boy have not be so chivalrously obedient , he could have break into the citadel , five minute ago . do he know ? .... she look at his radiant face .... yes ; he know . there be not many thing the boy do not know . she must not allow the seven day , even though she could absolutely trust his obedience and his chivalry . she must tell he the rest of the story , and send he away to - day . poor invade army , shorn of its glad triumph ! poor Jericho , leave desolate ! it be decidedly unusual to be compare to Jericho , and Diana of the Ephesians , and Joan of Arc , all in the same conversation ; and it be rather funny to enjoy it . but then most thing which happen by reason of the Boy be funny and unusual . he would always come march ' as an army with banner . ' the Professor would drive up to Jericho in a fly , and knock a decorous rat - tat on the gate . would the wall tremble at that knock ? alas , alas ! they have never tremble yet . would they ever tremble again , save for the march - past of the boy ? would the gate ever really fly open , except to the horn - blast of little boy Blue ? ... the Aunt dare not think any long . she feel she must take refuge in immediate action . 

 " boy dear , " she say , in her most maternal voice , " come down from the cloud , and listen to I . I want to tell you the rest of the story of my little boy Blue . " 

 he spring up , and come and sit on the grass at her foot . all the Boy 's movement be so bewilderingly sudden . they be over and do , before you have time to consider whether or no you intend to allow they . but this new move be quite satisfactory . he look less big and manly , down on the grass ; and she really feel maternal , with his curly head so close to her knee . she even venture to put out a cool motherly hand and smooth the hair back from his forehead , as she begin to speak . she have intend to touch it only once just to accentuate the fact of her motherliness but it be the sort of soft thick hair which seem mean for the gentle pass through it of a woman 's finger . and the Boy seem to like it , for he give one long sigh of content , and lean his head against her knee . 

 " now I must tell you , " say the Aunt , " of the only other time when I venture to speak to my little boy Blue . he have come to his favourite place beside the breakwater . the tide have long ago sweep away castle , courtyard , and cannon ; but the cannon - ball be still there . it partook of the nature of ' thing that remain . ' heavy stone usually do ! when I peep over the breakwater , little Boy Blue be sit on the sand . his sturdy leg be spread wide . his bare toe look like ten little pink sea - shell . between his small brown knee , he have plant his bucket . his right hand wield a wooden spade , on the handle of which be writ large , in blue pencil : Master Guy Chelsea . he be bent upon fill his bucket with sand . but the spade be long , and the bucket too close to he   boy , leave my shoe alone ! it do not require attention   most of the sand miss the bucket , and go over himself . I hear he sigh rather wearily , and say ' blow ! ' in a tired little voice . I lean over the breakwater . ' little boy Blue , ' I say , ' may I play with you , and help you to fill your bucket with sand ? ' 

 " little Boy Blue look up . his curl , his eyebrow , his long dark eyelash be full of sand . there be sand on his little straight nose . but no amount of sand could detract from the dignity of his little face , or weaken its stern decision . he lay down his spade , put up a damp little hand , and , lift his blue cap to I , say : ' fank ; but I do not   like girl . ' oh , Master Guy Chelsea , how you snub I ! " 

 the Boy 's broad shoulder shake with laughter , but he capture the hand still smooth his hair ; and , draw it down to his lip , kiss it gently , back and palm , and then each finger . 

 " poor kind - hearte , well - mean little girl , " he say . " but she must admit , little girl of seven be not always attractive to small boy of six . " 

 " I be not seven , " say the Aunt , with portentous emphasis . " leave go of my hand , boy , and listen . when you be six , I be sixteen . " 

 this bomb of the Aunt 's be receive with a moment 's respectful silence , as befit the discharge of her principal field - piece . then the Boy 's gay voice say : 

 " and what of that , dear ? when I be six , you be sixteen . when I be twenty , you be twenty - nine " 

 " Thirty , Boy ; thirty ! be accurate . and now you be twenty - six , and I be get on towards forty " 

 " thirty - six , dear , thirty - six ! be accurate ! " plead the Boy . 

 " and when you be forty , I shall be fifty ; and when you be fifty , boy only fifty ; a man be in his prime at fifty I shall be sixty . " 

 " and when I be eighty , " say the Boy , " you will be ninety an old lady be in her prime at ninety . what a charming old couple we shall be ! I wonder if we shall still play tennis . I think quite the jolly thing to do , when we be very very old quite decrepit , you know will be to stay at folkestone , and hire two bath - chair , with nice active old man to draw they ; ancient , of course , but they would seem young compare to we ; and then make they race on the Leas , a five - pound note to the winner , to insure they really gallop . we would start at the most crowded time , when the band be play , and race in and out among lot of other bath - chair go slowly , and simply terrify at we . let us be sure and remember to do it , Christobel , sixty year from to - day . have you a pocket - book ? I shall be a gay young person of eighty - six , and you " 

 " boy dear , " she say , bend over he , with a catch in her voice ; " you must be serious and listen . when I have say that which I must say , you will understand directly that it be no use have your seven day . it will be well and wise to raise the siege at once , and march away . listen ! ... hush , stay perfectly still . no ; I can say what I be go to say more easily if you do not   look at I .... please , boy ; please .... I tell you my ' little boy blue story ' to make you realize how very much old I be than you . I be practically grow up , when you be still a dear delightful baby . I could have pick you up in my arm and carry you about . oh , can not you see that , however much I love he perhaps I should rather say : just because I love he , because I have always want to help he carry his heavy stone ; make the good of his life , and accomplish manfully the task he set himself to do I could not possibly marry my little boy Blue ? I could not , oh I could not , let he tie his youth and brightness to a woman , staid and middle - aged , who might almost be his mother ! " 

 the earnest , anxious voice , eager in its determined insistence , cease . 

 the Boy sit very still , his head bend forward , his brown hand clasp his knee . then suddenly he kneel up beside she , lean over the arm of her chair , and look into her eye . there be in his face such a tender reverence of adoration , that the Aunt know she need not be afraid to have he so near . this be holy ground . she put from off her foot the shoe of doubt and distrust ; wait , in perfect calmness , to hear what he have to say . 

 " dear , " murmur the Boy , tenderly , " your little story might possibly have have the effect you intend specially the place where you pause and gaze at I as if you see I still with sand upon my nose , and ten pink toe like sea - shell ! that be calculate to make any chap feel youngish , and a bit shy . be not   it ? yes ; they might have tell the way you mean , be it not for one dear sentence which overshadow all the rest . you say just now : ' I know my little boy Blue have no mother . I want to take he in my arm , smooth his curl , and comfort he . ' Christobel , that dear wish of yours be a gift you then give to your little boy Blue . you can not   take it away now , because he have grow big . he still have no mother , no sister , no near relation in the world . that all hold good . can you refuse he the haven , the help , the comfort you would have give he then , now when at last he be old enough to know and understand ; to turn to they , in grateful worship and wonder ? would you have I marry a girl as feather - brain , as harum - scarum , as silly as I often be myself ? you suggest Mollie ; but the boy Blue of to - day agree with his small wise self of twenty year ago and say : ' fank , but I do not   like girl ! ' oh , Christobel , I want a woman 's love , a woman 's arm , a woman 's understanding tenderness ! you say , just now , you wish you have be my mother . do not the love of the sort of wife a fellow really want , have a lot of the mother in it too ? I have   be fill with such a glory , Christobel , since you admit what you feel for your little boy Blue because I seem to know , somehow , that have once feel it , though the feeling may have go to sleep , you could never put it quite away . but , if your little Boy Blue come back , from the other end of the world , and want you " 

 the Boy stop suddenly , strike dumb by the look on the beautiful face beneath his . he see it pale to absolute whiteness , while the dear firm lip falter and tremble . he see the startled pain leap into the eye . he do not understand the cause of her emotion , or know that he have waken in that strongly repress nature the desperate hunger for motherhood , possible only to woman at the fine and well . 

 she realize now why she have never forget she little boy Blue of the Dovercourt sand . he , in his baby beauty and sweetness , have waken the embryo mother in the warm - hearted girl of sixteen . and now he have come back , in the full strength of his young manhood , overflow with passionate ideality and romance , to teach the lonely woman of thirty - six the true sweet meaning of love and of wifehood . 

 her heart seem to turn to marble and cease beat . she feel helpless in her pain . only the touch of her little boy Blue , or of baby Boy Blues so like he , that they must have come trot down the sand of life straight from the heaven of his love and her , could ever still this ache at her bosom . 

 she look helplessly up into his longing , glow , boyish face so sweet , so young , so beautiful . 

 should she put up her arm and draw it to her breast ? 

 she have give no actual promise to the Professor . she have not mention he to the Boy . 

 ah , dear God ! if one have wait twelve long year for a thing which be to prove but an empty husk after all ! in order not to fail the possible expectation of another , have she any right to lay such a heavy burden of disappointment upon her little boy Blue ? and , if she must do so , how could she good help he to bear it ? 

 " fank , " come a brave little voice , with almost startling distinctness , across the shore of memory ; " fank , but I always do my own cawwying . " 

 at last she find her voice . 

 " boy dear , " she say , gently ; " please go now . I be tired . " 

 then she shut her eye . 

 in a few second she hear the gate close , and know the garden be empty . 

 tear slip from between the closed lid , and course slowly down her cheek . the only right way be apt to be a way of such pain at the moment , that even those soul possess clear vision and endow with strong faith , be unable to hear the golden clarion - call , sound amid the din of present conflict : " through much tribulation , enter into the kingdom . " 

 thus hopeless tear fall in the old garden . 

 and Martha , the elderly housekeeper , faithful but curious , let fall the lath of the green Venetian blind cover the storeroom window , through which she have permit herself to peep . as the postern gate close on the erect figure of the boy , she drop the blind and turn away , an unwonted tear run down the furrow of her hard old face . 

 " Lord love ' I m ! " she say . " he will get what he want in time . there be not a woman walk this earth as could not   never refuse ' I m nothing . " 

 with which startling array of negative , old Martha compile one supreme positive in favour of the boy , leave altogether out of account alas ! the Professor . 

 then she wipe her eye with her apron , and chid her nose harshly for an unexpected display of sentiment . 

 and the Boy tramp back to his hotel with his soul full of glory , know his first march round have be to some purpose . the wall of the beloved Citadel have tremble indeed . 

 " and the evening and the morning be the first day . " 




 the second DAY 

 MISS CHARTERIS take CONTROL 

 the Boy arrive in flannel , his racket under his arm . he come in , as usual , through the little green gate in the red - brick fruit - wall at the bottom of the garden . from the first , he have take this privilege , which as a matter of fact have never be accord to anybody . 

 the Professor always enter by the front door , place his umbrella in the stand , wet or shine ; leave his golosh on the mat : hang up his cap and gown , and follow Jenkins into the drawing - room . though he have call regularly , twice a week , during the last dozen year first on his old friend and tutor , Professor Charteris ; after his death , on his widow and daughter ; and , when Miss Charteris be leave alone , on herself only he never fail to knock and ring ; nor do he ever enter unannounced . 

 the Boy have dash in at the garden gate on the occasion of his second visit , and appear to consider that he have thus create a precedent which should always be follow . 

 once , and once only on her thirtieth birthday the Professor have bring Miss Charteris a bouquet ; but , be very absent - minded , he deposit the bouquet on the mat , and advance into the drawing - room carry his golosh in his left hand . have shake hand with his right , he vaguely present the golosh . Miss Charteris , never at a loss where her friend be concern , take the Professor 's golosh from his hand , carry they out into the hall , find the bouquet on the mat , and save the situation by put the flower in water , and thank the Professor with somewhat more hilarity than the ordinary presentation of a bouquet would have call forth . 

 but to return to the second day . the Boy arrive in flannel , and tea be a merry meal . the boy want particular concern the marriage , which have take place a year or so before , between Martha maid of thirty year ' standing , now act as cook - housekeeper to Miss Charteris and Jenkins , the butler . the boy want to know which propose , Jenkins or Martha ; in what term they announce the fact of their engagement , to Miss Charteris ; whether Jenkins ever " buck up and look like a bridegroom , " and whether Martha wear orange - blossom and a wedding veil . he extort the admission that Christobel have be present at the wedding , and insist on a detailed account ; over which , when give at last , he slap his knee so often , and go into such peal of laughter , that Miss Charteris glance anxiously towards the kitchen and pantry window , which unfortunately look out on the garden . 

 the Boy expatiate on his enthusiastic admiration for Martha ; but at the same time be jolly well certain he would have bolt when it come to " I , Martha , take thee , Jenkins , " have he stand in the latter 's shoe . Miss Charteris do not dare admit , that as a matter of fact the sentence have be : " I , Martha , take thee , Noah . " that the meek Jenkins should possess so historical and patriarchal a name , would completely have finish the Boy , who be already take considerable risk by combine much laughter with an unusually large number of explosive bun . 

 the boy would have it , that , except in the rŰle of bride and subsequent conjugal owner and disciplinarian , Martha be perfect . 

 Miss Charteris admit Martha 's unrivalled excellence as a cook , her economy in management , and fidelity of heart . but Martha have a temper . also , though undoubtedly a superficial fault , yet try to the artistic eye of Miss Charteris , Martha 's hair be apt to be dishevel and untidy . 

 " it be a bit wispy , " admit the Boy , reluctantly . " why do not   you tell she so ? " 

 Miss Charteris smile . " boy dear , I dare not ! it would be as much as my place be worth , to make a personal observation to Martha ! " 

 " I will tell she for you , if you like , " say the Boy , coolly . 

 " if you do , " warn Miss Charteris , " it will be the very last remark you will ever make in Martha 's kitchen , boy . " 

 " oh , there be way of telling , " say the Boy , airily ; and pinch an explosive bun . 

 after tea they take their racket and stroll down the lawn , pause a moment while she choose he a buttonhole . the tie be orange on this second day , and she gather the opening bud of a William Allen Richardson rise . she smile into its golden heart as she pin it in his white flannel coat . somehow it bring a flash of remembrance of the golden heart of little Boy Blue , who could not bear that any one should be past pray for , or that even a scarecrow should seem lonely . 

 they cross the lane and enter the paddock ; tighten the net on the tennis - court ; choose out half a dozen brand - new ball , and settle down to fast and furious single . 

 Miss Charteris play as well as she have ever play in her life ; but the boy be off his service , and she beat he six to four . next time , he pull off ' game all , ' but lose the set ; then be beat , three to six . 

 Miss Charteris be glow with the exercise , and the consciousness of be in great form . 

 " boy dear ! " she call , as she play the win stroke of the third set , " I be afraid you be lazy to - day ! " 

 the boy walk up to the net , and look at she through his racket . 

 " I be not lazy , " he say ; " but I be on the wrong side of Jordan . this sort of thing be waste of time . I want to go over , and start march . " 

 " do not   be absurd , boy . I prefer this side Jordan , thank you ; and you shall stay here until you beat I . " 

 the boy win the next set . 

 it be deliciously cool and quiet under the mulberry - tree . 

 the boy be quite subdued for he . he seem inclined to do his marching in silence , on this second day . 

 Miss Charteris feel her mental balance restore . she hold the rein to - day , and begin consider how to deal wisely with the boy . so much depend upon how she manage he . 

 at length she say : " boy , when you be at Trinity , I often use to see you . I know you be my little boy Blue of all those year ago . I use to feel inclined to send for you , talk to you for your good , and urge you to set to , and do great thing ; but I remember the stone , and the bucket ; and I do not want to let myself in for a third snubbing . " 

 the boy smile . " do you think I a lazy beggar ? " he ask . " I be not   really , you know . I do quite a good deal of all kind of thing . but I do not   want to get play out . I want to do thing all the rest of my life . fellow who grind at college and come out Senior Wranglers , begin and end there . you do not   hear of them again . " 

 " I see , " say Miss Charteris , amusement in her eye . " so you feel it wisest to avoid be Senior Wrangler ? " 

 " just so , " say the Boy . " I be content with a fairly respectable B.A. and I hope you see I take it . how rotten it be , go up in a bunch , all hang on to an old chap 's finger . " 

 " boy , boy ! I know all about you ! you waste golden opportunity ; you decline to use your excellent ability ; you give the authority an anxious time . you be so disgracefully popular , that everybody think your example the fine thing to follow , and you be more or less responsible for every lark and row which take place during your time . " 

 the boy do not smile . he look at she , with a quaint , innocent seriousness , which make she feel almost uncomfortable . 

 " dear , " he say , " I have plenty of money , and heap of friend , and I want to have a good time . also I want all the other fellow to have a good time ; and I enjoy get the well of all the old fogy who have forget what youth be like if they have ever know it . and I have no mother to ask I question , and no sister to turn up at my room unexpectedly . but I can tell you this , Christobel . I hope to be marry soon ; and I hope to marry a woman so sweet and noble and pure , that her very presence test a man 's every thought , feeling , and memory . and I can honestly look into your dear eye and say : my wife will be welcome to know every detail of every prank I ever play in Cambridge ; nor be there a thing in those three year I need feel ashamed of her know . there ! will that do ? " 

 Miss Charteris throw out a deprecatory hand . " oh , boy dear ! " she say . " I never doubt that . my little boy Blue , do not   I know you ? but I can not let you talk as if you owe I any explanation . how curious to think I see you so often during those year , yet we never actually meet . " 

 the boy smile . " yes , " he say , " we be all awfully proud of you , you know . what be it you take at Girton ? " 

 Miss Charteris mention , modestly , the high honour in classic as yet take by a woman . the boy have often hear it before . but he listen with bated breath . 

 " yes , " he say , " we be awfully proud of it , because of your tennis , and because of you be well , just you . if you have be a round - shoulder little person in a placket , we should have take it differently . we always call you ' the Goddess , ' because of your splendid walk . do you know ? " 

 " no , boy , I do not know ; but I confess to feel immensely flattered . only , take a friend 's advice , and avoid conversational allusion to placket , because you be obviously ignorant of the meaning of the word . and now , tell I ? have successfully escape so serious a drawback to future greatness as become Senior Wrangler , on what definite enterprise have you embark ? " 

 " fly , " say the Boy , sit forward in his chair . " I be go to break every record . I be go to fly higher , far , fast , than any man have ever fly before . this week , if I have not stay on here you know originally I come up only for the ' May week ' I be to have do a Channel flight . ah , you do not   know what it mean , to own three fly - machine , all of different make , and each the good of its kind ! you feel you own the world ! and then to climb into your seat and go whirl away , with the wonderful hum in your ear , master the air the hitherto invincible air . may I tell you what I be go to do for my next fly ? start from the high ground between Dover and Folkestone ; fly over the Channel ; circle round Boulogne Cathedral you remember the high dome , rise out of the old town surround by the rampart ? then back across the Channel , and to ground again at Folkestone ; all in one flight ; and I hope to do it in record time , if wind be right . " 

 " and if wind be wrong , boy ? if you rush out and take the horrid risk of the cross - current you tell we about ? if something happen to your propeller , and you fall headlong into the sea ? " 

 " oh , it be all U p then , " say the Boy , lightly . " but one never expect that sort of thing to happen ; and when it do , all be over so quickly that there be no time for anticipation . beside , there must be pioneer . every good life give , advance the cause . " 

 Christobel Charteris look at he . his be not the terrible , unmistakable , relentless face of the bird - man . he be brilliant with enthusiasm , but it be the enthusiasm of the sportsman , keen to excel ; of Young England , dauntless , fearless , eager to break record . the spirit of the true bird - man have not , as yet , enter into her little Boy Blue . 

 she press her hand upon her bosom . it ache still . 

 " boy dear , " she say , softly . " have it ever strike you that , if you marry , your wife whoever she might be would most probably want you to give up fly ? I can not imagine a woman be able to bear that a man who be she all , should do these thing . " 

 the boy never turn a hair ! he do not bind in his seat . he do not even look at she . 

 " why , of course , dear , " he say , " if you wish it , I should give up fly , like a shot , and sell my aeroplane . I know plenty of chap who would like to buy they to - morrow . and I will tell you what we would do . we would buy the big , most powerful motor - car we could get , and we would tear all over the country , exceed the speed - limit , and do everything jolly we could think of . that would be every bit as good as fly , if if we do it together . I say , Christobel do you know how to make a sentence of ' together ' ? just three word : to get she ! that be what ' together ' spell for I now . " 

 Miss Charteris smile . " you might have take honour in spelling , boy . and I be not the sort of person who enjoy exceed speed - limit . also I be afraid I have a troublesome habit of always want to stop and see all there be to see . " 

 but the boy be infinitely accommodate . " oh , we would not   exceed the speed - limit much . and we would stop everywhere , and see everything . you should breakfast in London ; lunch at the Old White Horse , Mr. Pickwick 's inn at Ipswich ; have tea at the Maid 's head , beneath the shadow of Norwich Cathedral , where you could wash your hand in Queen Elizabeth 's fusty old bedroom what a lot of bedroom Queen Elizabeth sleep in , and make they all fusty and have time to show I little Boy Blue 's breakwater at Dovercourt , before dinner . there be nothing like motor ! " 

 " it sound interesting , certainly , " say Miss Charteris . 

 " and then , " continue the Boy , in a calm business - like voice , " it be less expensive than fly . you run through fifty thousand a year in no time with aeroplane . and of course we should want to open both my place . I be awfully glad I do not   let the tenant in the old home renew their lease . as it be , they turn out in three month . oh , I say , Christobel , I do believe it be a set worthy of you . have you ever see it ? the great hall , the old picture , the oak staircase I once ride down it on my rock - horse and come to utter smash . and outside the park , the lake , the beech avenue , the rose - garden , the peacock . and a funny little old village belong to we . think how the people must want look after . I believe you would like it all I really believe you would ! and think , ah , just think what it would be to I , to see my own splendid wife , queen over everything in my dear jolly old home ! Hullo ! Hark to all the clock ! what be that striking ? seven ? oh , I say ! I be din with the Master to - night . I must rush off , and change . though I be such a bad lot , they all seem quite pleased to see I again . really they do ! have I stay too long ? ... sure ? ... may I come to - morrow ? ... you be most awfully good to I . good - bye . " 

 and the boy be go . he have hold her hand , in a firm , strong clasp , a second long than the conventional handshake ; his clear eye , exactly on a level with her , have look at she gravely , wistfully , tenderly ; and he be go . 

 she walk slowly up the lawn . she must write a few letter before post time ; then dress for her solitary dinner . 

 she feel a little flat ; quite without cause . what could have be more satisfactory , in every way , than the Boy 's visit ; in spite of his absurd castle in the air ? these must be tactfully demolish to - morrow . to - day , it be wisest just to let he talk . 

 poor little boy Blue ! instead of the wall of Jericho fall , his own castle in the air would come tumble about his ear . poor little boy Blue ! 

 she feel she have be completely mistress of the situation to - day , hold it exactly as she wish it to be . there be no need to fear the remain day . 

 and when the seven day be over what then ? ... she certainly feel very flat this evening . how suddenly the boy have go ! there be still so much she want to say to he .... and to - morrow be the Professor 's afternoon . mercifully , he never stay later than four o'clock . it be to be hop the boy would not turn up early ! but there be never any knowing what the boy would do . 

 she smile as she mount the flight of stone step , and pass into the house . 

 and , outside the postern gate , the Boy throw up his cap , and catch it ; then start off and sprint a hundred yard ; then , turn aside , leapt a five - bar gate , and make off across the field . when he pull up at last , in his own bedroom , he have just time to tub , shave , and wrestle with his evening clothe . he commune with himself in the few moment of enforce stillness , while he master his tie . 

 " that be all right , " he say . " I jolly well work that all right ! there be nothing to frighten she to - day not a thing . dear lip ! they never tremble once ; and no more turn faint . and , my Goody , how she lecture I ! I wonder who be be tell she what . I know why she do it too . she want to feel quite sure she be boss the show . and so she be , bless she ! but I march round ! yes , I jolly well march round .... oh , I say ! can not   you stop where I put you ? " this , to his tie . 

 then , with her golden rise in his button - hole , fasten by the pin from his flannel coat , off go the boy to dine with the Master of his college . 

 " and the evening and the morning be the second day . " 




 the third day 

 the boy INVADES the KITCHEN 

 the Boy sit on a corner of the kitchen table , swing a loose leg , and watch Martha make hot buttered - toast . 

 he have arrive early , and , find no one in the garden , have enter the house by the garden - door , to pursue investigation upstairs . 

 on the mat in the hall he see a pair of golosh ; in the umbrella - stand , a very large , badly - roll umbrella ; hang on a peg near by , a professor 's cap and gown . 

 the boy stand stock still in the middle of the little hall , and look at the golosh . 

 then from the drawing - room , through the closed door , come the voice of Miss Charteris full , clear , measured , melodious read greek tragedy . 

 ťrrois anaidťs , ťn tŠchei neanŪa 
 declaim Miss Charteris ; and the boy flee . 

 arrive in the kitchen , he persuade Martha that cigarette smoke be fatal to black - beetle . he go about , blow fragrant cloud into every possible crack and cranny . Martha watch he , out of the corner of her eye , crawl along under the dresser in his immaculate white flannel , and Martha bless her star that her kitchen floor be so spotlessly clean . only this morning she have remark to Jenkins that he could very well eat his dinner off the board . mercifully , Jenkins tiresome man though he usually be have not take this literally ; or he might have make the floor less fit for the Boy 's perambulation . 

 have take all this trouble in order to establish his unquestioned right to smoke in Martha 's kitchen , and to pose as a public benefactor while so do , the Boy seat himself on the edge of the table , exactly behind Martha ; light a fresh " Zenith , " and prepare to enjoy himself . 

 Martha glance nervously at the smoke , issue from crack and hole on all side . it give she a feeling that the house be on fire . of course she know it be not ; but to feel the house be on fire , be only one degree less alarming than to know it be . however , beetle be nasty thing ; and the condescend kindness and regard for Martha 's personal comfort , which crawl about after they in white flannel , be gratify to a degree . 

 so Martha turn and give the boy one of her unusual smile . he be very intently blow ring " bubble " Martha call they afterwards , when explain they to jenkin ; but that be Martha 's mistake . they be smoke ring . it be one of the Boy 's special accomplishment . he be an expert at blow ring . 

 presently : " Martha , my duck " he say suddenly . 

 Martha jump . " bless we , Mr. Guy ! what a name ! " 

 " what be the matter with it ? " inquire the boy , innocently . " I consider it a very nice name , and scriptural . " 

 " oh , I do not   mean m ' own name , " explain Martha , more flushed than the warmth of the fire warrant . " not but what m ' godfather and godmother might well ' ave choose I a well . " 

 " oh , do not   blame they , overmuch , Martha , " say the Boy , earnestly . " you see their choice be limited . if you study your catechism you will find that it have to be ' n ' or ' m ' ' Naomi ' or ' Martha . ' even at that early age , they think you favour ' Martha ' rather than ' Naomi ' ; so they name you ' Martha . ' " 

 " well I never ! " exclaim Mrs. Jenkins . " ' N ' or ' m ' ! so it be ! now I never notice that before . we live and learn ! and Jenkins silly man ' as always bin annoy that they name ' I m ' noah . ' but how about when you be christen , Mr. Guy ? " 

 " oh , " explain the Boy , with a wave of his cigarette , " I be christen a bit later than you , Martha ; and , by that time , Parliament have sit in solemn convocation , and have bring in a Bill to the effect that all needless and vexatious limitation and restriction in the Prayer Book might for the future be disregard . the first to go be ' N ' or ' m. ' " 

 " well , I never ! " say Martha . " I wish they would ha ' do it afore my time . " 

 " you see , " expound the Boy , who be enjoy himself vastly , and get the conjunction of the golosh and the Greek play off his mind ; " you see , Martha , those progressive Bills , intimately affect the whole community , of vital importance to the nation at large , be always block by the House of Lords . if the Commons could have have their own way , you might have be name ' Lucy ' or ' Clara . ' " 

 " I do not   incline to ' Lucy ' or ' Clara , ' sir , " say Mrs. Jenkins , decidedly ; " be , as they always strike I , sickly story - book sort of name ; but I do like justice and a free country ! I always have feel doubtful o ' they Lords , since I listen to my married niece 's husband , a very respectable journeyman tailor but mostly out of work ; and if it be their do that I be ' Martha , ' well , I shall know what to do with Jenkins 's vote that be all ! " 

 the Boy slap his leg and rock . " Martha , you ought to be put up to speak at political meeting . that be the whole thing in a nutshell : cause , effect , result , argument , everything ! oh , my wig ! yes , they be a lot of old stick - in - the - muds in the Upper House , be not   they ? " pursue the Boy who have have a long line of dignified ancestor in that much abused place ; have an uncle there at the present moment , and be more than likely eventually to have to sit there himself " a rotten lot of old stick - in - the - muds , Martha ; but I think they do well by you . I would give they the benefit of Jenkins 's vote . I really would . I be glad they choose ' M , ' not ' n. ' Naomi be a widow and dismal . she never make the small effort to buck up . but Martha be a nice person ; a bit flurried perhaps , and hot - temper ; but well up in cooking , and keen on it . I like Martha . " 

 the boy sit and meditate . why do she read Greek play with a person who leave golosh on the mat , and bring out an ancient umbrella with a waist , on an absolutely cloudless day ? 

 " it be not   m ' own name surprise I , Mr. Guy , sir , " remark Martha , coyly ; " it be the name you be pleased to hadd . " 

 the Boy pull himself together . " eh , what ? oh , ' Martha , my duck ' ? I see . I hope you do not   mind , Martha . it seem to I rather a suitable and pretty addition to ' Martha . ' you see , yours be a name which can not be shorten when one feel affectionate . ' Sarah ' can be ' Sally ' ; ' Amelia ' can be ' milly ' ; ' Caroline ' can be ' Carrie ' ; but ' Martha ' remain ' Martha ' however love people feel . what do Jenkins call you when he feel affectionate ? " 

 Martha snort . " jenkin know ' be place , " she say , jerk the round lid off the stove , and put on the kettle . 

 " Jenkins be a model , " smile the boy . 

 then Martha look round , her feminine curiosity , and perhaps a touch of jealousy , get the well of her respectful discretion . she have see so much , and hear so little ; and she be a very old family servant . 

 " what do you call she , Mr. Guy ? " she ask , in a confidential whisper , with a jerk of the head toward the mulberry - tree . 

 " she ? " repeat the boy , surprised . then his whole tone soften . it be so sweet to speak her name to some one . " I call she ' christobel , ' " he say , gently . 

 but Martha want to know more . Martha be woman enough to desire an unshared possession of her own . she bent over the fire , stir it through the bar . 

 " Mr. Guy , sir , I suppose you do not   I suppose you do that be to say , sir do you call she what you have   be pleased to call I ? " 

 " eh , what ? " say the Boy , vaguely . 

 " oh , I see . ' Christobel , my ' oh , no , Martha . no , I do not ! not even when I feel most affectionate . " here the boy be seize with sudden convulsion , slap his knee noiselessly , and rock on the kitchen table . he whisper it , in an ecstasy of enjoyment . " ' Christobel , my duck ! ' oh , lor ! ' Christobel , my duck ! ' I hope I shall be able to resist tell she . I should have to own I have call Martha so . ' Christobel , my ' " 

 Martha , wonder at the silence , look round suddenly . but the boy have that instant recover , and be sit gravely on the corner of the table . 

 " Martha , my duck , " he say , " to return to the original opening of this conversation : have Jenkins ever tell you what a nice little wisp of hair you have , behind your left ear ? " 

 " get along , sir ! " retort Martha , fairly blushing . " you be make game of I . " 

 " indeed , I be not , " say the Boy , seriously . " if you make it into a curl , Martha , and fasten it with an invisible pin , it would be quite too fascinating . you ask Jenkins . I say , Martha ? what be a placket ? " 

 " a placket , sir , " say Martha , on her way to fetch something from a shelf near which hang the kitchen mirror ; " a placket , sir , be a thing which show when it should not . " 

 " I see , " say the Boy . " then you could not   exactly go about in one . Martha , whose golosh be those , sit on the mat in the hall ? " 

 Martha snort . " an old woman 's , " she say , wrathfully . 

 the Boy consider this . " and do the umbrella with the waist belong to the same old woman ? " 

 Martha nod . 

 " and the Professor 's cap and gown , hang near by ? " 

 Martha hesitate . " ' tain't   always petticoat make an old woman , " she say , sententiously . 

 " Martha , you be pro - foundly right , " say the Boy . " do the Professor stay to tea ? " 

 " thank goodness no , sir . we draw the line at that , ' cept when Miss Hann come too . " 

 " who be Miss Hann ? " 

 " she be the Professor 's sister . " Martha hesitate ; pour hot water into the silver teapot ; then turn to whisper confidentially , with concentrated dislike : " she be always a - hegging of them on ! " 

 " what a curious occupation , " remark the Boy , blow a smoke - ring . " do Miss Hann come often ? " 

 " no , Mr. Guy . thank be , she be a hinvalid . " 

 " Poor Miss Hann . what be the matter with she ? " 

 Martha snort . " fancy herself too much . " 

 " what a curious complaint . what be the symptom ? " 

 " fancy herself in a bath - chair , " say Martha , scornfully . 

 " I see , " say the Boy . " oh , poor Miss Hann ! I should feel very sick if I fancy myself in a bath - chair . I wish I could meet Miss Hann . I should like to talk to she about the hegging - on business . " 

 " you would make she sit up , " say Martha , with spiteful enjoyment . 

 " oh no , I should not , " say the Boy . " that would not be kind to an invalid . I should see that she recline , comfortably ; and then I should jolly well flatten she out . " 

 at that moment a shadow fall across the sunny window . Miss Charteris , her guest have depart , pass down the garden step , and move across the lawn . 

 the Boy spring to his foot . at sight of she , his conscience smite he that he should have thus gossip and chaff with old Martha . he suddenly remember why he have originally find his way to the kitchen . 

 " Martha , " he say ; " I want you to let I carry out the tea - tray this afternoon . she do not   know I be here . she will think it be you or jenkin , till she look round . let I carry it out , Martha , there be a duck ! " 

 " as you please , sir , " say Martha ; " but if you want she to think it be jenkin , you must put it down with a clatter . it take a man to be clumsy . " 

 the boy walk over to the window . the mulberry - tree be not visible from the kitchen table . 

 " do not   go there , Mr. Guy ! " cry Martha . " Miss Christobel will see you , sir . this window , and the pantry , show from the garden . if you want to ' ave a look at she , go through that door into the storeroom . the venetian blind be always down in there . there be one crack through which I " 

 Martha stop short , disconcert . 

 " one crack through which you think I could see ? thank you , Martha , " say the Boy , readily . " hurry up with the tray . " 

 he go into the store - room ; find Martha 's chink , and realize exactly what have be the extent of Martha 's view , during the last two day . 

 then he bend his hungry young eye on Christobel . 

 she be seat in a garden chair , her back to the house , her face towards the postern gate in the old red wall at the bottom of the garden . the rustic table , upon which he would soon deposit the tea - tray , be slightly behind and to the left of she . the sun shine through the mulberry leaf , glint on the pure whiteness of her gown . she lean her beautiful head back wearily . her whole attitude betoken fatigue . he could not see her face ; but he feel sure her eye be open ; and he know her eye be on the gate . 

 the Boy 's lip move . " Christobel , " he whisper . " Christobel belove ? " 

 she be wait ; and he know she be wait for he . 

 presently he drop the lath of the venetian blind , and turn to go . but first he take out his pocket - book and fasten the lath which lift most easily , to those above and below it , with halfpenny stamp . he know old Martha would take a hint from he . there must be no eye on the mulberry - tree to - day . 

 in the kitchen the tray be ready ; tea freshly make , thin bread - and - butter , cucumber sandwich ; hot butter - toast in perfection ; cornflour bun , warrant to explode ; all the thing he like most ; and , good of all , cup for two . he grasp the tray firmly with both hand . 

 " Martha , " he say , " you be a jewel ! I give you leave to watch I down the lawn from the kitchen window . but when I have safely arrive , turn your attention to your own tea , or I shall look up and shake my fist at your dear nice old face . and , I say , Martha , do you ever write postcard ? because , if you want any ha'penny stamp , you will find some on the storeroom blind . only , do not   want they , Martha , till this week be over , and I be go . " 

 Whereupon the boy lift the tray , and make for the door . 

 down the lawn he bear it , and set it safely on the rustic table . he be very deft of movement , be the boy ; yet , remember his instruction , he contrive to set it down with something of a clatter . 

 Miss Charteris do not turn her head her eye , half close beneath the long lash , be on the postern gate . 

 " Jenkins ? " she say . 

 " yes , ma'am , " reply the Boy , in excellent imitation of the meek tone of Jenkins . 

 " should any one call this afternoon , Jenkins , please remember that I be not ' at home . ' " 

 " Hip , hip , hurrah ! " say the Boy . 

 then she turn and her face be all , and more than all , he have hop it might be . 

 " oh , boy , " she say . " oh , boy dear ! " 

 after that , it be a very happy tea . neither have be quite natural , nor have they be really true to themselves , the day before ; so the delight of meeting seem to follow a long parting than the actual twenty - four hour . the Boy 's brown eye rest in tenderness on the hand that fill his cup , and she do not say " do not " ; she merely smile indulgently , and add the cream and sugar slowly , as if to let he do what he will . 

 the hum of bee be in the garden ; a sense of youth be in the air . the sunbeam dance among the mulberry leaf . 

 the Boy insist upon carry back the tray , to do away at once with the possibility of interruption from Jenkins . then he draw their chair into the deep shade of the mulberry - tree , a corner invisible from all window . the Boy have learn a lesson while look through the storeroom blind . 

 there they sit and talk , in calm content . it do not seem to matter much of what they speak , so long as they could lie back face one another ; each listen to the voice which hold so much more of meaning in it than the mere word it utter ; each look into the eye which have now become clear window through which shine the soul . 

 suddenly the Boy say : " how silly we be , the other day , to talk of the relative age of our body . what do they matter ? our soul be the real you and I. and our soul be always the same age . some soul be old old from the first . I have see an old soul look out of the eye of a little child ; and I have see a young soul dance in the eye of an old , old woman . you and I , thank God , have young soul , Christobel , and we shall be eternally young . " 

 he stretch his arm over his head , in utter joyful content with life . 

 " go on , boy dear , " say Christobel . " I be not sure that I agree with you ; but I like to hear you talk . " 

 " at first , " he say , " our body be so babyish that our soul do not find they an adequate medium of expression . but by and by our body grow and develop ; after which come the beautiful year of perfection , ten , twenty , thirty of they , when the young soul go strong and gay through life , clothe in the strong gay young body . then gradually , gradually , the strong young soul , in its unwearied , immortal youth , wear out the body . the body grow old , but not the soul . nothing can age that ; and when at last the body quite wear out , the young soul break free , and begin again . youthful soul wear out their body quick than old one ; just as a strong young boy romp through a suit of clothe soon than a weakly old man . but there be always life more abundant , and a full life far on . so the mating of soul be the all - important thing ; and when young soul meet and mate , what do it matter if there be a few year ' difference in the age of their body ? their essential youthfulness will surmount all that . " 

 Christobel look at he , and truly for a moment the young soul in her leapt out to his , in glad response . then the other side of the question rise before she . 

 " ah , but , boy dear , " she say , " the soul express themselves their need , their delight , their activity through the body . and suppose one body , in the soul - union , be wear out soon than the other ; that be hard on the other hard on both . boy my little boy Blue shall I tell you an awful secret ? I suppose I sit too closely over my book at Girton ; I suppose I be not sufficiently careful about good print , or good light . anyway boy dear I have to use glass when I read . " she look wistfully into his bright eye . " you see ? already I be begin to grow old . " her sweet lip tremble . 

 in a moment he be kneel by the arm of her chair , bend over she , as he do on the first day ; but as he do not do yesterday . suddenly she realize why she have feel so flat yesterday , after he be go . 

 he lift her hand and kiss it gently , back and palm . then he part the third finger from the rest , with his own brown one , and hold that against his warm young lip . 

 she draw her hand slowly away ; pass it over his hair ; then let it fall upon her lap . she could not speak ; she could not move ; she could not send he away . she want he so her little boy Blue , of long ago . 

 " Old , my Beloved ? " he say . " you old ! never ! always perfect perfect to I . and why not wear glass ? heap of mere kid wear glass , and wear they all the time . only how alarmingly clever you must look in spectacle , Christobel . it would terrify I now ; but by and by it will make I feel proud . I think one would expect glass to go with those awe - inspire classical honour . with my barely respectable B.A. , I dare not   lay claim to any outward mark of erudition . " then , as she do not smile , but still gaze up at he , wistfully , his look soften to still deep tenderness : " dear eye , " he murmur , " oh dear , dear eye , " and gently lay his lip on each in turn . 

 " do not , " she say , with a half sob . " ah , boy , do not ! you know you must not kiss I . " 

 " kiss you ! " he say , still bend over she . " do you call that kissing ? " then he laugh ; and the joyous love in his laughter wring her heart . " Christobel , on the seventh day , when the gate fly open , and the wall fall down ; when the citadel surrender ; when you admit you be my own then I shall kiss you ; then you will know what kissing really mean . " 

 he bend above she . his lip be very near to her . she close her eye and wait . her own lip tremble . she know how fearfully it tempt the boy that her lip should tremble because his be near ; yet she let they tremble . she forget to remember the past ; she forget to consider the future . she be conscious of only one thing : that she want she little boy Blue to teach she what kissing really mean . so she close her eye and wait . 

 she do not hear he go ; but presently she know he be no long there . 

 she open her eye . 

 the Boy have walk across the lawn , and stand look into the golden heart of an opening yellow rise . his back appear very uncompromising ; very determined ; very erect . 

 she rise and walk over to he . as she move forward , with the graceful dignity of motion which be always her , her mental balance return . 

 she slip her hand beneath his arm . " come , boy , " she say ; " let we walk up and down , and talk . it be enervate to sit too long in the sunshine . " 

 he turn at once , suit his step to her , and they pace the lawn in silence . 

 when they reach the postern gate the Boy stand still . something in his look suddenly recall her little Boy Blue , when the sand on his small nose could not detract from the dignity of his little face , nor weaken its stern decision . 

 he take both her hand in his , and look into her eye . 

 " Christobel , " he say , " I must go . I must go , because I dare not stay . you be so wonderful this afternoon ; so dear beyond expression . I know you trust I absolutely ; but this be only the third day ; and I can not trust myself , dear . so I be off ! " 

 he lift both her hand to his lip . 

 " may I go , my queen ? " he say . 

 " yes , boy , " she answer . " go . " 

 and he go . 

 it be hard to hear the thud of the closing door . for some time she stand wait , just on the inside . she think he would come back , and she wish he to find she there , the moment he open the door . 

 but the Boy be the boy do not come back . 

 presently she return to her chair , in the shade of the mulberry - tree . she lay , with closed eye , and live again through the afternoon , from the moment when the boy have say : " Hip , hip , hurrah ! " there come a time when she turn very pale , and her lip tremble , as they have do before . 

 at length she rise and pace slowly up the lawn . on her face be the quiet calm of an irrevocable decision . 

 " to - morrow , " she say , " I must tell the boy about the Professor . " 

 in the middle of the night , Martha , be wakeful , become haunted by the remembrance of the smoke , as it have curl from crack and keyhole in the kitchen . she feel constrain to put on a wonderful pink wrapper , and go creak slowly down the stair to make sure the house be not on fire . Martha 's wakefulness be partly cause by the unusual fact of a large and hard curl - paper , behind her left ear . 

 Miss Charteris be also awake . she be not worry by memory of smoke , or vision of fire ; and her soft hair be completely innocent of curl - paper . but she be consider how she should tell the boy about the Professor ; and that consideration be not conducive to calm slumber . she hear Martha go creak down the stair ; and , as Martha come creak up again , she open her door , and confront she . 

 " what be you do , Martha ? " she say . 

 Martha , intensely conscious of her curl - paper , be about to answer with more than her usual respectful irritability , when the eye of the two woman mistress and maid meet , in the light of their respective candle , and a sudden sense of fellowship in the cause of their night vigil pass between they . 

 Martha smile a crooked smile , half ashamed to be see smile . when she speak , her aspirate fall away from she more completely than in the daytime . 

 " ' e go crawlin ' about the kitchen , " she say , in a muffle midnight whisper ; " all in ' be white flannel , puffin ' smoke in every crack an ' ' ole to kill the beetle . so kind ' e mean it ; but I could not   sleep for wonderin ' if the place be smokin ' still . I ' ad to go down an ' see . ' ow come you to be awake , Miss Christobel ? " 

 " thing he say in the garden , Martha , have give I food for thought . I begin think they over ; and sleep go . " 

 Martha smile again and this time the smile come more easily . " ' E ' as a way of keepin ' one on the go , " she say ; " but we would well be gittin ' to sleep now , miss . ' e'll be at it again to - morrow , bless ' be ' eart ! " and Martha , in her pink wrapper , lumber upwards . 

 but the Boy , who have this disturbing effect on the woman who love he , sleep soundly himself , one arm fling high above his tumbled head . and if the sweet mother , who perforce have have to let she die arm slip from about her baby - boy , almost before his little foot could carry he across a room , see from above the pure radiance on his lip and brow as he sleep , she must have turn to the Emerald Throne with glad thanksgiving for the answer vouchsafe to a dead mother 's prayer . 

 " and the evening and the morning be the third day . " 




 the fourth day 

 CHRISTOBEL signs her name 

 " I be exhaust , " say the Boy , reach out a long arm , and secure his third piece of hot butter - toast . " I be ruffle . my usual calm mental poise be overthrow and on the Sabbath , of all day ! every feather I possess have be rub up the wrong way . " he lie back in the depth of his chair , stretch out his leg , and look dejectedly at Christobel . 

 her quiet smile envelop he . her look be as a cool touch on a hot forehead . 

 " poor little boy Blue ! I think something be wrong . I should feel a keener anxiety , be the hot butter - toast less obviously console . " 

 " I will jolly well never go again , " say the Boy , with indignation . " not I ! " 

 " before you be bear , boy ; when I go to school , " say Miss Charteris , " we be teach to say ' not i. ' and if you be to tell I where you have be , on this Sabbath afternoon , I might be able to give you more intelligent sympathy . " 

 " I have   be to a drawing - room meeting , " say the Boy , " and I have   hear a woman hold forth . for an hour and a quarter , I have   sit stuff up , breathe the atmosphere of other people 's go - to - meeting clothe , and hear a good lady go meander on , while I have no room for my leg . " 

 " I think you seem find they extra long , boy . why do you go to a drawing - room meeting ? " 

 " I go , " say the Boy , " because the dear old thing in whose house it be hold ask I to go . she use to know my mother . when I be at Trinity she look I up , often invite I to her charming home , give I excellent little dinner , follow by the kind , nice , most nervous little preachment . do not   look amuse , dear . I never fail to profit . I respect she for it . she be as good and genuine as they make them ; and if she have stand up this afternoon , with her friendly smile , and dear shaky old voice , and give we an exposition of the twenty - third Psalm , we should have all come away quite ' good and happy . ' instead of which oh , my wig ! " 

 the boy take an explosive bun , and put it whole into his mouth . " the only way to manage they on Sunday , " he explain , as soon as speech be possible , " when sweeping be not the right thing . but let we hope Mollie 's papa 's ' clerical brother ' will not   find it out . there would certainly be less conversation and few crumb , but no fun at all . " 

 " I do not   think you need be afraid , boy dear . even should such a way out of the difficulty occur to they , I be inclined to think they would prefer the explosion , to the whole bun at a mouthful . it have a rather startling effect , you know , until one get use to see it do . I can not   quite imagine an archdeacon do it , while stand on the hearthrug in conversation with my brother . now tell I what the good lady say , which you find so try . " 

 " oh , she meander on , " grumble the Boy . " she tell we all we should have be , if we have not be what we be ; and all we might be , if we be not what we be ; and all we shall be , when we be not what we be ! she implore we to consider , and weigh well , where we should go , if , by a sudden and unexpected dispensation of Providence , we cease to be where we then be . I jolly well know the answer to that ; for if Providence have suddenly dispensate which it do not , for a good three - quarter of an hour I should have be here , here , here , as fast as my good Sunday boot could carry I ! " his brown eye soften . " ah , think what ' here ' mean , " he say . " think ! ' here ' mean you ! " 

 but Miss Charteris do not wish the conversation to become too meltingly personal . 

 " what else do she say , boy ? " 

 he consult the mulberry leaf , then bound in his chair . " ha , I have it ! I keep this tit - bit for you . she use an astronomical illustration , I have not   the least idea apropos of what , but she tell we exactly how many million of mile the sun be from the earth ; and then she smile upon we blandly , and say : ' or be it billion ? ' think of that ! she say : ' or be it billion ? ' in exactly the same tone of voice as she might have say of the bonnet she have on : ' I buy it , at a sale , for elevenpence three farthing , or be it a shilling ? ' " 

 " oh , boy , you really be naughty ! I never connect you with personal sarcasm . " 

 " yes , but that sort of woman should not , " complain the boy . " and with half Cambridge sitting listen . ' million , or be it billion ? ' oh lor ! " 

 " poor thing ! " remark Miss Charteris . " she could not have know that she have in the audience a person who have only just avoid the drawback to future enterprise , of be Senior Wrangler . have she realize that , she would have be more careful with her figure . " 

 " tease away ! " say the Boy . " I do not   care , now I be safe here . only I shall not   tell you any more . " 

 " I do not   want to hear any more , boy . I always enjoy appreciation , even of thing I do not myself appreciate . but non - appreciation do not appeal to I . if a person have mean to be effective and prove inadequate , or try to do good and do harm , I would rather not know it , unless I can help to put matter right . have some more tea , boy ; and then I want to talk to you myself . I have something rather special to tell you . " 

 the boy stand up and bring his cup to the little table . when she have fill it , he kneel on one knee beside she , his elbow on the arm of her chair , and drink his tea there . 

 " I be sorry , dear , " he say , presently . " I will not   do it again . perhaps I listen wrong , because I be bored at be there at all . I say , Christobel it have just occur to I do you know my mother ? " 

 the old garden be very still . a hush , as of the Paradise of God , seem suddenly to fall upon it . as the Boy ask his quiet question , a spirit seem to hover , between they and the green dome of mulberry leaf above they , smooth the Boy 's tumbled hair , and touch the noble brow of the woman the Boy love ; a gentle , watch , thankful spirit eternally remember , and tenderly glad to be remember . for a few moment the silence be a silence which could not be break . the Boy lift wonder eye to the move leaf . Christobel lay her hand upon his , as it grip her chair . an unseen voice seem to whisper to the boy not in the stern tone of the Church , but as an eager , anxious , question : " wilt thou have this woman to be thy wed wife ? " and silently the Boy reply : " please God , I will " ; and , bending , kiss the hand rest on his . 

 the spell lift . Christobel speak . 

 " yes , boy dear , I know she . I have often wonder whether I might tell you . she and my mother be dear friend . I be thirteen when she die . you be three , poor little boy Blue ! two thing I specially remember about your mother : the peculiar radiance of her face a light from within , shin out ; and the fact that when she be in a room the whole atmosphere seem rarefied , beautify , uplifted . I think she live very near heaven , boy ; and , like Enoch , she walk straight in one day , and come back no more . she ' be not ' ; for God take she . " 

 another long holy silence . the mulberry leaf be still . then the Boy say , softly : " some day , will you tell I heap more detail lot of little thing about she ? no one ever have . but I seem almost to begin to remember she , when you talk of she . meanwhile , may I show you this ? " 

 he draw from the inner pocket of his coat , a small well - wear pocket - Bible . open it at the fly - leaf , he pass it to Miss Charteris . 

 " it be her , " he say . 

 she bent over it and read the inscription : 

 M. a. Chelsea 

 " through faith and patience inherit the promise . " 

 below , in a delicate writing , trace by a hand that tremble : 

 to my Baby boy from his mother 

 " I have pray for thee , that thy faith fail not . " 

 she look at it in silence . how much have this book mean during all these year , to the " Baby boy " ? have the book in his pocket , and the prayer hover about he , something to do with the fact that he be still just little boy Blue ? 

 the boy have take a fountain pen from his pocket , and be shake it vigorously over the grass . 

 now he pass it to she . 

 " write your dear name beneath , " he say . 

 Infinitely touch , she make no comment , raise no question . she take the pen , and write just " Christobel . " 

 " and the evening and the morning be the fourth day . " 




 the FIFTH DAY 

 guy CHELSEA takes CONTROL 

 " now , Sir Boy , " say Miss Charteris with decision , " this be your fifth day . our time be nearly over . you have do most of the talking . you have have thing entirely your own way . what ? ... oh , well , almost entirely your own way . I have allow you to play your Old Testament game to your heart 's content . with commendable adaptability , I have be Jericho , and you have march round . I have be Jericho in my own garden , and have refresh the invade army with hot butter - toast and explosive bun . now it be my turn to take the initiative . jenkin have remove the tea , and it be too hot for tennis , I be go to ask you to sit still , while I explain to you quite clearly why I must send you away at the close of the seventh day . " 

 she try to hide her extreme trepidation beneath a tone of gay banter . she hop it do not sound as force to he as it do to herself . the Boy 's clear eye be fix upon she . have he notice the trembling of her hand , before she steady they by lay hold of the arm of her chair ? 

 " so now for a serious talk , if you please , Sir Boy . " 

 " excuse I , dear , " say the Boy , " the Israelites be not allow to parley . " 

 " you need not parley , " say Miss Charteris ; " you be request merely to listen . you may smoke if you like . I understand cigarette smoke be fatal to black - beetle . possibly it have the same effect on garden insect . Russell tell I we be overrun by snail . smoke , boy , if you like . " 

 " dear , " say the Boy , his head throw back , his hand thrust deep into his coat pocket , " I never have the small desire to smoke in your presence . I should feel as if I be smoke in church . " 

 " oh , you dear amazing altogether absurd boy ! do not   look at I like that . and do not   say such unexpected thing , or I shall be unable to parley satisfactorily . " 

 " when I go to school , " remark the Boy , " and you be an engaging little girl in a pigtail , I be teach to say : ' do not look at I thus ' ; at least , master frequently appear to think it necessary to make that remark to I . I can not   imagine why ; because they be not specially worth look at ; except that a very large person , in a very angry condition , always present a spectacle of extreme interest to my juvenile mind . it be so fascinating to watch and see what they would do next . they be like those wooden monkey and bear you buy in swiss shop , do not   you know ? you pull a hang string , and their leg and arm jump about unexpectedly . one always feel a really angry grown - up be a mere puppet . unseen finger be pull the string ; and it be funny to watch . there be an exciting element of danger , too ; because sometimes a hand jerk up and box your ear . " 

 " little boy Blue , " she say , " it must have be quite impossible ever to be mildly angry with you . either one would have wax impotently furious ; or one would have want to to hug you ! " 

 the Boy leapt up . 

 " sit down , " say Miss Charteris , " or I shall send you away . and I do not wish to do that ; because I have quite make up my mind to tell you to - day , a thing which I suppose I ought to have tell you long ago ; and I try to do so , boy ; but somehow you always make it impossible . I want to to tell you about the Professor . " she pause . 

 it be so very difficult . it be like roll a heavy stone up a steep hill . and the boy make no attempt to help she . he lie back with an exaggerated display of resignation . he look at she with sleepy , amused eye . and he ask no question . the army of Israel obviously decline to parley . 

 " I have long feel I ought to tell you about the Professor , " continue Miss Charteris . 

 the Boy sigh . " I think I jolly well know all there be to know about professor , " he say . 

 " not about this one , " explain Miss Charteris . " he be my Professor . " 

 " oh , if he be your Professor , " say the Boy , sit up , " of course I be interested . but I be not sure that I approve of you have a tame Professor ; especially when it arrive in golosh , and leave they in the hall . " 

 " I be afraid nobody will ask whether you approve or not , little boy Blue . the Professor have be a great friend of mine during nearly twelve year ; and I think I be possibly in fact , very probably go to marry the Professor . " 

 " really ? " say the Boy . " may I ask when he propose ? " 

 " he have not propose , boy . " 

 the boy produce his pocket - book , take out a calendar , and study it attentively . 

 " then I be afraid you will have some time to wait , " he say . " it will not be leap year again until 1912 . " 

 this sound impertinent ; but the boy could no more have be guilty of intentional impertinence toward she , than he could have pick her pocket ; and Miss Charteris know it . there be one thing of which those who have dealing with Christobel Charteris could always be sure absolute justice . she have see the Boy 's face whiten suddenly , to a terrible pallor , beneath his tan . she know he be make a desperate fight for self - control . how good could she help ? her own part seem almost more than she could manage . 

 " come here , boy dear , " she say , hold out her hand . 

 he hesitate one instant ; then rise unsteadily to his foot , and come not to his usual place at the side , bend over she ; but in front of she , on one knee , silently wait . 

 she bent forward . " take my hand , boy . " 

 he take it , in a firm unhesitate clasp . they hold each other so , in silence . the colour come back into the Boy 's face . the dumb horror die out of his eye . they smile into hers again . 

 " now promise I , boy dear , that you will let I tell you all ; and that you will try not to misunderstand . " 

 " my dearest , " say the Boy , " I promise . but I do not need to say I will try not to misunderstand . I could not misunderstand you , if I try . " 

 " then go back to your chair , boy . " 

 he go . his eye be bright again . 

 " boy , please to understand that I be not engaged to the Professor . of course , have that be the case , I should have tell you , long ago . he have never say one word to I of love or marriage . but he have be a great friend an intimate friend , intellectually ; and I have reason to know that he wish have wish for year a good deal more than he have ever express to I . he have wait , boy ; and when anybody have wait nearly twelve year , could one fail they ? " 

 " why , of course ! " cry the Boy , eagerly . " if a man could wait twelve year good heaven , why should not   he wait twenty ! a man have no business to wait ; or to be able to wait ; or to keep a woman wait . twelve year ? oh , I say ! I do not   wait twelve day . now , do I ? " 

 she smile . " you break all speed record , boy , always . but can not you understand that all man have not fifty thousand a year , and the world at their foot ? have you be penniless , boy , you even you would have have to wait . " 

 " not a bit ! " say the Boy , stoutly . " I would drive a cab , I would sweep a crossing , I would do anything , or be anything ; but I would not   wait for the woman I love ; nor would I " his voice drop almost to a whisper " keep the woman who love I , wait . " 

 " but suppose she have a comfortable little income of her own ; and you have less much less to offer she ? surely , boy , proper pride would keep you from ask she to marry you , until your income at least equalled her ? " 

 " not a bit ! " say the Boy . " that sort of rot be not   proper pride . it be just selfish false pride . however much a woman have , when a man a man , mind you , not an old woman , or a thing with no pluck or vertebra when a man give a woman his whole love , his whole life , the worship of his whole body , heart , and soul , he have give she that which no money could buy ; and be she a millionairess she would still be poor if , from false pride , he rob she of that gift which be his to give she and perhaps his alone . " 

 " boy dear , " she say , gently ; " it sound very plausible . but it be so easy to be plausible with fifty thousand a year in the background . let I tell you about the Professor . he have , of course , his fellowship , and be quite comfortably off now , live as a bachelor , in room . but he practically support his unmarried sister , considerably old than himself , who live in a tiny little villa , and keep one maid . the Professor could not afford to marry , and set up a large establishment , on his present income ; at least he apparently think he could not . and your theory of rob the woman who the woman he love , do not appear to have occur to he . but , during all these year he have be compile an Encyclopedia I do not   suppose you know what an encyclopedia be , boy . " 

 " oh , do not   I ? " say the Boy . " it be a thing you pile up on the floor to stand upon when you want to fix a new pipe - rack . " 

 Miss Charteris ignore this try definition of an encyclopedia . 

 " the Professor be compile a wonderful book , " she say , with dignity ; " and , when it be complete and publish , he will be in a position to marry . " 

 " have he tell you so ? " inquire the Boy . 

 " no , boy . he have never mention the subject of marriage to I . but he have tell his sister ; and she have tell I . " 

 " ha ! " say the Boy . " Miss Hann , I suppose . I must say , I distrust Miss Hann . " 

 " what do you know of Miss Ann ? " inquire Christobel , astonish . 

 " only that she be always a - hegging of them on , " say the Boy , calmly . 

 the indignant blood rush into the fair proud face . 

 " boy ! you have   be gossip with Martha . " 

 " I have , dear ; I admit it . you see , I arrive early , on the third day ; find the garden empty ; go gaily into the house to look for you . ran up into the hall ; when up get a pair of old golosh eh , what ? oh , sorry up get a pair of new golosh , and hit I in the eye ! a professor 's cap and gown hang up , as if at home ; and while I meditate upon these thing , the voice of my Beloved be uplifted in loud and sonorous Greek , exclaim : ' Avaunt , rash youth ! Thou impudent intruder ! ' can you wonder that I avaunte to Martha ? " 

 " you will please tell I at once all Martha say to you . " 

 " of course I will , dear . do not   be vex . I always mean to tell you , some time or other . I ask she whose be the golosh ; the umbrella with the er decide figure ; the suspend cap and gown . Martha say they be the Professor 's . I inquire whether the Professor stay to tea . you really can not   blame I for ask that ; because I have go to the kitchen for the express purpose of carry out the tea - tray , your and mine ; but not the Professor 's . no possible pleasure could have result , either to you , or to I , or to the Professor , from my unexpected appearance with the tea - tray , if the Professor have be there . now could it ? I think it would be nice of you , dear , and only fair , if , remember the peculiar circumstance of that afternoon , you just say : ' no ; it could not . ' 

 " well , I ask Martha whether the Professor stay to tea , and hear that ' thank goodness , no ! ' we draw the line at that , except when Miss Hann come too . with the awful possibility of Miss Hann ' come too , ' on one of my priceless day , I naturally desire a little light throw on Miss Hann . I be considerably relieve to learn that Miss Hann suffer from the peculiar complaint mental , I gather of ' fancy herself in a bath - chair . ' this might be no hindrance to the ' hegging on ' propensity , but it certainly diminish the chance of the ' come too . ' that be all , dear . " 

 " boy , you ought to have be ashamed of yourself ! " 

 " so I be , the moment I see you walk down the lawn . but you really need not   look so indignant . I be work for you , at the same time . " 

 " work for I ? " 

 " yes , dear . I tell Martha her wisps would look nice if she curl they . I also suggest ' invisible pin . ' if you like I will tell you how I come to know about ' invisible pin ' ; but it be a very long story , and not specially interesting , for the lady in the case be my great - aunt . " 

 " oh , boy , " say Miss Charteris , laugh in spite of herself ; " I wish you be the size of my little boy Blue on the sand at Dovercourt . I would dearly like to shake you . " 

 " well , " he say , " you do more than shake I , just now . you give I about the bad five minute I ever have in my life . christobel ? you do not   really care about the Professor ? " 

 " boy , dear , I really do . I have care about he very much , for year . " 

 " yes , as a woman love a book ; but not as a woman love a man . " 

 " explain your meaning , please . " 

 " oh , hang it all ! " exclaim the Boy , violently . " do you love his mouth , his eye , his hair ? " the boy choke , and stop short . 

 Miss Charteris consider , and reply with careful deliberation . " I do not know that I have ever see his mouth ; he wear a beard . his eye be not strong , but they look very kind through his glass . his hair ? well , really , he have not much to speak of . but all these thing matter very little . his mind be great and beautiful ; his thought appeal to I . I understand his way of view thing : he understand mine . it would be a wonderful privilege to be able to make life easy and happy for one for whom I have so profound a respect and esteem . I have look upon it , during the last few year , as a privilege which be , eventually , to be mine . " 

 " Christobel , " cry the Boy , " it be wrong , it be terrible ! it be not the high . I can not   stand it , and I will not . I will not let you give yourself to a wizene old bookworm " 

 " be quiet , boy , " she say , sharply . " do you wish to make I really angry ? the Professor be not old . he be only fourteen year my senior . to your extreme youth , fifty may seem old . the Professor be in his prime . I be afraid we have nothing to gain , boy , by prolong this discussion . " 

 " but we can not   leave it at this , " say the Boy , desperately . " where do I come in ? " 

 " my little boy Blue , I be afraid you do not   come in at all , except as a very sweet idyll which , all through the year to come , I shall never forget . you beg for your seven day , and I give they . but I never lead you to assume I could say ' yes . ' now listen , boy , and I will tell you the honest truth . I do not know that I be ever go to marry the Professor . I only feel pledge to he from the vague belief that we each consider the other be wait . do not   break your heart over it , boy ; because it be more than likely it will never come to pass . but even be there no professor oh , boy dear , I could not marry you . I love my little boy Blue more tenderly and deeply than I have ever before love anything or any one on this earth . but I could not marry a boy , however dearly I love he ; however sweet be his love to I . I be a woman grow , and I could surrender myself wholly , only to a man who would wholly be my mate and master . I can not pretend to call my little boy Blue ' the man I love , ' because he be really dear to I when I think of he , with expectation in his baby - eye , trot down the sand to find his cannon - ball .... oh , boy , I be hurt you ! I hate to hurt you , boy . your love be so beautiful . nothing as perfect will ever touch my life again . yet I can not , honestly , give what you ask .... boy dear , ought I to have tell you , quite plainly , soon ? if so , you must forgive I . " 

 the Boy have rise , and stand before she . " you always do the right thing , " he say , " and never , under any circumstance , could there be anything for I to forgive you . I have be an egregious young ass . I have take thing for grant , all along the line . what must you think of I ! why should you care ? you , with your intellectual attainment , your honour , your high standing in the world of book ? why should you care , Christobel ? why should you care ? " 

 he stand before she , straight and tall and desperately implacable . the exuberant youth have die out of his face . for the first time , she could not see in he her little boy Blue . 

 " why should you care ? " he say again . 

 she rise and face he . " but I do care , boy , " she say . " how dare you pretend to think I do not ? I care very tenderly and deeply . " 

 " Pooh ! " say the Boy . " do you suppose I wish you to marry a bare - toed baby , with sand on its nose ? " he laugh wildly ; paused and look at she , then laugh again . " a silly little ass that say it do not   like girl ? oh , I say ! I think it be about time I be off . will you walk down to the gate ? ... thank . you be always most awfully good to I . I say , Miss Charteris , may I ask the Professor 's name ? " 

 " harvey , " she say , quietly . " Kenrick Harvey . " the dull anguish at her heart seem almost more than she could bear . yet what could she say or do ? he be merely accept her own decision . 

 " Harvey ? " he say . " why of course I know he . he be not much to look at , be he ? but we always think he an awfully good sort , and kind as they make them . we consider he a confirm bachelor ; but well , we do not   know he be wait . " 

 they have reach the postern gate . oh , would he see the grow pain in her eye ? what be she lose ? what have she lose ? why do her whole life seem pass out through that green gate ? 

 " good - bye , " he say , " and please forget all the rot I talk about Jericho . it go with the spade and bucket , and all the rest . you have be most awfully kind to I , all along . but the very kind thing you can do now , be to forget all the impossible thing I think and say ... allow I .... I will shut the door . " 

 he put up his hand , to lift his cap ; but he be bareheade . he laugh again ; turn , and pass out . 

 " boy ! boy ! come back , " say Christobel . but the door have close on the first word . 

 she stand alone . 

 this time she do not wait . where be the good of wait ? 

 she turn and walk slowly up the lawn , pause to look at the flower in the border . the yellow rose still look golden . the jolly little " what - d'-you - call-'ems " lift pale purple face to the sky . 

 but the boy be go . 

 she reach her chair , where he have place it , deep in the shade of the mulberry - tree . she feel tired ; wear - out ; old . 

 the boy be go . 

 she lean back with closed eye . she have hurt he so . she remember all the glad , sweet confident thing he have say each day . now she have hurt he so .... what radiant faith , in love and in life , have be his . but she have spoil that faith , and dim that brightness . 

 suddenly she remember his dead mother 's prayer for he . " I have pray for thee , that thy faith fail not . " and under those word she have write " Christobel . " would he want to obliterate that name ? no , she know he would not . nothing approach a hard or a bitter thought could ever find a place in his heart . it would always be the golden heart of her little Boy Blue . 

 tear force their way beneath her close lash , and roll slowly down her cheek . 

 " oh , boy dear , " she say aloud , " I love you so I love you so ! " 

 " I know you do , dear , " he say . " it be almost unbelievable yet I know you do . " 

 she open her eye . the boy have come back . she have not hear his light step , on the springy turf . he kneel in his favourite place , on the left of her chair , and bend over she . once more his face be radiant . his faith have not fail . 

 she look up into his shin eye , and the joy in her own heart make she dizzy . 

 " boy dear , " she whisper , " not my lip , because I be not altogether yours I may have to you know ? the Professor . but , oh boy , I can not   help it ! I be afraid I care terribly . " 

 he be quite silent ; yet it seem to she that he have shout . a burst of trumpet - triumph seem to fill the air . 

 he bend lower . " of course I would not , Christobel , " he say ; " not before the seventh day . but there be a lot beside lip , and it be all so dear . " 

 then she feel the Boy 's kiss on her hair , on her brow , on her eye . " dear eye , " he say , ' shed tear for my pain . ah , dear eye ! " and he kiss they again . 

 she put up her hand , to push he gently away . he capture it , and hold it to his lip . 

 " stop , boy dear , " she say . " be good now , and sit down . " 

 he slip to the grass at her foot , and rest his head against her knee . 

 she stroke his hair , with gentle , tender touch . her little boy Blue have come back to she . oh , bliss unutterable ! why worry about the future ? 

 " how silly we be , dear ! " he say . " how silly to suppose we could part like that you and I ! " then his sudden merry laugh ring out oh , such music ! such sweet music ! " I say , Christobel , " he say , " it be all very well now to say ' stop , and be good . ' but on the seventh day , when the wall fall down , and I march up into the citadel , I shall give you million of kiss or will it be billion ? " 

 " judge from my knowledge of you , boy dear , " she say , " I rather think it would be billion . " 

 later , as they stand once more by the postern gate , he turn , frame in the doorway , smile a last gay good - bye . 

 it be their second parting that day , and how different from the first . there be to be a third , unlike either , before the day be over ; but its approach be , as yet , unsuspected . 

 but as he stand in the doorway , full in a shaft of sunlight , the glad certainty in his eye smite she with sudden apprehension . 

 " oh , boy dear , " she say , " take care ! you be build castle again . they will tumble about our ear . I have not   promise you anything , little boy Blue of mine ; and I be afraid I shall have to marry the Professor . " 

 " if you do , dear , " he say , " I shall have to give he a new umbrella as a wedding present ! " and the boy go whistle down the lane . 

 but , out of sight of the postern gate and of the woman who , lean against it , watch he to the turning , he drop his bound step and jaunty bearing . his face grow set and anxious ; his walk , perplexed . 

 " oh , God , " say the Boy , as he walk , " do not   let I lose she ! " 

 a few minute later , a telegram be put into his hand from the friend leave on the coast , in charge of his new aeroplane . 

 " Arrange Channel flight , if possible , day after to - morrow . " 

 " not I , " say the Boy , crumple the message into his pocket . " the day after to - morrow be the seventh day . " 

 he be din with friend , but an unaccountable restlessness seize he during the evening . he make his excuse , and return to the Bull Hotel soon after nine o'clock . the hall - porter at once hand he a note , leave by special messenger , ten minute early . it be mark " urgent . " the handwriting be Christobel 's . 

 the Boy fling away his cigarette , tear the note open , and turn to a light . it be very short and clear . 


 " boy dear , I must see you at once . you will find I in the garden . 

 " Christobel . " 

 when the boy have turn the corner and disappear , Miss Charteris pass through the little postern gate , and move slowly up the lawn . ah , how different to her sad return from that gate an hour before ! 

 the William Allen Richardsons still open their golden heart to the sunset . the jolly little " what - d'-you - call-'ems " still lift their purple face to the sky . but instead of stab she with agony , they sing a fragrant psalm of love . 

 ah , why be the boy so dear ? why be the boy so near ? she have watch he go stride down the lane , yet he still walk beside she ; his gay young laugh of glad content be in her ear ; his pure young kiss on her brow and eye ; his head against her knee . 

 just as she reach the mulberry , Jenkins hasten from the house . the note he bring , in a familiar handwriting , thin and pointed , be mark " urgent " in one corner , and " immediate " in the other ; but Miss Ann 's note usually be one or other . this happen to be both . 

 " you need not wait , Jenkins , " she say . 

 she stand close to a spread branch of the mulberry . her tall head be up among the move leaf . whispering , they caress she . something withhold she from enter the soft shade , sacred to herself and the boy . she stand , to read Ann Harvey 's letter . 

 as she read , every vestige of colour leave her face . bend over the letter , she might have be a sorely troubled and perplexed replica of the noble Venus of Milo . 

 fold the letter , she go slowly up the lawn , still wear that white look of cold dismay . she speak to Martha through the open window , keep she face out of sight . 

 " Martha , " she say , " I be oblige to go immediately to Miss Ann . if I be not back by eight o'clock , I shall be remain with she for dinner . " she pass on , and Martha turn to Jenkins . 

 by the way , Jenkins be have an unusually festive time . during the last twenty - four hour , Martha have be kind to he than he have ever know she to be . he be now comfortably ensconce in the Windsor armchair in a corner of the kitchen , read yesterday 's daily paper , and enjoy his pipe . never before have his pipe be allow in the kitchen ; but he have just be graciously tell he might bring it in , if he would not   be " messy with the hash " ; Mrs. Jenkins volunteer the additional remarkable information , that it be " good for the beetle . " jenkin be doubtful as to whether this mean that his pipe give pleasure to the beetle , or the reverse ; but experience have teach he that a condition of peaceful uncertainty in his own mind be to be prefer to a torrent of vituperative explanation from Martha . he therefore also receive in silence the apparently unnecessary injunction not to go " crawlin ' about all over the floor " ; it take " a figure to do that ! " 

 eight o'clock come , and Miss Charteris have not return . 

 " remain with ' er for dinner , " pronounce Martha , fling open the oven , and wrathfully relegate to the larder the chicken she have be roast with extreme care ; " an ' a precious poor dinner it will be ! jenkin , you may ' ave this sparrow - grass . I ' aven't   the ' eart . an ' I ' ope she would ' ave ' ad the sense to keep ' I m to dinner ; know as there be a chicking an ' ' grass for two . now what be take Miss Hann ' urgent and immediate , ' I would like to know ! " continue Martha , derive considerable comfort from bang the plate and tumbler on to the kitchen table , with just as much violence as be consistent with their personal safety , as she walk round it , lay the table for supper . " eat a biscuit , I should think , an ' fly to ' er cheat . I have   no patience ; no , that I ' aven't ! " and Martha attack the loaf , with fury . 

 at a quarter before nine , Miss Charteris return . in a few moment the bell summon Jenkins . the note he be to take be also mark " Immediate . " he leave it on the kitchen table , and , while he change his coat , Martha fetch her glass . then she follow he to the pantry . 

 " ' Ere , run man ! " she say , " run ! never mind your muffler . who want a muffler in June ? ' E be in it ! it be something more than a biscuit . drat that woman ! " 

 a quarter of an hour later , a tall white figure move noiselessly down the lawn , to the seat beneath the mulberry . the full moon be just rise above the high red wall , glide up among the tree , huge and golden through their branch . Christobel Charteris wait in the garden for the Boy . 

 he come . 

 by then , the lawn be bath in moonlight . she see he , tall and slim , in the conventional black and white of a man 's evening dress , pass silently through the postern gate . she note that he do not bang it . he come up the lawn slowly for he . he wear no hat , and every clear - cut feature of the clean - shaven young face show up in the moonlight . 

 at the mulberry , he pause , uncertain ; peer into the dark shadow . 

 " Christobel ? " he say , softly . 

 " boy dear ; I be here . come . " 

 he come ; feel his way among the chair , and move aside a table , which stand between . 

 he find she , sit where he have find she , on his return , three hour before . a single ray of moonlight pierce the thick foliage of the mulberry , and fall across her face . he mark its unusual pallor . he stand before she , put one hand on each arm of her chair , and bend over she . 

 " what be it ? " he say , softly . " what be it , dear heart ? it be so wonderful to be want , and send for . but let I know quickly that you be not in any trouble . " 

 she look up at he dumbly , during five , ten , twenty second . then she say : " boy , I have something to tell you . will you help I to tell it ? " 

 " of course I will , " he say . " how can I help well ? " 

 " I do not   know , " she answer . " oh , I do not   know ! " 

 he consider a moment . then he sit down on the grass at her foot , and lean his head against her knee . she pass her finger softly through his hair . 

 " what happen after I have go ? " ask the Boy . 

 " Jenkins bring I a note from Miss Harvey , ask I to come to she at once , to hear some very wonderful news , intimately affect herself , and the Professor , and and I . she write very ecstatically and excitedly , poor dear . she always do . of course , I go . " 

 " well ? " say the Boy , gently . the pause be so very long , that it seem to require supplement . he feel for the other hand , which have be hold the lace at her breast , and draw it to his lip . it be wet with tear . 

 the Boy start . he sit up ; turn , rest his arm upon her lap , and try to see her face . 

 " go on , dear , " he say . " get it over . " 

 " boy , " say Miss Charteris , " a rich old uncle of the Harveys have die , leave the Professor a very considerable legacy , sufficient to make he quite independent of his fellowship , and of the production of the encyclopedia . " 

 " well ? " 

 " they be very happy about it , naturally . Poor Ann be happy than I have ever see she . and the chief cause of their joy appear to be that now the Professor be , at last , in a position to marry . " 

 " well ? " 

 " I have not see he yet , but Miss Ann be full of it . she tell I a good many very touching thing . I have no idea it have mean so much to he all these year . boy dear ? " 

 " yes . " 

 " I shall have to marry the Professor . " 

 no answer . 

 " I do not   know how to make you understand why I feel so bound to they . they be very old friend of my father and mother . they be so good to I through all the day of sorrow , when I be leave alone . Miss Ann be a great invalid , and very dependent upon love and care , and upon not be thwart in her little hope and plan . she expect to come and live in in her brother 's home . she know I should love to have she . and he have do so much for I , intellectually ; so patiently keep my mind alive , when it be inclined to stagnate ; and work , when it would have grow slack . he have give up hour of his valuable time to I , every week , for year . " 

 no answer . 

 suddenly the moonlight , through an opening in the mulberry leaf , fall upon his upturned face . she see the anguish in his eye . she turn his head away , rest it against her knee , and clasp her hand upon it . 

 " boy dear ; it be terribly hard for we , I know . in a most extraordinary way in a way I can not understand you have win my body . it yearn to be with you ; it ache if you suffer ; it live in your gladness ; it grow young in your youth . nobody else have ever make I feel this ; I do not suppose anybody else ever will . but oh Boy body be not everything . body be the least of all . and I think I think the Professor hold my mind . he win it long ago . I have grow much old since then , and very tired of wait . but I can look back to the time when I use to think the great privilege in the world would be , to be the to marry the Professor . " 

 she pause , and wait . 

 " body count , " say the Boy , in a low voice . " you will jolly well find , that body count . " 

 it be such a relief to hear he speak at last . 

 " oh , I know , boy dear , " she say . " but more between some , than other . the Professor and I be united , primarily , on the mental and spiritual plane . be so sure of this , realize the difference , make it less hard , in a way , to to give up my little boy Blue . boy dear , you must help I ; because I love you as I have never love anybody else in this world before ; as I know I never shall love again . but I be bind in honour not to disappoint the man who know I have wait for he . Miss Ann admit to I to - night that she have tell he . she say , in the first moment of joy she have to tell he ; he be so anxious ; and so diffident . boy dear , have it not be for that , I think I should have beg off . but as he know as they have trust I dear , we must say ' good - bye ' to - night . he be go to write to I to - morrow , ask if he may come . I shall say : ' yes . ' ... boy dear ? be it very hard ? ... oh , can not   you see where duty come in ? there can be no true happiness if one have fail to be true to what one know be just and right .... can not   you realize , boy , that they have be everything to I for seven year ? you have come in , for seven day . " 

 " time be nothing , " say the Boy , suddenly . " you and I be one , Christobel ; eternally , indissolubly one . you will find it out , when it be too late . age be nothing ! time be nothing ! love be all ! " 

 she hesitate . the Boy 's theory be so vital , so vigorous , so assured . be she make a mistake ? there be no question as to the pain involve by her decision ; but be that pain to result as she believe , in high good to all ; or be it to mean irreparable loss ? the very knowledge that her body so yearned for he , lead she to emphasize the fact that the boy could not oh surely could not be a fit mate for her mind . yet he be so confident , so sure of himself , in regard to she , on every point ; so unhesitatingly certain that they be mean for each other . 

 and then she see Ann Harvey , with clasped hand , say : " darling child , forgive I , but I have to tell Kenrick ! he be so humble he be so diffident , so doubtful of his own power of attraction . I have to tell he that I know you have be very fond of he for year . I do not say much , sweet child ; but just enough to give dear Kenrick hope and confidence . " 

 she could see Miss Ann 's delicate wrinkle face ; the tearful eye ; the lavender ribbon on her lace cap ; the mysterious hair - brooch , fasten the old lace at her neck . the scene be photograph upon her memory ; for , in that moment , hope the young Hope , bear of the youthful boy and his desire have die . Christobel Charteris have take up the burden of life ; a life apart from the seven day ' romance , create by the amazing over - confidence of her little boy Blue . 

 the masterful man attract ; but , in the end , it be usually the diffident man who win . the innate unselfishness of the noble type of woman , cause she to yield more readily to the insistence of her pity than to the force of her desire . in these case , marriage and martyrdom be really though unconsciously synonymous ; and the same pure , holy courage which go smile to the stake , go smile to the altar . do a martyr 's crown await it , in another world ? possibly . the only perplexing question , in these case , be : what await the wrecked life of " the other man " ? 

 Christobel Charteris have put her hand to the plough ; she would not look back . 

 " little boy Blue , " she say , " you must say ' good - bye ' and go . I be go to marry the Professor quite soon , and I must not see you again . say ' good - bye , ' boy dear . " 

 then the Boy 's anguish break through all bound . he fling his arm around she , and hide his face in her lap . a sudden throb of speechless agony seem to overwhelm they both , submerge all argument , all casuistry , all obligation to other , in a molten ocean of love and pain . 

 then she hear the boy pray : " o God , give she to I ! give she to I ! o God , give she to I ! " 

 " Hush , boy , " she say ; " oh , hush ! " 

 he be silent at once . 

 then bend , she gather he to she , hold his face against her breast ; shelter he in the tenderness of her arm . he have never seem so completely her own little boy Blue as in that moment , when she listen to his hopeless prayer : " o God , give she to I ! " this be the little boy Blue who try to carry cannon - ball ; who face the world , with sand upon his nose ; cloudless faith in his bright eye ; indomitable courage in his heart . she forget the man 's estate to which he have attain ; she forget the man 's request to which she have give a final denial . she hold he as she have first long to do , when his nurse , in unreasonable wrath , shake he on the sand ; she rock he gently to and fro , as his dead mother might have do , long year ago . " oh , my little boy Blue , my little boy Blue ! " she say . 

 suddenly she feel the Boy 's hot tear upon her neck . 

 then , in undreamed of pain , her heart stand still . then the full passion of her tenderness awake , and find voice in an exceed bitter cry . 

 " oh , I can not bear it ! I can not bear it ! boy dear , oh , boy dear , you shall have all you wish all all ! ... do you hear , my little boy Blue ? it shall all be for you , darling ; all for you ! nobody else matter . you shall have all you want all all all ! " 

 silence under the mulberry - tree ; the silence of a great decision . 

 then he draw himself gently but firmly from her arm . 

 he stand before she , tall , erect , unbend . the moonlight fall upon his face . it have lose its look of youth , take on a new power . it be the face of a man ; and of a man who , have come to a decision , intend , at all cost , to abide by it . 

 " no , Christobel , " he say . " no , my Beloved . I could not accept happiness even such happiness at so great a cost to you . there could be no bliss for you , no peace , no satisfaction , even in our great love , if you have go against your supreme sense of duty ; your own high conception of right and wrong . also , Christobel , dearest you must not give yourself in a rush of emotion . you must give yourself deliberately where your mind have choose , and where your great soul be content . that be so , I must be off , Christobel ; and do not   you worry about I . you have   be heavenly good to I , dear ; and I have   put you through so much . I will go up to town to - night . I shall not come back , unless you send for I . but when you want I and send why , my love , I will come from the other end of the world . " 

 he stoop and take both her hand in his ; lift they reverently , tenderly , to his lip ; hold they there one moment , then lay they back upon her lap , and turn away . 

 she see he walk down the moonlit lawn , tall and erect . she see he pass through the gate , without look back . she hear it close quietly not with the old boyish bang yet close irrevocably , decisively . 

 then she shut her eye , and begin again to rock gently to and fro . little boy Blue be still in her arm ; it comfort she to rock he there . but the man who have arise and leave she , when he might , take advantage of her weakness , have win she against her own conscience and will ; the man who , master his own agony , have thus be brave and strong for she have carry her whole heart with he , when he go out through the postern gate . 

 in rise , he leave the boy in her arm . through the long hard year to come , she pray she might keep he there her own little boy Blue . 

 but he who go out alone , for her sake to face life without she , be the man she love . 

 she know it , at last . 

 " and the evening and the morning be the fifth day . " 




 the sixth day 

 MISS ANN have " MUCH to say " 

 on the afternoon of the sixth day , at the hour which have hitherto be keep for the Boy , Christobel Charteris , in response to another urgent and immediate summon , go to take tea with Miss Ann . 

 it have be a long , dull , uneventful day , hold at first a certain amount of restless uncertainty as to whether the Boy be really go ; mingle with apprehensive anticipation of a call from the Professor . 

 but before noon a reply - pay telegram arrive from the boy , send off at Charing Cross . 


 " good morning . all be well . just off for Folkestone . please tell I how you be . " 


 to which , while Jenkins and the telegraph - boy wait , Miss Charteris reply : 


 " quite well , thank you . do be careful at Folkestone . " 


 and afterwards thought of many other message which she might have send , hold more , and well express . but that precious moment in touch with the boy pass so quickly ; and it seem so impossible to think of anything but commonplace word , while Jenkins stand at attention near the table ; and the telegraph - boy keep ring his bicycle - bell outside , as a reminder that he wait . 

 yet her heart feel warm and comfort by this momentary contact with the boy . he still care to know how she be . and it be so like he to put : " all be well . " he wish she to know he have not go down beneath his trouble . " fank , but I always do my own cawwying . " Brave Little Boy Blue , of long ago ! 

 the expectation of the Professor 's note or call remain , keep she anxious ; until she hear from Ann Harvey , that her brother have be oblige to go to London on business , and would not return until the evening . " come to tea with I , dear child , " the note conclude ; " we have much to say ! " 

 it seem to christobel that there remain nothing which Miss Ann have not already say , in every possible form and way . nevertheless , she put on her hat , and go . Miss Ann have succeed in impress all her friend with the conviction that her wish must never be thwart . 

 Miss Ann have name her villa " Shiloh , " undoubtedly a suitable name , so far as she herself be concern ; her time be mostly spend upon a comfortable sofa in her tiny drawing - room ; or recline on a wicker lounge beneath the one tree in her small garden ; or be carefully wheel out in a bath - chair . 

 but nobody else find Miss Ann 's villa in any sense a " resting - place . " she have a way of keep everybody about she from jade Emma to the most casual caller on the move , while she herself present a delicate picture of frail inactivity . immediately upon their arrival , her friend find an appoint task await they ; but it be always something which Miss Ann would have give to somebody else to do , have they not chance at that moment to appear ; and they be usually leave with the feeling that the particular somebody else whose privilege they , in their well - mean zeal , have usurped would have accomplish it well . 

 direct they from the sofa , Miss Ann keep she entourage busy and perpetually on the move . yet she never feel she be ask much of they ; nor , however weary at the conclusion of the task , do they ever feel much have be accomplish , owe to the judicious use of the word " just . " 

 " my dear , " Miss Ann would say , " as you be here , will you just clean the canary ? " clean the canary mean a very thorough turning out of an intricate little brass cage ; several journey up and down stair in quest of sand , seed , and brass polish , and an out - door excursion to a neighbour 's garden for groundsel . the canary 's name be " sweetie - weet , " and , however much annoy Miss Ann 's friend might be feel with the canary , they have to call he " sweetie - weet " all the time they " clean he , " lest his fluttering should upset Miss Ann . now you can not say " sweetie - weet " in an angry voice . try , and you will see . consequently Miss Ann 's friend have no vent for their feeling during the process of get a rather large hand in and out of a very small brass door with a spring , which always snap to , at the wrong moment , while the hand , which seem to its possessor large than it have ever seem before , be crooked round in an impossible position in a strained attempt to fix Sweetie - weet 's perch . if anything go wrong during the cleaning process , Miss Ann , from her vantage - ground on the sofa would sigh , and exclaim : " poor patient little Sweetie - weet ! " Miss Ann be in full possession of all her faculty . her hearing be preternaturally sharp . it be no use say " fiend ! " to Sweetie - weet , in an emphatic whisper . he flutter the more . 

 when the task be complete , the cage have to be bring to Miss Ann 's couch for inspection . she then usually discover the perch to have be put back before they be perfectly dry . now nothing as surely you hardly ought to require to be tell be so prejudicial to Sweetie - weet 's delicate constitution as to have damp wood beneath his precious little foot . consequently all the perch have just to be take out again , dry before the kitchen fire , and put back once more . when this mandate go forth , the glee in the bright black eye in Sweetie - weet 's yellow head be unmistakable . he share Miss Ann 's mania for keep people busy . 

 when , at last , the second installation of perch be over , and the cage be suspend from the brass chain in the sunny window , Sweetie - weet pour forth a shrill crescendo of ear - pierce sarcasm " a little song of praise " Miss Ann call it direct full at the hot and exhausted friend , who be apply a pocket - handkerchief to the wire scratch on the back of her hand , and try to smile at Miss Ann 's recital of all Emma would say , when she find that her special privilege and delight the cleaning of Sweetie - weet have be wrest from she by the over - zealous friend . as a matter of fact , jade Emma 's personal remark about Sweetie - weet , during the perch - dry process in the kitchen , have be of a nature which would not bear repeat in Sweetie - weet 's presence , and have provide the only amusement the friend have get out of the whole performance . 

 when Christobel Charteris arrive at Shiloh , she find Miss Ann on the green velvet sofa , look very frail and ethereal ; a Shetland shawl about her shoulder , fasten by the large and most mysterious of her hair - brooch a gold - mount oval brooch , in which a weeping willow of fair hair droop over a sarcophagus of dark hair ; while a crescent moon of grey hair keep watch over both . this funereal collection of family hair always possess a weird fascination for small child , bring by their parent to call upon Miss Ann . the most undemonstrative become affectionate , and hasten with ready docility to the sofa to kiss Miss Ann , in order to obtain a close view , and to settle the much dispute point as to the significance of a small round object in the left - hand corner at the bottom . in fact , to the undisguised dismay of his mother , a sturdy youngster once emerge from Miss Ann 's embrace , exclaim eagerly to his little sister : " it be a furze - bush , not a hedgehog ! " an unfortunate remark , which might have be take by Miss Ann to refer to even more personal matter than a detail in her brooch . 

 Christobel herself be not altogether free from the spell of this hirsute cemetery ; chiefly because she know it be wear on day when deep emotion be to be feel and express . at sight of it , she be quite prepared for the tearful smile with which Miss Ann sign to she to close the door . then extend her arm , " sweet sister , " she say , with emotion , " let I take you to my heart . " 

 it be somewhat startling to Christobel to be apostrophize as ' sister " by Miss Ann . the Boy have make she feel so young , and so completely his contemporary , that if Miss Ann have call she " daughter , " or even " granddaughter , " it would have seem more appropriate . also her magnificent proportion constitute a somewhat large order for Miss Ann 's propose embrace . 

 however , she kneel beside the sofa , and allow herself to be take to Miss Ann 's heart in section . then , have find and restore Miss Ann 's lace pocket - handkerchief , she seat herself in a low chair beside the couch , hop for enlightenment upon the immediate prospect of her own future . 

 Miss Ann weep gently for a while . Christobel sit silent . her recent experience of tear , wring from such deep anguish of soul , make it less easy for she to feel sympathetic towards tear which flow from no apparent cause , and fall delicately into perfume lace . so she wait in silence , while Miss Ann weep . 

 the room be very still . the bang with which the Boy usually make his entry anywhere , would have be terrific in its joyful suddenness . at the mere thought of it , Christobel 's heart stand still and listen . but this be a place into which the boy would never make an entry , noisy or otherwise . besides the boy be go . oh , silent , sober , sorry world ! the boy be go . 

 Sweetie - weet put his head on one side , and chirp interrogatively . in his judgment , the silence have last sufficiently long . 

 Miss Ann dry her eye , make an effort to control her emotion . then she speak , in a voice which still tremble . 

 " dearest child , " she say , " I want you just to cover this book for I . Emma have offer to do it , several time , but I say : ' no , Emma . we must keep it for Miss Christobel . I do not know what she would say to you , if you take to cover my book ! ' Emma be a good soul , and willing ; but have not the mind and method require to cover a book properly . if you will just run up to my room , dear child , you will find a neat piece of whity - brown paper lay aside on purpose .... Hush , sweetie - weet ! christobel know you be pleased to see she .... it be either on the ottoman behind the screen , or in the top left - hand drawer of the mahogany chest , between the window and the fireplace . ah , how much we have come through , during the last twenty - four hour ! the scissor , dear Love , be hang by black tape from a nail in the store - room . you require a large and common pair for cut brown paper . how truly wonderful be the way of Providence , dear Christobel ! the paste be in the little cupboard under the stair . " 

 when Miss Charteris have finish cover the book , have bend upon it all the mind and method it require , she forestall the setting of another task , by say firmly : " I want an important talk now , please . Ann , be you sure you tell your brother that I have care for he for year ? " 

 " Darling , dear Kenrick be so diffident ; so unable to realize his own power of attraction ; so " 

 " do you think it be fair toward a woman , even if it be true , to tell a man who have never ask her love , that that love have long be his ? " 

 " sweet child , how crudely you put it ! I merely hint , whisper ; give the most delicate indication of what I know to be your feeling . for you do love my brother ; do you not , dear Christobel ? " 

 " I think , " say Miss Charteris , slowly , weigh each word ; " I think I love the Professor as a woman love a book . " 

 there be a moment of tense silence in Miss Ann 's drawing - room . Christobel Charteris look straight before she , a stern light upon her face , as of one confront on the path of duty by the clear shining of the mirror of self - revelation . 

 into Miss Ann 's pale blue eye shoot a gleam of nervous anxiety . 

 Sweetie - weet chirp , interrogatively . 

 then Miss Ann , recovering , clasp her hand . " ah , what a beautiful definition ! " she say . " what could be more pure , more perfect ? " 

 Miss Charteris know a love of a very different kind , which be absolutely pure , and altogether perfect . but that be the love she have put from she . 

 " a woman could hardly marry a book , " she say . 

 Miss Ann give a little deprecatory shriek . " darling child ! " she cry . " no simile , however beautiful , should be press too far ! your exquisite description of your love for dear Kenrick merely assure we that your union with he will prove one of complete contentment to the mind . and the mind that sensitive instrument , attune to all the immensity of the intellectual sphere the mind be what really matter . " 

 " body count , " say Miss Charteris , with conviction ; add beneath her breath , the dawning of a smile in her sad eye : " we shall jolly well find , body count . " 

 Miss Ann 's hearing , as we have already remark , be preternaturally sharp . she start . " my dear Christobel , what an expression ! and do you not think , that , under these circumstance , any mention of body savour of impropriety ? " 

 Miss Charteris turn quickly . the colour flame into her beautiful face . the glint of angry indignation flash from her eye . but the elderly figure on the couch look so small and frail . to wound and crush it would be so easy ; and so unworthy of her strength , and wide experience . 

 suddenly she remember a little blue back , round with grief and shame ; a small sandy face , silent and unflinche ; a brave little heart which keep its faith in God , and pray on trustfully , while nurse misunderstood and bully . then Miss Charteris conquer her own wrath . 

 " Dear Ann , " she say , gently , " do you really believe your brother would be much disappointed if after all when he ask I to marry he which he have not do yet I feel it well not to do so ? " 

 " my darling child ! " exclaim Miss Ann , and her hair - brooch fly open , as if to accentuate her horror and amazement . " my darling child ! think how patiently he have wait ! remember the long year ! remember " 

 " yes , I know , " say Miss Charteris . " you tell I all that last night , do not   you ? but it seem to I that , if a man can wait twelve year , he might as well wait twenty . " 

 " so he would have ! " cry Miss Ann . " undoubtedly dear Kenrick would have wait twenty year , have it not be for this fortunate legacy , which place he in a position to marry at once . but why should you wish to keep he wait any long ? be not twelve year sufficiently long ? " 

 Miss Charteris smile . " twelve day would be too long for some people , " she say , gently . " I have no wish to keep he wait . but you must remember , Ann , the Professor have , as yet , speak no word of love to I . " 

 " dear child , " say Miss Ann , eagerly ; " he would have come to you to - day , but imperative legal business , connect with our uncle 's will , take he to town . I know for certain that he intend write to you this evening ; and , if you then give he leave to do so , he will call upon you to - morrow . oh , darling girl , you will not disappoint we ? we have so trust you ; so believe in you ! a less scrupulously honourable man than Kenrick , might have try to bind you by a promise , before he be in a position to offer you immediate marriage . think of all the hope the hope and p - plan , which depend upon your faithfulness ! " Miss Ann dissolve into tear but not to a degree which should hinder her flow of eloquence . " ah , sweetest child ! you kneel beside this very sofa , five year ago , and you say : ' Ann , I think any woman might be proud to become the wife of the Professor ! ' have you forget that you say that , kneel beside this very sofa ? " 

 " I have not forget , " say Miss Charteris ; " and I think so still . " 

 " then you will marry Kenrick ? " say Miss Ann , through her tear . 

 Christobel Charteris rise . she stand , for a moment , tall and immovable , in the small , low room , crowd with knick - knack china , bric - a - brac , fern in paint pot , embroidery , photograph frame overseate with easy chair , which , in their turn , be overfill with a varied assortment of cushion . Miss Ann 's drawing - room give the effect of a rather prettily arrange bazaar . you mentally picture yourself walk round , admire everything , but see nothing you like quite well enough to wish to buy it , and take it home . 

 Christobel Charteris , tall and stately , in her simple white gown , look so utterly apart from the trumpery elegance of these surrounding . as the boy have say , the mellow beauty of his ancestral home would indeed be a fit setting for her stately grace . but she have send away the boy , with his beautiful castle in the air , and place in the shire . the atmosphere and surrounding of Shiloh be those to which she must be willing to bend her fastidious taste . Miss Ann would expect to make her home with the Professor . 

 " then you will marry Kenrick ? " whisper Miss Ann , through her lace pocket - handkerchief . 

 Christobel bend over she , tenderly ; fasten the clasp of the mysterious hair - brooch . 

 " Dear Ann , " she say . " it will not be leap year again , until 1912 . and , meanwhile , the Professor have not propose marriage to I . " 

 Miss Ann instantly brighten . laugh gaily , she wipe away a few remain tear . 

 " ah , naughty ! " she say . " naughty , to make I tell ! but as you will ask he be go to write to - night . but you must never let he know I tell you ! and now I want you just to find the Spectator it be lay over that exquisitely embroider blotter on the writing - table in the window , send I last Christmas by that kind creature , Lady Goldsmith ; so thoughtful , tasteful , and quite touching ; Emma , careful soul , spread it over the blotter , while darle Sweetie - weetie take his bath . dear pet , it be a sight to see he splash and splutter . Lady Goldsmith think so much of dear Kenrick . the first time she see he , she be immensely strike by his extraordinarily clever appearance . he sit exactly opposite she at a Guildhall banquet ; and she tell I afterwards that the mere sight of he be sufficient to take away all inclination for food ; except for that intellectual nourishment which he be so well able to supply . I think that be rather well express , and , come from a florid woman , such as Lady Goldsmith , be quite a tribute to my brother . you would call Lady Goldsmith ' florid , ' would you not , dear Christobel ? ... oh , you do not know she by sight ? I be surprised . as the wife of the Professor , you will soon know all these distinguished people by sight . yes , she be undoubtedly florid ; and incline to be what my dear father use to call ' a woman of a stout habit . ' this be the case , it be certainly a tribute a tribute of which you and I , dear child , have a right to feel justly proud .... oh , be it still damp ? Naughty Sweetie - weet ! do not   you think it might be wise , just to take it to the kitchen . Emma , good soul , will let you dry it before the fire . I have hear of fatality cause by damp newspaper . precious child , we can have you run no risk ! what would Kenrick say ? but when it be absolutely dry , I want you just to explain to I the gist of that article on the effect of oriental literature on modern thought . Kenrick tell I you have read it . he wish to discuss it with I . I really can not undertake to read it through . I have not the time require . yet I must be prepare to talk it over intelligently with my brother , when next he pay I a visit . he may look in this evening , weary with his day in town , and require the relaxation of a little intellectual conversation . I must be ready . " 

 an hour later , somewhat tired in body , and completely exhausted in mind , Miss Charteris walk home . she make a detour , in order to pass along the lane , and enter through the postern gate at the bottom of the garden . 

 she open it , and pass in . 

 a shaft of sunlight lie along the lawn . the jolly little " what d'-you - call-'ems " lift gay purple face to the sky . 

 she pause in the doorway , try to realize how this quiet green seclusion , the old - fashioned flower - border , the spread mulberry - tree , the quaint white house , in the distance , with its green shutter , must have look to the Boy each day , as he come in . she know he have more eye for colour , and more knowledge of artistic effect , than his casual acquaintance might suppose . it would not surprise she some day to find , as one of the gem of the New Gallery , a reproduction of her own garden , with a halo of jolly little " what - d'-you - call-'ems " in the border , and an indication of seat , deep in the shadow of the mulberry - tree . she would not need to refer to the catalogue for the artist 's name . the boy have have a painting in the Academy the year before . she have chance to see it . notice the name of her little boy Blue of the Dovercourt sand in the catalogue , she have make her way through the crowded room , and find his picture . it hang on the line . she have be strike by its thoughtful beauty , and wealth of imaginative skill . she have not forget that picture ; and during all these day she have be quietly wait to hear the boy say he have have a painting in the Academy . then she be go to tell he she have see it , have greatly admire it , and have note with pleasure all the kind thing critic have say of it . 

 but , the subject of picture not have come up , it have not occur to the boy to mention it . the boy never talk of what he have do , because he have do it . but be a subject mention upon which he be keen , he would bound up , with shin eye , and tell you all he know about it ; all he have see , hear , and do ; all he be do , and all he hop to do in the future , in connexion with that particular thing . he would never have think of inform you that he own three aeroplane . but if the subject of aviation come up , and you say to the boy : " do you know anything about it ? " he would lean forward , beam at you , and say : " I should jolly well think I do ! " and talk aeroplane to you for as long as you be willing to listen . this trait of the Boy 's , cause shallow - minded people to consider he conceited . but the woman he love know how to distinguish between keenness and conceit ; between exuberant enthusiasm and egotistical self - assertion ; and the woman who love he , smile tenderly as she remember that even on the day when she scold he , and he have to admit his " barely respectable B.A. , " he have not tell she of the painting hang on the line and mention in the Times . yet if the question of art have come up , the boy would very probably have sit forward in his chair , and talk about his painting , straight on end , for half an hour . 

 she still stand beneath the archway , in the red - brick wall , as these thought chase quickly through her mind . she would have make a fair picture for any one who have chance to be wait beneath the mulberry - tree , with eye upon the gate . 

 " straight on end for half an hour , he would have talk about his picture ; and how bright his eye would have be . and then I should have say : ' I see it , boy dear ; and it be quite as beautiful as you say . ' and he would have answer : ' it jolly well give you the feeling of the scene , do not   it , Christobel ? ' and I should have know that his delight in it , as an artistic success , have nothing to do with the fact that it be paint by himself . just because egotism be impossible to he , he be free to be so full of vivid enthusiasm . " 

 she smile again . a warm glow seem to enfold she . " how well I know my boy ! " she say aloud ; then remember with a sudden pang that she must not call he her boy . she have let he go . she be very probably go to marry the Professor . she have not with the whole of she be want he to stay , until he have have the manliness to rise up and go . then it have be too late . ah , be it too late ? if the boy come back to plead once more ? if once again she could hear he say : " age be nothing ! time be nothing ! love be all ! " would she not answer : " yes , Guy . love be all " ? 

 the blood rush into her sweet proud face . the name of the man she love have come into her mind unconsciously . it have never yet as a name for he pass her lip . that she should unconsciously call he so in her heart , give she another swift moment of self - revelation . 

 she close the gate gently , careful not to let it bang . as she pass up the lawn , her heart stand still . it seem to she that he must be wait , in the shade of the mulberry - tree . 

 she hardly dare to look . she feel so sure he be there .... yes , she know he be there .... she feel certain the boy have come back . he could not stay away from she on his sixth day . have he not say he would " march round " every day ? ah , dear wait army of Israel ! here be Jericho hasten to meet it . why have she allow Ann Harvey to keep she so late ? why have she go at all , during the Boy 's own time ? she might have know he would come .... should she walk past the mulberry , as if make for the house , just for the joy of hear he call " Christobel " ? no , that would not be quite honest , know he be there ; and they be always absolutely honest with one another . 

 she pass , breathlessly , under the droop branch . her cheek glow ; her lip be part . her eye shine with love and expectation . 

 she lift a hang bough , and pass beneath . 

 his chair be there , and her ; but they be empty . the Boy be the boy have not come back . 

 presently she go slowly up to the house . 

 a telegram lie on the hall table . she know at once from whom it come . there be but one person who carry on a correspondence by telegraph . Reply pay be write on the envelope . 

 she stand quite still for a moment . then she open it slowly . telegram from the Boy give she a delicious memory of the way he use to jump about . he would be out of his chair , and sit at her foot , before she know he be go to move . 

 she open it slowly , turn to a window , and read it . 


 " how be you , dear ? please tell I . I be go to do my big fly to - morrow . I jolly well mean to break the record . wish I luck . " 


 she take up the reply - pay form and write : 


 " quite well . good luck ; but please be careful , little boy Blue . " 


 she hesitate a moment , before write the playful name by which she so often call he . but his telegram be so absolutely the boy , all over . it be good he should know nothing of " the man she love , " who have go out at the gate . it be good he should not know what she would have call he , have he be under the mulberry just now . she be undoubtedly go to marry the Professor . in which case she would never call the boy anything but " little boy Blue . " so she put it into her telegram , as a repartee to his audacious " dear . " then she go out , and send it off herself . it be comfort to have something , however small , to do for he . 

 she come in again ; dress for the evening , and din . she be thoroughly tired ; and one sentence beat itself incessantly against the mirror of her reflection , like a frightened bird with a broken wing : " he be go to do a big fly to - morrow .... he be go to do a big fly to - morrow ! little boy Blue be go to fly and break the record . " 

 she sit in the stillness of her drawing - room , and try to read . but between her eye and the print page , burn in letter of fire : " he be go to fly to - morrow . " 

 she go down the garden to the chair beneath the mulberry - tree . it be cool there ; but the loneliness be too fierce an agony . 

 she walk up and down the lawn , now bath in silvery moonlight . " he be go to do a big fly to - morrow . he jolly well mean to break the record . " 

 she pass in , and go to her bedroom . she lie in the darkness and try to sleep . she try in vain . what if he get into cross - current ? what if the propeller break ? what if the steering - gear twisted ? she begin remember every detail he have tell herself and Mollie ; when she sit listening , think of he as Mollie 's lover , though all the while he have be her little boy Blue .... " oh of course then it be all U P. but there must be pioneer ! " 

 at last she could bear it no long . she light her candle , and rise . she go to her medicine cupboard , and do a thing she have never do before , in the whole of her healthy life . she take a sleeping draught . the draught be one of Miss Ann 's ; leave behind at the close of a recent visit . she know it contain chiefly bromide ; harmless but effective . 

 she put out the light , and lie once more in darkness . 

 the bromide begin to act . 

 the bird with the broken wing become less insistent . 

 the absent boy draw near , and bent over , kneel beside she . 

 she talk to he softly . her voice sound far away , and unlike her own . " be careful , little boy Blue , " she say . " you may jolly well what an expression ! break the record if you like ; but do not   break yourself ; because , if you do , you will break my heart . " 

 the bromide be act strongly now . the bird with the broken wing have go . there be a strange rhythmical throbbing in her ear . it be the Boy 's aeroplane ; but it have start without he . she know sleep be come ; merciful oblivion . yet now she be too happy to wish to sleep . 

 the boy draw nearer . 

 " oh , boy dear , I love you so , " she whisper into the throb darkness ; " I love you so . " 

 " I know you do , dear , " say the Boy . " it be almost unbelievable , Christobel ; but I know you do . " 

 then she put up her arm , and draw he to her breast . 

 thus the boy though far away march round . 

 " and the evening and the morning be the sixth day . " 




 AN INTERLUDE 

 " AS a dream , when one awaketh " 

 when Miss Charteris open her eye , the sun be stream into her room . the sense of have sleep heavily and unnaturally lie upon she . she have not hear Martha 's entry ; but her blind be up , and the tea on the tray beside her bed be still fresh and hot . 

 she take a cup , and the after - effect of the bromide seem to leave she . 

 she dress , and go downstairs . 

 on the breakfast - table , beside her plate , lie the Professor 's letter . when she have pour out her coffee and butter her toast , she open and read it . 

 the letter be exactly such as she have always dream the Professor would write , if he ever come to the point of make she a proposal . he touch on their long friendship ; on how much it have mean to they both . he say he have often hop for the possibility of a close tie , but have not feel justify in suggest it , until he be in a position to offer she a suitable home and income . this be now fortunately the case ; therefore he hasten to write and plead his cause , though keenly conscious of how little there be in himself calculate to call forth in a woman the affection which it be his earnest hope and desire to win . she have trust he as a friend , an intellectual guide and comrade , during many year . if she could now bring herself to trust he in a yet more intimate relation , he would endeavour never to disappoint or fail she . 

 the letter be sign : 

 " your in sincere devotion , " KENRICK harvey . " 

 a postscript request to be allow to call , at the usual hour , that afternoon , for a reply . 

 Miss Charteris write a brief note of thank and appreciation , and give the Professor leave to call at three . 

 the Professor call at three . 

 he knock and ring , and fumble long over the umbrella - stand in the hall . he seem to be take all the umbrella out , and put they back again . 

 at last he appear at the door of the drawing - room , where Miss Charteris await he . he be very nervous . he repeat the substance of his letter , only rather less well express . he allude to Miss Ann , and to the extreme happiness and pleasure to she of have Christobel as a sister . but he completely ignore , both in the letter and in conversation , Miss Ann 's betrayal of Christobel 's confidence . for this she be grateful to he . 

 as soon as the Professor , have flounder through the unusual water of express sentiment , step out on to the high and dry path of an actual question , Miss Charteris answer that question in the affirmative , and accept the Professor 's offer . 

 he rise , and hold her hand for a few moment , look at she with great affection through his glass , which do not at all impede the warmth of his regard ; in fact , be powerful convex lens , they magnify it . then he kiss she rather awkwardly on the brow , and hurry back to his seat . 

 a somewhat strained silence would have follow , have not the Professor have an inspiration . 

 draw a book from his pocket , he look at she as you look at a child for whom you have a delightful surprise in store . 

 " that er matter be satisfactorily settle , my dear Christobel , " he say , ' should we not find it decidedly er refreshing to spend an hour over our persian translation ? " 

 Miss Charteris agree at once ; but while the Professor read , translate , and expound , expatiate on the interest and beauty of various passage , her mind wander . 

 she find herself picture the boy under similar circumstance ; how the boy would have behave during the first hour of engagement ; what the boy would have say ; what the boy would have do . she be not quite sure what the boy would have do ; she have never experience the boy with the curb completely off . but she suddenly remember : " Millions , or would it be billion ? " and the recollection give she a shock of such vivid reaction , that she laugh aloud . 

 the Professor pause , and look up in surprise . then he smile , indulgently . 

 " my dear er Christobel , this passage be not intend to be humorous , " he say . 

 " I know it be not , " reply Miss Charteris . " I beg your pardon . I laugh involuntarily . " 

 the Professor resume his reading . 

 no ; she be not quite sure as to all the boy would have do ; but she know quite well what he would have say . 

 and here the boy , quite unexpectedly , take a First in classic ; for what the boy would have say would certainly have be greek to the Professor . 

 after this , event follow one another so rapidly that the whole thing become dream - like to Miss Charteris . she find herself helpless in the grip of Miss Ann 's iron will up to now , carefully shroud in Shetland and lace . at last she understand why Emma 's old mother have have to die alone in a little cottage away in Northumberland ; Emma , good soul , be too devoted to her mistress to ask for the necessary week , in order to go home and nurse her mother . Emma have seem a broken woman , ever since ; and Christobel understand now the impossibility of any one ever ask Miss Ann for a thing which Miss Ann have make up her mind not to grant . 

 she and the Professor now become puppet in Miss Ann 's delicate hand . Miss Ann lie upon her couch , and pull the wire . the Professor dance , because he have not the discernment to know he be dance ; Miss Charteris , because she have not the heart to resist . the Boy have go out of her life , nothing seem to matter . it be her duty to marry the Professor , and there be nothing to be gain by the postponement of duty . 

 but it be Miss Ann who insist on the wedding take place within a week . it be Miss Ann who remind they that , the Long Vacation have just commence , the Professor could easily be away , and there be research connect with his encyclopedia which it be of the utmost importance he should immediately make in the museum and library of Brussels . it be Miss Ann who insist upon a special licence be obtain , and who overrule Christobel 's desire to be marry by her brother , the bishop . Miss Ann have become quite hysterical at the idea of the bishop be bring back from a tour he be make in Ireland , and Christobel yield the more readily , because her brother 's arrival would undoubtedly have mean Mollie 's ; and Mollie 's presence , even if she refrain from protest and expostulation , would have bring such poignant memory of the boy . 

 so it come to pass , with a queer sense of the whole thing be dream - like and unreal , that Miss Charteris who should have have the most crowded and most popular wedding in Cambridge find herself stand , as a bride , beside the Professor , in an ill - ventilate church , at ten o'clock in the morning , be marry by an old clergyman she have never see before , who seem partially deaf , and partially blind , and wholly inadequate to the solemn occasion ; with Miss Ann and her faithful Emma , sniff in a pew on one side ; while Jenkins breathe rather heavily in a pew , on the other . Martha have flatly refuse to attend ; and when Miss Charteris send for she to bid her good - bye , Martha have appear , apparently in her bad and most morose temper ; then have suddenly break down , and , exclaim wildly : " ' ow about ' I m ? " have throw her apron over her head , and leave the room , sob . 

 " how about he ? how about he ? " 

 each turn of the wheel reiterate the question as she drive to Shiloh to pick up Miss Ann ; then on to the church where the Professor wait . 

 how about he ? but he have leave she to do that which she feel to be right , and she be do it . 

 nevertheless , Martha 's wild outburst have bring the boy very near ; and he seem with she as she walk up the church . 

 her mind wander during the reading of the exhortation . in this nightmare of a wedding she seem to have no really important part to play . the boy would burst in , in a minute ; and a shaft of light would come with he . he would walk straight up the church to she , say : " we have jolly well have enough of this , Christobel ! " then they would all wake up , and he would whirl she away in a motor and she would say : " boy dear ; do not   exceed the speed - limit . " 

 but the boy do not burst in ; and the Professor 's hand , look unusually large in a pair of white kid glove , be twitch nervously , for an emphatic question be be put to he by the old clergyman , who have emerge from his hiding - place behind the Prayer - book , as soon as the exhortation be over . 

 the Professor say : " I will , " with considerable emotion ; while Miss Ann sob audibly into her lace pocket - handkerchief . 

 Christobel look at the Professor . his outward appearance seem greatly improve . his beard have be trim ; his hair what there be of it cut . he have not once look at she since she enter the church and take her place at his side ; but she know , if he do look , his eye would be kind kind , with a magnify kindness , behind the convex lens . the boy have ask whether she love the Professor 's mouth , eye , and hair . what question the amazing boy use to ask ! and she have answer 

 but here a silence in the church recall her wandering thought . the all - important question have be put to she . she have not hear one word of it ; yet the church await she " I will . " 

 the silence become alarming . this be the exact psychological moment in which the boy should have dash in to the rescue . but the boy do not dash in . 

 then Christobel Charteris do a thing perhaps unique in the annal of bride , but essentially characteristic of her extreme honesty . 

 " I be sorry , " she say , in a low voice ; " I do not hear the question . will you be good enough to repeat it ? " 

 Miss Ann , in the pew behind , gasp audibly . the old clergyman peer at she , in astonishment , over his glass . his eye be red - rimmed and bloodshot . 

 then he repeat the question slowly and deliberately , introduce a tone of reproof , which make of it a menace . Miss Charteris listen carefully to each clause and at the end she say : " I will . " 

 Whereupon , with much fumbling , the Professor and the old clergyman between they , succeed in find a ring , and in place it upon the third finger of her left hand . as they do so , her thought wander again . she be back in the garden with the boy . he have catch her left hand in both his , and kiss it ; then , divide the third finger from the other , and hold it apart with his strong brown one , he have lay his lip upon it , with a touch of unspeakable reverence and tenderness . she understand now , why the Boy have kiss that finger separately . she look down at it . the Professor 's ring encircle it . 

 then the old clergyman say : " let we pray " ; and , kneel meekly upon her knee , Christobel Charteris pray , with all her heart , that she might be a good wife to her old friend , the Professor . 

 from the church , they drive straight to the station , Miss Ann 's plan for they be , that they should lunch in London , reach folkestone in time for tea , and spend a day or two there , at a boarding - house keep by an old cronie of Miss Ann 's , before cross to Boulogne , en route for Brussels . 

 Christobel dislike the idea of the boarding - house , extremely . she have never , in her life , stay at a boarding - house ; moreover it seem to she that a wedding journey call imperatively for hotel and the good of hotel . but Miss Ann have dismiss the question with an authoritative wave of the hand , and a veil insinuation that hotel particularly Metropole hotel be scarcely proper place . Dear Miss Slinker 's boarding - house would be so safe and nice , and the company so congenial . but here the Professor have interpose , lay his hand gently on Christobel 's : " my dear Ann , we take our congenial company with we . " 

 this be the farth excursion into the realm of sentiment , upon which the Professor have as yet venture . the sober , middle - aged side of Miss Charteris have appreciate it , with a certain amount of grateful emotion . but the youthful soul of Christobel have suddenly realize how the boy would slap his leg , and rock , over the recital of such a sentence ; and , between the two , she have be reduce to a condition border on hysteric . 

 they travel from Cambridge in a first - class compartment , have it to themselves , and fall quite naturally into the style of conversation which have always characterize their friendship ; meet each other 's mind , not over the happening of a live present , but in a mutual appreciation of the great intellect of a dead and go past . before long , the Professor have whisk his favourite persian poet from the tail - pocket of his coat , Christobel have provide paper and pencil , and they be deep in translation . 

 arrive at Liverpool Street station , they enter a four - wheeler , and trundle slowly off to Cannon Street . Christobel have imagine four - wheeler to be obsolete ; but the Professor dismiss her suggestion of a taxi , as be " a needlessly rapid mode of progression , indubitably fraught with perpetual danger , " and proceed to hail the sleepy and astonished driver of a four - wheel cab . 

  oh , boy dear , what would you have say to that four - wheeler you dear record - break , speed - limit - exceed , astonishingly rapid boy ? that ancient four - wheeler , trundle past the Bank of England , the Royal Exchange , the Mansion House , up King William Street , and round into Cannon Street , endlessly block , continually pull up ; then start on , only to be stop again ; and your beloved inside it , boy dear , look out of the ramshackle old window , in a vain endeavour to see something of the London you have plan to show she in your own delightful extravagant way . oh , boy dear , keep out of this ! it be not your show . this four - wheeler have be hail and engage by the Professor . the lady within be the bride of the Professor . hand off , boy ! 

 they draw up , for a few minute , outside a bookseller 's in New Broad Street , on the left - hand side , just after they have trundle into it a delightful little place , cram , line , almost carpet , with book . the Professor plunge in , upset a pile of magazine in his hasty entrance through the narrow doorway . here he always find precisely the book he happen to be require for his late research . with an incoherent remark to the proprietor , who advance to meet he , the Professor become immediately absorb , in a far corner of the shop , oblivious of his cab , his bride , and his train . Christobel have follow he , and stand , a dignified , but somewhat lonely figure , just within the doorway . she have be to this shop with her father , during his lifetime , on several occasion , and have since often write for book . the bookseller come forward . he be a man possess of the useful faculty of remember face and the name appertain to they . also he have cultivate the habit of take an intelligent interest in his customer . but he do not connect this beautiful waiting figure , with the absorb back of the Professor . 

 " what can I do for you to - day , Miss Charteris ? " he inquire , with ready courtesy . 

 Christobel start . " nothing to - day , thank you , Mr. Taylor . but I be much oblige to you for so often supply my requirement by return of post . and , by the way , you have an excellent memory . it be many year since I come here last , with my father . " 

 " Professor Charteris be one of my good customer , " say the bookseller , in an undertone of deferential sympathy . " I never know a fine judge of a book than he . if I may be allow to say so , I deeply deplore his loss , Miss Charteris . " 

 Christobel smile , and gently unbent , allow the kindly expression of appreciation and regret to reach she with comfort in these moment of dream - like isolation . a friendly hand seem to have be outstretche across the chasm which divide the passionately regret past , from the scarcely appreciated present . she could see her father 's tall scholarly figure , as he stand lovingly finger a book , engage in earnest conversation with Mr. Taylor , regardless of the passing of time ; until she be oblige to lay her hand on his arm , and hurry he through the crowded street , down the steep incline , to the platform from which the Cambridge express be on the point of start . and when safely seat , with barely a minute to spare , he would turn to she , with a smile of gentle reproof , say : " but , my dear child , we have not conclude our conversation . " and she would laugh and say : " but we have to get home to - night , Papa . " whereupon he would lean back , contentedly , reply : " quite right , my dear . so we have . " 

 ah , happy those whose father and mother still walk the earth beside they . youth remain , notwithstanding the passing of year , while there be still a voice to say , in reproof or approbation : " my child . " 

 but the bookseller , not yet connect she with the Professor , still wait her pleasure ; and suddenly a thought strike Christobel . an eager wish awake within she . 

 " Mr. Taylor , " she say , hurriedly ; " can you supply I with the very new thing on the subject of aviation ? I want to learn all there be to know about propeller , steering - gear , cross - current , and how to avoid the danger " 

 she stop short . the Professor have find what he want , and be fumble for his purse . 

 the bookseller turn quickly to a pile at his elbow , take up a paper - cover book , and place it in her hand . " the very late , " he say . " publish yesterday . you will find in it all you want to know . " then , as he hand the Professor his change , " allow I to place it to your account , Miss Charteris , " he say . 

 experience a quite unaccountable sense of elation and fresh interest in life , Christobel , arm with her book on aviation , re - enter the four - wheeler . the Professor , absorb in his own purchase , have not notice her private transaction . he follow she into the cab , and make three ineffectual attempt to close the door . just as the driver be slowly begin to prepare to climb down , Mr. Taylor come across the crowded pavement , to their rescue ; release the Professor 's coat - tail , shut they in , and sign to the cabman to drive on . with a good deal of " gee - up " and whip - flourish , they re - commenced to trundle . Mr. Taylor be not merely a provider of literature ; he be also a keen observer of life , and of human nature . as Christobel lean forward to acknowledge his help , and to smile her farewell , his expression seem to say : " a four - wheeler , Professor Harvey , and the late work on aviation ! an unusual combination . " " very unusual , " she say to herself , and smile again . then it seem to she that her friend of the bookshop have say : " you will find what you want , on page 274 . " she know he have not , as a matter of fact , mention any page ; but the figure come into her mind . she open the book , and glance at page 274 . it be head : " fine performance by Mr. Guy Chelsea . " she shut it quickly . there be no room for the actual presence of the boy in the Professor 's four - wheeler . 

 they lunch at a depűt of the Aerated Bread Company , close to Cannon Street station . while Christobel be struggle with a very large plateful of cold tongue , she suddenly remember that one of the Boy 's many plan have be to take she to lunch at his favourite restaurant in Piccadilly ; where she would be able to order any dish she fancy , and find it well serve than she have ever know it before ; or to dine at the Hotel Metropole , where Monsieur Delma 's perfect orchestra would play for her any mortal thing for which she choose to ask , and play it well than she have ever hear it play . 

 these memory , and a really excellent cup of coffee , help Christobel in her struggle with the round of cold tongue ; and she look across the little marble - top table brightly at the Professor , and speak with a cheerful hopefulness which surprise herself . 

 but something , other than his own plate of cold tongue , seem weigh on the Professor . he have become preoccupied and distrait . 

 when they reach the Folkestone train , Christobel find out the cause of his preoccupation . 

 " my dear Ann I should say Christobel , " remark the Professor , hurriedly , as he put she into an empty compartment , and hesitate in the doorway . " I be always accustomed at this hour to have my pipe and a nap . should you object , my dear Ann er that be , Christobel , if I seek a smoking compartment ? " 

 " oh , please do ! " she exclaim , eagerly . the idea of two hour of freedom and solitude suddenly seem an undreamed of joy . " do not   think of I . I be quite happy here . " 

 " I will provide you with a paper , " say the Professor , and hail a pass boy . he lay the paper on her lap , and disappear . 

 the train start . 

 Christobel look out of the window as they slowly steam across the bridge over the Thames . she love the flow of the river , with its constant procession of barge , dredge , boat , and steamer ; a silent , move highway , right through the heart of the noisy whirl of London street - traffic . they run past old St. Saviour 's Church , now promote to be Southwark Cathedral ; out through the suburb , until street become villa , wood and meadow appear , and the train run through Chislehurst peaceful english resting - place where lie entomb the bright imperial hope of France then on through Sevenoaks , into the bowery green of the kentish hop - gardens . 

 after pass Sevenoaks , she take up the Professor 's paper and glance at it . somehow she have feel sure it would be the Daily Graphic . it be the Daily Mirror ! she have never hold a halfpenny illustrate paper in her hand before . no doubt it be an excellent paper , and meet the need of an immense number of people , to whom an additional halfpenny a day would be a consideration . but , that the Professor , when provide she with one paper , should have choose a halfpenny instead of a penny paper , seem to hold a curious significance , and call up sudden swift memory of the boy . he would have buy Punch , the Graphic , the Illustrated , the Spectator , and a Morning Post , plump they all down on the seat in front of she ; then sit beside she , and talk , the whole journey through , so that she would not have have a moment in which to open one of they . 

  oh , boy dear ! do not   look at this Daily Mirror . you might misjudge the good Professor . with your fifty thousand a year , how can you be expect to understand a mind which must consider ha'pence , even when bride and wedding journey be concern . do keep away , boy dear . this be not your wedding journey . 

 then she open the Daily Mirror , and there look out at she , from its central page , the merry , handsome , daring face of her own little boy Blue ! 

 he be seat in his fly machine , steering - wheel in hand , look out from among many wire . his cap be on the back of his head ; his bright eye look straight into her ; his firm lip , part in a smile , seem to be say : " I jolly well mean to do it . " beneath be an account of he , and a description of the flight he be to attempt on that day , across the Channel , circle round Boulogne Cathedral , and back . he be to start at two o'clock . at that very moment he must be in mid - air . 

 oh , little boy Blue ! little boy Blue ! you have a way of make heart stand still . 

 the boarding - house prove to be a place decidedly conducive to the taking of a fresh - air cure ; because nobody remain within its four wall , if the weather could possibly admit of their go out . 

 as soon as Christobel and the Professor have take tea , and reply to Miss Slinker 's many question , they go out to walk on the Leas until sunset . it be a radiant afternoon , and the strong wind which have suddenly arise , blow , in unexpected gust , from the sea , act as a tonic to weary heart and brain . Christobel , hold on her hat as she walk , battle her way beside the Professor , up a cross street , into the Sandgate Road . 

 there they go to the telegraph office , and send Miss Ann news of their safe arrival , and of the extreme comfort they feel sure of experience at Miss Slinker 's delightful abode .   this be the Professor 's wording . 

 they look in at Parson 's Library just to order a book Miss Ann want ; and , on a little far , just to match some crewel silk for a tea - cosy Miss Ann be make . 

 these commission duly execute , they be free to make their way to the Leas parade , whence they would look down upon the beach , and enjoy a distance view across the Channel . they take the side street which bring they out upon the esplanade , close to the lift by which people continuously mount or descend the steep face of the cliff . 

 a considerable crowd line the esplanade rail , look over eagerly . apparently there be some object of particular interest to be see below . 

 Christobel and the Professor advance to the railing , and also look over . 

 she see a strange thing float in the sea , between the promenade pier and the harbour . it seem a huge insect , with broken wing . its body be a mass of twisted wire . around this , a little fleet of rowing - boat have gather . they look black , on the blue wind - sweep water , like water - boatman on a village pond . they dart in and out and round about the wreckage of the huge wing and twisted wire , and seem wait for a chance to help . 

 a man stand next to Christobel and the Professor ; a man who talk to himself . 

 " ah , poor chap , " he say ; " poor chap ! so nearly back ! so nearly break the record ! such a sport ! " 

 " what be that thing in the water ? " inquire the Professor . 

 the man turn and look at he . 

 " an aeroplane , " he say , slowly , speak with a sort of stolid deliberation . " a wrecked aeroplane . catch in a cross - current , bad luck ! just accomplish one of the fine flight on record . start from up here ; skim over the Channel to Boulogne ; circle round the cathedral such a clear day ; we could watch the whole flight with field - glass come gaily back without a stop ; be make for the cliff again , when a cross - current catch he ; something go wrong with the steering - gear ; and down it go , with a plunge , head first into the sea . " 

 " and the er occupant ? " inquire the Professor . 

 " the aeronaut ? ah , he do not   fall clear , bad luck , or they could soon have fish he out . he stick to his seat and his wheel , and fall smash in among his wire . they be try to extricate he now . bad luck , poor chap ! such a sport . " 

 " do you know his name ? " ask the Professor , peer down at the waiting crowd which line the beach . 

 " Guy Chelsea , " say the man . " and I give you my word , he be the fine , plucky young amateur we have among the airman . " 

 then Christobel 's heart begin to beat again , and her limb seem to regain the power to move . 

 " he be mine , " she say . " I must go to he . he be my own little boy Blue . " and she begin to run along the Leas toward the stone step which zigzag down to the shore . 

 she hear the Professor run after she . 

 " Ann , " he call , " Ann ! stay ! this be most unnecessary ! " 

 she fly on . 

 " at least take the lift ! " bawl the Professor . 

 she hurry on and reach the step , pause an instant to glance back . 

 the Professor have stop at the lift , and be wave to she with his umbrella . 

 she could never remember run down those step . in what seem but a moment from the time she reach they , she find herself stumble painfully down the steep slope of shingle to the water 's edge . 

 the lift , bear the Professor , have just begin to crawl down the face of the cliff . she could see he gesticulate through the glass window . 

 the crowd on the shore , chiefly compose of rough man , be thick round the base of a wide stone breakwater , jut out into the sea . on this break - water stand an empty stretcher . a coast - guardsman march up and down , keep the crowd off the breakwater . 

 Christobel reach the outskirt of the crowd , and could get no far . 

 " please let I through , " she say . " I belong to he . he be mine . " 

 they turn and look at she . 

 " she be ' be mother , " say a voice . " let ' er through . " 

 " Mother be blow ! " say another voice , hoarsely . " get out ! she be ' be wife . " 

 " yes , " she cry eagerly . " yes ! oh , do let I through ! I be his wife . " 

 suddenly she know it be true . the Boy 's great love have make she his wife . have he not say : " you and I be one , Christobel ; eternally , indissolubly one . you will find it out , when it be too late " ? 

 the crowd part , make a way for she , straight to the foot of the breakwater . 

 she mount it , and walk towards the empty stretcher . 

 the coast - guardsman confront she . 

 " he be mine , " she say , quietly . " I have the right to be here . " 

 the man salute , in respectful silence . 

 she stand gaze out to where the crowd of boat hover about the great insect with broken wing . 

 the sea gleam golden in the sunset . 

 one boat , large than the rest , slowly detach itself from the general melťe , pull with measured stroke toward the breakwater . 

 something lie very still in the bow , cover with a sail - cloth . 

 two coast - guardsman row ; one steer . 

 the boat come toward the breakwater , in a shaft of sunlight . 

 Christobel turn to the man beside she . 

 " be there any hope ? " she ask . 

 " ' Fraid not , lady . my mate just signal : all U P. " 

 " ah ! " she say , look wide - eyed into his face . " ah ! but there must be pioneer . " 

 the coast - guardsman turn and walk toward the crowd . 

 " she be ' be wife , man , " he say , with a jerk of his thumb over his shoulder . " she be ' be wife ; yet when I tell she it be all U P , she say : ' there must be pioneer . ' " 

 the crowd of rough doff their cap . 

 the boat draw slowly nearer . 

 then she see the Professor , hurry down the shingle , wave his umbrella . 

 he must not come yet . 

 she advance to the shore end of the breakwater , and speak to the crowd . 

 " please , " she say , " oh , please , if possible , prevent that gentleman from reach the breakwater . " 

 they turn , and see the advance figure of the Professor , flurry and irate . 

 " ' Ullo , Bill , " cry a voice . " she say : do not   let the old bloke through . " 

 they pass the word from one to the other . " do not   let the old bloke through . " they close the outer rank , stand shoulder to shoulder . the Professor 's umbrella wave wildly on the outskirt . 

 she move along the breakwater . yes , that be it . " do not   let the old bloke through . " she have never use such a word in her life before , but it just meet the need of the case . " do not   let the old bloke through . " 

 the boat draw nearer . 

 a bugle , away up on the cliff , sound the call to arm . 

 " little boy Blue , come blow I your horn ! the cow be in the meadow ; the sheep , in the corn . where be the boy who look after the sheep ? ah , dear God ! where be the boy ? where be the boy ? where be the boy ? he be under the sailcloth fast asleep . " 

 the boat draw nearer . she could hear the measured plash of the oar ; the rhythmic rattle of the rowlock . they advance , to the beat of the word in her brain . 

 " there must be pion eer ! do not   let the old bloke through . oh , where be the boy who look after the sheep ? he be under the sail - cloth , fast asleep . " 

 the boat draw level with the breakwater , grate against it . 

 " under the sail - cloth , boy dear ; under the sail - cloth fast asleep . " 

 tenderly , carefully , they lift their burden . as the boat rock , and their foot shuffle beneath the weight , she close her eye . when she open they once more , the quiet thing under the sail - cloth lie upon the stretcher . every man within sight stand silent and bareheade . 

 the bugle on the cliff sound : " light out . " 

 the golden shaft of sunlight die from off the sea . 

 then she come forward , and knelt beside she Boy . 

 suddenly she understand the cry of anguish wring from the love heart of a woman at a tomb : " tell I where thou hast lay he , and I will take he away ! " oh , faithful heart of woman , alike through all the age ; ready , with superhuman effort , to prove a limitless love and a measureless grief ! 

 she kneel beside the stretcher , and lift the sail - cloth . 

 yes , it be the boy her own little boy Blue . 

 his curly hair be mat with blood and salt water . there be a deep gash across his temple , from the ear , right up into the hair his eye be close ; but his lip smile , triumphant . " there must be pioneer ! every good life give , advance the cause . " " yes , little boy Blue . but have it ever strike you , that , if you marry , your wife will most probably want you to give up fly ; not be able to bear that a man who be she ALL , should do these thing ? " she lift the sail - cloth quite away , and stand look down upon he , so shattered , yet so beautiful , in his triumphant sleep . 

 suddenly her arm be seize from behind . she turn . 

 the Professor have succeed in push his way through the crowd , and in mount the breakwater . his cravat be awry ; his top - hat be on the back of his head . he look at she through his glass , in amazed indignation . 

 " Christobel , " he say , " this be no place for you . come away at once . do you hear ? I bid you come with I at once . " 

 the only thing she really minded be that his hat be on , in the presence of her Dead . 

 she could not free her arm from the grip of the Professor . 

 she turn and point to the stretcher , with her left hand . 

 " my place be here , " she say , clearly and deliberately . " I have the right to be here . this be all a fearful nightmare , from which we be bind before long to wake . but meanwhile , I tell you plainly as I ought to have tell you before this be the body of the man I love . " 

 at that moment , one of the crowd , spring on to the breakwater behind the Professor , strike off his hat with a cane . it fall into the sea . 

 the Professor let go her arm , and turn to see who have perpetrate the outrage , and whether the hat could be recover . 

 then she bend over the stretcher . 

 " boy dear , " she whisper , in tone of ineffable tenderness ; " this be where they have lay you ; but I will take you away . " 

 she put her arm beneath the body ; then , with an almost superhuman effort , lift it , and gather it to she . it feel limp and break . the head fall heavily against her breast . the blood and salt - water soak through her thin muslin blouse . but she hold he , and would not let he go . " I will take he away , " she whisper ; " I will take he away . " 

 she know she be lose her reason , but she have know that , ever since she first look down from the top of the cliff , and see the broken wing float on the sea . now , with she boy in her arm , her one idea be to get away from the Professor ; away from the coast - guardsman ; away from the crowd . 

 turn she back upon the beach , she stagger along the breakwater , toward the open sea . 

 " I will take he away , " she repeat ; " I will take he away . " 

 then her foot slip . she still hold the Boy , but she feel herself fall . 

 she close her eye . 

 she never know which she strike first , the stone breakwater , or the sea 




 the seventh DAY 

 the stone be roll away 

 when Christobel recover consciousness and open her eye , she find herself in bed , in her own room , at home . 

 Martha bend over she . 

 the morning light enter dimly , through closed curtain . 

 in dumb anguish of mind , she look up into Martha 's grim old face . 

 " tell I where you have lay he , " she say , " and I will take he away . " 

 Martha snort . 

 " I have   lay your tea - tray on the table beside your bed , Miss , " she say ; " and when you ' ave finish with it , I will take it away . " 

 Whereupon , Martha lumber to the large bow - window , draw back all the curtain with a vigorous clatter of brass ring , and let in a blaze of morning sunshine . 

 Christobel lie quite still , try to collect her thought . 

 one of her pillow be clasp tightly in her arm . 

 she lift her left hand , and look at it . 

 no ring encircle the third finger . 

 " Martha , " she call , softly . 

 Martha loom large at the side of the bed . 

 " what be to - day ? " 

 " Wednesday , Miss , " reply Martha , too much surprised to be contemptuous . 

 " Martha where be Mr. Chelsea ? " 

 " Lord only know , " say Martha , tragically . 

 " Martha be he live ? " 

 " live ? " repeat Martha , deliberately . then she smile , her crooked smile . " live do not   express it , Miss Christobel . Lively 's more like it , when Mr. Guy be concern . and I reckon , wherever ' e be , e 's makin ' thing lively somewhere for somebody . you do not   look quite the thing this morning , Miss. sit up and take your tea . " 

 she sit up , loose the pillow out of her arm the pillow which have be , first her little boy Blue , as she draw he to she in the darkness ; then the dead body of Guy Chelsea , as she lift it on the breakwater . 

 she take her tea from Martha 's hand , and drink it quickly . she want Martha to go . 

 it be Wednesday ! then the Boy have leave she only the day before yesterday . his telegram have come last night . the Professor 's proposal have not yet reach she . 

 Martha lift the tray and depart . 

 then Christobel Charteris rise , and stand at her open window , in the morning sunlight . she look out upon the mulberry - tree and the long vista of soft turf ; in the dim distance , the postern gate in the old red wall his paradise , and her . 

 she lift she beautiful arm above her head . the loose sleeve of her nightdress fall away , bar they to the elbow . she might have stand , in her noble development of face and form , for a splendid statue of hope and praise . 

 " ah , dear God ! " she breathe , " be it indeed true ? be it possible ? be my boy alive ? and be I free free to be his alone ? be I free to give he all he want , free to be all he need ? " 

 she stand long at the window motionless , realize the mental adjustment which have come to she during the strenuous hour of the night . 

 her dream have teach her one great lesson : that under no circumstance whatever , can it be right for a woman to marry one man , while with her whole be she love another . love be Lord of all . love reign paramount . no expectation , past or present , base on friendship or gratitude ; no sense of duty or obligation of any kind could make a marriage right , if , in view of that marriage , Love have to stand by with broken wing . 

 she feel quite sure , now , that she could never marry the Professor ; and humbly she thank God for open her eye to the wrong she have contemplate , before it be too late . 

 but there still remain the difficult prospect of have to disappoint a man she esteem so highly ; a man who have be lead to believe she care for he , and have wait year for he ; a man who , for year , have set his heart upon she . this be a heavy stone , and it lie right in the path of perfect bliss which she long to tread with her little boy Blue . 

 who should roll it away ? 

 could she feel free to take happiness with the boy , if she have disappoint and crush a deeply sensitive nature which trust she ? 

 she dress , and go down to the breakfast - room , her soul fill , in spite of perplexity , with a radiance of glad thanksgiving . 

 Martha and Jenkins come in to prayer . Martha have now take to curl all her wisps . she appear with many frizzled ringlet , keep in place by invisible pin . 

 Martha always come in to prayer , as if she be march at the head of a long row of man and maid . jenkin follow meekly , place his chair at what would have be the tail of Martha 's imaginary retinue . accord to the triumphant dignity of Martha 's entry , Jenkins place his chair near or far away . Martha be in great form to - day . jenkin sit almost at the door . if the door - bell ring during prayer , the first ring be tacitly ignore ; but if it ring again , Martha sign to Jenkins , who tiptoe reverently out , and answer it . no matter how early in the morning 's devotion the interruption occur , Jenkins never consider it etiquette to return . Miss Charteris use to dread a duet alone with Martha . she always become too intensely conscious of herself and of Martha , to be uplifted as usual by the inspire word of Bible and Prayer - book . the presence of Jenkins at once constitute a congregation . 

 on this particular morning , no interruption occur . 

 the portion for the day chance to be the scene at the empty tomb , in the early dawn of that first Easter Day , as give by Saint Mark . 

 the quiet voice vibrate with unusual emotion as Miss Charteris read : 


 " and very early in the morning , the first day of the week , they come unto the sepulchre at the rise of the sun . and they say among themselves , who shall roll we away the stone from the door of the sepulchre ? and when they look , they see that the stone be roll away : for it be very great . " 


 Christobel Charteris pause . she seem to see the shore at Dovercourt , and the brave little figure struggle to carry the heavy stone ; and , later on when the cannon - ball lie safely in the castle court - yard , little boy Blue stand erect , with lift cap , and shin eye , a picture of faith triumphant . 

 " I have pray for thee , that thy faith fail not . " 

 how far be the happening of this strange night owe to that dead mother 's prayer ; and to the boy 's unfailing faith , even through these hard day ? 

 Miss Charteris could read no far . she close the Bible . " let we pray , " she say , and turn to the Collect for the week . 


 " o God , whose never - fail providence ordereth all thing both in heaven and earth : we humbly beseech Thee to put away from we all hurtful thing , and to give we those thing which be profitable for we ; through Jesus Christ our Lord . amen . " 

 on the breakfast - table , beside her plate , lie the Professor 's letter . she have know it would be there . 

 she pour out her coffee and butter her toast . 

 then she open the letter . 


 " my dear Ann " 

 after the nightmare through which she have just pass , this begin scarcely surprise she . she glance back at the envelope to make quite sure it be address to herself ; then read on . it be date the evening before , from the Professor 's room in College . 


 " MY DEAR ANN , I regret to have be unable to look in upon you this evening , on my return from town , and my duty will keep I from pay you a visit until to - morrow , in the late afternoon . hence this letter . 

 " needless to say , I have be think over , carefully , the remarkable statement you see fit to make to I , concern the feeling and expectation of our young friend . it come to I as a genuine surprise . I have always look upon our friendship as purely platonic ; base entirely upon the intellectual enjoyment we find in pursue our classical study together . 

 " I admit , I can not bring myself to contemplate matrimony with much enthusiasm . 

 " at the same time , your feeling in the matter be so strong , and my sense of gratitude toward my late friend , a thing never to be forget ; if you be quite sure , Ann and I confess it seem to I altogether incredible that our young friend entertain , toward I , feeling which will mean serious disappointment to she , if I fail " 


 this bring the letter to the bottom of the first page . 

 without read any far , Miss Charteris fold it , and replace it in the envelope . 

 the indignant blood have mount to the root of her soft fair hair . but already , in her heart , sound a song of wonder praise . 


 " and when they look , they see that the stone be roll away : for it be very great . " 


 the iron gate of the front garden swung open . hurried step fly up the path . Emma , poor soul , have be tell to fly ; and Emma have fly . she almost fall into the arm of Jenkins , as he open the hall door . 

 the note with which Emma have run , at a speed which be now cause she ' such a stitch as never be , " come from Miss Ann , and be mark " urgent " and " immediate . " 

 the corner of Christobel 's proud mouth curve into a quiet smile as she take it from the salver . she have expect this note . 

 " take Emma downstairs , Jenkins , " she say . " ask Martha to give she a cup of coffee , and an egg , if she fancy it . tell Emma , I wish she to sit down comfortably and rest . the answer to this note will be ready in about half an hour ; not before . " 

 Miss Charteris finish her coffee and toast , pour out a fresh cup , and take some marmalade . she do not hurry over her breakfast . 

 when she have quite finish , she rise , and walk over to the writing - table . she sit down , open her blotter , take paper and envelope ; find a pen , and try it . 

 then she open Miss Ann 's letter , mark " urgent " and " immediate . " 


 " SWEETEST CHILD "   write Miss Ann   " see what Kenrick have do ! we you and I so understand his dear absent - minded way . he write this letter to you last night , and , owe to his natural emotion and tension of mind , address it to I ! needless to say , I have read only the open sentence . Darling Christobel , you will , I feel sure , overlook the very natural mistake , and not allow it in any way to affect your answer to my brother 's proposal . remember how difficult it be for great mind to be accurate in the small detail of daily life . I have know Kenrick to put two spoonful of mustard into a cup of coffee , stir it round , and drink it , quite unaware that anything be wrong I have indeed ! see how our dear Professor need a wife ! 

 " I feel quite foolishly anxious this morning . do send I one line of assurance that all be well . you can not but be touch by my brother 's letter . from beginning to end , it breathe the faithful devotion of a lifetime . do not misunderstand the natural reticence of one wholly unaccustomed to the voicing of sentiment . I only wish you could hear all he say to I ! " 


 then follow a few prayer and devout allusion to Providence which bring a stern look to the face of Miss Charteris and , with a whiff of effusive sentiment , Ann Harvey close her epistle . 

 an open letter from the Professor to herself be enclose ; but this , Christobel quietly lay aside . 

 she take pen and paper , and write at once the note for which Emma wait . 


 " DEAR ANN , I enclose a letter from your brother which come , address to I , this morning , but be evidently intend for you . I have read only the first page , which be quite sufficient to make the true state of affair perfectly clear to I . 

 " Providence have indeed interpose , by mean of the Professor 's absent - minded way , to prevent the wrecking of three life mine , your brother 's , and that of the man I love ; to whom I shall be betroth before the day be over . 

 " I shall not tell the Professor that I have see a portion of his letter to you . I think we owe it to he not to do so . he have always be a true and honourable friend to I . 

 " your , " C. C. " 

 when Emma have duly depart with this letter and enclosure , Miss Charteris breathe more freely . she have be afraid lest , in her righteous indignation , in her consciousness of the terrible mischief so nearly wrought , she should write too strongly to Miss Ann , thus cause her unnecessary pain . 

 it be quite impossible , to the fine generosity of a nature such as that of Christobel Charteris , really to understand the mean , self - centre , unscrupulous dishonesty of an action such as this of Miss Ann 's . from the calm height whereon she walk , such small - minded selfishness of motive do not come within her field of vision . she could never bring herself to believe bad of Miss Ann than that , in some incomprehensible way , she have labour under a delusion regard herself and the Professor . 

 Miss Ann dispose of , she turn to the Professor 's letter . 

 it be not the letter of her dream , by any mean ; nor be it the letter she have sometimes dream he would write . 

 it be straightforward and simple ; and , hold the key to the situation , she could read between the line a certain amount of dismayed surprise , which make she heartily sorry for her old friend . 

 the Professor touch on their long friendship , his regard for her parent , his sincere admiration for herself ; their unity of interest and congeniality of taste ; his sudden change of fortune ; quote a little Greek , a little sanskrit , and a little persian ; then , fortify by these familiar aid to the emotion , offer her marriage , in valiant and unmistakable term . 

 Christobel 's heart stand still as she realize that not one word in that letter would have reveal to she the true state of the case . truly , under Providence , she have cause to bless the Professor 's " dear absent - minded way . " 

 as she take pen and paper to reply to his letter , her heart feel very warm toward her old friend . she give he full credit for the effort with which he have do what he have be lead to consider be the right thing toward she . 


 " MY DEAR PROFESSOR "   she write , " I rejoice to hear of your good fortune . it be well indeed when the great thinker of the world be render independent of all anxious taking of thought as to what they shall eat , or what they shall drink , or wherewithal they shall be clothe . I like to think of you , my friend , as now set completely free from all mundane care ; able to give your undivided attention to the work you love . 

 " I appreciate , more than I can say , the kind proposition concern myself , which you make in your letter . I owe it to our friendship to tell you quite frankly that I feel , and have long feel , how great an honour it would be for any woman to be in a position so to administer your household as to set you completely free for your great intellectual pursuit . 

 " but marriage would mean more than this , and our long friendship embolden I to say that I should grieve to see you owe perhaps to pressure or advice from other burden your life with family tie for which you surely do not yourself feel any special inclination . 

 " and , now , my friend , I must not close my letter without tell you how great a happiness have come into my lonely life . I be about to marry a man whom " Miss Charteris pause , and look through the open window to the softly move leaf of the old mulberry - tree . a gleam of amusement shone in her eye , curve her lip into a tender smile . the boy seem beside she , slap his knee and rock with merriment at the way she be about to bewilder Miss Ann and the Professor " a man whom I have know and love for over twenty year . 

 " I be sure you will wish I joy , dear Professor . 

 " believe I , always , 
 " gratefully and affectionately your , 
 " CHRISTOBEL CHARTERIS . " 

 she ring the bell , and send the answer to the Professor 's letter , by Jenkins . she could not wait for the slow medium of the post . she could not let he remain another hour in the belief that , in order to save she from disappointment , he be compel to marry Christobel Charteris . 

 she stand at the breakfast - room window , and watch Jenkins as he hurry down the garden with the note . go by the lane , and take a short cut across the field , he would reach the Professor 's room in a quarter of an hour . until then , life be somewhat intolerable . 

 the proud blood mantle again over the face , the strong sweet beauty of which the boy so love . her letter to the Professor have not be easy to write . she have have to be true to herself , and true to he , in the light of what she know to be his real feeling in the matter ; bear in mind that before long he would almost certainly learn from Miss Ann that she have reply to his proposal after have read his sentiment on the subject , so candidly express on the first page of his letter to his sister . 

 to relieve her mind , after this intricate whirl of cross - correspondence , she take up the Daily Graphic , and open it , casually turn the page . 

 suddenly there look out at she from the central page , the merry , handsome , daring face of her own little boy Blue . he be seat in his fly - machine steering - wheel in hand , look out from among many wire . his cap be on the back of his head , his bright eye look straight into her ; his firm young lip , part in a smile , seem to say ; " I jolly well mean to do it ! " it be the very picture she have see in the Professor 's Daily Mirror , in her dream of the night before . below be an account of the flight from folkestone which he be about to attempt . 

 then she remember , with a shock of realization , that the flight across the Channel , round Boulogne Cathedral and back , be to take place on that very day . his telegram , of the night before , have say : " I be go to do a big fly to - morrow . wish I luck . " ah , what if it end as she have see it end in her dream : great broken wing ; a mass of tangled wire ; and the boy her boy with matted hair , and wound head , asleep beneath the sailcloth ! 

 her heart stand still . 

 with their perfect joy so near its fulfilment , she could not let he take the risk . be there time to stop he ? 

 she look at the paper . the start be for 2 p.m. it be now eleven o'clock . 

 she remember his last word : " when you want I and send why , I will come from the other end of the world . " 

 she never quite know how she reach the telegraph - office . it seem almost as dreamlike as her flight from the top to the bottom of the folkestone cliff . but it be not a dream this time ; it be desperate reality . 

 why do people always break the point of the pencil hang from string in the telegraph - office ? surely it be possible to write a telegram without stub off the pencil , and leave it in that condition , for the next person in a hurry . 

 she fly from compartment to compartment , and at last produce her own pencil , and write her telegram in the final section of the row , independent of official break point . 


 " do not fly to - day . come to I . I want you . 

 " Christobel . " 


 she address it to the hotel from which he have telegraph on the previous day ; but add to the address : " if not there , send immediately to aviation shed . " she have no idea what to call the place , but this sound well , and seem an intuition , or an unconscious recollection of some remark of the boy 's . 

 she hand it over the counter . " please see that it go through at once , " she say . 

 the clerk know she . " yes , Miss Charteris , " he reply . he begin read the message aloud , but almost immediately stop , and check the word off silently . he glance at the clock . " it should be there before noon , Miss Charteris , " he say . 

 he do not look at she , as he pass she the stamp . he have long think her one of the fine woman who step in and out of the post - office . he have never expect to see her hand tremble . and fancy any woman even she be able to tell Guy Chelsea not to fly ! he have a bet on , about that flight , with an enthusiastic backer of Chelsea 's . he be glad he have take the odd against its come off , before see this wire . but after all ! it be easy enough to ask a chap not to fly ; but 

 he take up a copy of the Daily Mirror , and look at the brave smile face . " I jolly well mean to do it ! " the young aeronaut seem to be say . the clerk laugh , and shake his head . " hurry up that wire , " he call to the operator . then he jingle the loose change in his pocket . " I wonder , " he say . 

 during the hour which follow , Christobel Charteris know suspense . 

 perhaps that strong , self - contain nature could never have fully sound the depth of its own surrender , without those hour of uncertainty , when nothing stand between she and the man she love , but the possibility that her telegram would fail to reach he ; that he would carry out his dangerous flight ; that disaster and death would overtake he and wrest he from she , and that he would die Guy Chelsea would die without ever know of the cup of bliss she be now ready , with utterly love hand , to hold to his lip . 

 have send her message , there be nothing more she could do , and the burden of inaction seem almost too great a weight to carry , during the hour which must elapse , before his coming could turn uncertainty into assurance ; restlessness , into peace . 

 it do not occur to she , as a possibility , that Guy Chelsea would elect to fly , after receive her request . she know her slight wish would be law to the Boy 's tender loyalty ; and though he know nothing of her cause for anxiety , nor of the complete change of circumstance since he leave she , not forty - eight hour before , she feel sure he would not fly ; she feel certain he would come if if the message reach he in time . 

 at two o'clock it come to she , with overwhelming certainty , that her message have not reach he , and that he have start on his flight . she seem to see the great wing mount mount ; then skim over the sea . she almost hear the hum he have so often describe the hum of the giant insect on which the bird - man fly . 

 her own little Boy Blue be fly through space . o God , what might not any minute be bring ! he have say : " one never expect those thing to happen , and when they do happen , it be over so quickly that there be no time for expectation . " be it happen now ? be it go to be over so quickly , that her cup of bliss would be dash from her lip untasted ? be she to lose she all , because of a cross - current or a twisted wire ? 

 she be walk up and down the garden now , and pause beside the chair in which she have sit when he have say , only seven day ago : " it be always you I want ; not your niece . good heaven ! how can you have think it be Mollie , when it be you you just only you , all the time ? " and she , half - laugh at he , have ask : " be this a proposal ? " 

 " my ALL , " she say . " oh , boy dear , my ALL . if I lose you , I lose my ALL . " 

 she walk on slowly , move to the repetition of those word . it seem a comfort to repeat the great fact that , at last , he be this to she . surely it would reach he , by some sort of wireless telegraphy through space . surely it would control cross - current , keep propeller act as they should ; steering - gear from twisting . 

 " o God , he be my all he be my ALL ! " 

 the afternoon sun begin to glint through the tree . 

 the jolly little " what - d'-you - call-'ems " lift pale anxious face to the sky . 

 clock all around chime the hour of four . 

 suddenly her limb weaken . she could walk no long . 

 she sink into a chair , beneath the mulberry - tree . 

 in a few minute jenkin would bring out tea . would Martha have arrange a tea such as the boy love , with cup for two , hot butter - toast and explosive bun ? 

 what a boy he be , at heart this man who have win she ; what a gay , laughter - love boy ! 

 she lie back , very still , under the mulberry - tree , and live again through each of the Boy 's day , from the first to the sixth . 

 she keep her eye close . the sunlight , glint through the mulberry leaf , fall in bright patch on her white gown , and on her soft golden hair . 

 the garden be very still . all nature seem wait with the heart that wait . 

 " little boy Blue , come blow I your horn ! " 

 " I shall blow it all right on the seventh day , " the Boy have say ; " and when I do , you will hear it . " 

 this be the seventh day . 


 suddenly the horn of a motor toot loudly in the lane . 

 she rise , her hand clasp upon her breast , and stand wait 

 a shaft of golden sunlight stream down the garden , and seem to focus on the postern gate . 

 then the gate swing open and the boy come in , slam it behind he . she see he come up the lawn toward she , bareheade ; the sunlight in his shin eye . 

 " I could not   wait for train , " he shout . " I come by motor . and I jolly well exceed the speed - limit all the way ! " 

 she move a few step to meet he . 

 " boy dear , " she say , " you always exceed all speed - limit . it be a way you have . exceed they as much as you like , so long as I be with you when you do it . but oh , my little boy Blue ! do not   fly again ; for , if you fall and break your wing , indeed you will break my heart . " 

 in a moment she be sob on his breast , her arm fling around he . there be nothing broken or limp about his strong young body , pulsate with life . 

 he put his arm about she , hold she in a clasp of close possessive tenderness . 

 he do not yet understand what have happen ; but he know the great gift he desire have be give he . he wait for she to speak . 

 she lift her face to his . 

 " Guy , " she say ; " ah , take I , hold I , keep I ! I be altogether your own . I will explain to you fully , by and by . the stone be very great ; but lo , as we reach it , the Angel of the Lord have roll it away .... no other man have a shadow of claim over I . I be free to say , to the only man I have ever really love : take I ; I be yours . oh , boy ! I be altogether yours . " 

 he bend over she . 

 the sweet proud lip be part in utter surrender , and lift to his . 

 he pause just for one exquisite moment , of realization . 

 she wait his kiss with closed eye , so she do not see the radiance of his face , as he look up to the blue sky , fleck with fleeting white cloud . but she hear the voice , which from that hour be to make the music of her life : 

 " thank the Lord , " say little Boy Blue . 

 then he kiss she . 

 " and the evening and the morning be the seventh day . " 

