the GRAND BABYLON H"TEL 

 Arnold Bennett 
 chapter one the MILLIONAIRE and the waiter 


 ' yes , sir ? ' 

 jule , the celebrated head waiter of the Grand Babylon , be bend 
 formally towards the alert , middle - aged man who have just enter the 
 smoking - room and drop into a basket - chair in the corner by the 
 conservatory . it be 7.45 on a particularly sultry June night , and 
 dinner be about to be serve at the Grand Babylon . man of all size , 
 age , and nationality , but every one alike array in faultless 
 evening dress , be dot about the large , dim apartment . a faint odour 
 of flower come from the conservatory , and the tinkle of a fountain . 
 the waiter , command by Jules , move softly across the thick oriental 
 rug , balance their tray with the dexterity of juggler , and 
 receive and execute order with that air of profound importance of 
 which only really first - class waiter have the secret . the atmosphere 
 be an atmosphere of serenity and repose , characteristic of the Grand 
 Babylon . it seem impossible that anything could occur to mar the 
 peaceful , aristocratic monotony of existence in that perfectly - manage 
 establishment . yet on that night be to happen the mighty upheaval 
 that the Grand Babylon have ever know . 

 ' yes , sir ? ' repeat Jules , and this time there be a shade of august 
 disapproval in his voice : it be not usual for he to have to address a 
 customer twice . 

 ' oh ! ' say the alert , middle - aged man , look up at length . beautifully 
 ignorant of the identity of the great Jules , he allow his grey eye 
 to twinkle as he catch sight of the expression on the waiter 's face . 
 ' bring I an Angel Kiss . ' 

 ' Pardon , sir ? ' 

 ' bring I an Angel Kiss , and be good enough to lose no time . ' 

 ' if it be an american drink , I fear we do not   keep it , sir . ' the voice of 
 Jules fall icily distinct , and several man glance round uneasily , as if 
 to deprecate the slight disturbance of their calm . the appearance of 
 the person to whom Jules be speak , however , reassure they somewhat , 
 for he have all the look of that expert , the travelled Englishman , who 
 can differentiate between one h"tel and another by instinct , and who 
 know at once where he may make a fuss with propriety , and where it 
 be advisable to behave exactly as at the club . the Grand Babylon be a 
 h"tel in whose smoking - room one behave as though one be at one 's club . 

 ' I do not   suppose you do keep it , but you can mix it , I guess , even in 
 this h"tel . ' 

 ' this be not   an american h"tel , sir . ' the calculated insolence of the 
 word be cleverly mask beneath an accent of humble submission . 

 the alert , middle - aged man sit up straight , and gaze placidly at Jules , 
 who be pull his famous red side - whisker . 

 ' get a liqueur glass , ' he say , half curtly and half with good - humour 
 tolerance , ' pour into it equal quantity of maraschino , cream , and 
 creme de menthe . do not   stir it ; do not   shake it . bring it to I . and , I 
 say , tell the bar - tender - ' 

 ' bar - tender , sir ? ' 

 ' tell the bar - tender to make a note of the recipe , as I shall probably 
 want an Angel Kiss every evening before dinner so long as this weather 
 last . ' 

 ' I will send the drink to you , sir , ' say Jules distantly . that be his 
 parting shoot , by which he indicate that he be not as other waiter 
 be , and that any person who treat he with disrespect do so at his 
 own peril . 

 a few minute later , while the alert , middle - aged man be taste the 
 Angel Kiss , Jules sit in conclave with Miss Spencer , who have charge of 
 the bureau of the Grand Babylon . this bureau be a fairly large chamber , 
 with two slide glass partition which overlook the entrance - hall and 
 the smoking - room . only a small portion of the clerical work of the great 
 h"tel be perform there . the place serve chiefly as the lair of Miss 
 Spencer , who be as well known and as important as Jules himself . Most 
 modern h"tel have a male clerk to superintend the bureau . but the Grand 
 Babylon go its own way . Miss Spencer have be bureau clerk almost 
 since the Grand Babylon have first raise its massive chimney to heaven , 
 and she remain in her place despite the vagary of other h"tel . 
 always admirably dress in plain black silk , with a small diamond 
 brooch , immaculate wrist - band , and frizz yellow hair , she look now 
 just as she have look an indefinite number of year ago . her age - none 
 know it , save herself and perhaps one other , and none care . the 
 gracious and alluring contour of her figure be irreproachable ; and 
 in the evening she be a useful ornament of which any h"tel might be 
 innocently proud . her knowledge of Bradshaw , of steamship service , and 
 the programme of theatre and music - hall be unrivalle ; yet she never 
 travel , she never go to a theatre or a music - hall . she seem to 
 spend the whole of her life in that official lair of her , impart 
 information to guest , telephone to the various department , or 
 engage in intimate conversation with her special friend on the staff , 
 as at present . 

 ' who be number 107 ? ' Jules ask this black - rob lady . 

 Miss Spencer examine her ledger . 

 ' Mr Theodore Racksole , New York . ' 

 ' I think he must be a New Yorker , ' say Jules , after a brief , 
 significant pause , ' but he talk as good English as you or I . say he 
 want an " Angel Kiss " - maraschino and cream , if you please - every night . 
 I will see he do not   stop here too long . ' 

 Miss Spencer smile grimly in response . the notion of refer to 
 Theodore Racksole as a ' New Yorker ' appeal to her sense of humour , a 
 sense in which she be not entirely deficient . she know , of course , and 
 she know that Jules know , that this Theodore Racksole must be the unique 
 and only Theodore Racksole , the third rich man in the United States , 
 and therefore probably in the world . nevertheless she range herself at 
 once on the side of Jules . 

 just as there be only one Racksole , so there be only one Jules , 
 and Miss Spencer instinctively share the latter 's indignation at the 
 spectacle of any person whatsoever , millionaire or Emperor , presume to 
 demand an ' Angel Kiss ' , that unrespectable concoction of maraschino and 
 cream , within the precinct of the Grand Babylon . in the world of h"tel 
 it be currently state that , next to the proprietor , there be three 
 god at the Grand Babylon - Jules , the head waiter , Miss Spencer , and , 
 most powerful of all , Rocco , the renowned chef , who earn two thousand 
 a year , and have a chalet on the Lake of Lucerne . all the great h"tel 
 in Northumberland Avenue and on the Thames Embankment have try to get 
 Rocco away from the Grand Babylon , but without success . Rocco be well 
 aware that even he could rise no high than the maître h"tel of the 
 Grand Babylon , which , though it never advertise itself , and do not 
 belong to a limited company , stand an easy first among the h"tel of 
 Europe - first in expensiveness , first in exclusiveness , first in that 
 mysterious quality know as ' style ' . 

 situate on the Embankment , the Grand Babylon , despite its noble 
 proportion , be somewhat dwarf by several colossal neighbour . it have 
 but three hundred and fifty room , whereas there be two h"tel within a 
 quarter of a mile with six hundred and four hundred room respectively . 
 on the other hand , the Grand Babylon be the only h"tel in London with 
 a genuine separate entrance for royal visitor constantly in use . the 
 Grand Babylon count that day waste on which it do not entertain , at 
 the low , a german prince or the Maharajah of some Indian State . 
 when Felix Babylon - after whom , and not with any reference to London 's 
 nickname , the h"tel be christen - when Felix Babylon found the h"tel 
 in 1869 he have set himself to cater for Royalty , and that be the secret 
 of his triumphant eminence . 

 the son of a rich swiss h"tel proprietor and financier , he have contrive 
 to establish a connection with the official of several European 
 Courts , and he have not spar money in that respect . sundry king and 
 not a few princess call he Felix , and speak familiarly of the h"tel 
 as ' Felix 's ' ; and Felix have find that this be very good for trade . 
 the Grand Babylon be manage accordingly . the ' note ' of its policy be 
 discretion , always discretion , and quietude , simplicity , remoteness . the 
 place be like a palace incognito . there be no gold sign over the roof , 
 not even an explanatory word at the entrance . you walk down a small 
 side street off the Strand , you see a plain brown building in front of 
 you , with two mahogany swing door , and an official behind each ; the 
 door open noiselessly ; you enter ; you be in Felix 's . if you 
 mean to be a guest , you , or your courier , give your card to Miss 
 Spencer . upon no consideration do you ask for the tariff . it be 
 not good form to mention price at the Grand Babylon ; the price be 
 enormous , but you never mention they . at the conclusion of your stay 
 a bill be present , brief and void of dry detail , and you pay it 
 without a word . you meet with a stately civility , that be all . no one 
 have originally ask you to come ; no one express the hope that you 
 would come again . the Grand Babylon be far above such manoeuvre ; it 
 defy competition by ignore it ; and consequently be nearly always 
 full during the season . 

 if there be one thing more than another that annoy the Grand 
 Babylon - put its back up , so to speak - it be to be compare with , or 
 to be mistake for , an american h"tel . the Grand Babylon be resolutely 
 oppose to american method of eating , drinking , and lodge - but 
 especially american method of drinking . the resentment of Jules , on 
 be request to supply Mr Theodore Racksole with an Angel Kiss , will 
 therefore be appreciate . 

 ' anybody with Mr Theodore Racksole ? ' ask Jules , continue his 
 conversation with Miss Spencer . he put a scornful stress on every 
 syllable of the guest 's name . 

 ' Miss Racksole - she be in no . 111 . ' 

 jule pause , and stroke his left whisker as it lie on his gleaming 
 white collar . 

 ' she be where ? ' he query , with a peculiar emphasis . 

 ' no . 111 . I could not   help it . there be no other room with a bathroom 
 and dressing - room on that floor . ' Miss Spencer 's voice have an appealing 
 tone of excuse . 

 ' why do not   you tell Mr Theodore Racksole and Miss Racksole that we be 
 unable to accommodate they ? ' 

 ' because Babs be within hearing . ' 

 only three people in the wide world ever dream of apply to Mr Felix 
 Babylon the playful but mean abbreviation - Babs : those three be Jules , 
 Miss Spencer , and Rocco . Jules have invent it . no one but he would have 
 have either the wit or the audacity to do so . 

 ' you would well see that Miss Racksole change her room to - night , ' Jules 
 say after another pause . ' leave it to I : I will fix it . Au revoir ! it be 
 three minute to eight . I shall take charge of the dining - room myself 
 to - night . ' 

 and Jules depart , rub his fine white hand slowly and 
 meditatively . it be a trick of his , to rub his hand with a strange , 
 roundabout motion , and the action denote that some unusual excitement 
 be in the air . 

 at eight o'clock precisely dinner be serve in the immense salle 
 manger , that chaste yet splendid apartment of white and gold . at a small 
 table near one of the window a young lady sit alone . her frock say 
 Paris , but her face unmistakably say New York . it be a self - possess 
 and bewitch face , the face of a woman thoroughly accustomed to do 
 exactly what she like , when she like , how she like : the face of 
 a woman who have teach hundred of gilded young man the true art of 
 fetching and carry , and who , by twenty year or so of parental 
 spoiling , have come to regard herself as the feminine equivalent of the 
 Tsar of all the Russias . such woman be only make in America , and they 
 only come to their full bloom in Europe , which they imagine to be a 
 continent create by Providence for their diversion . 

 the young lady by the window glance disapprovingly at the menu card . 
 then she look round the dining - room , and , while admire the diner , 
 decide that the room itself be rather small and plain . then she gaze 
 through the open window , and tell herself that though the Thames by 
 twilight be passable enough , it be by no mean level with the Hudson , 
 on whose shore her father have a hundred thousand dollar country 
 cottage . then she return to the menu , and with a pursing of lovely 
 lip say that there appear to be nothing to eat . 

 ' sorry to keep you wait , Nella . ' it be Mr Racksole , the intrepid 
 millionaire who have dare to order an Angel Kiss in the smoke - room 
 of the Grand Babylon . Nella - her proper name be Helen - smile at her 
 parent cautiously , reserve to herself the right to scold if she should 
 feel so inclined . 

 ' you always be late , father , ' she say . 

 ' only on a holiday , ' he add . ' what be there to eat ? ' 

 ' nothing . ' 

 ' then let us have it . I be hungry . I be never so hungry as when I be be 
 seriously idle . ' 

 ' Consommé Britannia , ' she begin to read out from the menu , ' Saumon 
 d'Ecosse , Sauce Genoise , Aspics de Homard . oh , heaven ! who want these 
 horrid mess on a night like this ? ' 

 ' but , Nella , this be the good cooking in Europe , ' he protest . 

 ' Say , father , ' she say , with seem irrelevance , ' have you forget 
 it be my birthday to - morrow ? ' 

 ' have I ever forget your birthday , o most costly daughter ? ' 

 ' on the whole you have   be a most satisfactory dad , ' she answer 
 sweetly , ' and to reward you I will be content this year with the cheap 
 birthday treat you ever give I . only I will have it to - night . ' 

 ' well , ' he say , with the long - suffer patience , the readiness for any 
 surprise , of a parent whom Nella have thoroughly train , ' what be it ? ' 

 ' it be this . let us have fillet steak and a bottle of Bass for dinner 
 to - night . it will be simply exquisite . I shall love it . ' 

 ' but my dear Nella , ' he exclaim , ' steak and beer at Felix 's ! it be 
 impossible ! moreover , young woman still under twenty - three can not be 
 permit to drink Bass . ' 

 ' I say steak and Bass , and as for be twenty - three , shall be go in 
 twenty - four to - morrow . ' 

 Miss Racksole set her small white tooth . 

 there be a gentle cough . jule stand over they . it must have be out 
 of a pure spirit of adventure that he have select this table for his 
 own service . usually Jules do not personally wait at dinner . he merely 
 hover observant , like a captain on the bridge during the mate 's watch . 
 regular frequenter of the h"tel feel themselves honour when Jules 
 attach himself to their table . 

 Theodore Racksole hesitate one second , and then issue the order with a 
 fine air of carelessness : 

 ' fillet steak for two , and a bottle of Bass . ' it be the brave act 
 of Theodore Racksole 's life , and yet at more than one previous crisis a 
 high courage have not be lack to he . 

 ' it be not in the menu , sir , ' say Jules the imperturbable . 

 ' never mind . get it . we want it . ' 

 ' very good , sir . ' 

 jule walk to the service - door , and , merely affect to look behind , 
 come immediately back again . 

 ' Mr Rocco 's compliment , sir , and he regret to be unable to serve steak 
 and Bass to - night , sir . ' 

 ' Mr Rocco ? ' question Racksole lightly . 

 ' Mr Rocco , ' repeat Jules with firmness . 

 ' and who be Mr Rocco ? ' 

 ' Mr Rocco be our chef , sir . ' Jules have the expression of a man who be 
 ask to explain who Shakespeare be . 

 the two man look at each other . it seem incredible that Theodore 
 Racksole , the ineffable Racksole , who own a thousand mile of railway , 
 several town , and sixty vote in Congress , should be defy by a 
 waiter , or even by a whole h"tel . yet so it be . when Europe 's effete 
 back be against the wall not a regiment of millionaire can turn its 
 flank . jule have the calm expression of a strong man sure of victory . 
 his face say : ' you beat I once , but not this time , my New York 
 friend ! ' 

 as for Nella , know her father , she foresaw interesting event , and 
 wait confidently for the steak . she do not feel hungry , and she could 
 afford to wait . 

 ' excuse I a moment , Nella , ' say Theodore Racksole quietly , ' I shall be 
 back in about two second , ' and he stride out of the salle a manger . 
 no one in the room recognize the millionaire , for he be unknown to 
 London , this be his first visit to Europe for over twenty year . have 
 anyone do so , and catch the expression on his face , that man might 
 have tremble for an explosion which should have blow the entire Grand 
 Babylon into the Thames . 

 jule retire strategically to a corner . he have fire ; it be the 
 antagonist 's turn . a long and varied experience have teach Jules that a 
 guest who embark on the subjugation of a waiter be almost always lose ; 
 the waiter have so many advantage in such a contest . 




 chapter two how MR RACKSOLE obtain his dinner 

 nevertheless , there be man with a confirm habit of get their own 
 way , even as guest in an exclusive h"tel : and Theodore Racksole have 
 long since fall into that useful practice - except when his only 
 daughter Helen , motherless but high - spirited girl , choose to think that 
 his way cross her , in which case Theodore capitulate and fall back . 
 but when Theodore and his daughter happen to be go one and the same 
 road , which be pretty often , then Heaven alone might help any obstacle 
 that be so ill - advise as to stand in their path . jule , great and 
 observant man though he be , have not notice the terrible projecting 
 chin of both father and daughter , otherwise it be possible he would 
 have reconsider the question of the steak and Bass . 

 Theodore Racksole go direct to the entrance - hall of the h"tel , and 
 enter Miss Spencer 's sanctum . 

 ' I want to see Mr Babylon , ' he say , ' without the delay of an instant . ' 

 Miss Spencer leisurely raise her flaxen head . 

 ' I be afraid - , ' she begin the usual formula . it be part of her daily 
 duty to discourage guest who desire to see Mr Babylon . 

 ' no , no , ' say Racksole quickly , ' I do not   want any " I be afraid . " this 
 be business . if you have be the ordinary h"tel clerk I should have 
 slip you a couple of sovereign into your hand , and the thing would 
 have be do . 

 as you be not - as you be obviously above bribe - I merely say to you , 
 I must see Mr Babylon at once on an affair of the utmost urgency . my 
 name be Racksole - Theodore Racksole . ' 

 ' of New York ? ' question a voice at the door , with a slight foreign 
 accent . 

 the millionaire turn sharply , and see a rather short , French - look 
 man , with a bald head , a grey beard , a long and perfectly - build frock 
 coat , eye - glass attach to a minute silver chain , and blue eye that 
 seem to have the transparent innocence of a maid 's . 

 ' there be only one , ' say Theodore Racksole succinctly . 

 ' you wish to see I ? ' the new - comer suggest . 

 ' you be Mr Felix Babylon ? ' 

 the man bow . 

 ' at this moment I wish to see you more than anyone else in the world , ' 
 say Racksole . ' I be consume and burn up with a desire to see you , Mr 
 Babylon . 

 I only want a few minute ' quiet chat . I fancy I can settle my business 
 in that time . ' 

 with a gesture Mr Babylon invite the millionaire down a side corridor , 
 at the end of which be Mr Babylon 's private room , a miracle of Louis XV 
 furniture and tapestry : like most unmarried man with large income , Mr 
 Babylon have ' taste ' of a highly expensive sort . 

 the landlord and his guest sit down opposite each other . Theodore 
 Racksole have meet with the usual millionaire 's luck in this adventure , 
 for Mr Babylon make a practice of not allow himself to be interview 
 by his guest , however distinguish , however wealthy , however 
 pertinacious . if he have not chance to enter Miss Spencer 's office at 
 that precise moment , and if he have not be impress in a somewhat 
 peculiar way by the physiognomy of the millionaire , not all Mr 
 Racksole 's american energy and ingenuity would have avail for a 
 confabulation with the owner of the Grand Babylon h"tel that night . 
 Theodore Racksole , however , be ignorant that a mere accident have serve 
 he . he take all the credit to himself . 

 ' I read in the New York paper some month ago , ' Theodore start , 
 without even a clearing of the throat , ' that this h"tel of your , Mr 
 Babylon , be to be sell to a limited company , but it appear that the 
 sale be not carry out . ' 

 ' it be not , ' answer Mr Babylon frankly , ' and the reason be that 
 the middle - man between the propose company and myself wish to make a 
 large secret profit , and I decline to be a party to such a profit . they 
 be firm ; I be firm ; and so the affair come to nothing . ' 

 ' the agree price be satisfactory ? ' 

 ' quite . ' 

 ' may I ask what the price be ? ' 

 ' be you a buyer , Mr Racksole ? ' 

 ' be you a seller , Mr Babylon ? ' 

 ' I be , ' say Babylon , ' on term . the price be four hundred thousand 
 pound , include the leasehold and goodwill . but I sell only on the 
 condition that the buyer do not transfer the property to a limited 
 company at a high figure . ' 

 ' I will put one question to you , Mr Babylon , ' say the millionaire . 
 ' what have your profit average during the last four year ? ' 

 ' thirty - four thousand pound per annum . ' 

 ' I buy , ' say Theodore Racksole , smile contentedly ; ' and we will , if 
 you please , exchange contract - letter on the spot . ' 

 ' you come quickly to a resolution , Mr Racksole . but perhaps you have 
 be consider this question for a long time ? ' 

 ' on the contrary , ' Racksole look at his watch , ' I have be 
 consider it for six minute . ' 

 Felix Babylon bow , as one thoroughly accustomed to eccentricity of 
 wealth . 

 ' the beauty of be well - know , ' Racksole continue , ' be that you 
 need not   trouble about preliminary explanation . you , Mr Babylon , 
 probably know all about I . I know a good deal about you . we can take 
 each other for grant without reference . really , it be as simple to buy 
 an h"tel or a railroad as it be to buy a watch , provide one be equal to 
 the transaction . ' 

 ' precisely , ' agree Mr Babylon smile . ' shall we draw up the little 
 informal contract ? there be detail to be think of . but it occur to 
 I that you can not have din yet , and might prefer to deal with minor 
 question after dinner . ' 

 ' I have not din , ' say the millionaire , with emphasis , ' and in that 
 connexion will you do I a favour ? will you send for Mr Rocco ? ' 

 ' you wish to see he , naturally . ' 

 ' I do , ' say the millionaire , and add , ' about my dinner . ' 

 ' Rocco be a great man , ' murmur Mr Babylon as he touch the bell , 
 ignore the last word . ' my compliment to Mr Rocco , ' he say to the 
 page who answer his summon , ' and if it be quite convenient I should 
 be glad to see he here for a moment . ' 

 ' what do you give Rocco ? ' Racksole inquire . 

 ' two thousand a year and the treatment of an Ambassador . ' 

 ' I shall give he the treatment of an Ambassador and three thousand . ' 

 ' you will be wise , ' say Felix Babylon . 

 at that moment Rocco come into the room , very softly - a man of forty , 
 thin , with long , thin hand , and an inordinately long brown silky 
 moustache . 

 ' Rocco , ' say Felix Babylon , ' let I introduce Mr Theodore Racksole , of 
 New York . ' 

 ' sharme , ' say Rocco , bow . ' Ze - ze , vat you call it , millionaire ? ' 

 ' exactly , ' Racksole put in , and continue quickly : ' Mr Rocco , I wish to 
 acquaint you before any other person with the fact that I have purchase 
 the Grand Babylon H"tel . if you think well to afford I the privilege of 
 retain your service I shall be happy to offer you a remuneration of 
 three thousand a year . ' 

 ' tree , you say ? ' 

 ' three . ' 

 ' sharme . ' 

 ' and now , Mr Rocco , will you oblige I very much by order a plain 
 beefsteak and a bottle of Bass to be serve by Jules - I particularly 
 desire Jules - at table no . 17 in the dining - room in ten minute from 
 now ? and will you do I the honour of lunch with I to - morrow ? ' 

 Mr Rocco gasp , bow , mutter something in French , and depart . 

 five minute later the buyer and seller of the Grand Babylon h"tel have 
 each sign a curt document , scribble out on the h"tel note - paper . 
 Felix Babylon ask no question , and it be this heroic absence 
 of curiosity , of surprise on his part , that more than anything else 
 impress Theodore Racksole . how many h"tel proprietor in the world , 
 Racksole ask himself , would have let that beef - steak and Bass go by 
 without a word of comment . 

 ' from what date do you wish the purchase to take effect ? ' ask Babylon . 

 ' oh , ' say Racksole lightly , ' it do not   matter . shall we say from 
 to - night ? ' 

 ' as you will . I have long wish to retire . and now that the moment have 
 come - and so dramatically - I be ready . I shall return to Switzerland . 
 one can not spend much money there , but it be my native land . I shall be 
 the rich man in Switzerland . ' he smile with a kind of sad amusement . 

 ' I suppose you be fairly well off ? ' say Racksole , in that easy 
 familiar style of his , as though the idea have just occur to he . 

 ' besides what I shall receive from you , I have half a million invest . ' 

 ' then you will be nearly a millionaire ? ' 

 Felix Babylon nod . 

 ' I congratulate you , my dear sir , ' say Racksole , in the tone of a judge 
 address a newly - admit barrister . ' nine hundred thousand pound , 
 express in franc , will sound very nice - in Switzerland . ' 

 ' of course to you , Mr Racksole , such a sum would be poverty . now if one 
 might guess at your own wealth ? ' Felix Babylon be imitate the other 's 
 freedom . 

 ' I do not know , to five million or so , what I be worth , ' say Racksole , 
 with sincerity , his tone indicate that he would have be glad to give 
 the information if it be in his power . 

 ' you have have anxiety , Mr Racksole ? ' 

 ' still have they . I be now holiday - making in London with my daughter in 
 order to get rid of they for a time . ' 

 ' be the purchase of h"tel your notion of relaxation , then ? ' 

 Racksole shrug his shoulder . ' it be a change from railroad , ' he 
 laugh . 

 ' ah , my friend , you little know what you have buy . ' 

 ' oh ! yes I do , ' return Racksole ; ' I have buy just the first h"tel 
 in the world . ' 

 ' that be true , that be true , ' Babylon admit , gaze meditatively at 
 the antique persian carpet . ' there be nothing , anywhere , like my h"tel . 
 but you will regret the purchase , Mr Racksole . it be no business of 
 mine , of course , but I can not help repeat that you will regret the 
 purchase . ' 

 ' I never regret . ' 

 ' then you will begin very soon - perhaps to - night . ' 

 ' why do you say that ? ' 

 ' because the Grand Babylon be the Grand Babylon . you think because you 
 control a railroad , or an iron - work , or a line of steamer , therefore 
 you can control anything . but no . not the Grand Babylon . there be 
 something about the Grand Babylon - ' he throw up his hand . 

 ' servant rob you , of course . ' 

 ' of course . I suppose I lose a hundred pound a week in that way . but 
 it be not that I mean . it be the guest . the guest be too - too 
 distinguish . 

 the great ambassador , the great financier , the great noble , all the 
 man that move the world , put up under my roof . London be the centre of 
 everything , and my h"tel - your h"tel - be the centre of London . once I 
 have a King and a Dowager Empress stay here at the same time . imagine 
 that ! ' 

 ' a great honour , Mr Babylon . but wherein lie the difficulty ? ' 

 ' Mr Racksole , ' be the grim reply , ' what have become of your 
 shrewdness - that shrewdness which have make your fortune so immense that 
 even you can not calculate it ? do you not perceive that the roof which 
 habitually shelter all the force , all the authority of the world , must 
 necessarily also shelter nameless and numberless plotter , schemer , 
 evil - doer , and worker of mischief ? the thing be as clear as day - and 
 as dark as night . Mr Racksole , I never know by whom I be surround . I 
 never know what be go forward . 

 only sometimes I get hint , glimpse of strange act and strange 
 secret . 

 you mention my servant . they be almost all good servant , skilled , 
 competent . but what be they besides ? for anything I know my fourth 
 sub - chef may be an agent of some European Government . for anything I 
 know my invaluable Miss Spencer may be in the pay of a court dressmaker 
 or a frankfort banker . even Rocco may be someone else in addition to 
 Rocco . ' 

 ' that make it all the more interesting , ' remark Theodore Racksole . 


 ' what a long time you have be , Father , ' say Nella , when he return 
 to table no . 17 in the salle manger . 

 ' only twenty minute , my dove . ' 

 ' but you say two second . there be a difference . ' 

 ' well , you see , I have to wait for the steak to cook . ' 

 ' do you have much trouble in get my birthday treat ? ' 

 ' no trouble . but it do not   come quite as cheap as you say . ' 

 ' what do you mean , Father ? ' 

 ' only that I have   buy the entire h"tel . but do not   split . ' 

 ' Father , you always be a delicious parent . shall you give I the h"tel 
 for a birthday present ? ' 

 ' no . I shall run it - as an amusement . by the way , who be that chair 
 for ? ' 

 he notice that a third cover have be lay at the table . 

 ' that be for a friend of mine who come in about five minute ago . of 
 course I tell he he must share our steak . he will be here in a moment . ' 

 ' may I respectfully inquire his name ? ' 

 ' Dimmock - christian name Reginald ; profession , english companion to 
 Prince Aribert of Posen . I meet he when I be in St Petersburg with 
 cousin Hetty last fall . oh ; here he be . Mr Dimmock , this be my dear 
 father . he have succeed with the steak . ' 

 Theodore Racksole find himself confront by a very young man , with 
 deep black eye , and a fresh , boyish expression . they begin to talk . 

 jule approach with the steak . Racksole try to catch the waiter 's 
 eye , but could not . the dinner proceed . 

 ' oh , Father ! ' cry Nella , ' what a lot of mustard you have take ! ' 

 ' have I ? ' he say , and then he happen to glance into a mirror on his 
 left hand between two window . he see the reflection of Jules , who stand 
 behind his chair , and he see Jules give a slow , significant , ominous 
 wink to Mr Dimmock - Christian name , Reginald . 

 he examine his mustard in silence . he think that perhaps he have 
 help himself rather plenteously to mustard . 




 chapter three AT three A.M. 

 MR REGINALD DIMMOCK prove himself , despite his extreme youth , to be 
 a man of the world and of experience , and a practised talker . 
 conversation between he and Nella Racksole seem never to flag . they 
 chatter about St Petersburg , and the ice on the Neva , and the tenor 
 at the opera who have be exile to Siberia , and the quality of russian 
 tea , and the sweetness of russian champagne , and various other aspect 
 of Muscovite existence . Russia exhaust , Nella lightly outline her own 
 doing since she have meet the young man in the Tsar 's capital , and this 
 recital bring the topic round to London , where it stay till the 
 final piece of steak be eat . Theodore Racksole notice that Mr 
 Dimmock give very meagre information about his own movement , either 
 past or future . he regard the youth as a typical hanger - on of Courts , 
 and wonder how he have obtain his post of companion to Prince Aribert 
 of Posen , and who Prince Aribert of Posen might be . the millionaire 
 think he have once hear of Posen , but he be not   sure ; he rather 
 fancy it be one of those small nondescript german States of 
 which five - sixth of the subject be Palace official , and the rest 
 charcoal - burner or innkeeper . until the meal be nearly over , Racksole 
 say little - perhaps his thought be too busy with Jules ' wink to Mr 
 Dimmock , but when ice have be follow by coffee , he decide that it 
 might be as well , in the interest of the h"tel , to discover something 
 about his daughter 's friend . he never for an instant question she 
 right to possess her own friend ; he have always leave she in the most 
 amazing liberty , rely on her inherit good sense to keep she out 
 of mischief ; but , quite apart from the wink , he be strike by Nella 's 
 attitude towards Mr Dimmock , an attitude in which an amiable scorn be 
 blend with an evident desire to propitiate and please . 

 ' Nella tell I , Mr Dimmock , that you hold a confidential position with 
 Prince Aribert of Posen , ' say Racksole . ' you will pardon an American 's 
 ignorance , but be Prince Aribert a reign Prince - what , I believe , you 
 call in Europe , a Prince Regnant ? ' 

 ' his Highness be not a reign Prince , nor ever likely to be , ' answer 
 Dimmock . ' the Grand Ducal Throne of Posen be occupy by his Highness 's 
 nephew , the Grand Duke Eugen . ' 

 ' nephew ? ' cry Nella with astonishment . 

 ' why not , dear lady ? ' 

 ' but Prince Aribert be surely very young ? ' 

 ' the Prince , by one of those vagary of chance which occur sometimes 
 in the history of family , be precisely the same age as the Grand Duke . 
 the late Grand Duke 's father be twice marry . hence this youthfulness 
 on the part of an uncle . ' 

 ' how delicious to be the uncle of someone as old as yourself ! but 
 I suppose it be no fun for Prince Aribert . I suppose he have to be 
 frightfully respectful and obedient , and all that , to his nephew ? ' 

 ' the Grand Duke and my serene master be like brother . at present , of 
 course , Prince Aribert be nominally heir to the throne , but as no doubt 
 you be aware , the Grand Duke will shortly marry a near relative of 
 the Emperor 's , and should there be a family - ' Mr Dimmock stop and 
 shrug his straight shoulder . ' the Grand Duke , ' he go on , without 
 finish the last sentence , ' would much prefer Prince Aribert to be his 
 successor . he really do not   want to marry . between ourselves , strictly 
 between ourselves , he regard marriage as rather a bore . but , of course , 
 be a german Grand Duke , he be bind to marry . he owe it to his 
 country , to Posen . ' 

 ' how large be Posen ? ' ask Racksole bluntly . 

 ' Father , ' Nella interpose laugh , ' you should not   ask such 
 inconvenient question . you ought to have guess that it be not 
 etiquette to inquire about the size of a German Dukedom . ' 

 ' I be sure , ' say Dimmock , with a polite smile , ' that the Grand Duke 
 be as much amuse as anyone at the size of his territory . I forget the 
 exact acreage , but I remember that once Prince Aribert and myself walk 
 across it and back again in a single day . ' 

 ' then the Grand Duke can not travel very far within his own dominion ? 
 you may say that the sun do set on his empire ? ' 

 ' it do , ' say Dimmock . 

 ' unless the weather be cloudy , ' Nella put in . ' be the Grand Duke content 
 always to stay at home ? ' 

 ' on the contrary , he be a great traveller , much more so than Prince 
 Aribert . 

 I may tell you , what no one know at present , outside this h"tel , that 
 his Royal Highness the Grand Duke , with a small suite , will be here 
 to - morrow . ' 

 ' in London ? ' ask Nella . 

 ' yes . ' 

 ' in this h"tel ? ' 

 ' yes . ' 

 ' oh ! how lovely ! ' 

 ' that be why your humble servant be here to - night - a sort of advance 
 guard . ' 

 ' but I understand , ' Racksole say , ' that you be - er - attach to 
 Prince Aribert , the uncle . ' 

 ' I be . Prince Aribert will also be here . the Grand Duke and the Prince 
 have business about important investment connect with the Grand 
 Duke 's marriage settlement .... in the high quarter , you understand . ' 

 ' for so discreet a person , ' think Racksole , ' you be fairly 
 communicative . ' then he say aloud : ' shall we go out on the terrace ? ' 

 as they cross the dining - room Jules stop Mr Dimmock and hand he 
 a letter . ' just come , sir , by messenger , ' say Jules . 

 Nella drop behind for a second with her father . ' leave I alone with 
 this boy a little - there be a dear parent , ' she whisper in his ear . 

 ' I be a mere cypher , an obedient nobody , ' Racksole reply , pinch she 
 arm surreptitiously . ' treat I as such . use I as you like . I will go 
 and look after my h"tel ' and soon afterwards he disappear . 

 Nella and Mr Dimmock sit together on the terrace , sip iced drink . 
 they make a handsome couple , bowered amid plant which blossom at the 
 command of a Chelsea wholesale florist . People who pass by remark 
 privately that from the look of thing there be the beginning of a 
 romance in that conversation . perhaps there be , but a more intimate 
 acquaintance with the character of Nella Racksole would have be 
 necessary in order to predict what precise form that romance would take . 

 Jules himself serve the liquid , and at ten o'clock he bring another 
 note . entreat a thousand pardon , Reginald Dimmock , after he have 
 glance at the note , excuse himself on the plea of urgent business 
 for his serene master , uncle of the Grand Duke of Posen . he ask if he 
 might fetch Mr Racksole , or escort Miss Racksole to her father . but Miss 
 Racksole say gaily that she feel no need of an escort , and should go 
 to bed . she add that her father and herself always endeavour to be 
 independent of each other . 

 just then Theodore Racksole have find his way once more into Mr 
 Babylon 's private room . before arrive there , however , he have 
 discover that in some mysterious manner the news of the change of 
 proprietorship have work its way down to the low strata of the 
 h"tel 's cosmo . the corridor hum with it , and even under - servant 
 be to be see discuss the thing , just as though it matter to 
 they . 

 ' have a cigar , Mr Racksole , ' say the urbane Mr Babylon , ' and a mouthful 
 of the old cognac in all Europe . ' 

 in a few minute these two be talk eagerly , rapidly . Felix Babylon 
 be astonish at Racksole 's capacity for absorb the detail of h"tel 
 management . and as for Racksole he soon realize that Felix Babylon must 
 be a prince of h"tel manager . it have never occur to Racksole before 
 that to manage an h"tel , even a large h"tel , could be a specially 
 interesting affair , or that it could make any excessive demand upon 
 the brain of the manager ; but he come to see that he have underrate 
 the possibility of an h"tel . the business of the Grand Babylon be 
 enormous . it take Racksole , with all his genius for organization , 
 exactly half an hour to master the detail of the h"tel laundry - work . 
 and the laundry - work be but one branch of activity amid score , and 
 not a very large one at that . the machinery of check supply , and of 
 establish a mean ratio between the raw stuff receive in the kitchen 
 and the number of meal serve in the salle a manger and the private 
 room , be very complicated and delicate . when Racksole have grasp 
 it , he at once suggest some improvement , and this lead to a long 
 theoretical discussion , and the discussion lead to digression , and then 
 Felix Babylon , in a moment of absent - mindedness , yawn . 

 Racksole look at the gilt clock on the high mantelpiece . 

 ' Great Scott ! ' he say . ' it be three o'clock . Mr Babylon , accept my 
 apology for have keep you up to such an absurd hour . ' 

 ' I have not spend so pleasant an evening for many year . you have let I 
 ride my hobby to my heart 's content . it be I who should apologize . ' 

 Racksole rise . 

 ' I should like to ask you one question , ' say Babylon . ' have you ever 
 have anything to do with h"tel before ? ' 

 ' never , ' say Racksole . 

 ' then you have miss your vocation . you could have be the great 
 of all h"tel - manager . you would have be great than I , and I be 
 unequalled , though I keep only one h"tel , and some man have half a 
 dozen . Mr Racksole , why have you never run an h"tel ? ' 

 ' Heaven know , ' he laugh , ' but you flatter I , Mr Babylon . ' 

 ' I ? Flatter ? you do not know I . I flatter no one , except , perhaps , 
 now and then an exceptionally distinguished guest . in which case I give 
 suitable instruction as to the bill . ' 

 ' speak of distinguished guest , I be tell that a couple of german 
 prince be come here to - morrow . ' 

 ' that be so . ' 

 ' do one do anything ? do one receive they formally - stand bow in 
 the entrance - hall , or anything of that sort ? ' 

 ' not necessarily . not unless one wish . the modern h"tel proprietor be 
 not like an innkeeper of the Middle Ages , and even prince do not expect 
 to see he unless something should happen to go wrong . as a matter 
 of fact , though the Grand Duke of Posen and Prince Aribert have both 
 honour I by stay here before , I have never even set eye on they . 
 you will find all arrangement have be make . ' 

 they talk a little long , and then Racksole say good night . ' let 
 I see you to your room . the lift will be close and the place will be 
 desert . 

 as for myself , I sleep here , ' and Mr Babylon point to an inner door . 

 ' no , thank , ' say Racksole ; ' let I explore my own h"tel unaccompanie . 
 I believe I can discover my room . ' when he get fairly into the passage , 
 Racksole be not so sure that he could discover his own room . the number 
 be 107 , but he have forget whether it be on the first or second 
 floor . 

 travel in a lift , one be unconscious of floor . he pass several 
 lift - doorway , but he could see no glint of a staircase ; in all 
 self - respect h"tel staircase have go out of fashion , and 
 though h"tel architect still continue , for old sake ' sake , to build 
 staircase , they be tuck away in remote corner where their presence 
 be not likely to offend the eye of a spoiled and cosmopolitan public . 
 the h"tel seem vast , uncanny , deserted . an electric light glow 
 here and there at long interval . on the thick carpet , Racksole 's 
 thinly - shod foot make no sound , and he wander at ease to and fro , 
 rather amused , rather strike by the peculiar sens of night and mystery 
 which have suddenly come over he . he fancy he could hear a thousand 
 snore peacefully descend from the upper realm . at length he find a 
 staircase , a very dark and narrow one , and presently he be on the first 
 floor . he soon discover that the number of the room on this floor 
 do not get beyond seventy . he encounter another staircase and 
 ascend to the second floor . by the decoration of the wall he 
 recognize this floor as his proper home , and as he stroll through the 
 long corridor he whistle a low , meditative whistle of satisfaction . he 
 think he hear a step in the transverse corridor , and instinctively 
 he obliterate himself in a recess which hold a service - cabinet and a 
 chair . he do hear a step . peep cautiously out , he perceive , what he 
 have not perceive previously , that a piece of white ribbon have be tie 
 round the handle of the door of one of the bedroom . then a man come 
 round the corner of the transverse corridor , and Racksole draw back . it 
 be Jules - Jules with his hand in his pocket and a slouch hat over his 
 eye , but in other respect attire as usual . 

 Racksole , at that instant , remember with a special vividness what 
 Felix Babylon have say to he at their first interview . he wish he have 
 bring his revolver . he do not   know why he should feel the desirability 
 of a revolver in a London h"tel of the most unimpeachable fair fame , 
 but he do feel the desirability of such an instrument of attack and 
 defence . he privately decide that if Jules go past his recess he 
 would take he by the throat and in that attitude put a few plain 
 question to this highly dubious waiter . but Jules have stop . the 
 millionaire make another cautious observation . jule , with infinite 
 gentleness , be turn the handle of the door to which the white ribbon 
 be attach . the door slowly yield and Jules disappear within 
 the room . after a brief interval , the night - prowl Jules reappear , 
 close the door as softly as he have open it , remove the ribbon , 
 return upon his step , and vanish down the transverse corridor . 

 ' this be quaint , ' say Racksole ; ' quaint to a degree ! ' 

 it occur to he to look at the number of the room , and he steal 
 towards it . 

 ' well , I be d - d ! ' he murmur wonderingly . 

 the number be 111 , his daughter 's room ! he try to open it , but the 
 door be lock . rush to his own room , No . 107 , he seize one of a 
 pair of revolver   the kind that be make for millionaire   and follow 
 after Jules down the transverse corridor . at the end of this corridor 
 be a window ; the window be open ; and Jules be innocently gaze out 
 of the window . ten silent stride , and Theodore Racksole be upon he . 

 ' one word , my friend , ' the millionaire begin , carelessly wave the 
 revolver in the air . Jules be indubitably startle , but by an admirable 
 exercise of self - control he recover possession of his faculty in a 
 second . 

 ' Sir ? ' say Jules . 

 ' I just want to be inform , what the deuce you be do in no . 111 a 
 moment ago . ' 

 ' I have be request to go there , ' be the calm response . 

 ' you be a liar , and not a very clever one . that be my daughter 's room . 
 now - out with it , before I decide whether to shoot you or throw you into 
 the street . ' 

 ' excuse I , sir , No . 111 be occupy by a gentleman . ' 

 ' I advise you that it be a serious error of judgement to contradict I , 
 my friend . do not   do it again . we will go to the room together , and you 
 shall prove that the occupant be a gentleman , and not my daughter . ' 

 ' impossible , sir , ' say Jules . 

 ' scarcely that , ' say Racksole , and he take Jules by the sleeve . the 
 millionaire know for a certainty that Nella occupy no . 111 , for he have 
 examine the room she , and himself see that her trunk and her maid 
 and herself have arrive there in safety . ' now open the door , ' whisper 
 Racksole , when they reach No.111 . 

 ' I must knock . ' 

 ' that be just what you must not   do . open it . no doubt you have your 
 pass - key . ' 

 confront by the revolver , Jules readily obey , yet with a deprecatory 
 gesture , as though he would not be responsible for this outrage against 
 the decorum of h"tel life . Racksole enter . the room be brilliantly 
 light . 

 ' a visitor , who insist on see you , sir , ' say Jules , and flee . 

 Mr Reginald Dimmock , still in evening dress , and smoke a cigarette , 
 rise hurriedly from a table . 

 ' hello , my dear Mr Racksole , this be an unexpected - ah - pleasure . ' 

 ' where be my daughter ? this be her room . ' 

 ' do I catch what you say , Mr Racksole ? ' 

 ' I venture to remark that this be Miss Racksole 's room . ' 

 ' my good sir , ' answer Dimmock , ' you must be mad to dream of such a 
 thing . 

 only my respect for your daughter prevent I from expel you 
 forcibly , for such an extraordinary suggestion . ' 

 a small spot half - way down the bridge of the millionaire 's nose turn 
 suddenly white . 

 ' with your permission , ' he say in a low calm voice , ' I will examine the 
 dressing - room and the bath - room . ' 

 ' just listen to I a moment , ' Dimmock urge , in a milder tone . 

 ' I will listen to you afterwards , my young friend , ' say Racksole , and he 
 proceed to search the bath - room , and the dressing - room , without any 
 result whatever . ' lest my attitude might be open to misconstruction , Mr 
 Dimmock , I may as well tell you that I have the most perfect confidence 
 in my daughter , who be as well able to take care of herself as any woman 
 I ever meet , but since you enter it there have be one or two rather 
 mysterious occurrence in this h"tel . that be all . ' feel a draught of 
 air on his shoulder , Racksole turn to the window . ' for instance , ' he 
 add , ' I perceive that this window be break , badly break , and from 
 the outside . 

 now , how could that have occur ? ' 

 ' if you will kindly hear reason , Mr Racksole , ' say Dimmock in his 
 good diplomatic manner , ' I will endeavour to explain thing to you . I 
 regard your first question to I when you enter my room as be 
 offensively put , but I now see that you have some justification . ' 
 he smile politely . ' I be pass along this corridor about eleven 
 o'clock , when I find Miss Racksole in a difficulty with the h"tel 
 servant . Miss Racksole be retire to rest in this room when a large 
 stone , which must have be throw from the Embankment , break the 
 window , as you see . apart from the discomfort of the broken window , she 
 do not care to remain in the room . she argue that where one stone 
 have come another might follow . she therefore insist on her room be 
 change . the servant say that there be no other room available with a 
 dressing - room and bath - room attach , and your daughter make a point of 
 these matter . I at once offer to exchange apartment with she . she 
 do I the honour to accept my offer . our respective belonging be 
 move - and that be all . Miss Racksole be at this moment , I trust , asleep 
 in no . 124 . ' 

 Theodore Racksole look at the young man for a few second in silence . 

 there be a faint knock at the door . 

 ' come in , ' say Racksole loudly . 

 someone push open the door , but remain stand on the mat . it be 
 Nella 's maid , in a dressing - gown . 

 ' Miss Racksole 's compliment , and a thousand excuse , but a book of her 
 be leave on the mantelshelf in this room . she can not sleep , and wish 
 to read . ' 

 ' Mr Dimmock , I tender my apology - my formal apology , ' say Racksole , 
 when the girl have go away with the book . ' good night . ' 

 ' pray do not   mention it , ' say Dimmock suavely - and bow he out . 




 Chapter four entrance of the prince 

 nevertheless , sundry small thing weigh on Racksole 's mind . first 
 there be Jules ' wink . then there be the ribbon on the door - handle and 
 Jules ' visit to no . 111 , and the broken window - break from the outside . 
 Racksole do not forget that the time be 3 a.m. he sleep but little 
 that night , but he be glad that he have buy the Grand Babylon H"tel . 
 it be an acquisition which seem to promise fun and diversion . 

 the next morning he come across Mr Babylon early . ' I have empty my 
 private room of all personal paper , ' say Babylon , ' and it be now at 
 your disposal . 

 I purpose , if agreeable to yourself , to stay on in the h"tel as a guest 
 for the present . we have much to settle with regard to the completion of 
 the purchase , and also there be thing which you might want to ask I . 
 also , to tell the truth , I be not anxious to leave the old place with 
 too much suddenness . it will be a wrench to I . ' 

 ' I shall be delighted if you will stay , ' say the millionaire , ' but it 
 must be as my guest , not as the guest of the h"tel . ' 

 ' you be very kind . ' 

 ' as for wish to consult you , no doubt I shall have nee to do so , but 
 I must say that the show seem to run itself . ' 

 ' ah ! ' say Babylon thoughtfully . ' I have hear of h"tel that run 
 themselves . if they do , you may be sure that they obey the law of 
 gravity and run downwards . you will have your hand full . for example , 
 have you yet hear about Miss Spencer ? ' 

 ' no , ' say Racksole . ' what of she ? ' 

 ' she have mysteriously vanish during the night , and nobody appear to 
 be able to throw any light on the affair . her room be empty , her box 
 go . 

 you will want someone to take her place , and that someone will not be 
 very easy to get . ' 

 ' H'm ! ' Racksole say , after a pause . ' Hers be not the only post that 
 fall vacant to - day . ' 

 a little later , the millionaire instal himself in the late owner 's 
 private room and rang the bell . 

 ' I want Jules , ' he say to the page . 

 while wait for Jules , Racksole consider the question of Miss 
 Spencer 's disappearance . 

 ' good morning , Jules , ' be his cheerful greeting , when the imperturbable 
 waiter arrive . 

 ' good morning , sir . ' 

 ' take a chair . ' 

 ' thank you , sir . ' 

 ' we have meet before this morning , Jules . ' 

 ' yes , sir , at 3 a.m. ' 

 ' rather strange about Miss Spencer 's departure , be it not ? ' suggest 
 Racksole . 

 ' it be remarkable , sir . ' 

 ' you be aware , of course , that Mr Babylon have transfer all his 
 interest in this h"tel to I ? ' 

 ' I have be inform to that effect , sir . ' 

 ' I suppose you know everything that go on in the h"tel , Jules ? ' 

 ' as the head waiter , sir , it be my business to keep a general eye on 
 thing . ' 

 ' you speak very good English for a foreigner , Jules . ' 

 ' for a foreigner , sir ! I be an Englishman , a Hertfordshire man bear 
 and breed . perhaps my name have mislead you , sir . I be only call Jules 
 because the head waiter of any really high - class h"tel must have either 
 a French or an italian name . ' 

 ' I see , ' say Racksole . ' I think you must be rather a clever person , 
 jule . ' 

 ' that be not for I to say , sir . ' 

 ' how long have the h"tel enjoy the advantage of your service ? ' 

 ' a little over twenty year . ' 

 ' that be a long time to be in one place . do not   you think it be time you 
 get out of the rut ? you be still young , and might make a reputation for 
 yourself in another and wide sphere . ' 

 Racksole look at the man steadily , and his glance be steadily 
 return . 

 ' you be not   satisfied with I , sir ? ' 

 ' to be frank , Jules , I think - I think you - er - wink too much . and I 
 think that it be regrettable when a head waiter fall into a habit of 
 take white ribbon from the handle of bedroom door at three in the 
 morning . ' 

 jule start slightly . 

 ' I see how it be , sir . you wish I to go , and one pretext , if I may 
 use the term , be as good as another . very well , I can not   say that I be 
 surprised . it sometimes happen that there be incompatibility of temper 
 between a h"tel proprietor and his head waiter , and then , unless one 
 of they go , the h"tel be likely to suffer . I will go , Mr Racksole . in 
 fact , I have already think of give notice . ' 

 the millionaire smile appreciatively . ' what wage do you require in 
 lieu of notice ? it be my intention that you leave the h"tel within an 
 hour . ' 

 ' I require no wage in lieu of notice , sir . I would scorn to accept 
 anything . and I will leave the h"tel in fifteen minute . ' 

 ' good - day , then . you have my good wish and my admiration , so long as 
 you keep out of my h"tel . ' 

 Racksole get up . ' good - day , sir . and thank you . ' 

 ' by the way , Jules , it will be useless for you to apply to any other 
 first - rate european h"tel for a post , because I shall take measure 
 which will ensure the rejection of any such application . ' 

 ' without discuss the question whether or not there be not   at least 
 half a dozen h"tel in London alone that would jump for joy at the 
 chance of get I , ' answer Jules , ' I may tell you , sir , that I 
 shall retire from my profession . ' 

 ' really ! you will turn your brain to a different channel . ' 

 ' no , sir . I shall take room in Albemarle Street or Jermyn Street , 
 and just be content to be a man - about - town . I have save some twenty 
 thousand pound - a mere trifle , but sufficient for my need , and I shall 
 now proceed to enjoy it . pardon I for trouble you with my personal 
 affair . and good - day again . ' 

 that afternoon Racksole go with Felix Babylon first to a firm of 
 solicitor in the City , and then to a stockbroker , in order to carry out 
 the practical detail of the purchase of the h"tel . 

 ' I mean to settle in England , ' say Racksole , as they be come back . 
 ' it be the only country - ' and he stop . 

 ' the only country ? ' 

 ' the only country where you can invest money and spend money with 
 a feeling of security . in the United States there be nothing worth 
 spend money on , nothing to buy . in France or Italy , there be no real 
 security . ' 

 ' but surely you be a true American ? ' question Babylon . 

 ' I be a true american , ' say Racksole , ' but my father , who begin by 
 be a bedmaker at an Oxford college , and ultimately make ten million 
 dollar out of iron in Pittsburg - my father take the wise precaution of 
 have I educate in England . I have my three year at Oxford , like any 
 son of the upper middle class ! it do I good . it have be worth more 
 to I than many successful speculation . it teach I that the English 
 language be different from , and well than , the american language , 
 and that there be something - I have not   yet find out exactly what - in 
 english life that Americans will never get . why , ' he add , ' in the 
 United States we still bribe our judge and our newspaper . and we talk 
 of the eighteenth century as though it be the beginning of the world . 
 yes , I shall transfer my security to London . I shall build a house in 
 Park Lane , and I shall buy some immemorial country seat with a history 
 as long as the a. T. and S. railroad , and I shall calmly and gradually 
 settle down . d'you know - I be rather a good - natured man for a 
 millionaire , and of a social disposition , and yet I have not   six real 
 friend in the whole of New York City . think of that ! ' 

 ' and I , ' say Babylon , ' have no friend except the friend of my boyhood 
 in Lausanne . I have spend thirty year in England , and gain nothing 
 but a perfect knowledge of the english language and as much gold coin as 
 would fill a rather large box . ' 

 these two plutocrat breathe a simultaneous sigh . 

 ' talk of gold coin , ' say Racksole , ' how much money should you think 
 Jules have contrive to amass while he have be with you ? ' 

 ' oh ! ' Babylon smile . ' I should not like to guess . he have have unique 
 opportunity - opportunity . ' 

 ' should you consider twenty thousand an extraordinary sum under the 
 circumstance ? ' 

 ' not at all . have he be confide in you ? ' 

 ' Somewhat . I have dismiss he . ' 

 ' you have dismiss he ? ' 

 ' why not ? ' 

 ' there be no reason why not . but I have feel inclined to dismiss he for 
 the past ten year , and never find courage to do it . ' 

 ' it be a perfectly simple proceeding , I assure you . before I have do 
 with he , I rather like the fellow . ' 

 ' Miss Spencer and Jules - both go in one day ! ' muse Felix Babylon . 

 ' and no one to take their place , ' say Racksole . ' and yet the h"tel 
 continue its way ! ' 

 but when Racksole reach the Grand Babylon he find that Miss Spencer 's 
 chair in the bureau be occupy by a stately and imperious girl , 
 dress becomingly in black . 

 ' Heavens , Nella ! ' he cry , go to the bureau . ' what be you do 
 here ? ' 

 ' I be take Mis Spencer 's place . I want to help you with your h"tel , 
 Dad . I fancy I shall make an excellent h"tel clerk . I have arrange with 
 a Miss Selina Smith , one of the typist in the office , to put I up to 
 all the tip and trick , and I shall do very well . ' 

 ' but look here , Helen Racksole . we shall have the whole of London 
 talk about this thing - the great of all american heiress a h"tel 
 clerk ! and I come here for quiet and rest ! ' 

 ' I suppose it be for the sake of quiet and rest that you buy the 
 h"tel , Papa ? ' 

 ' you would insist on the steak , ' he retort . ' get out of this , on the 
 instant . ' 

 ' here I be , here to stay , ' say Nella , and deliberately laugh at her 
 parent . 

 just then the face of a fair - haired man of about thirty year appear 
 at the bureau window . he be very well - dress , very aristocratic in his 
 pose , and he seem rather angry . 

 he look fixedly at Nella and start back . 

 ' Ach ! ' he exclaim . ' you ! ' 

 ' yes , your Highness , it be indeed I. Father , this be his Serene Highness 
 Prince Aribert of Posen - one of our most esteemed customer . ' 

 ' you know my name , Fräulein ? ' the new - comer murmur in German . 

 ' certainly , Prince , ' Nella reply sweetly . ' you be plain Count 
 Steenbock last spring in Paris - doubtless travel incognito - ' 

 ' silence , ' he entreat , with a wave of the hand , and his forehead go 
 as white as paper . 




 Chapter five what occur to REGINALD DIMMOCK 

 in another moment they be all three talk quite nicely , and with at 
 any rate an appearance of be natural . Prince Aribert become suave , 
 even deferential to Nella , and more friendly towards Nella 's father 
 than their respective position demand . the latter amuse himself by 
 study this sprig of royalty , the first with whom he have ever come 
 into contact . he decide that the young fellow be personable enough , 
 ' have no frill on he , ' and would make an exceptionally good commercial 
 traveller for a first - class firm . such be Theodore Racksole 's 
 preliminary estimate of the man who might one day be the reign Grand 
 Duke of Posen . 

 it occur to Nella , and she smile at the idea , that the bureau of 
 the h"tel be scarcely the correct place in which to receive this august 
 young man . there he stand , with his head half - way through the bureau 
 window , negligently lean against the woodwork , just as though he be 
 a stockbroker or the manager of a New York burlesque company . 

 ' be your Highness travel quite alone ? ' she ask . 

 ' by a series of accident I be , ' he say . ' my equerry be to have meet I 
 at Charing Cross , but he fail to do so - I can not imagine why . ' 

 ' Mr Dimmock ? ' question Racksole . 

 ' yes , Dimmock . I do not remember that he ever miss an appointment 
 before . 

 you know he ? he have be here ? ' 

 ' he din with we last night , ' say Racksole - ' on Nella 's invitation , ' 
 he add maliciously ; ' but to - day we have see nothing of he . I know , 
 however , that he have engage the State apartment , and also a suite 
 adjoin the State apartment - No . 55 . that be so , be not   it , Nella ? ' 

 ' yes , Papa , ' she say , have first demurely examine a ledger . ' your 
 Highness would doubtless like to be conduct to your room - apartment I 
 mean . ' then Nella laugh deliberately at the Prince , and say , ' I do not 
 know who be the proper person to conduct you , and that be a fact . the 
 truth be that Papa and I be rather raw yet in the h"tel line . you see , 
 we only buy the place last night . ' 

 ' you have buy the h"tel ! ' exclaim the Prince . 

 ' that be so , ' say Racksole . 

 ' and Felix Babylon have go ? ' 

 ' he be go , if he have not already go . ' 

 ' ah ! I see , ' say the Prince ; ' this be one of your american ' stroke " . 
 you have buy to sell again , be that not it ? you be on your holiday , 
 but you can not resist make a few thousand by way of relaxation . I 
 have hear of such thing . ' 

 ' we sha'n't   sell again , Prince , until we be tired of our bargain . 
 sometimes we tire very quickly , and sometimes we do not . it depend - eh ? 
 what ? ' 

 Racksole break off suddenly to attend to a servant in livery who have 
 quietly enter the bureau and be make urgent mysterious sign to 
 he . 

 ' if you please , sir , ' the man by frantic gesture implore Mr Theodore 
 Racksole to come out . 

 ' pray do not   let I detain you , Mr Racksole , ' say the Prince , and 
 therefore the proprietor of the Grand Babylon depart after the 
 servant , with a queer , curt little bow to Prince Aribert . 

 ' may not   I come inside ? ' say the Prince to Nella immediately the 
 millionaire have go . 

 ' Impossible , Prince , ' Nella laugh . ' the rule against visitor enter 
 this bureau be frightfully strict . ' 

 ' how do you know the rule be so strict if you only come into possession 
 last night ? ' 

 ' I know because I make the rule myself this morning , your Highness . ' 

 ' but seriously , Miss Racksole , I want to talk to you . ' 

 ' do you want to talk to I as Prince Aribert or as the friend - the 
 acquaintance - whom I know in Paris ' last year ? ' 

 ' as the friend , dear lady , if I may use the term . ' 

 ' and you be sure that you would not like first to be conduct to your 
 apartment ? ' 

 ' not yet . I will wait till Dimmock come ; he can not fail to be here 
 soon . ' 

 ' then we will have tea serve in father 's private room - the proprietor 's 
 private room , you know . ' 

 ' good ! ' he say . 

 Nella talk through a telephone , and ring several bell , and behave 
 generally in a manner calculate to prove to Princes and to whomever 
 it might concern that she be a young woman of business instinct and 
 training , and then she step down from her chair of office , emerge 
 from the bureau , and , precede by two menial , lead Prince Aribert to 
 the Louis XV chamber in which her father and Felix Babylon have have their 
 long confabulation on the previous evening . 

 ' what do you want to talk to I about ? ' she ask her companion , as she 
 pour out for he a second cup of tea . the Prince look at she for 
 a moment as he take the proffered cup , and be a young man of sane , 
 healthy , instinct , he could think of nothing for the moment except her 
 loveliness . 

 Nella be indeed beautiful that afternoon . the beauty of even the most 
 beautiful woman ebb and flow from hour to hour . Nella 's this afternoon 
 be at the flood . vivacious , alert , imperious , and yet ineffably sweet , 
 she seem to radiate the very joy and exuberance of life . 

 ' I have forget , ' he say . 

 ' you have forget ! that be surely very wrong of you ? you give I to 
 understand that it be something terribly important . but of course I 
 know it could not   be , because no man , and especially no Prince , ever 
 discuss anything really important with a woman . ' 

 ' Recollect , Miss Racksole , that this afternoon , here , I be not the 
 Prince . ' 

 ' you be Count Steenbock , be that it ? ' 

 he start . ' for you only , ' he say , unconsciously lower his voice . 
 ' Miss Racksole , I particularly wish that no one here should know that I 
 be in Paris last spring . ' 

 ' an affair of State ? ' she smile . 

 ' an affair of State , ' he reply soberly . ' even Dimmock do not   know . it 
 be strange that we should be fellow guest at that quiet out - of - the - way 
 h"tel - strange but delightful . I shall never forget that rainy afternoon 
 that we spend together in the Museum of the Trocadéro . let we talk about 
 that . ' 

 ' about the rain , or the museum ? ' 

 ' I shall never forget that afternoon , ' he repeat , ignore the 
 lightness of her question . 

 ' nor I , ' she murmur correspond to his mood . 

 ' you , too enjoy it ? ' he say eagerly . 

 ' the sculpture be magnificent , ' she reply , hastily glance at the 
 ceiling . 

 ' ah ! so they be ! tell I , Miss Racksole , how do you discover my 
 identity . ' 

 ' I must not say , ' she answer . ' that be my secret . do not seek to 
 penetrate it . who know what horror you might discover if you probe 
 too far ? ' she laugh , but she laugh alone . the Prince remain 
 pensive - as it be brood . 

 ' I never hop to see you again , ' he say . 

 ' why not ? ' 

 ' one never see again those whom one wish to see . ' 

 ' as for I , I be perfectly convinced that we should meet again . ' 

 ' why ? ' 

 ' because I always get what I want . ' 

 ' then you want to see I again ? ' 

 ' certainly . you interest I extremely . I have never meet another man 
 who could talk so well about sculpture as the Count Steenbock . ' 

 ' do you really always get what you want , Miss Racksole ? ' 

 ' of course . ' 

 ' that be because your father be so rich , I suppose ? ' 

 ' oh , no , it be not ! ' she say . ' it be simply because I always do get what 
 I want . it be get nothing to do with Father at all . ' 

 ' but Mr Racksole be extremely wealthy ? ' 

 ' Wealthy be not   the word , Count . there be no word . it be positively awful 
 the amount of dollar poor Papa make . and the bad of it be he can not 
 help it . 

 he tell I once that when a man have make ten million no power on 
 earth could stop those ten million from grow into twenty . and so it 
 continue . 

 I spend what I can , but I can not   come near cop with it ; and of course 
 Papa be no use whatever at spending . ' 

 ' and you have no mother ? ' 

 ' who tell you I have no mother ? ' she ask quietly . 

 ' i - er - inquire about you , ' he say , with equal candour and humility . 

 ' in spite of the fact that you never hop to see I again ? ' 

 ' yes , in spite of that . ' 

 ' how funny ! ' she say , and lapse into a meditative silence . 

 ' your must be a wonderful existence , ' say the Prince . ' I envy you . ' 

 ' you envy I - what ? my father 's wealth ? ' 

 ' no , ' he say ; ' your freedom and your responsibility . ' 

 ' I have no responsibility , ' she remark . 

 ' pardon I , ' he say ; ' you have , and the time be come when you will 
 feel they . ' 

 ' I be only a girl , ' she murmur with sudden simplicity . ' as for you , 
 count , surely you have sufficient responsibility of your own ? ' 

 ' I ? ' he say sadly . ' I have no responsibility . I be a nobody - a Serene 
 Highness who have to pretend to be very important , always take immense 
 care never to do anything that a Serene Highness ought not to do . bah ! ' 

 ' but if your nephew , Prince Eugen , be to die , would you not come to 
 the throne , and would you not then have these responsibility which you 
 so much desire ? ' 

 ' eugen die ? ' say Prince Aribert , in a curious tone . ' impossible . he 
 be the perfection of health . in three month he will be marry . no , I 
 shall never be anything but a Serene Highness , the most despicable of 
 God 's creature . ' 

 ' but what about the State secret which you mention ? be not that a 
 responsibility ? ' 

 ' ah ! ' he say . ' that be over . that belong to the past . it be an 
 accident in my dull career . I shall never be Count Steenbock again . ' 

 ' who know ? ' she say . ' by the way , be not Prince Eugen come here 
 to - day ? Mr Dimmock tell we so . ' 

 ' see ! ' answer the Prince , stand up and bend over she . ' I be 
 go to confide in you . I do not   know why , but I be . ' 

 ' do not   betray state secret , ' she warn he , smile into his face . 

 but just then the door of the room be unceremoniously open . 

 ' go right in , ' say a voice sharply . it be Theodore Racksole 's . two 
 man enter , bear a prone form on a stretcher , and Racksole follow 
 they . 

 Nella spring up . Racksole star to see his daughter . 

 ' I do not   know you be in here , Nell . here , ' to the two man , ' out 
 again . ' 

 ' why ! ' exclaim Nella , gaze fearfully at the form on the stretcher , 
 ' it be Mr Dimmock ! ' 

 ' it be , ' her father acquiesce . ' he be dead , ' he add laconically . ' I would 
 have break it to you more gently have I know . your pardon , Prince . ' 
 there be a pause . 

 ' dimmock dead ! ' Prince Aribert whisper under his breath , and he 
 kneel down by the side of the stretcher . ' what do this mean ? ' 

 the poor fellow be just walk across the quadrangle towards the 
 portico when he fall down . a commissionaire who see he say he be 
 walk very quickly . at first I think it be sunstroke , but it 
 could not   have be , though the weather certainly be rather warm . it must 
 be heart disease . but anyhow , he be dead . we do what we could . I have 
 send for a doctor , and for the police . I suppose there will have to be an 
 inquest . ' 

 Theodore Racksole stop , and in an awkward solemn silence they all 
 gaze at the dead youth . his feature be slightly draw , and his eye 
 close ; that be all . he might have be asleep . 

 ' my poor Dimmock ! ' exclaim the Prince , his voice break . ' and I be 
 angry because the lad do not meet I at Charing Cross ! ' 

 ' be you sure he be dead , Father ? ' Nella say . 

 ' you would well go away , Nella , ' be Racksole 's only reply ; but the girl 
 stand still , and begin to sob quietly . on the previous night she have 
 secretly make fun of Reginald Dimmock . she have deliberately set herself 
 to get information from he on a topic in which she happen to be 
 specially interested and she have get it , laugh the while at his 
 youthful crudity - his vanity , his transparent cunning , his absurd 
 air . she have not like he ; she have even distrust he , and decide 
 that he be not ' nice ' . but now , as he lie on the stretcher , these 
 thing be forget . she go so far as to reproach herself for they . 
 such be the strange commanding power of death . 

 ' oblige I by take the poor fellow to my apartment , ' say the Prince , 
 with a gesture to the attendant . ' surely it be time the doctor come . ' 

 Racksole feel suddenly at that moment he be nothing but a mere h"tel 
 proprietor with an awkward affair on his hand . for a fraction of a 
 second he wish he have never buy the Grand Babylon . 

 a quarter of an hour later Prince Aribert , Theodore Racksole , a doctor , 
 and an inspector of police be in the Prince 's reception - room . they 
 have just come from an ante - chamber , in which lie the mortal remain of 
 Reginald Dimmock . 

 ' well ? ' say Racksole , glance at the doctor . 

 the doctor be a big , boyish - look man , with keen , quizzical eye . 

 ' it be not heart disease , ' say the doctor . 

 ' not heart disease ? ' 

 ' no . ' 

 ' then what be it ? ' ask the Prince . 

 ' I may be able to answer that question after the post - mortem , ' say the 
 doctor . ' I certainly can not   answer it now . the symptom be unusual to a 
 degree . ' 

 the inspector of police begin to write in a note - book . 




 chapter six in the GOLD ROOM 

 at the Grand Babylon a great ball be give that night in the Gold Room , 
 a huge saloon attach to the h"tel , though scarcely part of it , and 
 certainly less exclusive than the h"tel itself . Theodore Racksole know 
 nothing of the affair , except that it be an entertainment offer by 
 a Mr and Mrs Sampson Levi to their friend . who Mr and Mrs Sampson Levi 
 be he do not know , nor could anyone tell he anything about they 
 except that Mr Sampson Levi be a prominent member of that part of the 
 Stock Exchange familiarly call the Kaffir Circus , and that his wife 
 be a stout lady with an aquiline nose and many diamond , and that they 
 be very rich and very hospitable . Theodore Racksole do not want a 
 ball in his h"tel that evening , and just before dinner he have almost a 
 mind to issue a decree that the Gold Room be to be close and the ball 
 forbid , and Mr and Mrs Sampson Levi might name the amount of damage 
 suffer by they . his reason for such a course be threefold - first , 
 he feel depressed and uneasy ; second , he do not   like the name of Sampson 
 Levi ; and , third , he have a desire to show these so - call plutocrat 
 that their wealth be nothing to he , that they could not do what they 
 choose with Theodore Racksole , and that for two pin Theodore Racksole 
 would buy they up , and the whole Kaffir Circus to boot . but something 
 warn he that though such a high - handed proceeding might be tolerate 
 in America , that land of freedom , it would never be tolerate in 
 England . he feel instinctively that in England there be thing you 
 can not   do , and that this particular thing be one of they . so the ball 
 go forward , and neither Mr nor Mrs Sampson Levi have ever the least 
 suspicion what a narrow escape they have have of look very foolish in 
 the eye of the thousand or so guest invite by they to the Gold Room 
 of the Grand Babylon that evening . 

 the Gold Room of the Grand Babylon be build for a ballroom . a balcony , 
 support by arch face with gilt and lapis - lazulo , run around it , and 
 from this vantage man and maiden and chaperon who could not or would 
 not dance might survey the scene . everyone know this , and most people 
 take advantage of it . what everyone do not know - what no one know - be 
 that high up than the balcony there be a little bar window in the 
 end wall from which the h"tel authority might keep a watchful eye , not 
 only on the dancer , but on the occupant of the balcony itself . 

 it may seem incredible to the uninitiated that the guest at any social 
 gathering hold in so gorgeous and renowne an apartment as the Gold Room 
 of the Grand Babylon should need the observation of a watchful eye . yet 
 so it be . strange matter and unexpected face have be descry from 
 the little window , and more than one european detective have keep vigil 
 there with the most eminently satisfactory result . 

 at eleven o'clock Theodore Racksole , afflict by vexation of spirit , 
 find himself gaze idly through the little bar window . Nella be 
 with he . 

 together they have be wander about the corridor of the h"tel , still 
 strange to they both , and it be quite by accident that they have light 
 upon the small room which have a surreptitious view of Mr and Mrs Sampson 
 Levi 's ball . except for the light of the chandelier of the ball - room the 
 little cubicle be in darkness . Nella be look through the window ; 
 her father stand behind . 

 ' I wonder which be Mrs Sampson Levi ? ' Nella say , ' and whether 
 she match her name . would not   you love to have a name like that , 
 Father - something that people could take hold of - instead of Racksole ? ' 

 the sound of violin and a confused murmur of voice rise gently up to 
 they . 

 ' Umphl ' say Theodore . ' curse those evening paper ! ' he add , 
 inconsequently but with sincerity . 

 ' Father , you be very horrid to - night . what have the evening paper be 
 do ? ' 

 ' well , my young madame , they have   get I in for one , and you for another ; 
 and they be manufacture mystery like fun . it be young Dimmock 's death 
 that have start them . ' 

 ' well , Father , you surely do not   expect to keep yourself out of the 
 paper . besides , as regard newspaper , you ought to be glad you be not 
 in New York . just fancy what the dear old Herald would have make out of 
 a little transaction like your of last night . ' 

 ' that be true , ' assent Racksole . ' but it will be all over New York 
 to - morrow morning , all the same . the bad of it be that Babylon have 
 go off to Switzerland . ' 

 ' why ? ' 

 ' do not   know . sudden fancy , I guess , for his native heath . ' 

 ' what difference do it make to you ? ' 

 ' none . only I feel sort of lonesome . I feel I want someone to lean up 
 against in run this h"tel . ' 

 ' Father , if you have that feel you must be get ill . ' 

 ' yes , ' he sigh , ' I admit it be unusual with I . but perhaps you have not 
 grasp the fact , Nella , that we be in the middle of a rather queer 
 business . ' 

 ' you mean about poor Mr Dimmock ? ' 

 ' partly Dimmock and partly other thing . first of all , that Miss 
 Spencer , or whatever her wretched name be , mysteriously disappear . then 
 there be the stone throw into your bedroom . then I catch that rascal 
 Jules conspire with Dimmock at three o'clock in the morning . then your 
 precious Prince Aribert arrive without any suite - which I believe be a 
 most peculiar and wicked thing for a Prince to do - and moreover I find 
 my daughter on very intimate term with the say Prince . then young 
 Dimmock go and die , and there be to be an inquest ; then Prince Eugen 
 and his suite , who be expect here for dinner , fail to turn up at 
 all - ' 

 ' Prince Eugen have not come ? ' 

 ' he have not ; and Uncle Aribert be in a deuce of a stew about he , and 
 telegraph all over Europe . altogether , thing be work up pretty 
 lively . ' 

 ' do you really think , Dad , there be anything between Jules and poor Mr 
 Dimmock ? ' 

 ' think ! I know ! I tell you I see that scamp give Dimmock a wink last 
 night at dinner that might have mean - well ! ' 

 ' so you catch that wink , do you , Dad ? ' 

 ' why , do you ? ' 

 ' of course , Dad . I be go to tell you about it . ' 

 the millionaire grunt . 

 ' look here , Father , ' Nella whisper suddenly , and point to the 
 balcony immediately below they . ' who be that ? ' she indicate a man with a 
 bald patch on the back of his head , who be prop himself up against 
 the railing of the balcony and gaze immovable into the ball - room . 

 ' well , who be it ? ' 

 ' be not   it jule ? ' 

 ' Gemini ! by the beard of the prophet , it be ! ' 

 ' perhaps Mr Jules be a guest of Mrs Sampson Levi . ' 

 ' guest or no guest , he go out of this h"tel , even if I have to throw 
 he out myself . ' 

 Theodore Racksole disappear without another word , and Nella follow 
 he . 

 but when the millionaire arrive on the balcony floor he could see 
 nothing of Jules , neither there nor in the ball - room itself . say 
 no word aloud , but quietly whisper wicked expletive , he search 
 everywhere in vain , and then , at last , by tortuous stairway and 
 corridor return to his original post of observation , that he might 
 survey the place anew from the vantage ground . to his surprise he 
 find a man in the dark little room , watch the scene of the ball 
 as intently as he himself have be do a few minute before . hearing 
 footstep , the man turn with a start . 

 it be Jules . 

 the two exchange glance in the half light for a second . 

 ' good evening , Mr Racksole , ' say Jules calmly . ' I must apologize for 
 be here . ' 

 ' Force of habit , I suppose , ' say Theodore Racksole drily . 

 ' just so , sir . ' 

 ' I fancy I have forbid you to re - enter this h"tel ? ' 

 ' I think your order apply only to my professional capacity . I be 
 here to - night as the guest of Mr and Mrs Sampson Levi . ' 

 ' in your new r"le of man - about - town , eh ? ' 

 ' exactly . ' 

 ' but I do not   allow man - about - town up here , my friend . ' 

 ' for be up here I have already apologize . ' 

 ' then , have apologize , you have well depart ; that be my 
 disintereste advice to you . ' 

 ' good night , sir . ' 

 ' and , I say , Mr Jules , if Mr and Mrs Sampson Levi , or any other Hebrews 
 or Christians , should again invite you to my h"tel you will oblige I by 
 decline the invitation . you will find that will be the safe course for 
 you . ' 

 ' good night , sir . ' 

 before midnight strike Theodore Racksole have ascertain that the 
 invitation - list of Mr and Mrs Sampson Levi , though a somewhat lengthy 
 one , contain no reference to any such person as Jules . 

 he sit up very late . to be precise , he sit up all night . he be a man 
 who , by dint of training , could comfortably dispense with sleep when he 
 feel so inclined , or when circumstance make such a course advisable . 
 he walk to and fro in his room , and cogitate as few people beside 
 Theodore Racksole could cogitate . at 6 a.m. he take a stroll round the 
 business part of his premise , and watch the supply come in from 
 Covent Garden , from Smithfield , from Billingsgate , and from other 
 strange place . he find the proceeding of the kitchen department quite 
 interesting , and make mental note of thing that he would have alter , 
 of man whose wage he would increase and man whose wage he would 
 reduce . at 7 a.m. he happen to be stand near the luggage lift , 
 and witness the descent of vast quantity of luggage , and its 
 disappearance into a Carter Paterson van . 

 ' whose luggage be that ? ' he inquire peremptorily . 

 the luggage clerk , with an aggrieved expression , explain to he that 
 it be the luggage of nobody in particular , that it belong to various 
 guest , and be bind for various destination ; that it be , in fact , 
 ' express ' luggage despatch in advance , and that a similar quantity 
 of it leave the h"tel every morning about that hour . 

 Theodore Racksole walk away , and breakfast upon one cup of tea and 
 half a slice of toast . 

 at ten o'clock he be inform that the inspector of police desire to 
 see he . the inspector have come , he say , to superintend the removal 
 of the body of Reginald Dimmock to the mortuary adjoin the place 
 of inquest , and a suitable vehicle wait at the back entrance of the 
 h"tel . 

 the inspector have also bring subpoena for himself and Prince Aribert 
 of Posen and the commissionaire to attend the inquest . 

 ' I think Mr Dimmock 's remain be remove last night , ' say Racksole 
 wearily . 

 ' no , sir . the fact be the van be engage on another job . ' 

 the inspector give the least hint of a professional smile , and Racksole , 
 disgust , tell he curtly to go and perform his duty . 

 in a few minute a message come from the inspector request Mr 
 Racksole to be good enough to come to he on the first floor . Racksole 
 go . in the ante - room , where the body of Reginald Dimmock have 
 originally be place , be the inspector and Prince Aribert , and two 
 policeman . 

 ' well ? ' say Racksole , after he and the Prince have exchange bow . 
 then he see a coffin lay across two chair . ' I see a coffin have be 
 obtain , ' he remark . ' quite right ' he approach it . ' it be empty , ' he 
 observe unthinkingly . 

 ' just so , ' say the inspector . ' the body of the deceased have 
 disappear . 

 and his serene Highness Prince Aribert inform I that though he have 
 occupy a room immediately opposite , on the other side of the corridor , 
 he can throw no light on the affair . ' 

 ' indeed , I can not ! ' say the Prince , and though he speak with sufficient 
 calmness and dignity , you could see that he be deeply pain , even 
 distressed . 

 ' well , I be - ' murmur Racksole , and stop . 




 Chapter Seven NELLA and the PRINCE 

 it appear impossible to Theodore Racksole that so cumbrous an article 
 as a corpse could be remove out of his h"tel , with no trace , no hint , 
 no clue as to the time or the manner of the performance of the deed . 
 after the first feeling of surprise , Racksole grow coldly and severely 
 angry . he have a mind to dismiss the entire staff of the h"tel . he 
 personally examine the night - watchman , the chambermaid and all other 
 person who by chance might or ought to know something of the affair ; 
 but without avail . the corpse of Reginald Dimmock have vanish 
 utterly - disappear like a fleshless spirit . 

 of course there be the police . but Theodore Racksole hold the police 
 in sorry esteem . he acquaint they with the fact , answer their 
 query with a patient weariness , and expect , nothing whatever from 
 that quarter . he also have several interview with Prince Aribert 
 of Posen , but though the Prince be suavity itself and beyond doubt 
 genuinely concerned about the fate of his dead attendant , yet it seem 
 to Racksole that he be keep something back , that he hesitate to 
 say all he know . Racksole , with characteristic insight , decide that the 
 death of Reginald Dimmock be only a minor event , which have occur , 
 as it be , on the fringe of some far more profound mystery . and , 
 therefore , he decide to wait , with his eye very wide open , until 
 something else happen that would throw light on the business . at the 
 moment he take only one measure - he arrange that the theft of Dimmock 's 
 body should not appear in the newspaper . it be astonish how well a 
 secret can be keep , when the possessor of the secret be handle with 
 the proper mixture of firmness and persuasion . Racksole manage this 
 very neatly . it be a complicated job , and his success in it rather 
 please he . 

 at the same time he be conscious of be temporarily worst by an 
 unknown group of schemer , in which he feel convinced that Jules be an 
 important item . he could scarcely look Nella in the eye . the girl have 
 evidently expect he to unmask this conspiracy at once , with a single 
 stroke of the millionaire 's magic wand . she be thoroughly accustom , 
 in the land of her birth , to see he achieve impossible feat . over 
 there he be a ' boss ' ; man tremble before his name ; when he wish a 
 thing to happen - well , it happen ; if he desire to know a thing , he 
 just know it . but here , in London , Theodore Racksole be not quite the 
 same Theodore Racksole . he dominate New York ; but London , for the most 
 part , seem not to take much interest in he ; and there be certainly 
 various person in London who be capable of snap their finger at 
 he - at Theodore Racksole . neither he nor his daughter could get use to 
 that fact . 

 as for Nella , she concern herself for a little with the ordinary 
 business of the bureau , and watch the incoming and outgoing of 
 Prince Aribert with a kindly interest . she perceive , what her father 
 have fail to perceive , that his Highness have assume an attitude of 
 reserve merely to hide the secret distraction and dismay which consume 
 he . she see that the poor fellow have no settle plan in his head , and 
 that he be trouble by something which , so far , he have confide to 
 nobody . it come to her knowledge that each morning he walk to and fro 
 on the Victoria Embankment , alone , and apparently with no object . on the 
 third morning she decide that drive exercise on the Embankment would 
 be good for her health , and thereupon order a carriage and issue 
 forth , array in a miraculous putty - coloured gown . Near Blackfriars 
 Bridge she meet the Prince , and the carriage be draw up by the 
 pavement . 

 ' good morning , Prince , ' she greet he . ' be you mistake this for 
 Hyde Park ? ' 

 he bow and smile . 

 ' I usually walk here in the morning , ' he say . 

 ' you surprise I , ' she return . ' I think I be the only person in 
 London who prefer the Embankment , with this view of the river , to the 
 dustiness of Hyde Park . I can not   imagine how it be that London will never 
 take exercise anywhere except in that ridiculous Park . now , if they have 
 Central Park - ' 

 ' I think the Embankment be the fine spot in all London , ' he say . 

 she lean a little out of the landau , bring her face near to his . 

 ' I do believe we be kindre spirit , you and I , ' she murmur ; and 
 then , ' Au revoir , Prince ! ' 

 ' one moment , Miss Racksole . ' his quick tone have a note of entreaty . 

 ' I be in a hurry , ' she fib ; ' I be not merely take exercise this 
 morning . you have no idea how busy we be . ' 

 ' ah ! then I will not trouble you . but I leave the Grand Babylon 
 to - night . ' 

 ' do you ? ' she say . ' then will your Highness do I the honour of 
 lunch with I today in Father 's room ? Father will be out - he be 
 have a day in the City with some stockbroke person . ' 

 ' I shall be charm , ' say the Prince , and his face show that he mean 
 it . 

 Nella drive off . 

 if the lunch be a success that result be due partly to Rocco , and 
 partly to Nella . the Prince say little beyond what the ordinary rule 
 of the conversational game demand . his hostess talk much and talk 
 well , but she fail to rouse her guest . when they have have coffee he 
 take a rather formal leave of she . 

 ' good - bye , Prince , ' she say , ' but I think - that be , no I do not . 

 good - bye . ' 

 ' you think I wish to discuss something with you . I do ; but I have 
 decide that I have no right to burden your mind with my affair . ' 

 ' but suppose - suppose I wish to be burden ? ' 

 ' that be your good nature . ' 

 ' sit down , ' she say abruptly , ' and tell I everything ; mind , 
 everything . I adore secret . ' 

 almost before he know it he be talk to she , rapidly , eagerly . 

 ' why should I weary you with my confidence ? ' he say . ' I do not   know , I 
 can not tell ; but I feel that I must . I feel that you will understand I 
 well than anyone else in the world . and yet why should you understand 
 I ? again , I do not   know . Miss Racksole , I will disclose to you the whole 
 trouble in a word . Prince Eugen , the hereditary Grand Duke of Posen , 
 have disappear . four day ago I be to have meet he at Ostend . he have 
 affair in London . he wish I to come with he . I send Dimmock on in 
 front , and wait for Eugen . he do not arrive . I telegraph back to 
 Cologne , his last stop - place , and I learn that he have leave there 
 in accordance with his programme ; I learn also that he have pass 
 through Brussels . it must have be between Brussels and the railway 
 station at Ostend Quay that he disappear . he be travel with a 
 single equerry , and the equerry , too , have vanish . I need not explain 
 to you , Miss Racksole , that when a person of the importance of my nephew 
 contrive to get lose one must proceed cautiously . one can not advertise 
 for he in the London Times . such a disappearance must be keep secret . 
 the people at Posen and at Berlin believe that eugen be in London , 
 here , at this h"tel ; or , rather , they do so believe . but this morning 
 I receive a cypher telegram from - from his Majesty the Emperor , a very 
 peculiar telegram , ask when Eugen might be expect to return to 
 Posen , and request that he should go first to Berlin . that telegram 
 be address to myself . now , if the Emperor think that Eugen be 
 here , why should he have cause the telegram to be address to I ? 
 I have hesitate for three day , but I can hesitate no long . I must 
 myself go to the Emperor and acquaint he with the fact . ' 

 ' I suppose you have   just get to keep straight with he ? ' Nella be on the 
 point of say , but she check herself and substitute , ' the Emperor 
 be your chief , be he not ? " first among equal " , you call he . ' 

 ' his Majesty be our over - lord , ' say Aribert quietly . 

 ' why do you not take immediate step to inquire as to the whereabouts of 
 your Royal nephew ? ' she ask simply . the affair seem to she just then 
 so plain and straightforward . 

 ' because one of two thing may have happen . either Eugen may have 
 be , in plain language , abduct , or he may have have his own reason 
 for change his programme and keep in the background - out of reach 
 of telegraph and post and railway . ' 

 ' what sort of reason ? ' 

 ' do not ask I . in the history of every family there be passage - ' he 
 stop . 

 ' and what be Prince Eugen 's object in come to London ? ' 

 Aribert hesitate . 

 ' money , ' he say at length . ' as a family we be very poor - poor than 
 anyone in Berlin suspect . ' 

 ' Prince Aribert , ' Nella say , ' shall I tell you what I think ? ' she 
 lean back in her chair , and look at he out of half - close eye . his 
 pale , thin , distinguished face hold her gaze as if by some fascination . 
 there could be no mistaking this man for anything else but a Prince . 

 ' if you will , ' he say . 

 ' Prince Eugen be the victim of a plot . ' 

 ' you think so ? ' 

 ' I be perfectly convinced of it . ' 

 ' but why ? what can be the object of a plot against he ? ' 

 ' that be a point of which you should know more than I , ' she remark 
 drily . 

 ' ah ! perhaps , perhaps , ' he say . ' but , dear Miss Racksole , why be you 
 so sure ? ' 

 ' there be several reason , and they be connect with Mr Dimmock . 
 do you ever suspect , your Highness , that that poor young man be not 
 entirely loyal to you ? ' 

 ' he be absolutely loyal , ' say the Prince , with all the earnestness of 
 conviction . 

 ' a thousand pardon , but he be not . ' 

 ' Miss Racksole , if any other than yourself make that assertion , I 
 would - I would - ' 

 ' consign they to the deep dungeon in Posen ? ' she laugh , lightly . 

 ' listen . ' and she tell he of the incident which have occur in the 
 night precede his arrival in the h"tel . 

 ' do you mean , Miss Racksole , that there be an understanding between 
 poor Dimmock and this fellow Jules ? ' 

 ' there be an understanding . ' 

 ' impossible ! ' 

 ' your Highness , the man who wish to probe a mystery to its root never 
 use the word " impossible " . but I will say this for young Mr Dimmock . 
 I think he repent , and I think that it be because he repent that 
 he - er - die so suddenly , and that his body be spirit away . ' 

 ' why have no one tell I these thing before ? ' Aribert exclaim . 

 ' prince seldom hear the truth , ' she say . 

 he be astonish at her coolness , her firmness of assertion , her air of 
 complete acquaintance with the world . 

 ' Miss Racksole , ' he say , ' if you will permit I to say it , I have 
 never in my life meet a woman like you . may I rely on your sympathy - your 
 support ? ' 

 ' my support , Prince ? but how ? ' 

 ' I do not know , ' he reply . ' but you could help I if you would . a 
 woman , when she have brain , always have more brain than a man . ' 

 ' ah ! ' she say ruefully , ' I have no brain , but I do believe I could 
 help you . ' 

 what prompt she to make that assertion she could not have explain , 
 even to herself . but she make it , and she have a suspicion - a 
 prescience - that it would be justify , though by what mean , through 
 what good fortune , be still a mystery to she . 

 ' go to Berlin , ' she say . ' I see that you must do that ; you have no 
 alternative . as for the rest , we shall see . something will occur . 
 I shall be here . my father will be here . you must count we as your 
 friend . ' 

 he kiss her hand when he leave , and afterwards , when she be alone , she 
 kiss the spot his lip have touch again and again . now , think 
 the matter out in the calmness of solitude , all seem strange , unreal , 
 uncertain to she . be conspiracy actually possible nowadays ? do 
 queer thing actually happen in Europe ? and do they actually happen in 
 London h"tel ? she din with her father that night . 

 ' I hear Prince Aribert have leave , ' say Theodore Racksole . 

 ' yes , ' she assent . she say not a word about their interview . 




 Chapter eight ARRIVAL and departure of the baroness 

 on the follow morning , just before lunch , a lady , accompany by a 
 maid and a considerable quantity of luggage , come to the Grand Babylon 
 H"tel . she be a plump , little old lady , with white hair and an 
 old - fashioned bonnet , and she have a quaint , simple smile of surprise at 
 everything in general . 

 nevertheless , she give the impression of belong to some aristocracy , 
 though not the english aristocracy . her tone to her maid , whom she 
 address in broken English - the girl be apparently English - be 
 distinctly insolent , with the calm , unconscious insolence peculiar to 
 a certain type of continental nobility . the name on the lady 's card run 
 thus : ' Baroness Zerlinski ' . she desire room on the third floor . it 
 happen that Nella be in the bureau . 

 ' on the third floor , madam ? ' question Nella , in her good clerkly 
 manner . 

 ' I do say on de tird floor , ' say the plump little old lady . 

 ' we have accommodation on the second floor . ' 

 ' I wish to be high up , out of de dust and in de light , ' explain the 
 Baroness . 

 ' we have no suite on the third floor , madam . ' 

 ' never mind , no mattaire ! have you not two room that communicate ? ' 

 Nella consult her book , rather awkwardly . 

 ' number 122 and 123 communicate . ' 

 ' or be it 121 and 122 ? the little old lady remark quickly , and then 
 bite her lip . 

 ' I beg your pardon . I should have say 121 and 122 . ' 

 at the moment Nella regard the Baroness 's correction of her figure as 
 a curious chance , but afterwards , when the Baroness have ascend in the 
 lift , the thing strike she as somewhat strange . perhaps the Baroness 
 Zerlinski have stay at the h"tel before . for the sake of convenience an 
 index of visitor to the h"tel be keep and the index extend back 
 for thirty year . Nella examine it , but it do not contain the name 
 of Zerlinski . then it be that Nella begin to imagine , what have swiftly 
 cross her mind when first the Baroness present herself at the 
 bureau , that the feature of the Baroness be remotely familiar to she . 
 she think , not that she have see the old lady 's face before , but that 
 she have see somewhere , some time , a face of a similar cast . it occur 
 to Nella to look at the ' Almanach de Gotha ' - that record of all the 
 maze of continental blue blood ; but the ' Almanach de Gotha ' make no 
 reference to any barony of Zerlinski . Nella inquire where the Baroness 
 mean to take lunch , and be inform that a table have be reserve 
 for she in the dining - room , and she at once decide to lunch in the 
 dining - room herself . seat in a corner , half - hide by a pillar , she 
 could survey all the guest , and watch each group as it enter or left . 
 presently the Baroness appear , dress in black , with a tiny lace 
 shawl , despite the June warmth ; very stately , very quaint , and gently 
 smile . Nella observe she intently . the lady eat heartily , work 
 without haste and without delay through the elaborate menu of the 
 luncheon . Nella notice that she have beautiful white tooth . then a 
 remarkable thing happen . a cream puff be serve to the Baroness by 
 way of sweet , and Nella be astonish to see the little lady remove 
 the top , and with a spoon quietly take something from the interior which 
 look like a piece of fold paper . no one who have not be watch 
 with the eye of a lynx would have notice anything extraordinary in the 
 action ; indeed , the chance be nine hundred and ninety - nine to one 
 that it would pass unheeded . but , unfortunately for the Baroness , it be 
 the thousandth chance that happen . Nella jump up , and walk over 
 to the Baroness , say to she : 

 ' I be afraid that the tart be not quite nice , your ladyship . ' 

 ' thank , it be delightful , ' say the Baroness coldly ; her smile have 
 vanish . ' who be you ? I think you be de bureau clerk . ' 

 ' my father be the owner of this h"tel . I think there be something in 
 the tart which ought not to have be there . ' 

 Nella look the Baroness full in the face . the piece of fold paper , 
 to which a little cream have attach itself , lie under the edge of a 
 plate . 

 ' no , thank . ' the Baroness smile her simple smile . 

 Nella depart . she have notice one trifling thing besides the 
 paper - namely , that the Baroness could pronounce the English ' th ' sound 
 if she choose . 

 that afternoon , in her own room , Nella sit meditate at the window for 
 long time , and then she suddenly spring up , her eye brighten . 

 ' I know , ' she exclaim , clap her hand . ' it be Miss Spencer , 
 disguise ! 

 why do not   I think of that before ? ' her thought run instantly to Prince 
 Aribert . ' perhaps I can help he , ' she say to herself , and give a 
 little sigh . she go down to the office and inquire whether the 
 Baroness have give any instruction about dinner . she feel that some 
 plan must be formulate . she want to get hold of Rocco , and put he in 
 the rack . she know now that Rocco , the unequalled , be also concerned in 
 this mysterious affair . 

 ' the Baroness Zerlinski have leave , about a quarter of an hour ago , ' say 
 the attendant . 

 ' but she only arrive this morning . ' 

 ' the Baroness 's maid say that her mistress have receive a telegram 
 and must leave at once . the Baroness pay the bill , and go away in a 
 four - wheeler . ' 

 ' where to ? ' the trunk be label for Ostend . ' 

 perhaps it be instinct , perhaps it be the mere spirit of adventure ; 
 but that evening Nella be to be see of all man on the steamer 
 for ostend which leave Dover at 11 p.m. she tell no one of her 
 intention - not even her father , who be not in the h"tel when she leave . 
 she have scribble a brief note to he to expect she back in a day or 
 two , and have post this at Dover . the steamer be the Marie Henriette , 
 a large and luxurious boat , whose state - room on deck vie with the 
 glory of the Cunard and White Star liner . one of these state - room , 
 the good , be evidently occupy , for every curtain of its window be 
 carefully draw . Nella do not hope that the Baroness be on board ; it 
 be quite possible for the Baroness to have catch the eight o'clock 
 steamer , and it be also possible for the Baroness not to have go 
 to ostend at all , but to some other place in an entirely different 
 direction . nevertheless , Nella have a faint hope that the lady who call 
 herself Zerlinski might be in that curtain stateroom , and throughout 
 the smooth moonlit voyage she never once relax her observation of its 
 door and its window . 

 the Maria Henriette arrive in Ostend Harbour punctually at 2 a.m. in 
 the morning . there be the usual heterogeneous , gesticulate crowd on 
 the quay . 

 Nella keep she post near the door of the state - room , and at length she 
 be reward by see it open . four middle - aged englishman issue from 
 it . from a glimpse of the interior Nella see that they have spend the 
 voyage in card - playing . 

 it would not be too much to say that she be distinctly annoyed . she 
 pretend to be annoy with circumstance , but really she be annoy 
 with Nella Racksole . at two in the morning , without luggage , without any 
 companionship , and without a plan of campaign , she find herself in 
 a strange foreign port - a port of evil repute , possess some of the 
 worst - manage h"tel in Europe . she stroll on the quay for a few 
 minute , and then she see the smoke of another steamer in the offing . 
 she inquire from an official what that steamer might be , and be tell 
 that it be the eight o'clock from Dover , which have break down , put 
 into Calais for some slight necessary repair , and be arrive at its 
 destination nearly four hour late . her mercurial spirit rise again . a 
 minute ago she be regard herself as no well than a ninny engage 
 in a wild - goose chase . now she feel that after all she have be very 
 sagacious and cunning . she be morally sure that she would find the 
 Zerlinski woman on this second steamer , and she take all the credit to 
 herself in advance . such be human nature . 

 the steamer seem interminably slow in come into harbour . Nella 
 walk on the Digue for a few minute to watch it the well . the town 
 be silent and almost deserted . it have a false and sinister aspect . she 
 remember tale which she have hear of this glitter resort , which 
 in the season hold more scoundrel than any place in Europe , save only 
 Monte Carlo . she remember that the gild adventure of every nation 
 under the sun forgather there either for business or pleasure , and 
 that some of the most wonderful crime of the latter half of the century 
 have be scheme and mature in that haunt of cosmopolitan iniquity . 

 when the second steamer arrive Nella stand at the end of the gangway , 
 close to the ticket - collector . the first person to step on shore 
 be - not the Baroness Zerlinski , but Miss Spencer herself ! Nella turn 
 aside instantly , hide her face , and Miss Spencer , carry a small 
 bag , hurry with assured footstep to the Custom House . it seem as 
 if she know the port of Ostend fairly well . the moon shine like day , 
 and Nella have full opportunity to observe her quarry . she could see now 
 quite plainly that the Baroness Zerlinski have be only Miss Spencer in 
 disguise . there be the same gait , the same movement of the head and of 
 the hip ; the white hair be easily to be account for by a wig , and 
 the wrinkle by a paint brush and some grease paint . Miss Spencer , 
 whose hair be now its old accustomed yellow , get through the Custom 
 House without difficulty , and Nella see she call a closed carriage and 
 say something to the driver . the vehicle drive off . Nella jump into 
 the next carriage - an open one - that come up . 

 ' follow that carriage , ' she say succinctly to the driver in French . 

 ' Bien , madame ! ' the driver whip up his horse , and the animal shot 
 forward with a terrific clatter over the cobble . it appear that this 
 driver be quite accustomed to follow other carriage . 

 ' now I be fairly in for it ! ' say Nella to herself . she laugh 
 unsteadily , but her heart be beat with an extraordinary thump . 

 for some time the pursue vehicle keep well in front . it cross the 
 town nearly from end to end , and plunge into a maze of small street 
 far on the south side of the Kursaal . then gradually Nella 's equipage 
 begin to overtake it . the first carriage stop with a jerk before a 
 tall dark house , and Miss Spencer emerge . Nella call to her driver to 
 stop , but he , determine to be in at the death , be engage in 
 whip his horse , and he completely ignore her command . he draw up 
 triumphantly at the tall dark house just at the moment when Miss Spencer 
 disappear into it . the other carriage drive away . Nella , uncertain 
 what to do , step down from her carriage and give the driver some 
 money . at the same moment a man reopen the door of the house , which 
 have close on Miss Spencer . 

 ' I want to see Miss Spencer , ' say Nella impulsively . she could not   think 
 of anything else to say . 

 ' Miss Spencer ? ' yes ; she be just arrive . ' 

 ' it be O.K. , I suppose , ' say the man . 

 ' I guess so , ' say Nella , and she walk past he into the house . she 
 be astonish at her own audacity . 

 Miss Spencer be just go into a room off the narrow hall . Nella 
 follow she into the apartment , which be shabbily furnish in the 
 belgian lodging - house style . 

 ' well , Miss Spencer , ' she greet the former Baroness Zerlinski , ' I 
 guess you do not   expect to see I . you leave our h"tel very suddenly this 
 afternoon , and you leave it very suddenly a few day ago ; and so I have 
 just call to make a few inquiry . ' 

 to do the lady justice , Miss Spencer bear the surprising ordeal very 
 well . 

 she do not flinch ; she betray no emotion . the sole sign of 
 perturbation be in her hurried breathing . 

 ' you have cease to be the Baroness Zerlinski , ' Nella continue . ' may I 
 sit down ? ' 

 ' certainly , sit down , ' say Miss Spencer , copy the girl 's tone . 
 ' you be a fairly smart young woman , that I will say . what do you want ? 
 be not   my book all straight ? ' 

 ' your book be all straight . I have not   come about your book . I have 
 come about the murder of Reginald Dimmock , the disappearance of his 
 corpse , and the disappearance of Prince Eugen of Posen . I think you 
 might be able to help I in some investigation which I be make . ' 

 Miss Spencer 's eye gleam , and she stand up and move swiftly to the 
 mantelpiece . 

 ' you may be a Yankee , but you be a fool , ' she say . 

 she take hold of the bell - rope . 

 ' do not   ring that bell if you value your life , ' say Nella . 

 ' if what ? ' Miss Spencer remark . 

 ' if you value your life , ' say Nella calmly , and with the word she 
 pull from her pocket a very neat and dainty little revolver . 




 Chapter nine two WOMEN and the REVOLVER 

 ' you - you be only do that to frighten I , ' stammer Miss Spencer , in 
 a low , quaver voice . 

 ' be I ? ' Nella reply , as firmly as she could , though her hand shake 
 violently with excitement , could Miss Spencer but have observe it . ' be 
 I ? you say just now that I might be a Yankee girl , but I be a fool . 
 well , I be a Yankee girl , as you call it ; and in my country , if they 
 do not   teach revolver - shooting in boarding - school , there be at least 
 a lot of girl who can handle a revolver . I happen to be one of they . I 
 tell you that if you ring that bell you will suffer . ' 

 Most of this be simple bluff on Nella 's part , and she tremble lest 
 Miss Spencer should perceive that it be simple bluff . happily for she , 
 Miss Spencer belong to that order of woman who have every sort of 
 courage except physical courage . Miss Spencer could have withstand 
 successfully any moral trial , but persuade she that her skin be in 
 danger , and she would succumb . Nella at once divine this useful fact , 
 and proceed accordingly , hide the strangeness of her own sensation 
 as well as she could . 

 ' you have well sit down now , ' say Nella , ' and I will ask you a few 
 question . ' 

 and Miss Spencer obediently sit down , rather white , and try to screw 
 her lip into a formal smile . 

 ' why do you leave the Grand Babylon that night ? ' Nella begin she 
 examination , put on a stern , barrister - like expression . 

 ' I have order to , Miss Racksole . ' 

 ' whose order ? ' 

 ' well , I be - I be - the fact be , I be a married woman , and it be my 
 husband 's order . ' 

 ' who be your husband ? ' Tom Jackson - Jules , you know , head waiter at the 
 Grand Babylon . ' 

 ' so Jules 's real name be Tom Jackson ? why do he want you to leave 
 without give notice ? ' 

 ' I be sure I do not   know , Miss Racksole . I swear I do not   know . he be my 
 husband , and , of course , I do what he tell I , as you will some day do 
 what your husband tell you . please heaven you will get a well husband 
 than mine ! ' 

 Miss Spencer show a sign of tear . 

 Nella finger the revolver , and put it at full cock . ' well , ' she 
 repeat , ' why do he want you to leave ? ' she be tremendously surprised 
 at her own coolness , and somewhat pleased with it , too . 

 ' I can not   tell you , I can not   tell you . ' 

 ' you have   just get to , ' Nella say , in a terrible , remorseless tone . 

 ' he - he wish I to come over here to Ostend . something have go wrong . 

 oh ! he be a fearful man , be Tom . if I tell you , he would - ' 

 ' have something go wrong in the h"tel , or over here ? ' 

 ' Both . ' 

 ' be it about Prince Eugen of Posen ? ' 

 ' I do not   know - that be , yes , I think so . ' 

 ' what have your husband to do with Prince Eugen ? ' 

 ' I believe he have some - some sort of business with he , some money 
 business . ' 

 ' and be Mr Dimmock in this business ? ' I fancy so , Miss Racksole . I be 
 tell you all I know , that I swear . ' 

 ' do your husband and Mr Dimmock have a quarrel that night in Room 111 ? ' 

 ' they have some difficulty . ' 

 ' and the result of that be that you come to Ostend instantly ? ' 

 ' yes ; I suppose so . ' 

 ' and what be you to do in Ostend ? what be your instruction from 
 this husband of your ? ' 

 Miss Spencer 's head drop on her arm on the table which separate she 
 from Nella , and she appear to sob violently . 

 ' have pity on I , ' she murmur , ' I can not   tell you any more . ' 

 ' why ? ' 

 ' he would kill I if he know . ' 

 ' you be wander from the subject , ' observe Nella coldly . ' this be the 
 last time I shall warn you . let I tell you plainly I have   get the good 
 reason for be desperate , and if anything happen to you I shall say 
 I do it in sell - defence . now , what be you to do in Ostend ? ' 

 ' I shall die for this anyhow , ' whine Miss Spencer , and then , with a 
 sort of fierce despair , ' I have to keep watch on Prince Eugen . ' 

 ' where ? in this house ? ' 

 Miss Spencer nod , and , look up , Nella could see the trace of 
 tear in her face . 

 ' then Prince Eugen be a prisoner ? some one have capture he at the 
 instigation of Jules ? ' 

 ' yes , if you must have it . ' 

 ' why be it necessary for you specially to come to Ostend ? ' 

 ' oh ! Tom trust I . you see , I know Ostend . before I take that place at 
 the Grand Babylon I have travel over Europe , and Tom know that I know 
 a thing or two . ' 

 ' why do you take the place at the Grand Babylon ? ' 

 ' because Tom tell I to . he say I should be useful to he there . ' 

 ' be your husband an Anarchist , or something of that kind , Miss Spencer ? ' 

 ' I do not   know . I would tell you in a minute if I know . but he be one of those 
 that keep themselves to themselves . ' 

 ' do you know if he have ever commit a murder ? ' never ! ' say Miss 
 Spencer , with righteous repudiation of the mere idea . 

 ' but Mr Dimmock be murder . he be poison . if he have not be 
 poison why be his body steal ? it must have be steal to prevent 
 inquiry , to hide trace . tell I about that . ' 

 ' I take my die oath , ' say Miss Spencer , stand up a little way from 
 the table , ' I take my dying oath I do not   know Mr Dimmock be dead till 
 I see it in the newspaper . ' 

 ' you swear you have no suspicion of it ? ' 

 ' I swear I have not . ' 

 Nella be inclined to believe the statement . the woman and the girl 
 look at each other in the tawdry , frowsy , lamp - light room . Miss Spencer 
 nervously pat her yellow hair into shape , as if gradually recover 
 her composure and equanimity . the whole affair seem like a dream to 
 Nella , a disturbing , sinister nightmare . she be a little uncertain 
 what to say . she feel that she have not yet get hold of any very definite 
 information . ' where be Prince Eugen now ? ' she ask at length . 

 ' I do not   know , miss . ' 

 ' he be not   in this house ? ' 

 ' no , miss . ' 

 ' ah ! we will see presently . ' 

 ' they take he away , Miss Racksole . ' 

 ' who take he away ? some of your husband 's friend ? ' 

 ' some of his - acquaintance . ' 

 ' then there be a gang of you ? ' 

 ' a gang of us - a gang ! I do not   know what you mean , ' Miss Spencer 
 quaver . 

 ' oh , but you must know , ' smile Nella calmly . ' you can not   possibly be 
 so innocent as all that , Mrs Tom Jackson . you can not   play game with 
 I . you have   just get to remember that I be what you call a Yankee girl . 
 there be one thing that I mean to find out , within the next five minute , 
 and that be - how your charming husband kidnap Prince Eugen , and why 
 he kidnap he . let we begin with the second question . you have evade 
 it once . ' 

 Miss Spencer look into Nella 's face , and then her eye drop , and 
 her finger work nervously with the tablecloth . 

 ' how can I tell you , ' she say , ' when I do not   know ? you have   get the 
 whip - hand of I , and you be torment I for your own pleasure . ' she 
 wear an expression of persecute innocence . 

 ' do Mr Tom Jackson want to get some money out of Prince Eugen ? ' 

 ' money ! not he ! Tom be never short of money . ' 

 ' but I mean a lot of money - ten of thousand , hundred of thousand ? ' 

 ' Tom never want money from anyone , ' say Miss Spencer doggedly . 

 ' then have he some reason for wish to prevent Prince Eugen from come 
 to London ? ' 

 ' perhaps he have . I do not   know . if you kill I , I do not   know . ' Nella 
 stop to reflect . then she raise the revolver . it be a mechanical , 
 unintentional sort of action , and certainly she have no intention of 
 use the weapon , but , strange to say , Miss Spencer again cower before 
 it . even at that moment Nella wonder that a woman like Miss Spencer 
 could be so simple as to think the revolver would actually be use . 
 have absolutely no physical cowardice herself , Nella have the great 
 difficulty in imagine that other people could be at the mercy of a 
 bodily fear . still , she see her advantage , and use it relentlessly , 
 and with as much theatrical gesture as she could command . she raise the 
 revolver till it be level with Miss Spencer 's face , and suddenly a new , 
 queer feeling take hold of she . she know that she would indeed use that 
 revolver now , if the miserable woman before she drive she too far . 
 she feel afraid - afraid of herself ; she be in the grasp of a savage , 
 primeval instinct . in a flash she see Miss Spencer dead at her foot - the 
 police - a court of justice - the scaffold . it be horrible . 

 ' speak , ' she say hoarsely , and Miss Spencer 's face go whiter . 

 ' Tom do say , ' the woman whisper rapidly , awesomely , ' that if Prince 
 Eugen get to London it would upset his scheme . ' 

 ' what scheme ? what scheme ? answer I . ' 

 ' heaven help I , I do not   know . ' Miss Spencer sink into a chair . ' he say 
 Mr Dimmock have turn tail , and he should have to settle he and then 
 Rocco - ' 

 ' Rocco ! what about Rocco ? ' Nella could scarcely hear herself . her grip 
 of the revolver tighten . 

 Miss Spencer 's eye open wider ; she gaze at Nella with a glassy 
 stare . 

 ' do not   ask I . it be death ! ' her eye be fix as if in horror . 

 ' it be , ' say Nella , and the sound of her voice seem to she to issue 
 from the lip of some third person . 

 ' it be death , ' repeat Miss Spencer , and gradually her head and 
 shoulder sink back , and hang loosely over the chair . Nella be 
 conscious of a sudden revulsion . the woman have surely faint . drop 
 the revolver she run round the table . she be herself again - feminine , 
 sympathetic , the old Nella . she feel immensely relieve that this have 
 happen . but at the same instant Miss Spencer spring up from the chair 
 like a cat , seize the revolver , and with a wild movement of the arm 
 fling it against the window . it crash through the glass , explode as 
 it go , and there be a tense silence . 

 ' I tell you that you be a fool , ' remark Miss Spencer slowly , ' come 
 here like a sort of female Jack Sheppard , and try to get the good of 
 I . 

 we be on equal term now . you frighten I , but I know I be a 
 cleverer woman than you , and that in the end , if I keep on long enough , 
 I should win . 

 now it will be my turn . ' 

 dumbfound , and overcome with a miserable sense of the truth of Miss 
 Spencer 's word , Nella stand still . the idea of her colossal foolishness 
 sweep through she like a flood . she feel almost ashamed . but even at 
 this juncture she have no fear . she face the woman bravely , her mind 
 leap about in search of some plan . she could think of nothing but a 
 bribe - an enormous bribe . 

 ' I admit you have   win , ' she say , ' but I have   not finish yet . just 
 listen . ' 

 Miss Spencer fold her arm , and glance at the door , smile bitterly . 

 ' you know my father be a millionaire ; perhaps you know that he be one 
 of the rich man in the world . if I give you my word of honour not 
 to reveal anything that you have   tell I , what will you take to let I go 
 free ? ' 

 ' what sum do you suggest ? ' ask Miss Spencer carelessly . 

 ' twenty thousand pound , ' say Nella promptly . she have begin to regard 
 the affair as a business operation . 

 Miss Spencer 's lip curl . 

 ' a hundred thousand . ' 

 again Miss Spencer 's lip curl . 

 ' well , say a million . I can rely on my father , and so may you . ' 

 ' you think you be worth a million to he ? ' 

 ' I do , ' say Nella . 

 ' and you think we could trust you to see that it be pay ? ' 

 ' of course you could . ' 

 ' and we should not suffer afterwards in any way ? ' 

 ' I would give you my word , and my father 's word . ' 

 ' bah ! ' exclaim Miss Spencer : ' how do you know I would not   let you go 
 free for nothing ? you be only a rash , silly girl . ' 

 ' I know you would not . I can read your face too well . ' 

 ' you be right , ' Miss Spencer reply slowly . ' I would not . I would not 
 let you go for all the dollar in America . ' 

 Nella feel cold down the spine , and sit down again in her chair . a 
 draught of air from the broken window blow on her cheek . step sound 
 in the passage ; the door open , but Nella do not turn round . she could 
 not move her eye from Miss Spencer 's . there be a noise of rush 
 water in her ear . she lose consciousness , and slip limply to the 
 ground . 




 chapter ten AT SEA 

 it seem to Nella that she be be rock gently in a vast cradle , 
 which sway to and fro with a motion at once slow and incredibly 
 gentle . this sensation continue for some time , and there be add to 
 it the sound of a quick , quiet , muffled beat . soft , exhilarate breeze 
 waft she forward in spite of herself , and yet she remain in a 
 delicious calm . she wonder if her mother be kneel by her side , 
 whisper some lullaby in her childish ear . then strange colour swam 
 before her eye , her eyelid waver , and at last she awake . for a few 
 moment her gaze travel to and fro in a vain search for some clue 
 to her surrounding , be aware of nothing except sense of repose and 
 a feeling of relief that some mighty and fatal struggle be over ; she 
 care not whether she have conquer or suffer defeat in the struggle 
 of her soul with some other soul ; it be finish , do with , and the 
 consciousness of its conclusion satisfied and content she . gradually 
 her brain , recover from its obsession , begin to grasp the phenomena 
 of her surrounding , and she see that she be on a yacht , and that the 
 yacht be move . the motion of the cradle be the smooth rolling of the 
 vessel ; the beat be the beat of its screw ; the strange colour be 
 the cloud tint throw by the sun as it rise over a distant and recede 
 shore in the wake of the yacht ; her mother 's lullaby be the croon 
 song of the man at the wheel . nella all through her life have have many 
 experience of yachting . from the water of the River Hudson to those 
 bluer tide of the Mediterranean Sea , she have yacht in all season and 
 all weather . she love the water , and now it seem deliciously right 
 and proper that she should be on the water again . she raise her head to 
 look round , and then let it sink back : she be fatigue , enervate ; she 
 desire only solitude and calm ; she have no care , no anxiety , no 
 responsibility : a hundred year might have pass since her meeting with 
 Miss Spencer , and the memory of that meeting appear to have fade into 
 the remotest background of her mind . 

 it be a small yacht , and her practised eye at once tell that it 
 belong to the high aristocracy of pleasure craft . as she recline 
 in the deck - chair   it do not occur to she at that moment to speculate 
 as to the identity of the person who have lead she therein   she examine 
 all visible detail of the vessel . the deck be as white and smooth as 
 her own hand , and the seam run along its length like blue vein . all 
 the brass - work , from the band round the slender funnel to the concave 
 surface of the binnacle , shine like gold . 

 the taper mast stretch upwards at a rakish angle , and the rigging 
 seem like spin silk . no sail be set ; the yacht be under steam , 
 and do about seven or eight knot . she judge that it be a boat of a 
 hundred ton or so , probably Clyde - build , and not more than two or three 
 year old . 

 no one be to be see on deck except the man at the wheel : this man wear 
 a blue jersey ; but there be neither name nor initial on the jersey , nor 
 be there a name on the white life - buoy lash to the main rigging , nor 
 on the polished dinghy which hang on the starboard davit . she call 
 to the man , and call again , in a feeble voice , but the steerer take 
 no notice of she , and continue his quiet song as though nothing else 
 exist in the universe save the yacht , the sea , the sun , and himself . 

 then her eye sweep the outline of the land from which they be 
 hasten , and she could just distinguish a lighthouse and a great white 
 irregular dome , which she recognize as the Kursaal at Ostend , that 
 gorgeous rival of the gaming palace at Monte Carlo . so she be leave 
 Ostend . the ray of the sun fall on her caressingly , like a restorative . 
 all around the water be change from wonderful grey and dark blue to 
 still more wonderful pink and translucent unearthly green ; the magic 
 kaleidoscope of dawn be go forward in its accustomed way , regardless 
 of the vicissitude of mortal . 

 here and there in the distance she descry a sail - the brown sail of 
 some Ostend fishing - boat return home after a night 's trawling . 
 then the beat of paddle catch her ear , and a steamer blunder past , 
 wallow clumsily among the wave like a tortoise . it be the Swallow 
 from London . she could see some of its passenger lean curiously over 
 the aft - rail . a girl in a mackintosh signal to she , and mechanically 
 she answer the salute with her arm . the officer of the bridge of the 
 Swallow hail the yacht , but the man at the wheel offer no reply . in 
 another minute the Swallow be nothing but a blot in the distance . 

 Nella try to sit straight in the deck - chair , but she find herself 
 unable to do so . throw off the rug which cover she , she discover 
 that she have be tie to the chair by mean of a piece of broad 
 web . instantly she be alert , awake , angry ; she know that her peril 
 be not over ; she feel that possibly they have scarcely yet begin . 
 her lazy contentment , her dreamy sense of peace and repose , vanish 
 utterly , and she steel herself to meet the danger of a grave and 
 difficult situation . 

 just at that moment a man come up from below . he be a man of forty or 
 so , clothe in irreproachable blue , with a peaked yacht cap . he raise 
 the cap politely . 

 ' good morning , ' he say . ' beautiful sunrise , be not   it ? ' the clever and 
 calculated insolence of his tone cut she like a lash as she lie bind in 
 the chair . like all people who have live easy and joyous life in those 
 fair region where gold smooth every crease and law keep a tight hand 
 on disorder , she find it hard to realize that there be other region 
 where gold be useless and law without power . twenty - four hour ago she 
 would have declare it impossible that such an experience as she have 
 suffer could happen to anyone ; she would have talk airily about 
 civilization and the nineteenth century , and progress and the police . 
 but her experience be teach she that human nature remain always 
 the same , and that beneath the thin crust of security on which we good 
 citizen exist the dark and secret force of crime continue to move , 
 just as they do in the day when you could not   go from Cheapside to 
 Chelsea without be set upon by thief . her experience be in a fair 
 way to teach she this lesson well than she could have learn it 
 even in the bureaux of the detective police of Paris , London , and St 
 Petersburg . 

 ' good morning , ' the man repeat , and she glance at he with a sullen , 
 angry gaze . 

 ' you ! ' she exclaim , ' you , Mr Thomas Jackson , if that be your name ! 
 Loose I from this chair , and I will talk to you . ' her eye flash as 
 she speak , and the contempt in they add mightily to her beauty . Mr 
 Thomas Jackson , otherwise jule , erstwhile head waiter at the Grand 
 Babylon , consider himself a connoisseur in feminine loveliness , and 
 the vision of Nella Racksole smite he like an exquisite blow . 

 ' with pleasure , ' he reply . ' I have forget that to prevent you from 
 fall I have secure you to the chair ' ; and with a quick movement he 
 unfasten the band . Nella stand up , quiver with fiery annoyance and 
 scorn . 

 ' now , ' she say , front he , ' what be the meaning of this ? ' 

 ' you faint , ' he reply imperturbably . ' perhaps you do not   remember . ' 

 the man offer she a deck - chair with a characteristic gesture . Nella 
 be oblige to acknowledge , in spite of herself , that the fellow have 
 distinction , an air of breeding . no one would have guess that for 
 twenty year he have be an h"tel waiter . his long , lithe figure , and 
 easy , careless carriage seem to be the figure and carriage of an 
 aristocrat , and his voice be quiet , restrain , and authoritative . 

 ' that have nothing to do with my be carry off in this yacht of 
 your . ' 

 ' it be not my yacht , ' he say , ' but that be a minor detail . as to the 
 more important matter , forgive I that I remind you that only a few 
 hour ago you be threaten a lady in my house with a revolver . ' 

 ' then it be your house ? ' 

 ' why not ? may I not possess a house ? ' he smile . 

 ' I must request you to put the yacht about at once , instantly , and take 
 I back . ' she try to speak firmly . 

 ' ah ! ' he say , ' I be afraid that be impossible . I do not   put out to sea 
 with the intention of return at once , instantly . ' in the last word 
 he give a faint imitation of her tone . 

 ' when I do get back , ' she say , ' when my father get to know of this 
 affair , it will be an exceedingly bad day for you , Mr Jackson . ' 

 ' but suppose your father do not   hear of it - ' 

 ' what ? ' 

 ' supposing you never get back ? ' 

 ' do you mean , then , to have my murder on your conscience ? ' 

 ' talk of murder , ' he say , ' you come very near to murder my 
 friend , Miss Spencer . at least , so she tell I . ' 

 ' be Miss Spencer on board ? ' Nella ask , see perhaps a faint ray of 
 hope in the possible presence of a woman . 

 ' Miss Spencer be not on board . there be no one on board except you and 
 myself and a small crew - a very discreet crew , I may add . ' 

 ' I will have nothing more to say to you . you must take your own course . ' 

 thank for the permission , ' he say . ' I will send you up some 
 breakfast . ' 

 he go to the saloon stair and whistle , and a Negro boy appear 
 with a tray of chocolate . Nella take it , and , without the slight 
 hesitation , throw it overboard . Mr Jackson walk away a few step and 
 then return . 

 ' you have spirit , ' he say , ' and I admire spirit . it be a rare quality . ' 

 she make no reply . ' why do you mix yourself up in my affair at all ? ' 
 he go on . again she make no reply , but the question set her thinking : 
 why have she mix herself up in this mysterious business ? it be quite 
 at variance with the usual method of her gay and butterfly existence to 
 meddle at all with serious thing . have she act merely from a desire 
 to see justice do and wickedness punish ? or be it the desire of 
 adventure ? or be it , perhaps , the desire to be of service to his serene 
 Highness Prince Aribert ? ' it be no fault of mine that you be in this 
 fix , ' jule continue . ' I do not   bring you into it . you bring yourself 
 into it . you and your father - you have be move along at a pace which 
 be rather too rapid . ' 

 ' that remain to be see , ' she put in coldly . 

 ' it do , ' he admit . ' and I repeat that I can not   help admire 
 you - that be , when you be not   interfere with my private affair . that 
 be a proceeding which I have never tolerate from anyone - not even from 
 a millionaire , nor even from a beautiful woman . ' he bow . ' I will tell 
 you what I propose to do . I propose to escort you to a place of 
 safety , and to keep you there till my operation be conclude , and 
 the possibility of interference entirely remove . you speak just now of 
 murder . what a crude notion that be of your ! it be only the amateur 
 who practise murder - ' 

 ' what about Reginald Dimmock ? ' she interject quickly . 

 he pause gravely . 

 ' Reginald Dimmock , ' he repeat . ' I have imagine his be a case of 
 heart disease . let I send you up some more chocolate . I be sure you be 
 hungry . ' 

 ' I will starve before I touch your food , ' she say . 

 ' gallant creature ! ' he murmur , and his eye rove over her face . her 
 superb , supercilious beauty overcome he . ' ah ! ' he say , ' what a wife 
 you would make ! ' he approach near to she . ' you and I , Miss Racksole , 
 your beauty and wealth and my brain - we could conquer the world . few 
 man be worthy of you , but I be one of the few . listen ! you might do 
 bad . marry I . I be a great man ; I shall be great . I adore you . 
 marry I , and I will save your life . all shall be well . I will begin 
 again . the past shall be as though there have be no past . ' 

 ' this be somewhat sudden - Jules , ' she say with bite contempt . 

 ' do you expect I to be conventional ? ' he retort . ' I love you . ' 

 ' grant , ' she say , for the sake of the argument . ' then what will occur 
 to your present wife ? ' 

 ' my present wife ? ' 

 ' yes , Miss Spencer , as she be call . ' 

 ' she tell you I be her husband ? ' 

 ' incidentally she do . ' 

 ' she be not . ' 

 ' perhaps she be not . but , nevertheless , I think I will not   marry you . ' Nella 
 stand like a statue of scorn before he . 

 he go still near to she . ' give I a kiss , then ; one kiss - I will not 
 ask for more ; one kiss from those lip , and you shall go free . man have 
 ruin themselves for a kiss . I will . ' 

 ' Coward ! ' she ejaculate . 

 ' Coward ! ' he repeat . ' coward , be I ? then I will be a coward , and you 
 shall kiss I whether you will or not . ' 

 he put a hand on her shoulder . as she shrink back from his lustrous 
 eye , with an involuntary scream , a figure spring out of the dinghy a 
 few foot away . with a single blow , neatly direct to Mr Jackson 's ear , 
 Mr Jackson be stretch senseless on the deck . Prince Aribert of Posen 
 stand over he with a revolver . it be probably the great surprise of 
 Mr Jackson 's whole life . 

 ' do not   be alarm , ' say the Prince to Nella , ' my be here be the 
 simple thing in the world , and I will explain it as soon as I have 
 finish with this fellow . ' 

 Nella could think of nothing to say , but she notice the revolver in the 
 Prince 's hand . 

 ' why , ' she remark , ' that be my revolver . ' 

 ' it be , ' he say , ' and I will explain that , too . ' 

 the man at the wheel give no heed whatever to the scene . 




 chapter Eleven the court pawnbroker 

 ' MR SAMPSON LEVI wish to see you , sir . ' 

 these word , speak by a servant to Theodore Racksole , arouse the 
 millionaire from a reverie which have be the reverse of pleasant . the 
 fact be , and it be necessary to insist on it , that Mr Racksole , 
 owner of the Grand Babylon h"tel , be by no mean in a state of 
 self - satisfaction . a mystery have attach itself to his h"tel , and with 
 all his acuman and knowledge of thing in general he be unable to solve 
 that mystery . he laugh at the fruitless effort of the police , but he 
 could not honestly say that his own effort have be less barren . the 
 public be talk , for , after all , the disappearance of poor Dimmock 's 
 body have get noise abroad in an indirect sort of way , and Theodore 
 Racksole do not like the idea of his impeccable h"tel be the subject 
 of sinister rumour . he wonder , grimly , what the public and the Sunday 
 newspaper would say if they be aware of all the other phenomenon , not 
 yet common property : of Miss Spencer 's disappearance , of Jules ' strange 
 visit , and of the non - arrival of Prince Eugen of Posen . Theodore 
 Racksole have worry his brain without result . he have conduct an 
 elaborate private investigation without result , and he have spend a 
 certain amount of money without result . the police say that they have 
 a clue ; but Racksole remark that it be always the business of the 
 police to have a clue , that they seldom have more than a clue , and that 
 a clue without some sequel to it be a pretty stupid business . the only 
 sure thing in the whole affair be that a cloud rest over his h"tel , 
 his beautiful new toy , the fine of its kind . the cloud be not 
 interfere with business , but , nevertheless , it be a cloud , and he 
 fiercely resent its presence ; perhaps it would be more correct to say 
 that he fiercely resent his inability to dissipate it . 

 ' Mr Sampson Levi wish to see you , sir , ' the servant repeat , have 
 receive no sign that his master have hear he . 

 ' so I hear , ' say Racksole . ' do he want to see I , personally ? ' 

 ' he ask for you , sir . ' 

 ' perhaps it be Rocco he want to see , about a menu or something of that 
 kind ? ' 

 ' I will inquire , sir , ' and the servant make a move to withdraw . 

 ' stop , ' Racksole command suddenly . ' Desire Mr Sampson Levi to step 
 this way . ' 

 the great stockbroker of the ' Kaffir Circus ' enter with a simple 
 unassuming air . he be a rather short , florid man , dress like a 
 typical hebraic financier , with too much watch - chain and too little 
 waistcoat . in his fat hand he hold a gold - head cane , and an absolutely 
 new silk hat - for it be Friday , and Mr Levi purchase a new hat every 
 Friday of his life , holiday time only except . he breathe heavily and 
 sniff through his nose a good deal , as though he have just perform 
 some Herculean physical labour . he glance at the american millionaire 
 with an expression in which a slight embarrassment might have be 
 detect , but at the same time his round , red face disclose a certain 
 frank admiration and good nature . 

 ' Mr Racksole , I believe - Mr Theodore Racksole . proud to meet you , sir . ' 

 such be the first word of Mr Sampson Levi . in form they be the 
 greeting of a third - rate chimney - sweep , but , strangely enough , Theodore 
 Racksole like their tone . he say to himself that here , precisely where 
 no one would have expect to find one , be an honest man . 

 ' good day , ' say Racksole briefly . ' to what do I owe the pleasure - ' 

 ' I expect your time be limited , ' answer Sampson Levi . ' anyhow , mine 
 be , and so I will come straight to the point , Mr Racksole . I be a plain 
 man . I do not   pretend to be a gentleman or any nonsense of that kind . 
 I be a stockbroker , that be what I be , and I do not   care who know it . the 
 other night I have a ball in this h"tel . it cost I a couple of thousand 
 and odd pound , and , by the way , I write out a cheque for your bill this 
 morning . I do not   like ball , but they be useful to I , and my little 
 wife like them , and so we give them . now , I have   nothing to say against the 
 h"tel management as regard that ball : it be very decently do , very 
 decently , but what I want to know be this - why do you have a private 
 detective among my guest ? ' 

 ' a private detective ? ' exclaim Racksole , somewhat surprised at this 
 charge . 

 ' yes , ' Mr Sampson Levi say firmly , fan himself in his chair , and 
 gaze at Theodore Racksole with the direct earnest expression of a man 
 have a grievance . ' yes ; a private detective . it be a small matter , I 
 know , and I dare say you think you have   get a right , as proprietor of the 
 show , to do what you like in that line ; but I have   just call to tell you 
 that I object . I have   call as a matter of principle . I be not angry ; it be 
 the principle of the thing . ' 

 ' my dear Mr Levi , ' say Racksole , ' I assure you that , have let the 
 Gold Room to a private individual for a private entertainment , I should 
 never dream of do what you suggest . ' 

 ' straight ? ' ask Mr Sampson Levi , use his own picturesque language . 

 ' straight , ' say Racksole smile . 

 ' there be a gent present at my ball that I do not   ask . I have   get 
 a wonderful memory for face , and I know . several fellow ask I 
 afterwards what he be do there . I be tell by someone that he be 
 one of your waiter , but I do not   believe that . I know nothing of the 
 Grand Babylon ; it be not quite my style of tavern , but I do not   think 
 you would send one of your own waiter to watch my guest - unless , of 
 course , you send he as a waiter ; and this chap do not   do any waiting , 
 though he do his share of drinking . ' 

 ' perhaps I can throw some light on this mystery , ' say Racksole . ' I 
 may tell you that I be already aware that man have attend your ball 
 uninvited . ' 

 ' how do you get to know ? ' 

 ' by pure chance , Mr Levi , and not by inquiry . that man be a former 
 waiter at this h"tel - the head waiter , in fact - Jules . no doubt you have 
 hear of he . ' 

 ' not I , ' say Mr Levi positively . 

 ' ah ! ' say Racksole , ' I be inform that everyone know Jules , but it 
 appear not . well , be that as it may , previously to the night of your 
 ball , I have dismiss Jules . I have order he never to enter the 
 Babylon again . 

 but on that evening I encounter he here - not in the Gold Room , but in 
 the h"tel itself . I ask he to explain his presence , and he state 
 he be your guest . that be all I know of the matter , Mr Levi , and I be 
 extremely sorry that you should have think I capable of the enormity 
 of place a private detective among your guest . ' 

 ' this be perfectly satisfactory to I , ' Mr Sampson Levi say , after a 
 pause . 

 ' I only want an explanation , and I have   get it . I be tell by some pal 
 of mine in the City I might rely on Mr Theodore Racksole go straight 
 to the point , and I be glad they be right . now as to that feller 
 Jules , I shall make my own inquiry as to he . might I ask you why you 
 dismiss he ? ' 

 ' I do not   know why I dismiss he . ' 

 ' you do not   know ? oh ! come now ! I be only ask because I think you 
 might be able to give I a hint why he turn up uninvited at my ball . 
 sorry if I be too inquisitive . ' 

 ' not at all , Mr Levi ; but I really do not   know . I only sort of feel that 
 he be a suspicious character . I dismiss he on instinct , as it be . 
 see ? ' 

 without answer this question Mr Levi ask another . ' if this Jules be 
 such a well - know person , ' he say , ' how could the feller hope to come 
 to my ball without be recognize ? ' 

 ' give it up , ' say Racksole promptly . 

 ' well , I will be move on , ' be Mr Sampson Levi 's next remark . ' good day , 
 and thank ye . I suppose you be not   do anything in Kaffirs ? ' 

 Mr Racksole smile a negative . 

 ' I think not , ' say Levi . well , I never touch american rail myself , 
 and so I reckon we sha'n't   come across each other . good day . ' 

 ' good day , ' say Racksole politely , follow Mr Sampson Levi to the 
 door . 

 with his hand on the handle of the door , Mr Levi stop , and , gaze at 
 Theodore Racksole with a shrewd , quizzical expression , remark : 

 ' strange thing be go on here lately , eh ? ' 

 the two man look very hard at each other for several second . 

 ' yes , ' Racksole assent . ' know anything about they ? ' 

 ' well - no , not exactly , ' say Mr Levi . ' but I have a fancy you and I 
 might be useful to each other ; I have a kind of fancy to that effect . ' 

 ' come back and sit down again , Mr Levi , ' Racksole say , attract by the 
 evident straightforwardness of the man 's tone . ' now , how can we be of 
 service to each other ? I flatter myself I be something of a judge of 
 character , especially financial character , and I tell you - if you will put 
 your card on the table , I will do ditto with mine . ' 

 ' agree , ' say Mr Sampson Levi . ' I will begin by explain my interest 
 in your h"tel . I have be expect to receive a summon from a certain 
 Prince Eugen of Posen to attend he here , and that summon have not 
 arrive . it appear that Prince Eugen have not   come to London at all . now , 
 I could have take my die davy that he would have be here yesterday 
 at the late . ' 

 ' why be you so sure ? ' 

 ' question for question , ' say Levi . ' let us clear the ground first , Mr 
 Racksole . why do you buy this h"tel ? that be a conundrum that be be 
 puzzle a lot of our fellow in the City for some day past . why do 
 you buy the Grand Babylon ? and what be the next move to be ? ' 

 ' there be no next move , ' answer Racksole candidly , ' and I will tell 
 you why I buy the h"tel ; there need be no secret about it . I buy 
 it because of a whim . ' and then Theodore Racksole give this little Jew , 
 whom he have begin to respect , a faithful account of the transaction 
 with Mr Felix Babylon . ' I suppose , ' he add , ' you find a difficulty in 
 appreciate my state of mind when I do the deal . ' 

 ' not a bit , ' say Mr Levi . ' I once buy an electric launch on the 
 Thames in a very similar way , and it turn out to be one of the most 
 satisfactory purchase I ever make . then it be a simple accident that you 
 own this h"tel at the present moment ? ' 

 ' a simple accident - all because of a beefsteak and a bottle of Bass . ' 

 ' um ! ' grunt Mr Sampson Levi , stroke his triple chin . 

 ' to return to Prince Eugen , ' Racksole resume . ' I be expect his 
 Highness here . the State apartment have be prepare for he . he be 
 due on the very afternoon that young Dimmock die . but he never come , 
 and I have not hear why he have fail to arrive ; nor have I see his 
 name in the paper . what his business be in London , I do not   know . ' 

 ' I will tell you , ' say Mr Sampson Levi , ' he be come to arrange a 
 loan . ' 

 ' a State loan ? ' 

 ' no - a private loan . ' 

 ' whom from ? ' 

 ' from I , Sampson Levi . you look surprised . if you have live in London a 
 little long , you would know that I be just the person the Prince would 
 come to . perhaps you be not   aware that down Throgmorton Street way I be 
 call " The Court Pawnbroker " , because I arrange loan for the minor , 
 second - class Princes of Europe . I be a stockbroker , but my real business 
 be finance some of the little Courts of Europe . now , I may tell you 
 that the Hereditary Prince of Posen particularly want a million , and 
 he want it by a certain date , and he know that if the affair be not 
 fix up by a certain time here he would not   be able to get it by that 
 certain date . that be why I be surprised he be not   in London . ' 

 ' what do he need a million for ? ' 

 ' debt , ' answer Sampson Levi laconically . 

 ' his own ? ' 

 ' certainly . ' 

 ' but he be not   thirty year of age ? ' 

 ' what of that ? he be not   the only European Prince who have run up a 
 million of debt in a dozen year . to a Prince the thing be as easy as 
 eat a sandwich . ' 

 ' and why have he take this sudden resolution to liquidate they ? ' 

 ' because the Emperor and the lady 's parent will not   let he marry till he 
 have do so ! and quite right , too ! he be get to show a clean sheet , or 
 the Princess Anna of Eckstein - Schwartzburg will never be Princess of 
 Posen . even now the Emperor have no idea how much Prince Eugen 's debt 
 amount to . if he have - ! ' 

 ' but would not the Emperor know of this propose loan ? ' 

 ' not necessarily at once . it could be so manage . Twig ? ' Mr Sampson 
 Levi laugh . ' I have   carry these little affair through before . after 
 marriage it might be allow to leak out . and you know the Princess 
 Anna 's fortune be pretty big ! now , Mr Racksole , ' he add , abruptly 
 change his tone , ' where do you suppose Prince Eugen have disappear 
 to ? because if he do not   turn up to - day he can not   have that million . 
 to - day be the last day . to - morrow the money will be appropriate , 
 elsewhere . of course , I be not alone in this business , and my friend 
 have something to say . ' 

 ' you ask I where I think Prince Eugen have disappear to ? ' 

 ' I do . ' 

 ' then you think it be a disappearance ? ' 

 Sampson Levi nod . ' put two and two together , ' he say , ' I do . the 
 Dimmock business be very peculiar - very peculiar , indeed . Dimmock be 
 a left - handed relation of the Posen family . Twig ? Scarcely anyone know 
 that . 

 he be make secretary and companion to Prince Aribert , just to keep he 
 in the domestic circle . his mother be an Irishwoman , whose misfortune 
 be that she be too beautiful . Twig ? '   Mr Sampson Levi always use this 
 extraordinary word when he be in a communicative mood .   ' my belief 
 be that Dimmock 's death have something to do with the disappearance of 
 Prince Eugen . 

 the only thing that pass I be this : why should anyone want to make 
 Prince Eugen disappear ? the poor little Prince have not   an enemy in the 
 world . if he be be " copped " , as they say , why have he be " copped " ? it 
 will not   do anyone any good . ' 

 ' will not   it ? ' repeat Racksole , with a sudden flash . 

 ' what do you mean ? ' ask Mr Levi . 

 ' I mean this : suppose some other european pauper Prince be anxious 
 to marry Princess Anna and her fortune , would not   that Prince have an 
 interest in stop this loan of yours to Prince Eugen ? would not   he 
 have an interest in cause Prince Eugen to disappear - at any rate , for 
 a time ? ' 

 Sampson Levi think hard for a few moment . 

 ' Mr Theodore Racksole , ' he say at length , ' I do believe you have hit on 
 something . ' 




 Chapter Twelve ROCCO and room no . 111 

 on the afternoon of the same day - the interview just describe have 
 occur in the morning - Racksole be visit by another idea , and 
 he say to himself that he ought to have think of it before . the 
 conversation with Mr Sampson Levi have continue for a considerable time , 
 and the two man have exchange various notion , and agree to meet again , 
 but the theory that Reginald Dimmock have probably be a traitor to his 
 family - a traitor whose repentance have cause his death - have not 
 be thoroughly discuss ; the talk have tend rather to Continental 
 politic , with a view to discover what princely family might have 
 an interest in the temporary disappearance of Prince Eugen . now , as 
 Racksole consider in detail the particular affair of Reginald Dimmock , 
 deceased , he be strike by one point especially , to wit : why have Dimmock 
 and Jules manoeuvre to turn Nella Racksole out of Room no . 111 on that 
 first night ? that they have so manoeuvre , that the break window - pane 
 be not a mere accident , Racksole feel perfectly sure . he have feel 
 perfectly sure all along ; but the significance of the fact have not 
 strike he . it be plain to he now that there must be something of 
 extraordinary and peculiar importance about Room no . 111 . after lunch he 
 wander quietly upstairs and look at Room No . 111 ; that be to say , he 
 look at the outside of it ; it happen to be occupy , but the guest 
 be leave that evening . the thought cross his mind that there could 
 be no object in gaze blankly at the outside of a room ; yet he gaze ; 
 then he wander quickly down again to the next floor , and in pass 
 along the corridor of that floor he stop , and with an involuntary 
 gesture stamp his foot . 

 ' Great Scott ! ' he say , ' I have   get hold of something - no . 111 be exactly 
 over the State apartment . ' 

 he go to the bureau , and issue instruction that no . 111 be not to 
 be re - let to anyone until further order . at the bureau they give he 
 Nella 's note , which run thus : 

 Dearest Papa , - I be go away for a day or two on the trail of a due . 

 if I be not back in three day , begin to inquire for I at Ostend . till 
 then leave I alone . - your sagacious daughter , NELL . 

 these few word , in Nella 's large scrawling hand , fill one side of the 
 paper . at the bottom be a p.t.o. he turn over , and read the sentence , 
 underline , ' P.S. - keep an eye on Rocco . ' 

 ' I wonder what the little creature be up to ? ' he murmur , as he tear 
 the letter into small fragment , and throw they into the waste - paper 
 basket . 

 then , without any delay , he take the lift down to the basement , with the 
 object of make a preliminary inspection of Rocco in his lair . he could 
 scarcely bring himself to believe that this suave and stately gentleman , 
 this enthusiast of gastronomy , be concern in the machination of 
 Jules and other rascal unknown . nevertheless , from habit , he obey 
 his daughter , give her credit for a certain amount of perspicuity and 
 cleverness . 

 the kitchen of the Grand Babylon h"tel be one of the wonder of 
 Europe . 

 only three year before the event now under narration Felix Babylon have 
 have they newly instal with every device and patent that the 
 ingenuity of two continent could supply . they cover nearly an acre of 
 superficial space . 

 they be wall and floor from end to end with tile and marble , 
 which enable they to be wash down every morning like the deck of a 
 man - of - war . 

 visitor be sometimes take to see the potato - par machine , the 
 patent plate - dryer , the Babylon - spit   a contrivance of Felix Babylon 's 
 own , the silver - grill , the system of connected stock - pot , and other 
 amazing phenomenon of the department . sometimes , if they be fortunate , 
 they might also see the artist who sculpture ice into form of man and 
 beast for table ornament , or the first napkin - folder in London , or the 
 man who daily invent fresh design for pastry and blancmange . 
 twelve chef pursue their labour in those kitchen , help by ninety 
 assistant chef , and a further army of unconsidered menial . over all 
 these be Rocco , supreme and unapproachable . half - way along the suite 
 of kitchen , Rocco have an apartment of his own , wherein he think out 
 those magnificent combination , those marvellous feat of succulence 
 and originality , which have give he his fame . visitor never catch a 
 glimpse of Rocco in the kitchen , though sometimes , on a special night , 
 he would stroll nonchalantly through the dining - room , like the great 
 man he be , to receive the compliment of the h"tel habitués - people of 
 insight who recognize his uniqueness . 

 Theodore Racksole 's sudden and unusual appearance in the kitchen cause 
 a little stir . he nod to some of the chef , but say nothing to 
 anyone , merely wander about amid the maze of copper utensil , and 
 white - cap worker . at length he see Rocco , surround by several 
 admire chef . Rocco be bend over a freshly - roasted partridge which 
 lie on a blue dish . he plunge a long fork into the back of the bird , 
 and raise it in the air with his left hand . in his right he hold a 
 long glitter carving - knife . he be give one of his world - famous 
 exhibition of carving . in four swift , unerring , delicate , perfect 
 stroke he cleanly sever the limb of the partridge . it be a 
 wonderful achievement - how wondrous none but the really skilful carver 
 can properly appreciate . the chef emit a hum of applause , and 
 Rocco , long , lean , and graceful , retire to his own apartment . Racksole 
 follow he . Rocco sit in a chair , one hand over his eye ; he have not 
 notice Theodore Racksole . 

 ' what be you do , M. Rocco ? ' the millionaire ask smile . ' ah ! ' 
 exclaim Rocco , start up with an apology . ' Pardon ! I be invent a 
 new mayonnaise , which I shall need for a certain menu next week . ' 

 ' do you invent these thing without material , then ? ' question 
 Racksole . 

 ' certainly . I do dem in my mind . I tink dem . why should I want 
 material ? I know all flavour . I tink , and tink , and tink , and it be 
 do . I write down . 

 I give the recipe to my good chef - dere you be . I need not even taste , 
 I know how it will taste . it be like compose music . De great composer 
 do not compose at de piano . ' 

 ' I see , ' say Racksole . 

 ' it be because I work like dat dat you pay I three thousand a year , ' 
 Rocco add gravely . 

 ' hear about Jules ? ' say Racksole abruptly . 

 ' Jules ? ' 

 ' yes . he be be arrest in Ostend , ' the millionaire continue , 
 lie cleverly at a venture . ' they say that he and several other be 
 implicate in a murder case - the murder of Reginald Dimmock . ' 

 ' truly ? ' drawled Rocco , scarcely hide a yawn . his indifference be so 
 superb , so gorgeous , that Racksole instantly divine that it be assume 
 for the occasion . 

 ' it seem that , after all , the police be good for something . but this 
 be the first time I ever know they to be worth their salt . there be to 
 be a thorough and systematic search of the h"tel to - morrow , ' Racksole 
 go on . ' I have mention it to you to warn you that so far as you be 
 concern the search be of course merely a matter of form . you will not 
 object to the detective look through your room ? ' 

 ' certainly not , ' and Rocco shrug his shoulder . 

 ' I shall ask you to say nothing about this to anyone , ' say Racksole . 
 ' the news of Jules ' arrest be quite private to myself . the paper know 
 nothing of it . you comprehend ? ' 

 Rocco smile in his grand manner , and Rocco 's master thereupon go 
 away . 

 Racksole be very well satisfied with the little conversation . it be 
 perhaps dangerous to tell a series of mere lie to a clever fellow like 
 Rocco , and Racksole wonder how he should ultimately explain they 
 to this great master - chef if his and Nella 's suspicion should be 
 unfounded , and nothing come of they . nevertheless , Rocco 's manner , 
 a strange elusive something in the man 's eye , have nearly convince 
 Racksole that he be somehow implicate in Jules ' scheme - and probably 
 in the death of Reginald Dimmock and the disappearance of Prince Eugen 
 of Posen . 

 that night , or rather about half - past one the next morning , when the 
 last noise of the h"tel 's life have die down , Racksole make his way 
 to Room 111 on the second floor . he lock the door on the inside , and 
 proceed to examine the place , square foot by square foot . every 
 now and then some creak or other sound startle he , and he listen 
 intently for a few second . the bedroom be furnish in the ordinary 
 splendid style of bedroom at the Grand Babylon h"tel , and in that 
 respect call for no remark . what most interested Racksole be the 
 flooring . he pull up the thick oriental carpet , and peer along every 
 plank , but could discover nothing unusual . 

 then he go to the dressing - room , and finally to the bathroom , both 
 of which open out of the main room . but in neither of these small 
 chamber be he any more successful than in the bedroom itself . finally 
 he come to the bath , which be enclose in a panel casing of polished 
 wood , after the manner of bath . some bath have a cupboard beneath the 
 tap , with a door at the side , but this one appear to have none . he 
 tap the panel , but not a single one of they give forth that ' curious 
 hollow sound ' which usually betoken a secret place . idly he turn the 
 cold - tap of the bath , and the water begin to rush in . he turn off the 
 cold - tap and turn on the waste - tap , and as he do so his knee , which 
 be press against the panelling , slip forward . the panelling have 
 give way , and he see that one large panel be hinge from the inside , 
 and catch with a hasp , also on the inside . a large space within the 
 casing of the end of the bath be thus reveal . before do anything 
 else , Racksole try to repeat the trick with the waste - tap , but he 
 fail ; it would not work again , nor could he in any way perceive that 
 there be any connection between the rod of the waste - tap and the hasp 
 of the panel . Racksole could not see into the cavity within the casing , 
 and the electric light be fix , and could not be move about like 
 a candle . he feel in his pocket , and fortunately discover a box of 
 match . aid by these , he look into the cavity , and see nothing ; 
 nothing except a rather large hole at the far end - some three foot from 
 the casing . with some difficulty he squeeze himself through the open 
 panel , and take a half - kneeling , half - sit posture within . there he 
 strike a match , and it be a most unfortunate thing that in strike , 
 the box be half open , he set fire to all the match , and be half 
 smother in the atrocious stink of phosphorus which result . one match 
 burn clear on the floor of the cavity , and , rub his eye , Racksole 
 pick it up , and look down the hole which he have previously descry . 
 it be a hole apparently bottomless , and about eighteen inch square . 
 the curious part about the hole be that a rope - ladder hang down it . 
 when he see that rope - ladder Racksole smile the smile of a happy man . 

 the match go out . 

 should he make a long journey , perhaps to some distant corner of the 
 h"tel , for a fresh box of match , or should he attempt to descend that 
 rope - ladder in the dark ? he decide on the latter course , and he be the 
 more strongly move thereto as he could now distinguish a faint , a very 
 faint tinge of light at the bottom of the hole . 

 with infinite care he compress himself into the well - like hole , and 
 descend the latter . at length he arrive on firm ground , perspiring , 
 but quite safe and quite excited . he see now that the tinge of light 
 come through a small hole in the wood . he put his eye to the wood , and 
 find that he have a fine view of the State bathroom , and through the 
 door of the State bathroom into the state bedroom . at the massive 
 marble - top washstand in the State bedroom a man be visible , bend 
 over some object which lie thereon . 

 the man be Rocco ! 




 Chapter Thirteen in the state bedroom 

 it be of course plain to Racksole that the peculiar passageway which he 
 have , at great personal inconvenience , discover between the bathroom 
 of no . 111 and the State bathroom on the floor below must have be 
 specially design by some person or person for the purpose of keep 
 a nefarious watch upon the occupant of the State suite of apartment . 
 it be a means of communication at once simple and ingenious . at that 
 moment he could not be sure of the precise method employ for it , but 
 he surmise that the casing of the waterpipe have be use as a ' well ' , 
 while space for the pipe themselves have be find in the thickness of 
 the ample brick wall of the Grand Babylon . the eye - hole , through which 
 he now have a view of the bedroom , be a very minute one , and probably 
 would scarcely be notice from the exterior . one thing he observe 
 concern it , namely , that it have be make for a man somewhat tall 
 than himself ; he be oblige to stand on tiptoe in order to get his eye 
 in the correct position . he remember that both Jules and Rocco be 
 distinctly above the average height ; also that they be both thin 
 man , and could have descend the well with comparative ease . Theodore 
 Racksole , though not stout , be a well - set man with large bone . 

 these thing flash through his mind as he gaze , spellbound , at the 
 mysterious movement of Rocco . the door between the bathroom and the 
 bedroom be wide open , and his own situation be such that his view 
 embrace a considerable portion of the bedroom , include the whole of 
 the immense and gorgeously - upholstered bedstead , but not include the 
 whole of the marble washstand . he could see only half of the washstand , 
 and at interval Rocco pass out of sight as his lithe hand move over 
 the object which lie on the marble . at first Theodore Racksole could 
 not decide what this object be , but after a time , as his eye grow 
 accustomed to the position and the light , he make it out . 

 it be the body of a man . or , rather , to be more exact , Racksole could 
 discern the leg of a man on that half of the table which be visible 
 to he . involuntarily he shudder , as the conviction force itself upon 
 he that Rocco have some unconscious human be helpless on that cold 
 marble surface . the leg never move . therefore , the hapless creature 
 be either asleep or under the influence of an anaesthetic - or   horrible 
 thought !   dead . 

 Racksole want to call out , to stop by some mean or other the dreadful 
 midnight activity which be proceed before his astonished eye ; but 
 fortunately he restrain himself . 

 on the washstand he could see certain strangely - shape utensil and 
 instrument which Rocco use from time to time . the work seem to 
 Racksole to continue for interminable hour , and then at last Rocco 
 cease , give a sign of satisfaction , whistle several bar from 
 ' Cavalleria Rusticana ' , and come into the bath - room , where he take off 
 his coat , and very quietly wash his hand . as he stand calmly and 
 leisurely wipe those long finger of his , he be less than four foot 
 from Racksole , and the coope - up millionaire tremble , hold his 
 breath , lest Rocco should detect his presence behind the woodwork . but 
 nothing happen , and Rocco return unsuspectingly to the bedroom . 
 Racksole see he place some sort of white flannel garment over the prone 
 form on the table , and then lift it bodily on to the great bed , where it 
 lie awfully still . the hide watcher be sure now that it be a 
 corpse upon which Rocco have be exercise his mysterious and sinister 
 function . 

 but whose corpse ? and what function ? could this be a West end h"tel , 
 Racksole 's own h"tel , in the very heart of London , the well - police city 
 in the world ? it seem incredible , impossible ; yet so it be . once more 
 he remember what Felix Babylon have say to he and realize the 
 truth of the saying anew . the proprietor of a vast and complicated 
 establishment like the Grand Babylon could never know a tithe of the 
 extraordinary and queer occurrence which happen daily under his 
 very nose ; the atmosphere of such a caravanserai must necessarily be 
 an atmosphere of mystery and problem apparently inexplicable . 
 nevertheless , Racksole think that Fate be carry thing with rather 
 a high hand when she permit his chef to spend the night hour over 
 a man 's corpse in his state bedroom , this sacred apartment which be 
 suppose to be occupy only by individual of Royal Blood . Racksole 
 would not have object to a certain amount of mystery , but he decidedly 
 think that there be a little too much mystery here for his taste . he 
 think that even Felix Babylon would have be surprise at this . 

 the electric chandelier in the centre of the ceiling be not light ; 
 only the two light on either side of the washstand be switch on , 
 and these do not sufficiently illuminate the feature of the man on 
 the bed to enable Racksole to see they clearly . in vain the millionaire 
 strain his eye ; he could only make out that the corpse be probably 
 that of a young man . just as he be wonder what would be the good 
 course of action to pursue , he see Rocco with a square - shape black box 
 in his hand . then the chef switch off the two electric light , and 
 the State bedroom be in darkness . in that swift darkness Racksole hear 
 Rocco spring on to the bed . another half - dozen moment of suspense , and 
 there be a blind flash of white , which endure for several second , 
 and show Rocco stand like an evil spirit over the corpse , the black 
 box in one hand and a burn piece of aluminium wire in the other . the 
 aluminium wire burn out , and darkness follow blacker than before . 

 Rocco have photograph the corpse by flashlight . 

 but the dazzle flare which have disclose the feature of the dead man 
 to the insensible lens of the camera have disclose they also to Theodore 
 Racksole . the dead man be Reginald Dimmock ! 

 Stung into action by this discovery , Racksole try to find the exit 
 from his place of concealment . he feel sure that there exist some way 
 out into the State bathroom , but he seek for it fruitlessly , grope 
 with both hand and foot . then he decide that he must ascend the 
 rope - ladder , make haste for the first - floor corridor , and intercept 
 Rocco when he leave the State apartment . it be a painful and difficult 
 business to ascend that thin and yield ladder in such a confined 
 space , but Racksole be manage it very nicely , and have nearly reach 
 the top , when , by some untoward freak of chance , the ladder break above 
 his weight , and he slip ignominiously down to the bottom of the 
 wooden tube . smother an excusable curse , Racksole crouch , baffle . 
 then he see that the force of his fall have somehow open a trap - door 
 at his foot . he squeeze through , push open another tiny door , and 
 in another second stand in the State bathroom . he be dishevel , 
 perspiring , rather bewildered ; but he be there . in the next second he 
 have resume absolute command of all his faculty . 

 strange to say , he have move so quietly that Rocco have apparently not 
 hear he . he step noiselessly to the door between the bathroom and 
 the bedroom , and stand there in silence . Rocco have switch on again the 
 light over the washstand and be busy with his utensil . 

 Racksole deliberately cough . 




 Chapter fourteen rocco answer some question 

 ROCCO turn round with the swiftness of a startled tiger , and give 
 Theodore Racksole one long pierce glance . 

 ' D - n ! ' say Rocco , with as pure an anglo - saxon accent and intonation as 
 Racksole himself could have accomplish . 

 the most extraordinary thing about the situation be that at this 
 juncture Theodore Racksole do not know what to say . he be so 
 dumbfound by the affair , and especially by Rocco 's absolute and 
 sublime calm , that both speech and thought fail he . 

 ' I give in , ' say Rocco . ' from the moment you enter this cursed h"tel 
 I be afraid of you . I tell Jules I be afraid of you . I know there 
 would be trouble with a man of your kidney , and I be right ; confound 
 it ! I tell you I give in . I know when I be beat . I have   get no revolver 
 and no weapon of any kind . I surrender . do what you like . ' 

 and with that Rocco sit down on a chair . it be magnificently do . only 
 a truly great man could have do it . Rocco actually keep his dignity . 

 for answer , Racksole walk slowly into the vast apartment , seize a 
 chair , and , drag it up to Rocco 's chair , sit down opposite to he . 
 thus they face each other , their knee almost touching , both in evening 
 dress . on Rocco 's right hand be the bed , with the corpse of Reginald 
 Dimmock . on Racksole 's right hand , and a little behind he , be the 
 marble washstand , still litter with Rocco 's implement . the electric 
 light shone on Rocco 's left cheek , leave the other side of his face in 
 shadow . Racksole tap he on the knee twice . 

 ' so you be another Englishman masquerade as a foreigner in my h"tel , ' 

 Racksole remark , by way of commence the interrogation . 

 ' I be not , ' answer Rocco quietly . ' I be a citizen of the United States . ' 

 ' the deuce you be ! ' Racksole exclaim . 

 ' yes , I be bear at West Orange , New Jersey , New York State . I call 
 myself an Italian because it be in Italy that I first make a name as a 
 chef - at Rome . it be well for a great chef like I to be a foreigner . 
 imagine a great chef name Elihu P. Rucker . you can not   imagine it . I 
 change my nationality for the same reason that my friend and colleague , 
 jule , otherwise Mr Jackson , change his . ' 

 ' so Jules be your friend and colleague , be he ? ' 

 ' he be , but from this moment he be no long . I begin to disapprove of 
 his method no less than a week ago , and my disapproval will now take 
 active form . ' 

 ' will it ? ' say Racksole . ' I calculate it just will not , Mr Elihu P. 
 Rucker , citizen of the United States . before you be very much old 
 you will be in the kind hand of the police , and your activity , in no 
 matter what direction , will come to an abrupt conclusion . ' 

 ' it be possible , ' sigh Rocco . 

 ' in the meantime , I will ask you one or two question for my own private 
 satisfaction . you have   acknowledge that the game be up , and you may as 
 well answer they with as much candour as you feel yourself capable of . 
 see ? ' 

 ' I see , ' reply Rocco calmly , ' but I guess I can not   answer all 
 question . 

 I will do what I can . ' 

 ' well , ' say Racksole , clear his throat , ' what be the scheme all 
 about ? tell I in a word . ' 

 ' not in a thousand word . it be not   my secret , you know . ' 

 ' why be poor little Dimmock poison ? ' the millionaire 's voice soften 
 as he look for an instant at the corpse of the unfortunate young man . 

 ' I do not   know , ' say Rocco . ' I do not   mind inform you that I object 
 to that part of the business . I be not   make aware of it till after it 
 be do , and then I tell you it get my dander up considerable . ' 

 ' you mean to say you do not   know why Dimmock be do to death ? ' 

 ' I mean to say I could not   see the sense of it . of course he - er - die , 
 because he sort of cry off the scheme , have previously take a share 
 of it . I do not   mind say that much , because you probably guess it 
 for yourself . but I solemnly state that I have a conscientious objection 
 to murder . ' 

 ' then it be murder ? ' 

 ' it be a kind of murder , ' Rocco admit . who do it ? ' 

 ' unfair question , ' say Rocco . 

 ' who else be in this precious scheme besides Jules and yourself ? ' 

 ' do not   know , on my honour . ' 

 ' well , then , tell I this . what have you be do to Dimmock 's body ? ' 

 ' how long be you in that bathroom ? ' Rocco parry with sublime 
 impudence . 

 ' do not   question I , Mr Rucker , ' say Theodore Racksole . ' I feel very 
 much inclined to break your back across my knee . therefore I advise you 
 not to irritate I . what have you be do to Dimmock 's body ? ' 

 ' I have   be embalm it . ' 

 ' em - balme it . ' 

 ' certainly ; Richardson 's system of arterial fluid injection , as improve 
 by myself . you be not   aware that I include the art of embalm among 
 my accomplishment . nevertheless , it be so . ' 

 ' but why ? ' ask Racksole , more mystified than ever . ' why should you 
 trouble to embalm the poor chap 's corpse ? ' 

 ' can not   you see ? do not   it strike you ? that corpse have to be take care 
 of . 

 it contain , or rather , it do contain , very serious evidence against 
 some person or person unknown to the police . it may be necessary to 
 move it about from place to place . a corpse can not   be hide for long ; a 
 corpse betray itself . one could not   throw it in the Thames , for it would 
 have be find inside twelve hour . one could not   bury it - it be not 
 safe . the only thing be to keep it handy and movable , ready for 
 emergency . I need not   inform you that , without embalm , you can not 
 keep a corpse handy and movable for more than four or five day . it be 
 the kind of thing that will not   keep . and so it be suggest that I should 
 embalm it , and I do . mind you , I still object to the murder , but I 
 could not   go back on a colleague , you understand . you do understand that , 
 do not   you ? well , here you be , and here it be , and that be all . ' 

 Rocco lean back in his chair as though he have say everything that 
 ought to be say . he close his eye to indicate that so far as he be 
 concern the conversation be also close . Theodore Racksole stand up . 

 ' I hope , ' say Rocco , suddenly open his eye , ' I hope you will call in 
 the police without any delay . it be get late , and I do not   like go 
 without my night 's rest . ' 

 ' where do you suppose you will get a night 's rest ? ' Racksole ask . 

 ' in the cell , of course . have not   I tell you I know when I be beat . I be 
 not so blind as not to be able to see that there be at any rate a prima 
 facie case against I . I expect I shall get off with a year or two 's 
 imprisonment as accessory after the fact - I think that be what they call 
 it . anyhow , I shall be in a position to prove that I be not implicate 
 in the murder of this unfortunate nincompoop . ' he point , with a 
 strange , scornful gesture of his elbow , to the bed . ' and now , shall we 
 go ? everyone be asleep , but there will be a policeman within call of the 
 watchman in the portico . I be at your service . let we go down together , 
 Mr Racksole . I give you my word to go quietly . ' 

 ' stay a moment , ' say Theodore Racksole curtly ; ' there be no hurry . it 
 will not   do you any harm to forego another hour 's sleep , especially as you 
 will have no work to do to - morrow . I have one or two more question to 
 put to you . ' 

 ' well ? ' Rocco murmur , with an air of tired resignation , as if to say , 
 ' what must be must be . ' 

 ' where have Dimmock 's corpse be during the last three or four day , 
 since he - die ? ' 

 ' oh ! ' answer Rocco , apparently surprised at the simplicity of the 
 question . ' it be be in my room , and one night it be on the roof ; once 
 it go out of the h"tel as luggage , but it come back the next day as a 
 case of Demerara sugar . I forget where else it have be , but it be be 
 keep perfectly safe and treat with every consideration . ' 

 ' and who contrive all these manoeuvre ? ' ask Racksole as calmly as he 
 could . 

 ' I do . that be to say , I invent they and I see that they be 
 carry out . you see , the suspicion of your police oblige I to be 
 particularly spry . ' 

 ' and who carry they out ? ' 

 ' ah ! that would be tell tale . but I do not   mind assure you that 
 my accomplice be innocent accomplice . it be absurdly easy for a man 
 like I to impose on underling - absurdly easy . ' 

 ' what do you intend to do with the corpse ultimately ? ' Racksole pursue 
 his inquiry with immovable countenance . 

 ' who know ? ' say Rocco , twist his beautiful moustache . ' that would 
 have depend on several thing - on your police , for instance . but 
 probably in the end we should have restore this mortal clay ' - again he 
 jerk his elbow - ' to the man 's sorrow relative . ' 

 ' do you know who the relative be ? ' 

 ' certainly . do not   you ? if you do not   I need only hint that Dimmock have a 
 Prince for his father . ' 

 ' it seem to I , ' say Racksole , with cold sarcasm , ' that you 
 behave rather clumsily in choose this bedroom as the scene of your 
 operation . ' 

 ' not at all , ' say Rocco . ' there be no other apartment so suitable in 
 the whole h"tel . who would have guess that anything be go on here ? 
 it be the very place for I . ' 

 ' I guess , ' say Racksole succinctly . 

 ' yes , you guess , Mr Racksole . but I have not count on you . you be 
 the only smart man in the business . you be an american citizen , and I 
 have not   reckon to have to deal with that class of person . ' 

 ' apparently I frighten you this afternoon ? ' 

 ' not in the least . ' 

 ' you be not afraid of a search ? ' 

 ' I know that no search be intend . I know that you be try to 
 frighten I . you must really credit I with a little sagacity and 
 insight , Mr Racksole . immediately you begin to talk to I in the kitchen 
 this afternoon I feel you be on the track . but I be not frightened . 
 I merely decide that there be no time to be lose - that I must act 
 quickly . I do act quickly , but , it seem , not quickly enough . I grant 
 that your rapidity exceed mine . let we go downstairs , I beg . ' 

 Rocco rise and move towards the door . with an instinctive action 
 Racksole rush forward and seize he by the shoulder . 

 ' no trick ! ' say Racksole . ' you be in my custody and do not   forget it . ' 

 Rocco turn on his employer a look of gentle , dignified scorn . ' have 
 I not inform you , ' he say , ' that I have the intention of go 
 quietly ? ' 

 Racksole feel almost ashamed for the moment . it flash across he that 
 a man can be great , even in crime . 

 ' what an ineffable fool you be , ' say Racksole , stop he at the 
 threshold , ' with your talent , your unique talent , to get yourself 
 mix up in an affair of this kind . you be ruin . and , by Jove ! you 
 be a great man in your own line . ' 

 ' Mr Racksole , ' say Rocco very quickly , ' that be the true word you 
 have speak this night . I be a great man in my own line . and I be an 
 ineffable fool . alas ! ' he bring his long arm to his side with a 
 thud . 

 ' why do you do it ? ' 

 ' I be fascinated - fascinated by Jules . he , too , be a great man . we have 
 great opportunity , here in the Grand Babylon . it be a great game . it 
 be worth the candle . the prize be enormous . you would admit these 
 thing if you know the fact . perhaps some day you will know they , for 
 you be a fairly clever person at get to the root of a matter . yes , 
 I be blind , hypnotize . ' 

 ' and now you be ruin . ' 

 ' not ruin , not ruin . afterwards , in a few year , I shall come up 
 again . 

 a man of genius like I be never ruin till he be dead . Genius be 
 always forgive . I shall be forgive . suppose I be send to prison . when 
 I emerge I shall be no gaol - bird . I shall be Rocco - the great Rocco . and 
 half the h"tel in Europe will invite I to join they . ' 

 ' let I tell you , as man to man , that you have achieve your own 
 degradation . there be no excuse . ' 

 ' I know it , ' say Rocco . ' let we go . ' 

 Racksole be distinctly and notably impress by this man - by this 
 master spirit to whom he be to have pay a salary at the rate of three 
 thousand pound a year . he even feel sorry for he . and so , side by 
 side , the captor and the capture , they pass into the vast deserted 
 corridor of the h"tel . 

 Rocco stop at the grating of the first lift . 

 ' it will be lock , ' say Racksole . ' we must use the stair to - night . ' 

 ' but I have a key . I always carry one , ' say Rocco , and he pull one 
 out of his pocket , and , unfasten the iron screen , push it open . 
 Racksole smile at his readiness and aplomb . 

 ' after you , ' say Rocco , bow in his fine manner , and Racksole 
 step into the lift . 

 with the swiftness of lighting Rocco push forward the iron screen , 
 which lock itself automatically . Theodore Racksole be hopelessly a 
 prisoner within the lift , while Rocco stand free in the corridor . 

 ' good - bye , Mr Racksole , ' he remark suavely , bow again , low 
 than before . ' good - bye : I hate to take a mean advantage of you in this 
 fashion , but really you must allow that you have be very simple . you 
 be a clever man , as I have already say , up to a certain point . it be 
 past that point that my own cleverness come in . again , good - bye . after 
 all , I shall have no rest to - night , but perhaps even that will be well 
 that sleep in a police cell . if you make a great noise you may wake 
 someone and ultimately get release from this lift . but I advise you to 
 compose yourself , and wait till morning . it will be more dignified . for 
 the third time , good - bye . ' 

 and with that Rocco , without hastening , walk down the corridor and so 
 out of sight . 

 Racksole say never a word . he be too disgusted with himself to speak . 
 he clench his fist , and put his tooth together , and hold his breath . 
 in the silence he could hear the dwindle sound of Rocco 's footstep on 
 the thick carpet . 

 it be the great blow of Racksole 's life . 

 the next morning the high - bear guest of the Grand Babylon be arouse 
 by a rumour that by some accident the millionaire proprietor of the 
 h"tel have remain all night lock up m the lift . it be also state 
 that Rocco have quarrel with his new master and incontinently leave the 
 place . a duchess say that Rocco 's departure would mean the ruin of the 
 h"tel , whereupon her husband advise she not to talk nonsense . 

 as for Racksole , he send a message for the detective in charge of the 
 Dimmock affair , and bravely tell he the happening of the previous 
 night . 

 the narration be a decided ordeal to a man of Racksole 's temperament . 

 ' a strange story ! ' comment Detective Marshall , and he could not avoid 
 a smile . ' the climax be unfortunate , but you have certainly get some 
 valuable fact . ' 

 Racksole say nothing . 

 ' I myself have a clue , ' add the detective . when your message arrive 
 I be just come up to see you . I want you to accompany I to a certain 
 spot not far from here . will you come , now , at once ? ' 

 ' with pleasure , ' say Racksole . 

 at that moment a page enter with a telegram . Racksole open it read : 

 ' please come instantly . Nella . H"tel Wellington , Ostend . ' 

 he look at his watch . 

 ' I can not   come , ' he say to the detective . I be go to ostend . ' 

 ' to ostend ? ' 

 ' yes , now . ' 

 ' but really , Mr Racksole , ' protest the detective . ' my business be 
 urgent . ' 

 ' so 's mine , ' say Racksole . 

 in ten minute he be on his way to Victoria Station . 




 chapter fifteen END of the yacht adventure 

 we must now return to Nella Racksole and Prince Aribert of Posen on 
 board the yacht without a name . the Prince 's first business be to make 
 jule , otherwise Mr Tom Jackson , perfectly secure by mean of several 
 piece of rope . although Mr Jackson have be stun into a complete 
 unconsciousness , and there be a contuse wound under his ear , no one 
 could say how soon he might not come to himself and get very violent . so 
 the Prince , have tie his arm and leg , make he fast to a stanchion . 

 ' I hope he will not   die , ' say Nella . ' he look very white . ' 

 ' the Mr Jacksons of this world , ' say Prince Aribert sententiously , 
 ' never die till they be hung . by the way , I wonder how it be that no 
 one have interfere with we . perhaps they be discreetly afraid of my 
 revolver - of your revolver , I mean . ' 

 both he and Nella glance up at the imperturbable steersman , who keep 
 the yacht 's head straight out to sea . by this time they be about a 
 couple of mile from the belgian shore . 

 address he in French , the Prince order the sailor to put the yacht 
 about , and make again for Ostend Harbour , but the fellow take no notice 
 whatever of the summon . the Prince raise the revolver , with the idea 
 of frighten the steersman , and then the man begin to talk rapidly 
 in a mixture of French and Flemish . he say that he have receive Jules ' 
 strict order not to interfere in any way , no matter what might happen 
 on the deck of the yacht . he be the captain of the yacht , and he have to 
 make for a certain english port , the name of which he could not 
 divulge : he be to keep the vessel at full steam ahead under any and 
 all circumstance . he seem to be a very big , a very strong , and a very 
 determined man , and the Prince be at a loss what course of action to 
 pursue . he ask several more question , but the only effect of they be 
 to render the man taciturn and ill - humour . 

 in vain Prince Aribert explain that Miss Nella Racksole , daughter of 
 millionaire Racksole , have be abduct by Mr Tom Jackson ; in vain he 
 flourish the revolver threateningly ; the surly but courageous captain 
 say merely that that have nothing to do with he ; he have instruction , 
 and he should carry they out . he sarcastically beg to remind his 
 interlocutor that he be the captain of the yacht . 

 ' it will not   do to shoot he , I suppose , ' say the Prince to Nella . ' I 
 might bore a hole into his leg , or something of that kind . ' 

 ' it be rather risky , and rather hard on the poor captain , with his 
 extraordinary sense of duty , ' say Nella . ' and , besides , the whole crew 
 might turn on we . no , we must think of something else . ' 

 ' I wonder where the crew be , ' say the Prince . 

 just then Mr Jackson , prone and bind on the deck , show sign of 
 recover from his swoon . his eye open , and he gaze vacantly 
 around . at length he catch sight of the Prince , who approach he with 
 the revolver well in view . 

 ' it be you , be it ? ' he murmur faintly . ' what be you do on board ? 
 who be tie I up like this ? ' 

 ' see here ! ' reply the Prince , ' I do not   want to have any argument , but 
 this yacht must return to Ostend at once , where you will be give up to 
 the authority . ' 

 ' really ! ' snarl Mr Tom Jackson . ' shall I ! ' then he call out in 
 French to the man at the wheel , ' hi André ! let these two be put off in 
 the dinghy . ' 

 it be a peculiar situation . certain of nothing but the possession of 
 Nella 's revolver , the Prince scarcely know whether to carry the argument 
 far , and with strong measure , or to accept the situation with as 
 much dignity as the circumstance would permit . 

 ' let we take the dinghy , ' say Nella ; ' we can row ashore in an hour . ' 

 he feel that she be right . to leave the yacht in such a manner seem 
 somewhat ignominious , and it certainly involve the escape of that 
 profound villain , Mr Thomas Jackson . but what else could be do ? the 
 Prince and Nella constitute one party on the vessel ; they know their 
 own strength , but they do not know the strength of their opponent . 
 they hold the hostile ringleader bind and captive , but this man have 
 prove himself capable of give order , and even to gag he would not 
 help they if the captain of the yacht persist in his obstinate course . 
 moreover , there be a distinct objection to promiscuous shooting ; the 
 Prince feel that ; there be no knowing how promiscuous shooting might 
 end . 

 ' we will take the dinghy , ' say the Prince quickly , to the captain . 

 a bell ring below , and a sailor and the Negro boy appear on deck . the 
 pulsation of the screw grow less rapid . the yacht stop . the dinghy 
 be lower . as the Prince and Nella prepare to descend into the little 
 cock - boat Mr Tom Jackson address Nella , all bind as he lay . 

 ' good - bye , ' he say , ' I shall see you again , never fear . ' . 

 in another moment they be in the dinghy , and the dinghy be adrift . 
 the yacht 's screw chume the water , and the beautiful vessel slip 
 away from they . as it recede a figure appear at the stem . it be Mr 
 Thomas Jackson . 

 he have be release by his minion . he hold a white handkerchief to 
 his ear , and offer a calm , enigmatic smile to the two forlorn but 
 victorious occupant of the dinghy . jule have be defeat for once 
 in his life ; or perhaps it would be more just to say that he have be 
 out - manoeuvre . man like Jules be incapable of be defeat . it be 
 characteristic of his luck that now , in the very hour when he have be 
 catch red - handed in a serious crime against society , he should be 
 effect a leisurely escape - an escape which leave no clue behind . 

 the sea be utterly calm and blue in the morning sun . the dinghy rock 
 itself lazily in the swell of the yacht 's departure . as the mist clear 
 away the outline of the shore become more distinct , and it appear as 
 if Ostend be distant scarcely a cable 's length . the white dome of the 
 great Kursaal glitter in the pale turquoise sky , and the smoke of 
 steamer in the harbour could be plainly distinguish . on the offing 
 be a crowd of brown - sail fishing lugger return with the night 's 
 catch . the many - hue bathing - van could be count on the distant beach . 
 everything seem perfectly normal . it be difficult for either Nella or 
 her companion to realize that anything extraordinary have happen within 
 the last hour . yet there be the yacht , not a mile off , to prove to they 
 that something very extraordinary have , in fact , happen . the yacht be 
 no vision , nor be that sinister watch figure at its stern a vision , 
 either . 

 ' I suppose Jules be too surprised and too feeble to inquire how I come 
 to be on board his yacht , ' say the Prince , take the oar . 

 ' oh ! how do you ? ' ask Nella , her face light up . ' really , I have 
 almost forget that part of the affair . ' 

 ' I must begin at the beginning and it will take some time , ' answer the 
 Prince . ' have we not well postpone the recital till we get ashore ? ' 

 ' I will row and you shall talk , ' say Nella . ' I want to know now . ' 

 he smile happily at she , but gently decline to yield up the oar . 

 ' be it not sufficient that I be here ? ' he say . 

 ' it be sufficient , yes , ' she reply , ' but I want to know . ' 

 with a long , easy stroke he be pull the dinghy shoreward . she sit 
 in the stern - sheet . 

 ' there be no rudder , ' he remark , ' so you must direct I . keep the 
 boat 's head on the lighthouse . the tide seem to be run in strongly ; 
 that will help we . the people on shore will think that we have only be 
 for a little early morning excursion . ' 

 ' will you kindly tell I how it come about that you be able to save my 
 life , Prince ? ' she say . 

 ' save your life , Miss Racksole ? I do not   save your life ; I merely 
 knock a man down . ' 

 ' you save my life , ' she repeat . ' that villain would have stop at 
 nothing . I see it in his eye . ' 

 ' then you be a brave woman , for you show no fear of death . ' his 
 admire gaze rest full on she . for a moment the oar cease to move . 

 she give a gesture of impatience . 

 ' it happen that I see you last night in your carriage , ' he say . ' the 
 fact be , I have not have the audacity to go to Berlin with my story . I 
 stop in Ostend to see whether I could do a little detective work on 
 my own account . 

 it be a piece of good luck that I see you . I follow the carriage as 
 quickly as I could , and I just catch a glimpse of you as you enter 
 that awful house . I know that Jules have something to do with that house . 
 I guess what you be do . I be afraid for you . fortunately I have 
 survey the house pretty thoroughly . there be an entrance to it at the 
 back , from a narrow lane . I make my way there . I get into the yard at 
 the back , and I stand under the window of the room where you have the 
 interview with Miss Spencer . I hear everything that be say . it be a 
 courageous enterprise on your part to follow Miss Spencer from the Grand 
 Babylon to ostend . well , I dare not force an entrance , lest I 
 might precipitate matter too suddenly , and involve both of we in a 
 difficulty . I merely keep watch . ah , Miss Racksole ! you be magnificent 
 with Miss Spencer ; as I say , I could hear every word , for the window be 
 slightly open . I feel that you need no assistance from I . and then 
 she cheat you with a trick , and the revolver come fly through the 
 window . I pick it up , I think it would probably be useful . there be 
 a silence . I do not guess at first that you have faint . I think that 
 you have escape . when I find out the truth it be too late for I to 
 intervene . there be two man , both desperate , besides Miss Spencer - ' 

 ' who be the other man ? ' ask Nella . 

 ' I do not know . it be dark . they drive away with you to the harbour . 
 again I follow . I see they carry you on board . before the yacht 
 weigh anchor I manage to climb unobserved into the dinghy . I lie down 
 full length in it , and no one suspect that I be there . I think you 
 know the rest . ' 

 ' be the yacht all ready for sea ? ' 

 ' the yacht be all ready for sea . the captain fellow be on the bridge , 
 and steam be up . ' 

 ' then they expect I ! how could that be ? ' 

 ' they expect some one . I do not think they expect you . ' 

 ' do the second man go on board ? ' 

 ' he help to carry you along the gangway , but he come back again to the 
 carriage . he be the driver . ' 

 ' and no one else see the business ? ' 

 ' the quay be desert . you see , the last steamer have arrive for the 
 night . ' 

 there be a brief silence , and then Nella ejaculate , under her breath . 

 ' truly , it be a wonderful world ! ' 

 and it be a wonderful world for they , though scarcely perhaps , in the 
 sense which Nella Racksole have intend . they have just emerge from a 
 highly disconcert experience . among other minor inconvenience , they 
 have have no breakfast . they be out in the sea in a tiny boat . neither 
 of they know what the day might bring forth . the man , at least , have the 
 most serious anxiety for the safety of his Royal nephew . and yet - and 
 yet - neither of they wish that that voyage of the little boat on the 
 summer tide should come to an end . each , perhaps unconsciously , have 
 a vague desire that it might last for ever , he lazily pull , she 
 direct his course at interval by a movement of her distractingly 
 pretty head . how be this condition of affair to be explain ? well , 
 they be both young ; they both have superb health , and all the ardour of 
 youth ; and - they be together . 

 the boat be very small indeed ; her face be scarcely a yard from his . 
 she , in his eye , surround by the glamour of beauty and vast wealth ; 
 he , in her eye , surround by the glamour of masculine intrepidity and 
 the brilliance of a throne . 

 but all voyage come to an end , either at the shore or at the bottom of 
 the sea , and at length the dinghy pass between the stone jetty of 
 the harbour . the Prince row to the near step , tie up the boat , 
 and they land . it be six o'clock in the morning , and a day of 
 gorgeous sunlight have open . few people be about at that early hour . 

 ' and now , what next ? ' say the Prince . ' I must take you to an h"tel . ' 

 ' I be in your hand , ' she acquiesce , with a smile which send the 
 blood race through his vein . he perceive now that she be tired and 
 overcome , suffer from a sudden and natural reaction . 

 at the H"tel Wellington the Prince tell the sleepy door - keeper that they 
 have come by the early train from bruge , and want breakfast at once . 
 it be absurdly early , but a common english sovereign will work wonder 
 in any belgian h"tel , and in a very brief time Nella and the Prince be 
 breakfast on the verandah of the h"tel upon chocolate that have be 
 specially and hastily brew for they . 

 ' I never taste such excellent chocolate , ' claim the Prince . 

 the statement be wildly untrue , for the H"tel Wellington be 
 not celebrate for its chocolate . nevertheless Nella reply 
 enthusiastically , ' nor I. ' 

 then there be a silence , and Nella , feel possibly that she have be 
 too ecstatic , remark in a very matter - of - fact tone : ' I must telegraph 
 to papa instantly . ' 

 thus it be that Theodore Racksole receive the telegram which draw he 
 away from Detective Marshall . 




 chapter Sixteen the woman with the red HAT 

 ' there be one thing , Prince , that we have just get to settle straight 
 off , ' say Theodore Racksole . 

 they be all three seat - Racksole , his daughter , and Prince 
 Aribert - round a dinner table in a private room at the H"tel Wellington . 
 Racksole have duly arrive by the afternoon boat , and have be meet on the 
 quay by the other two . they have din early , and Racksole have hear the 
 full story of the adventure by sea and land of Nella and the Prince . as 
 to his own adventure of the previous night he say very little , merely 
 explain , with as little detail as possible , that Dimmock 's body have 
 come to light . 

 ' what be that ? ' ask the Prince , in answer to Racksole 's remark . 

 ' we have get to settle whether we shall tell the police at once all that 
 have occur , or whether we shall proceed on our own responsibility . 
 there can be no doubt as to which course we ought to pursue . every 
 consideration of prudence point to the advisability of take the 
 police into our confidence , and leave the matter entirely in their 
 hand . ' 

 ' oh , Papa ! ' Nella burst out in her pouting , impulsive way . ' you surely 
 can not   think of such a thing . why , the fun have only just begin . ' 

 ' do you call last night fun ? ' question Racksole , gaze at she 
 solemnly . 

 ' yes , I do , ' she say promptly . ' now . ' 

 ' well , I do not , ' be the millionaire 's laconic response ; but perhaps he 
 be think of his own situation in the lift . 

 ' do you not think we might investigate a little far , ' say the 
 Prince judiciously , as he crack a walnut , ' just a little far - and 
 then , if we fail to accomplish anything , there would still be ample 
 opportunity to consult the police ? ' 

 ' how do you suggest we should begin ? ' ask Racksole . 

 ' well , there be the house which Miss Racksole so intrepidly enter last 
 evening ' - he give she the homage of an admiring glance ; ' you and I , Mr 
 Racksole , might examine that abode in detail . ' 

 ' to - night ? ' 

 ' certainly . we might do something . ' 

 ' we might do too much . ' 

 ' for example ? ' 

 ' we might shoot someone , or get ourselves mistaken for burglar . if we 
 outsteppe the law , it would be no excuse for we that we have be act 
 in a good cause . ' 

 ' true , ' say the Prince . ' nevertheless - ' he stop . 

 ' nevertheless you have a distaste for bring the police into the 
 business . 

 you want the hunt all to yourself . you be on fire with the ardour of 
 the chase . be not that it ? accept the advice of an old man , Prince , 
 and sleep on this affair . I have little fancy for nocturnal escapade 
 two night together . as for you , Nella , off with you to bed . the Prince 
 and I will have a yarn over such fluid as can be obtain in this 
 hole . ' 

 ' papa , ' she say , ' you be perfectly horrid to - night . ' 

 ' perhaps I be , ' he say . ' decidedly I be very cross with you for come 
 over here all alone . it be monstrous . if I do not   happen to be the most 
 foolish of parent - there ! good - night . it be nine o'clock . the Prince , I 
 be sure , will excuse you . ' 

 if Nella have not really be very tired Prince Aribert might have 
 be the witness of a good - natured but stubborn conflict between the 
 millionaire and his spirited offspring . as it be , Nella depart with 
 surprising docility , and the two man be leave alone . 

 ' now , ' say Racksole suddenly , change his tone , ' I fancy that after 
 all I be your man for a little amateur investigation to - night . and , if I 
 must speak the exact truth , I think that to sleep on this affair would 
 be about the very bad thing we could do . but I be anxious to keep 
 Nella out of harm 's way at any rate till to - morrow . she be a very 
 difficult creature to manage , Prince , and I may warn you , ' he laugh 
 grimly , ' that if we do succeed in do anything to - night we shall catch 
 it from her ladyship in the morning . be you ready to take that risk ? ' 

 ' I be , ' the Prince smile . ' but Miss Racksole be a young lady of quite 
 remarkable nerve . ' 

 ' she be , ' say Racksole drily . ' I wish sometimes she have less . ' 

 ' I have the high admiration for Miss Racksole , ' say the Prince , and 
 he look Miss Racksole 's father full in the face . 

 ' you honour we , Prince , ' Racksole observe . ' let we come to business . Am 
 I right in assume that you have a reason for keep the police out of 
 this business , if it can possibly be do ? ' 

 ' yes , ' say the Prince , and his brow cloud . ' I be very much afraid 
 that my poor nephew have involve himself in some scrape that he would 
 wish not to be divulge . ' 

 ' then you do not believe that he be the victim of foul play ? ' 

 ' I do not . ' 

 ' and the reason , if I may ask it ? ' 

 ' Mr Racksole , we speak in confidence - be it not so ? some year ago my 
 foolish nephew have an affair - an affair with a feminine star of the 
 Berlin stage . for anything I know , the lady may have be the very 
 pattern of her sex , but where a reign Prince be concern scandal 
 can not be avoid in such a matter . I have think that the affair 
 be quite at an end , since my nephew 's betrothal to Princess Anna of 
 Eckstein - Schwartzburg be shortly to be announce . but yesterday I see 
 the lady to whom I have refer drive on the Digue . the coincidence 
 of her presence here with my nephew 's disappearance be too extraordinary 
 to be disregard . ' 

 ' but how do this theory square with the murder of Reginald Dimmock ? ' 

 ' it do not square with it . my idea be that the murder of poor Dimmock 
 and the disappearance of my nephew be entirely unconnected - unless , 
 indeed , this Berlin actress be play into the hand of the murderer . 
 I have not think of that . ' 

 ' then what do you propose to do to - night ? ' 

 ' I propose to enter the house which Miss Racksole enter last night and 
 to find out something definite . ' 

 ' I concur , ' say Racksole . ' I shall heartily enjoy it . but let I 
 tell you , Prince , and pardon I for speak bluntly , your surmise be 
 incorrect . I would wager a hundred thousand dollar that Prince Eugen 
 have be kidnap . ' 

 ' what ground have you for be so sure ? ' 

 ' ah ! say Racksole , ' that be a long story . let I begin by ask you 
 this . 

 be you aware that your nephew , Prince Eugen , owe a million of money ? ' 

 ' a million of money ! ' cry Prince Aribert astonish . ' it be 
 impossible ! ' 

 ' nevertheless , he do , ' say Racksole calmly . then he tell he all he 
 have learn from Mr Sampson Levi . 

 ' what have you to say to that ? ' Racksole end . Prince Aribert make no 
 reply . 

 ' what have you to say to that ? ' Racksole insist . 

 ' merely that eugen be ruin , even if he be alive . ' 

 ' not at all , ' Racksole return with cheerfulness . ' not at all . we shall 
 see about that . the special thing that I want to know just now from you 
 be this : 

 have any previous application ever be make for the hand of the Princess 
 Anna ? ' 

 ' yes . last year . the King of Bosnia sue for it , but his proposal be 
 decline . ' 

 ' why ? ' 

 ' because my nephew be consider to be a more suitable match for she . ' 

 ' not because the personal character of his Majesty of Bosnia be scarcely 
 of the bright ? ' 

 ' no . unfortunately it be usually impossible to consider question of 
 personal character when a royal match be concern . ' 

 ' then , if for any reason the marriage of Princess Anna with your nephew 
 be frustrate , the King of Bosnia would have a fair chance in that 
 quarter ? ' 

 ' he would . the political aspect of thing would be perfectly 
 satisfactory . ' 

 ' thank ! ' say Racksole . ' I will wager another hundred thousand dollar 
 that someone in Bosnia - I do not   accuse the King himself - be at the 
 bottom of this business . the method of balkan politician have always 
 be half - oriental . let we go . ' 

 ' where ? ' 

 ' to this precious house of Nella 's adventure . ' 

 ' but surely it be too early ? ' 

 ' so it be , ' say Racksole , ' and we shall want a few thing , too . 
 for instance , a dark lantern . I think I will go out and forage for a 
 lantern . ' 

 ' and a revolver ? ' suggest Prince Aribert . 

 ' do it mean revolver ? ' the millionaire laugh . ' it may come to 
 that . ' ' here you be , then , my friend , ' say Racksole , and he pull one 
 out of his hip pocket . ' and your ? ' 

 ' I , ' say the Prince , ' I have your daughter 's . ' 

 ' the deuce you have ! ' murmur Racksole to himself . 

 it be then half past nine . they decide that it would be impolitic to 
 begin their operation till after midnight . there be three hour to 
 spare . 

 ' let we go and see the gambling , ' Racksole suggest . ' we might 
 encounter the Berlin lady . ' 

 the suggestion , in the first instance , be not make seriously , but it 
 appear to both man that they might do bad than spend the intervene 
 time in the gorgeous saloon of the Kursaal , where , in the season , 
 as much money be win and lose as at Monte Carlo . it be strike ten 
 o'clock as they enter the room . there be a large company present - a 
 company which include some of the most notorious person in Europe . in 
 that multifarious assemblage all be equal . the electric light shine 
 coldly and impartially on the just and on the unjust , on the fool and 
 the knave , on the european and the Asiatic . as usual , woman monopolize 
 the good place at the table . 

 the scene be familiar enough to Prince Aribert , who have witness it 
 frequently at Monaco , but Theodore Racksole have never before enter 
 any european gaming palace ; he have only the haziest idea of the rule of 
 play , and he be at once interested . for some time they watch the play 
 at the table which happen to be near to they . Racksole never move 
 his lip . 

 with his eye glue on the table , and ear open for every remark , of the 
 player and the croupier , he take his first lesson in roulette . he see 
 a mere youth win fifteen thousand franc , which be steal in the most 
 bareface mariner by a rouge girl scarcely old than the youth ; he see 
 two old gamester stake their coin , and lose , and walk quietly out of 
 the place ; he see the bank win fifty thousand franc at a single turn . 

 ' this be rather good fun , ' he say at length , ' but the stake be 
 too small to make it really exciting . I will try my luck , just for the 
 experience . I be bind to win . ' 

 ' why ? ' ask the Prince . 

 ' because I always do , in game of chance , ' Racksole answer with gay 
 confidence . ' it be my fate . then to - night , you must remember , I shall be 
 a beginner , and you know the tyro 's luck . ' 

 in ten minute the croupier of that table be oblige to suspend 
 operation pende the arrival of a further supply of coin . 

 ' what do I tell you ? ' say Racksole , lead the way to another table 
 far up the room . a hundred curious glance go after he . one old 
 woman , whose gay attire suggest a false youthfulness , beg he in 
 French to stake a five - franc piece for she . she offer he the coin . he 
 take it , and give she a hundred - franc note in exchange . she clutch the 
 crisp rustling paper , and with hysterical haste scuttle back to her own 
 table . 

 at the second table there be a considerable air of excitement . in the 
 forefront of the player be a woman in a low - cut evening dress of 
 black silk and a large red picture hat . her age appear to be about 
 twenty - eight ; she have dark eye , full lip , and a distinctly jewish 
 nose . she be handsome , but her beauty be of that forbidding , sinister 
 order which be often call Junoesque . this woman be the centre of 
 attraction . People say to each other that she have win a hundred and 
 sixty thousand franc that day at the table . 

 ' you be right , ' Prince Aribert whisper to Theodore Racksole ; ' that 
 be the Berlin lady . ' 

 ' the deuce she be ! have she see you ? will she know you ? ' 

 ' she would probably know I , but she have not   look up yet . ' 

 ' keep behind she , then . I propose to find she a little occupation . ' by 
 dint of a carefully - exercise diplomacy , Racksole manoeuvre himself 
 into a seat opposite to the lady in the red hat . the fame of his success 
 at the other table have follow he , and people regard he as a 
 serious and formidable player . in the first turn the lady put a thousand 
 franc on double zero ; Racksole put a hundred on number nineteen and a 
 thousand on the odd number . 

 nineteen win . Racksole receive four thousand four hundred franc . nine 
 time in succession Racksole back number nineteen and the odd number ; 
 nine time the lady back double zero . nine time Racksole win and the 
 lady lose . the other player , perceive that the affair have resolve 
 itself into a duel , stand back for the most part and watch those two . 
 Prince Aribert never stir from his position behind the great red 
 hat . the game continue . Racksole lose trifle from time to time , but 
 ninety - nine hundredth of the luck be with he . as an english spectator 
 at the table remark , ' he could not   do wrong . ' when midnight strike the 
 lady in the red hat be reduce to a thousand franc . then she fall into 
 a win vein for half an hour , but at one o'clock her resource 
 be exhaust . of the hundred and sixty thousand franc which she be 
 repute to have have early in the evening , Racksole hold about ninety 
 thousand , and the bank have the rest . 

 it be a calamity for the Juno of the red hat . she jump up , stamp 
 her foot , and hurry from the room . at a discreet distance Racksole and 
 the Prince pursue she . 

 ' it might be well to ascertain her movement , ' say Racksole . 

 outside , in the glare of the great arc light , and within sound of the 
 surf which beat always at the very foot of the Kursaal , the Juno of 
 the red hat summon a fiacre and drive rapidly away . Racksole and 
 the Prince take an open carriage and start in pursuit . they have not , 
 however , travel more than half a mile when Prince Aribert stop the 
 carriage , and , bid Racksole get out , pay the driver and dismiss 
 he . 

 ' I feel sure I know where she be go , ' he explain , ' and it will be 
 well for we to follow on foot . ' 

 ' you mean she be make for the scene of last night 's affair ? ' say 
 Racksole . 

 ' exactly . we shall - what you call , kill two bird with one stone . ' 

 Prince Aribert 's guess be correct . the lady 's carriage stop in 
 front of the house where Nella Racksole and Miss Spencer have have their 
 interview on the previous evening , and the lady vanish into the 
 building just as the two man appear at the end of the street . instead 
 of proceed along that street , the Prince lead Racksole to the lane 
 which give on to the back of the house , and he count the house as 
 they go up the lane . in a few minute they have burglariously climb 
 over a wall , and creep , with infinite caution , up a long , narrow piece 
 of ground - half garden , half pave yard , till they crouch under a 
 window - a window which be shield by curtain , but which have be leave 
 open a little . 

 ' listen , ' say the Prince in his light whisper , ' they be talk . ' 

 ' who ? ' 

 ' the Berlin lady and Miss Spencer . I be sure it be Miss Spencer 's voice . ' 

 Racksole boldly push the french window a little wider open , and put 
 his ear to the aperture , through which come a beam of yellow light . 

 ' take my place , ' he whisper to the Prince , ' they be talk german . 
 you will understand well . ' 

 silently they exchange place under the window , and the Prince listen 
 intently . 

 ' then you refuse ? ' Miss Spencer 's visitor be say . 

 there be no answer from Miss Spencer . 

 ' not even a thousand franc ? I tell you I have   lose the whole twenty - five 
 thousand . ' 

 again no answer . 

 ' then I will tell the whole story , ' the lady go on , in an angry rush of 
 word . ' I do what I promise to do . I entice he here , and you have   get 
 he safe in your vile cellar , poor little man , and you will not   give I a 
 paltry thousand franc . ' 

 ' you have already have your price . ' the word be Miss Spencer 's . they 
 fall cold and calm on the night air . 

 ' I want another thousand . ' 

 ' I have not   it . ' 

 ' then we will see . ' 

 Prince Aribert hear a rustle of fly skirt ; then another movement - a 
 door bang , and the beam of light through the aperture of the window 
 suddenly disappear . he push the window wide open . the room be in 
 darkness , and apparently empty . 

 ' now for that lantern of your , ' he say eagerly to Theodore Racksole , 
 after he have translate to he the conversation of the two woman , 
 Racksole produce the dark lantern from the capacious pocket of his dust 
 coat , and light it . the ray flash about the ground . 

 ' what be it ? ' exclaim Prince Aribert with a swift cry , point to the 
 ground . the lantern throw its light on a perpendicular grating at their 
 foot , through which could be discern a cellar . they both kneel down , 
 and peer into the subterranean chamber . on a broken chair a young man 
 sit listlessly with closed eye , his head lean heavily forward on his 
 chest . 

 in the feeble light of the lantern he have the livid and ghastly 
 appearance of a corpse . 

 ' who can it be ? ' say Racksole . 

 ' it be Eugen , ' be the Prince 's low answer . 




 Chapter Seventeen the RELEASE of PRINCE EUGEN 

 ' eugen , ' Prince Aribert call softly . at the sound of his own name 
 the young man in the cellar feebly raise his head and star up at 
 the grating which separate he from his two rescuer . but his feature 
 show no recognition . he gaze in an aimless , vague , silly manner for a 
 few second , his eye blink under the glare of the lantern , and then 
 his head slowly droop again on to his chest . he be dress in a 
 dark tweed travelling suit , and Racksole observe that one sleeve - the 
 left - be tear across the upper part of the cuff , and that there be 
 stain of dirt on the left shoulder . a soiled linen collar , which have 
 lose all its starch and be half unbuttoned , partially encircle the 
 captive 's neck ; his brown boot be unlaced ; a cap , a handkerchief , 
 a portion of a watch - chain , and a few gold coin lie on the floor . 
 Racksole flash the lantern into the corner of the cellar , but 
 he could discover no other furniture except the chair on which the 
 Hereditary Prince of Posen sit and a small deal table on which be a 
 plate and a cup . 

 ' eugen , ' cry Prince Aribert once more , but this time his forlorn 
 nephew make no response whatever , and then Aribert add in a low voice 
 to Racksole : ' perhaps he can not see we clearly . ' 

 ' but he must surely recognize your voice , ' say Racksole , in a hard , 
 gloomy tone . there be a pause , and the two man above ground look at 
 each other hesitatingly . each know that they must enter that cellar and 
 get Prince Eugen out of it , and each be somehow afraid to take the next 
 step . 

 ' thank God he be not dead ! ' say Aribert . 

 ' he may be bad than dead ! ' Racksole reply . 

 ' bad than - what do you mean ? ' 

 ' I mean - he may be mad . ' 

 ' come , ' Aribert almost shout , with a sudden access of energy - a wild 
 impulse for action . and , snatch the lantern from Racksole , he rush 
 into the dark room where they have hear the conversation of Miss Spencer 
 and the lady in the red hat . for a moment Racksole do not stir from the 
 threshold of the window . ' come , ' Prince Aribert repeat , and there be 
 an imperious command in his utterance . ' what be you afraid of ? ' 

 ' I do not   know , ' say Racksole , feel stupid and queer ; ' I do not   know . ' 

 then he march heavily after Prince Aribert into the room . on the 
 mantelpiece be a couple of candle which have be blow out , and in 
 a mechanical , unthinke way , Racksole light they , and the two man 
 glance round the room . it present no peculiar feature : it be just 
 an ordinary room , rather small , rather mean , rather shabby , with an ugly 
 wallpaper and ugly picture in ugly frame . throw over a chair be a 
 man 's evening - dress jacket . the door be close . Prince Aribert turn 
 the knob , but he could not open it . 

 ' it be lock , ' he say . ' evidently they know we be here . ' 

 ' nonsense , ' say Racksole brusquely ; ' how can they know ? ' and , take 
 hold of the knob , he violently shake the door , and it open . ' I tell 
 you it be not   lock , ' he add , and this small success of open the 
 door seem to steady the man . it be a curious psychological effect , 
 this terrorizing   for it amount to that   of two courageous full - grow 
 man by the mere apparition of a helpless creature in a cellar . gradually 
 they both recover from it . the next moment they be out in the 
 passage which lead to the front door of the house . the front door stand 
 open . they look into the street , up and down , but there be not a soul 
 in sight . the street , light by three gas - lamp only , seem strangely 
 sinister and mysterious . 

 ' she have go , that be clear , ' say Racksole , mean the woman with the 
 red hat . 

 ' and Miss Spencer after she , do you think ? ' question Aribert . 

 ' no . she would stay . she would never dare to leave . let we find the 
 cellar step . ' 

 the cellar step be happily not difficult to discover , for in move 
 a pace backwards Prince Aribert have a narrow escape of precipitate 
 himself to the bottom of they . the lantern show that they be build 
 on a curve . 

 Silently Racksole resume possession of the lantern and go first , the 
 Prince close behind he . at the foot be a short passage , and in this 
 passage crouch the figure of a woman . her eye throw back the ray 
 of the lantern , shin like a cat 's at midnight . then , as the man go 
 nearer , they see that it be Miss Spencer who bar their way . she 
 seem half to kneel on the stone floor , and in one hand she hold what 
 at first appear to be a dagger , but which prove to be nothing more 
 romantic than a rather long bread - knife . 

 ' I hear you , I hear you , ' she exclaim . ' get back ; you must not   come 
 here . ' 

 there be a desperate and dangerous look on her face , and her form shake 
 with scarcely control passionate energy . 

 ' now see here , Miss Spencer , ' Racksole say calmly , ' I guess we have   have 
 enough of this fandango . you would well get up and clear out , or we will 
 just have to drag you off . ' 

 he go calmly up to she , the lantern in his hand . without another word 
 she strike the knife into his arm , and the lantern fall extinguish . 
 Racksole give a cry , rather of angry surprise than of pain , and 
 retreat a few step . in the darkness they could still perceive the 
 glint of her eye . 

 ' I tell you you must not   come here , ' the woman say . ' now get back . ' 

 Racksole positively laugh . it be a queer laugh , but he laugh , 
 and he could not help it . the idea of this woman , this bureau clerk , 
 stop his progress and that of Prince Aribert by mean of a 
 bread - knife arouse his sense of humour . he strike a match , relighte 
 the candle , and face Miss Spencer once more . 

 ' I will do it again , ' she say , with a note of hard resolve . 

 ' oh , no , you will not , my girl , ' say Racksole ; and he pull out his 
 revolver , cock it , raise his hand . 

 ' put down that plaything of your , ' he say firmly . 

 ' no , ' she answer . 

 ' I shall shoot . ' 

 she press her lip together . 

 ' I shall shoot , ' he repeat . ' one - two - three . ' 

 Bang , bang ! he have fire twice , purposely miss she . Miss Spencer 
 never blench . Racksole be tremendously surprised - and he would 
 have be a thousandfold more surprised could he have contrast she 
 behaviour now with her abject terror on the previous evening when Nella 
 have threaten she . 

 ' you have   get a bit of pluck , ' he say , ' but it will not   help you . why will not 
 you let we pass ? ' 

 as a matter of fact , pluck be just what she have not , really ; she have 
 merely subordinate one terror to another . she be desperately afraid of 
 Racksole 's revolver , but she be much more afraid of something else . 

 ' why will not   you let we pass ? ' 

 ' I dare not , ' she say , with a plaintive tremor ; ' Tom put I in charge . ' 

 that be all . the man could see tear run down her poor wrinkle 
 face . 

 Theodore Racksole begin to take off his light overcoat . 

 ' I see I must take my coat off to you , ' he say , and he almost smile . 
 then , with a quick movement , he throw the coat over Miss Spencer 's head 
 and fly at she , seize both her arm , while Prince Aribert assist . 

 her struggle cease - she be beat . 

 ' that be all right , ' say Racksole : ' I could never have use that 
 revolver - to mean business with it , of course . ' 

 they carry she , unresisting , upstairs and on to the upper floor , where 
 they lock she in a bedroom . she lie in the bed as if exhaust . 

 ' now for my poor eugen , ' say Prince Aribert . 

 ' do not   you think we would well search the house first ? ' Racksole 
 suggest ; ' it will be safe to know just how we stand . we can not   afford 
 any ambush or thing of that kind , you know . ' 

 the Prince agree , and they search the house from top to bottom , but 
 find no one . then , have lock the front door and the french window 
 of the sitting - room , they proceed again to the cellar . 

 here a new obstacle confront they . the cellar door be , of course , 
 lock ; there be no sign of a key , and it appear to be a heavy door . 
 they be compel to return to the bedroom where Miss Spencer be 
 incarcerate , in order to demand the key of the cellar from she . she 
 still lie without movement on the bed . 

 ' Tom 's get it , ' she reply , faintly , to their question : ' Tom 's get it , 
 I swear to you . he take it for safety . ' 

 ' then how do you feed your prisoner ? ' Racksole ask sharply . 

 ' through the grating , ' she answer . 

 both man shudder . they feel she be speak the truth . for the third 
 time they go to the cellar door . in vain Racksole thrust himself 
 against it ; he could do no more than shake it . 

 ' let us try both together , ' say Prince Aribert . ' now ! ' there be a 
 crack . 

 ' again , ' say Prince Aribert . there be another crack , and then the 
 upper hinge give way . the rest be easy . over the wreck of the door they 
 enter Prince Eugen 's prison . 

 the captive still sit on his chair . the terrific noise and bustle of 
 break down the door seem not to have arouse he from his lethargy , 
 but when Prince Aribert speak to he in German he look at his uncle . 

 ' will you not come with we , eugen ? ' say Prince Aribert ; ' you need not 
 stay here any long , you know . ' 

 ' leave I alone , ' be the strange reply ; ' leave I alone . what do you 
 want ? ' 

 ' we be here to get you out of this scrape , ' say Aribert gently . 
 Racksole stand aside . 

 ' who be that fellow ? ' say Eugen sharply . 

 ' that be my friend Mr Racksole , an Englishman - or rather , I should say , 
 an American - to whom we owe a great deal . come and have supper , Eugen . ' 

 ' I will not , ' answer Eugen doggedly . ' I be wait here for she . you 
 do not   think anyone have keep I here , do you , against my will ? I tell 
 you I be wait for she . she say she would come . ' 

 ' who be she ? ' Aribert ask , humour he . 

 ' she ! why , you know ! I forget , of course , you do not   know . you must not 
 ask . 

 do not   pry , Uncle Aribert . she be wear a red hat . ' 

 ' I will take you to she , my dear eugen . ' Prince Aribert put his hand on 
 the other 's shoulder , but Eugen shake he off violently , stand up , and 
 then sit down again . 

 Aribert look at Racksole , and they both look at Prince Eugen . the 
 latter 's face be flushed , and Racksole observe that the left pupil be 
 more dilated than the right . the man start , mutter odd , fragmentary 
 scrap of sentence , now grumble , now whine . 

 ' his mind be unhinged , ' Racksole whisper in English . 

 ' hush ! ' say Prince Aribert . ' he understand English . ' but Prince Eugen 
 take no notice of the brief colloquy . 

 ' we have well get he upstairs , somehow , ' say Racksole . 

 ' yes , ' Aribert assent . ' eugen , the lady with the red hat , the lady you 
 be wait for , be upstairs . she have send we down to ask you to come 
 up . will not   you come ? ' 

 ' Himmel ! ' the poor fellow exclaim , with a kind of weak anger . ' why do 
 you not say this before ? ' 

 he rise , stagger towards Aribert , and fall headlong on the floor . he 
 have swoon . the two man raise he , carry he up the stone step , and 
 lay he with infinite care on a sofa . he lay , breathe queerly through 
 the nostril , his eye close , his finger contract ; every now and 
 then a convulsion run through his frame . 

 ' one of we must fetch a doctor , ' say Prince Aribert . 

 ' I will , ' say Racksole . at that moment there be a quick , curt rap 
 on the french window , and both Racksole and the Prince glance round 
 startle . a girl 's face be press against the large window - pane . it 
 be Nella 's . 

 Racksole unfasten the catch , and she enter . 

 ' I have find you , ' she say lightly ; ' you might have tell I . I 
 could not   sleep . I inquire from the h"tel - folk if you have retire , 
 and they say no ; so I slip out . I guess where you be . ' Racksole 
 interrupt she with a question as to what she mean by this escapade , 
 but she stop he with a careless gesture . what be this ? ' she point 
 to the form on the sofa . 

 ' that be my nephew , Prince Eugen , ' say Aribert . 

 ' hurt ? ' she inquire coldly . ' I hope not . ' 

 ' he be ill , ' say Racksole , ' his brain be turn . ' 

 Nella begin to examine the unconscious Prince with the expert movement 
 of a girl who have pass through the good hospital course to be obtain 
 in New York . 

 ' he have get brain fever , ' she say . ' that be all , but it will be enough . 
 do you know if there be a bed anywhere in this remarkable house ? ' 




 Chapter eighteen in the NIGHT - TIME 

 ' he must on no account be move , ' say the dark little belgian doctor , 
 whose eye seem to peer so quizzically through his spectacle ; and he 
 say it with much positiveness . 

 that pronouncement rather settle their plan for they . it be certainly 
 a professional triumph for Nella , who , previous to the doctor 's arrival , 
 have tell they the very same thing . considerable argument have pass 
 before the doctor be send for . Prince Aribert be for keep the whole 
 affair a deep secret among their three self . Theodore Racksole agree 
 so far , but he suggest far that at no matter what risk they should 
 transport the patient over to England at once . Racksole have an idea that 
 he should feel safe in that h"tel of his , and well able to deal with 
 any situation that might arise . Nella scorn the idea . in her quality 
 of an amateur nurse , she assure they that Prince Eugen be much more 
 seriously ill than either of they suspect , and she urge that they 
 should take absolute possession of the house , and keep possession till 
 Prince Eugen be convalescent . 

 ' but what about the Spencer female ? ' Racksole have say . 

 ' keep she where she be . keep she a prisoner . and hold the house against 
 all comer . if Jules should come back , simply defy he to enter - that be 
 all . 

 there be two of you , so you must keep an eye on the former occupier , 
 if they return , and on Miss Spencer , while I nurse the patient . but 
 first , you must send for a doctor . ' 

 ' Doctor ! ' Prince Aribert have say , alarm . ' will it not be necessary to 
 make some awkward explanation to the doctor ? ' 

 ' not at all ! ' she reply . ' why should it be ? in a place like Ostend 
 doctor be far too discreet to ask question ; they see too much to 
 retain their curiosity . besides , do you want your nephew to die ? ' 

 both the man be somewhat take aback by the girl 's sagacious grasp 
 of the situation , and it come about that they begin to obey she like 
 subordinate . 

 she tell her father to sally forth in search of a doctor , and he go . 
 she give Prince Aribert certain other order , and he promptly execute 
 they . 

 by the evening of the follow day , everything be go smoothly . the 
 doctor come and depart several time , and send medicine , and seem 
 fairly optimistic as to the issue of the illness . an old woman have be 
 induce to come in and cook and clean . Miss Spencer be keep out of 
 sight on the attic floor , pende some decision as to what to do 
 with she . and no one outside the house have ask any question . the 
 inhabitant of that particular street must have be accustom to 
 strange behaviour on the part of their neighbour , unaccountable 
 appearance and disappearance , strange flitting and arrival . 
 this strong - minded and active trio - Racksole , Nella , and Prince 
 Aribert - might have be the lawful and accustomed tenant of the house , 
 for any outward evidence to the contrary . 

 on the afternoon of the third day Prince Eugen be distinctly and 
 seriously bad . Nella have sit up with he the previous night and 
 throughout the day . 

 her father have spend the morning at the h"tel , and Prince Aribert have 
 keep watch . the two man be never absent from the house at the same 
 time , and one of they always do duty as sentinel at night . on this 
 afternoon Prince Aribert and Nella sit together in the patient 's 
 bedroom . the doctor have just leave . Theodore Racksole be downstair 
 read the New York Herald . the Prince and Nella be near the window , 
 which look on to the back - garden . 

 it be a queer shabby little bedroom to shelter the august body of a 
 european personage like Prince Eugen of Posen . curiously enough , both 
 Nella and her father , ardent democrats though they be , have be 
 somehow impress by the royalty and importance of the fever - stricken 
 Prince - impressed as they have never be by Aribert . they have both feel 
 that here , under their care , be a species of individuality quite new to 
 they , and different from anything they have previously encounter . 
 even the gesture and tone of his delirium have an air of abrupt yet 
 condescend command - an impose mixture of suavity and haughtiness . 
 as for Nella , she have be first strike by the beautiful ' E ' over a 
 crown on the sleeve of his linen , and by the signet ring on his pale , 
 emaciated hand . after all , these trifle outward sign be at least 
 as effective as other of deep but less obtrusive significance . 
 the Racksoles , too , duly mark the attitude of Prince Aribert to his 
 nephew : it be at once paternal and reverential ; it disclose clearly 
 that Prince Aribert continue , in spite of everything , to regard his 
 nephew as his sovereign lord and master , as a being surround by a 
 natural and inevitable pomp and awe . this attitude , at the beginning , 
 seem false and unreal to the Americans ; it seem to they to be 
 assume ; but gradually they come to perceive that they be 
 mistaken , and that though America might have cast out ' the monarchial 
 superstition ' , nevertheless that ' superstition ' have vigorously survive 
 in another part of the world . 

 ' you and Mr Racksole have be extraordinarily kind to I , ' say Prince 
 Aribert very quietly , after the two have sit some time in silence . 

 ' why ? how ? ' she ask unaffectedly . ' we be interested in this affair 
 ourselves , you know . it begin at our h"tel - you must not   forget that , 
 Prince . ' 

 ' I do not , ' he say . ' I forget nothing . but I can not help feel that I 
 have lead you into a strange entanglement . why should you and Mr Racksole 
 be here - you who be suppose to be on a holiday ! - hide in a strange 
 house in a foreign country , subject to all sort of annoyance and all 
 sort of risk , simply because I be anxious to avoid scandal , to avoid 
 any sort of talk , in connection with my misguided nephew ? it be nothing 
 to you that the Hereditary Prince of Posen should be liable to a public 
 disgrace . what will it matter to you if the throne of Posen become the 
 laugh - stock of Europe ? ' 

 ' I really do not   know , Prince , ' Nella smile roguishly . ' but we Americans 
 have , a habit of go right through with anything we have begin . ' 

 ' ah ! ' he say , ' who know how this thing will end ? all our trouble , our 
 anxiety , our watchfulness , may come to nothing . I tell you that when I 
 see eugen lie there , and think that we can not learn his story until 
 he recover , I be ready to go mad . we might be arrange thing , make 
 matter smooth , prepare for the future , if only we know - know what he 
 can tell we . I tell you that I be ready to go mad . if anything should 
 happen to you , Miss Racksole , I would kill myself . ' 

 ' but why ? ' she question . ' Supposing , that is , that anything could 
 happen to I - which it can not . ' 

 ' because I have drag you into this , ' he reply , gaze at she . ' it 
 be nothing to you . you be only be kind . ' 

 ' how do you know it be nothing to I , Prince ? ' she ask he quickly . 

 just then the sick man make a convulsive movement , and Nella fly to the 
 bed and soothe he . from the head of the bed she look over at Prince 
 Aribert , and he return her bright , excited glance . she be in her 
 travel - frock , with a large white belgian apron tie over it . large 
 dark circle of fatigue and sleeplessness surround her eye , and to 
 the Prince her cheek seem hollow and thin ; her hair lie thick over 
 the temple , half cover the ear . Aribert give no answer to her 
 query - merely gaze at she with melancholy intensity . 

 ' I think I will go and rest , ' she say at last . ' you will know all about 
 the medicine . ' 

 ' sleep well , ' he say , as he softly open the door for she . and then 
 he be alone with Eugen . it be his turn that night to watch , for they 
 still half - expect some strange , sudden visit , or onslaught , or move 
 of one kind or another from Jules . Racksole sleep in the parlour on the 
 ground floor . 

 Nella have the front bedroom on the first floor ; Miss Spencer be 
 immure in the attic ; the last - name lady have be singularly quiet and 
 incurious , take her food from Nella and ask no question , the old 
 woman go at night to her own abode in the purlieus of the harbour . 
 Hour after hour Aribert sit silent by his nephew 's bed - side , attend 
 mechanically to his want , and every now and then gaze hard into 
 the vacant , anguished face , as if try to extort from that mask the 
 secret which it hold . Aribert be torture by the idea that if he could 
 have only half an hour 's , only a quarter of an hour 's , rational speech 
 with Prince Eugen , all might be clear up and put right , and by the 
 fact that that rational talk be absolutely impossible on Eugen 's part 
 until the fever have run its course . as the minute creep on to midnight 
 the watcher , make nervous by the intense , electrical atmosphere which 
 seem always to surround a person who be dangerously ill , grow more 
 and more a prey to vague and terrible apprehension . his mind dwelt 
 hysterically on the most fatal possibility . 

 he wonder what would occur if by any ill - chance Eugen should die in 
 that bed - how he would explain the affair to Posen and to the Emperor , 
 how he would justify himself . he see himself be try for murder , 
 sentence   he - a Prince of the blood ! , lead to the scaffold ... a scene 
 unparalleled in Europe for over a century ! ... then he gaze anew at 
 the sick man , and think he see death in every draw feature of that 
 agonize face . he could have scream aloud . his ear hear a peculiar 
 resonant boom . he start - it be nothing but the city clock strike 
 twelve . but there be another sound - a mysterious shuffle at the door . 
 he listen ; then jump from his chair . nothing now ! nothing ! but 
 still he feel draw to the door , and after what seem an interminable 
 interval he go and open it , his heart beat furiously . Nella lie 
 in a heap on the door mat . she be fully dress , but have apparently 
 lose consciousness . he clutch at her slender body , pick she up , 
 carry she to the chair by the fire - place , and lay she in it . he have 
 forget all about Eugen . 

 ' what be it , my angel ? ' he whisper , and then he kiss she - kiss she 
 twice . he could only look at she ; he do not know what to do to succour 
 she . 

 at last she open her eye and sigh . 

 ' where be I ? ' she ask vaguely , in a tremulous tone as she recognize 
 he . ' be it you ? do I do anything silly ? do I faint ? ' 

 ' what have happen ? be you ill ? ' he question anxiously . he be 
 kneeling at her foot , hold her hand tight . 

 ' I see Jules by the side of my bed , ' she murmur ; ' I be sure I see he ; 
 he laugh at I . I have not undressed . I spring up , frighten , but he 
 have go , and then I run downstairs - to you . ' 

 ' you be dream , ' he soothe she . 

 ' be I ? ' 

 ' you must have be . I have not hear a sound . no one could have 
 enter . 

 but if you like I will wake Mr Racksole . ' 

 ' perhaps I be dream , ' she admit . ' how foolish ! ' 

 ' you be over - tired , ' he say , still unconsciously hold her hand . 
 they gaze at each other . she smile at he . 

 ' you kiss I , ' she say suddenly , and he blush red and stand up 
 before she . ' why do you kiss I ? ' 

 ' ah ! Miss Racksole , ' he murmur , hurry the word out . ' forgive I . 
 it be unforgivable , but forgive I . I be overpower by my feeling . I 
 do not know what I be do . ' 

 ' why do you kiss I ? ' she repeat . 

 ' because - Nella ! I love you . I have no right to say it . ' 

 ' why have you no right to say it ? ' 

 ' if Eugen die , I shall owe a duty to Posen - I shall be its ruler . ' 

 ' well ! ' she say calmly , with an adorable confidence . ' Papa be worth 
 forty million . would you not abdicate ? ' 

 ' ah ! ' he give a low cry . ' will you force I to say these thing ? I could 
 not shirk my duty to Posen , and the reign Prince of Posen can only 
 marry a Princess . ' 

 ' but Prince Eugen will live , ' she say positively , ' and if he live - ' 

 ' then I shall be free . I would renounce all my right to make you mine , 
 if - if - ' 

 ' if what , Prince ? ' 

 ' if you would deign to accept my hand . ' 

 ' be I , then , rich enough ? ' 

 ' Nella ! ' he bend down to she . 

 then there be a crash of break glass . Aribert go to the window 
 and open it . in the starlit gloom he could see that a ladder have be 
 raise against the back of the house . he think he hear footstep at 
 the end of the garden . 

 ' it be Jules , ' he exclaim to Nella , and without another word 
 rush upstairs to the attic . the attic be empty . Miss Spencer have 
 mysteriously vanish . 




 chapter nineteen ROYALTY AT the GRAND BABYLON 

 the royal apartment at the Grand Babylon be famous in the world of 
 h"tel , and indeed elsewhere , as be , in their own way , unsurpasse . 
 some of the palace of Germany , and in particular those of the mad 
 Ludwig of Bavaria , may possess room and saloon which outshine they in 
 gorgeous luxury and the mere wild fairy - like extravagance of wealth ; but 
 there be nothing , anywhere , even on Eighth Avenue , New York , which can 
 fairly be call more complete , more perfect , more enticing , or - not 
 least important - more comfortable . 

 the suite consist of six chamber - the ante - room , the saloon or 
 audience chamber , the dining - room , the yellow drawing - room   where 
 Royalty receive its friend , the library , and the state bedroom - to 
 the last of which we have already be introduce . the most important 
 and most impressive of these be , of course , the audience chamber , an 
 apartment fifty foot long by forty foot broad , with a superb outlook 
 over the Thames , the Shot Tower , and the high signal of the 
 South - Western Railway . the decoration of this room be mainly in the 
 german taste , since four out of every six of its royal occupant be of 
 teutonic blood ; but its chief glory be its french ceiling , a masterpiece 
 by Fragonard , take bodily from a certain famous palace on the Loire . 
 the wall be of panel oak , with an eight - foot dado of Arras cloth 
 imitate from unique continental example . the carpet , weave in one 
 piece , be an antique speciman of the fine turkish work , and it be 
 obtain , a bargain , by Felix Babylon , from an impecunious Roumanian 
 Prince . the silver candelabra , now fit with electric light , come from 
 the Rhine , and each have a separate history . the Royal chair - it be not 
 etiquette to call it a throne , though it amount to a throne - be loot 
 by Napoleon from an austrian city , and buy by Felix Babylon at the 
 sale of a french collector . at each corner of the room stand a gigantic 
 grotesque vase of german faience of the sixteenth century . these be 
 present to Felix Babylon by William the First of Germany , upon the 
 conclusion of his first incognito visit to London in connection with the 
 french trouble of 1875 . 

 there be only one picture in the audience chamber . it be a portrait of 
 the luckless but noble Dom Pedro , Emperor of the Brazils . give to Felix 
 Babylon by Dom Pedro himself , it hang there solitary and sublime as a 
 reminder to king and Princes that empire may pass away and greatness 
 fall . a certain Prince who be occupy the suite during the Jubilee of 
 1887 - when the Grand Babylon have seven person of royal blood under its 
 roof - send a curt message to Felix that the portrait must be remove . 
 Felix respectfully decline to remove it , and the Prince leave for 
 another h"tel , where he be rob of two thousand pound ' worth of 
 jewellery . the Royal audience chamber of the Grand Babylon , if people 
 only know it , be one of the sight of London , but it be never show , and 
 if you ask the h"tel servant about its wonder they will tell you 
 only foolish fact concern it , as that the Turkey carpet cost fifty 
 pound to clean , and that one of the great vas be crack across the 
 pedestal , owe to the rough treatment accord to it during a riotous 
 game of Blind Man 's Buff , play one night by four young Princesses , a 
 Balkan King , and his aide - de - camp . 

 in one of the window recess of this magnificent apartment , on a 
 certain afternoon in late July , stand Prince Aribert of Posen . he 
 be faultlessly dress in the conventional frock - coat of English 
 civilization , with a gardenia in his button - hole , and the indispensable 
 crease down the front of the trouser . he seem to be fairly amuse , 
 and also to expect someone , for at frequent interval he look rapidly 
 over his shoulder in the direction of the door behind the Royal chair . 
 at last a little wizene , stoop old man , with a distinctly german 
 cast of countenance , appear through the door , and lay some paper on 
 a small table by the side of the chair . 

 ' ah , Hans , my old friend ! ' say Aribert , approach the old man . ' I 
 must have a little talk with you about one or two matter . how do you 
 find his Royal Highness ? ' 

 the old man salute , military fashion . ' not very well , your highness , ' 
 he answer . ' I have   be valet to your Highness 's nephew since his 
 majority , and I be valet to his Royal father before he , but I never 
 see - ' he stop , and throw up his wrinkle hand deprecatingly . 

 ' you never see what ? ' Aribert smile affectionately on the old fellow . 
 you could perceive that these two , so sharply differentiate in rank , 
 have be intimate in the past , and would be intimate again . 

 ' do you know , my Prince , ' say the old man , ' that we be to receive the 
 financier , Sampson Levi - be that his name ? - in the audience chamber ? 
 surely , if I may humbly suggest , the library would have be good enough 
 for a financier ? ' 

 ' one would have think so , ' agree Prince Aribert , ' but perhaps your 
 master have a special reason . tell I , ' he go on , change the subject 
 quickly , ' how come it that you leave the Prince , my nephew , at Ostend , 
 and return to Posen ? ' 

 ' his order , Prince , ' and old Hans , who have have a wide experience of 
 royal whim and know half the secret of the Courts of Europe , give 
 Aribert a look which might have mean anything . ' he send I back on 
 an - an errand , your Highness . ' 

 ' and you be to rejoin he here ? ' 

 ' just so , Highness . and I do rejoin he here , although , to tell the 
 truth , I have begin to fear that I might never see my master again . ' 

 ' the Prince have be very ill in Ostend , Hans . ' 

 ' so I have gather , ' Hans respond drily , slowly rub his hand 
 together . ' and his Highness be not yet perfectly recover . ' 

 ' not yet . we despair of his life , Hans , at one time , but thank to an 
 excellent constitution , he come safely through the ordeal . ' 

 ' we must take care of he , your Highness . ' 

 ' yes , indeed , ' say Aribert solemnly , ' his life be very precious to 
 Posen . ' 

 at that moment , Eugen , Hereditary Prince of Posen , enter the audience 
 chamber . he be pale and languid , and his uniform seem to be a trouble 
 to he . his hair have be slightly ruffle , and there be a look of 
 uneasiness , almost of alarmed unrest , in his fine dark eye . he be 
 like a man who be afraid to look behind he lest he should see something 
 there which ought not to be there . but at the same time , here beyond 
 doubt be Royalty . nothing could have be more striking than the 
 contrast between Eugen , a sick man in the shabby house at Ostend , and 
 this Prince Eugen in the royal apartment of the Grand Babylon h"tel , 
 surround by the luxury and pomp which modern civilization can offer to 
 those bear in high place . all the desperate episode of Ostend be now 
 hide , pass over . it be suppose never to have occur . it exist 
 only like a secret shame in the heart of those who have witness it . 
 Prince Eugen have recover ; at any rate , he be convalescent , and he have 
 be remove to London , where he take up again the drop thread of his 
 princely life . the lady with the red hat , the incorruptible and savage 
 Miss Spencer , the unscrupulous and brilliant Jules , the dark , damp 
 cellar , the horrible little bedroom - these thing be over . thank to 
 Prince Aribert and the racksole , he have emerge from they in safety . he 
 be able to resume his public and official career . the Emperor have be 
 informed of his safe arrival in London , after an unavoidable delay 
 in Ostend ; his name once more figure in the Court chronicle of the 
 newspaper . in short , everything be smother over . only - only Jules , 
 Rocco , and Miss Spencer be still at large ; and the body of Reginald 
 Dimmock lie bury in the domestic mausoleum of the palace at Posen ; and 
 Prince Eugen have still to interview Mr Sampson Levi . 

 that various matter lie heavy on the mind of Prince Eugen be beyond 
 question . he seem to have withdraw within himself . despite the 
 extraordinary experience through which he have recently pass , event 
 which call aloud for explanation and confidence between the nephew 
 and the uncle , he would say scarcely a word to Prince Aribert . any 
 allusion , however direct , to the day at Ostend , be ignore by he with 
 more or less ingenuity , and Prince Aribert be really no nearer a full 
 solution of the mystery of Jules ' plot than he have be on the night 
 when he and Racksole visit the gaming table at Ostend . eugen be well 
 aware that he have be kidnap through the agency of the woman in the 
 red hat , but , doubtless ashamed at have be her dupe , he would not 
 proceed in any way with the clearing - up of the matter . 

 ' you will receive in this room , eugen ? ' Aribert question he . 

 ' yes , ' be the answer , give pettishly . ' why not ? even if I have no 
 proper retinue here , surely that be no reason why I should not hold 
 audience in a proper manner ? ... han , you can go . ' the old valet 
 promptly disappear . 

 ' Aribert , ' the Hereditary Prince continue , when they be alone in the 
 chamber , ' you think I be mad . ' 

 ' my dear eugen , ' say Prince Aribert , startle in spite of himself . 
 ' do not   be absurd . ' 

 ' I say you think I be mad . you think that that attack of brain fever have 
 leave its permanent mark on I . well , perhaps I be mad . who can tell ? God 
 know that I have be through enough lately to drive I mad . ' 

 Aribert make no reply . as a matter of strict fact , the thought have 
 cross his mind that Eugen 's brain have not yet recover its normal 
 tone and activity . this speech of his nephew 's , however , have the effect 
 of immediately restore his belief in the latter 's entire sanity . he 
 feel convinced that if only he could regain his nephew 's confidence , the 
 old brotherly confidence which have exist between they since the year 
 when they play together as boy , all might yet be well . but at present 
 there appear to be no sign that Eugen mean to give his confidence to 
 anyone . 

 the young Prince have come up out of the valley of the shadow of death , 
 but some of the valley 's shadow have clung to he , and it seem he be 
 unable to dissipate it . 

 ' by the way , ' say Eugen suddenly , ' I must reward these Racksoles , I 
 suppose . I be indeed grateful to they . if I give the girl a bracelet , 
 and the father a thousand guineas - how would that meet the case ? ' 

 ' my dear eugen ! ' exclaim Aribert aghast . ' a thousand guineas ! do 
 you know that Theodore Racksole could buy up all Posen from end to end 
 without make himself a pauper . a thousand guineas ! you might as well 
 offer he sixpence . ' 

 ' then what must I offer ? ' 

 ' nothing , except your thank . anything else would be an insult . these 
 be no ordinary h"tel people . ' 

 ' can not   I give the little girl a bracelet ? ' Prince Eugen give a sinister 
 laugh . 

 Aribert look at he steadily . ' no , ' he say . 

 ' why do you kiss she - that night ? ' ask Prince Eugen carelessly . 

 ' kiss whom ? ' say Aribert , blushing and angry , despite his most 
 determined effort to keep calm and unconcerned . 

 ' the Racksole girl . ' 

 ' when do you mean ? ' 

 ' I mean , ' say Prince Eugen , ' that night in Ostend when I be ill . you 
 think I be in a delirium . perhaps I be . but somehow I remember 
 that with extraordinary distinctness . I remember raise my head for 
 a fraction of an instant , and just in that fraction of an instant you 
 kiss she . oh , Uncle Aribert ! ' 

 ' listen , Eugen , for God 's sake . I love Nella Racksole . I shall marry 
 she . ' 

 ' you ! ' there be a long pause , and then Eugen laugh . ' ah ! ' he say . 
 ' they all talk like that to start with . I have talk like that myself , 
 dear uncle ; it sound nice , and it mean nothing . ' 

 ' in this case it mean everything , Eugen , ' say Aribert quietly . some 
 accent of determination in the latter 's tone make Eugen rather more 
 serious . 

 ' you can not   marry she , ' he say . ' the Emperor will not   permit a morganatic 
 marriage . ' 

 ' the Emperor have nothing to do with the affair . I shall renounce my 
 right . 

 I shall become a plain citizen . ' 

 ' in which case you will have no fortune to speak of . ' 

 ' but my wife will have a fortune . know the sacrifice which I shall 
 have make in order to marry she , she will not hesitate to place that 
 fortune in my hand for our mutual use , ' say Aribert stiffly . 

 ' you will decidedly be rich , ' muse Eugen , as his idea dwelt on 
 Theodore Racksole 's reputed wealth . ' but have you think of this , ' he 
 ask , and his mild eye glow again in a sort of madness . ' have you 
 think that I be unmarried , and might die at any moment , and then the 
 throne will descend to you - to you , Aribert ? ' 

 ' the throne will never descend to I , Eugen , ' say Aribert softly , ' for 
 you will live . you be thoroughly convalescent . you have nothing to 
 fear . ' 

 ' it be the next seven day that I fear , ' say Eugen . 

 ' the next seven day ! why ? ' 

 ' I do not know . but I fear they . if I can survive they - ' 

 ' Mr Sampson Levi , sire , ' Hans announce in a loud tone . 




 Chapter twenty MR SAMPSON LEVI BIDS PRINCE EUGEN good morning 

 PRINCE EUGEN start . ' I will see he , ' he say , with a gesture to Hans 
 as if to indicate that Mr Sampson Levi might enter at once . 

 ' I beg one moment first , ' say Aribert , lay a hand gently on his 
 nephew 's arm , and give old Hans a glance which have the effect of 
 precipitating that admirably train servant through the doorway . 

 ' what be it ? ' ask Prince Eugen crossly . ' why this sudden seriousness ? 
 do not   forget that I have an appointment with Mr Sampson Levi , and must 
 not keep he wait . someone say that punctuality be the politeness of 
 prince . ' 

 ' eugen , ' say Aribert , ' I wish you to be as serious as I be . why can not 
 we have faith in each other ? I want to help you . I have help you . you 
 be my titular Sovereign ; but on the other hand I have the honour to be 
 your uncle : 

 I have the honour to be the same age as you , and to have be your 
 companion from youth up . give I your confidence . I think you have 
 give it I year ago , but I have lately discover that you have your 
 secret , even then . and now , since your illness , you be still more 
 secretive . ' 

 ' what do you mean , Aribert ? ' say Eugen , in a tone which might have be 
 either inimical or friendly . ' what do you want to say ? ' 

 ' well , in the first place , I want to say that you will not succeed with 
 the estimable Mr Sampson Levi . ' 

 ' shall I not ? ' say Eugen lightly . ' how do you know what my business be 
 with he ? ' 

 ' suffice it to say that I know . you will never get that million pound 
 out of he . ' 

 Prince Eugen gasp , and then swallow his excitement . ' who have be 
 talk ? what million ? ' his eye wander uneasily round the room . ' ah ! ' 
 he say , pretend to laugh . ' I see how it be . I have be chatter 
 in my delirium . you must not   take any notice of that , Aribert . when one 
 have a fever one 's idea become grotesque and fanciful . ' 

 ' you never talk in your delirium , ' Aribert reply ; ' at least not 
 about yourself . I know about this project loan before I see you in 
 Ostend . ' 

 ' who tell you ? ' demand Eugen fiercely . 

 ' then you admit that you be try to raise a loan ? ' 

 ' I admit nothing . who tell you ? ' 

 ' Theodore Racksole , the millionaire . these rich man have no secret from 
 each other . they form a coterie , close than any coterie of our . eugen , 
 and far more powerful . they talk , and in talk they rule the world , 
 these millionaire . they be the real monarchs . ' 

 ' curse they ! ' say Eugen . 

 ' yes , perhaps so . but let I return to your case . imagine my shame , 
 my disgust , when I find that Racksole could tell I more about your 
 affair than I know myself . happily , he be a good fellow ; one can trust 
 he ; otherwise I should have be tempt to do something desperate when 
 I discover that all your private history be in his hand . eugen , let 
 we come to the point ; why do you want that million ? be it actually 
 true that you be so deeply in debt ? I have no desire to improve the 
 occasion . I merely ask . ' 

 ' and what if I do owe a million ? ' say Prince Eugen with assume valour . 

 ' oh , nothing , my dear eugen , nothing . only it be rather a large sum to 
 have scatter in ten year , be it not ? how do you manage it ? ' 

 ' do not   ask I , Aribert . I have   be a fool . but I swear to you that the 
 woman whom you call " the lady in the red hat " be the last of my folly . 
 I be about to take a wife , and become a respectable Prince . ' 

 ' then the engagement with Princess Anna be an accomplished fact ? ' 

 ' practically so . as soon as I have settle with Levi , all will be 
 smooth . 

 Aribert , I would not   lose Anna for the imperial throne . she be a good and 
 pure woman , and I love she as a man might love an angel . ' 

 ' and yet you would deceive she as to your debt , eugen ? ' 

 ' not she , but her absurd parent , and perhaps the Emperor . they have 
 hear rumour , and I must set those rumour at rest by present to 
 they a clean sheet . ' 

 ' I be glad you have be frank with I , Eugen , ' say Prince Aribert , 
 ' but I will be plain with you . you will never marry the Princess Anna . ' 

 ' and why ? ' say Eugen , supercilious again . 

 ' because her parent will not permit it . because you will not be able to 
 present a clean sheet to they . because this Sampson Levi will never lend 
 you a million . ' 

 ' explain yourself . ' 

 ' I propose to do so . you be kidnap - it be a horrid word , but we 
 must use it - in Ostend . ' 

 ' true . ' 

 ' do you know why ? ' 

 ' I suppose because that vile old red - hatted woman and her accomplice 
 want to get some money out of I . fortunately , thank to you , they 
 do not . ' 

 ' not at all , ' say Aribert . ' they want no money from you . they know 
 well enough that you have no money . they know you be the naughty 
 schoolboy among European Princes , with no sense of responsibility or of 
 duty towards your kingdom . shall I tell you why they kidnap you ? ' 

 ' when you have do abuse I , my dear uncle . ' 

 ' they kidnap you merely to keep you out of England for a few day , 
 merely to compel you to fail in your appointment with Sampson Levi . and 
 it appear to I that they succeed . assume that you do not   obtain the 
 money from Levi , be there another financier in all Europe from whom you 
 can get it - on such strange security as you have to offer ? ' 

 ' possibly there be not , ' say Prince Eugen calmly . ' but , you see , I 
 shall get it from Sampson Levi . Levi promise it , and I know from other 
 source that he be a man of his word . he say that the money , subject to 
 certain formality , would be available till - ' 

 ' till ? ' 

 ' till the end of June . ' 

 ' and it be now the end of July . ' 

 ' well , what be a month ? he be only too glad to lend the money . he will 
 get excellent interest . how on earth have you get into your sage old 
 head this notion of a plot against I ? the idea be ridiculous . a plot 
 against I ? what for ? ' 

 ' have you ever think of Bosnia ? ' ask Aribert coldly . 

 ' what of Bosnia ? ' 

 ' I need not tell you that the King of Bosnia be naturally under 
 obligation to Austria , to whom he owe his crown . Austria be anxious 
 for he to make a good influential marriage . ' 

 ' well , let he . ' 

 ' he be go to . he be go to marry the Princess Anna . ' 

 ' not while I live . he make overture there a year ago , and be 
 rebuff . ' 

 ' yes ; but he will make overture again , and this time he will not be 
 rebuff . oh , Eugen ! can not   you see that this plot against you be be 
 engineer by some person who know all about your affair , and whose 
 desire be to prevent your marriage with Princess Anna ? only one man in 
 Europe can have any motive for wish to prevent your marriage with 
 Princess Anna , and that be the man who mean to marry she himself . ' 
 Eugen go very pale . 

 ' then , Aribert , do you mean to convey to I that my detention in Ostend 
 be contrive by the agent of the King of Bosnia ? ' 

 ' I do . ' 

 ' with a view to stop my negotiation with Sampson Levi , and so 
 put an end to the possibility of my marriage with Anna ? ' 

 Aribert nod . 

 ' you be a good friend to I , Aribert . you mean well . but you be 
 mistaken . 

 you have be worry about nothing . ' 

 ' have you forget about Reginald Dimmock ? ' 

 ' I remember you say that he have die . ' 

 ' I say nothing of the sort . I say that he have be assassinate . that 
 be part of it , my poor eugen . ' 

 ' Pooh ! ' say Eugen . ' I do not   believe he be assassinate . and as for 
 Sampson Levi , I will bet you a thousand mark that he and I come to 
 term this morning , and that the million be in my hand before I leave 
 London . ' Aribert shake his head . 

 ' you seem to be pretty sure of Mr Levi 's character . have you have much to 
 do with he before ? ' 

 ' well , ' eugen hesitate a second , ' a little . what young man in my 
 position have not   have something to do with Mr Sampson Levi at one time or 
 another ? ' 

 ' I have not , ' say Aribert . 

 ' you ! you be a fossil . ' he ring a silver bell . ' Hans ! I will receive Mr 
 Sampson Levi . ' 

 Whereupon Aribert discreetly depart , and Prince Eugen sit down in 
 the great velvet chair , and begin to look at the paper which Hans have 
 previously place upon the table . 

 ' good morning , your Royal Highness , ' say Sampson Levi , bow as he 
 enter . ' I trust your Royal Highness be well . ' 

 ' moderately , thank , ' return the Prince . 

 in spite of the fact that he have have as much to do with people of Royal 
 blood as any plain man in Europe , Sampson Levi have never yet learn 
 how to be at ease with these exalt individual during the first few 
 minute of an interview . afterwards , he resume command of himself and 
 his faculty , but at the beginning he be invariably fluster , scarlet 
 of face , and incline to perspiration . 

 ' we will proceed to business at once , ' say Prince Eugen . ' will you take 
 a seat , Mr Levi ? ' 

 ' I thank your Royal Highness . ' 

 ' now as to that loan which we have already practically arrange - a 
 million , I think it be , ' say the Prince airily . 

 ' a million , ' Levi acquiesce , toy with his enormous watch chain . 

 ' everything be now in order . here be the paper and I should like to 
 finish the matter up at once . ' 

 ' exactly , your highness , but - ' 

 ' but what ? you month ago express the warm satisfaction at the 
 security , though I be quite prepared to admit that the security , be of 
 rather an unusual nature . you also agree to the rate of interest . it be 
 not everyone , Mr Levi , who can lend out a million at 5 - 1 2 per cent . 
 and in ten year the whole amount will be pay back . I - er - I believe I 
 inform you that the fortune of Princess Anna , who be about to accept 
 my hand , will ultimately amount to something like fifty million of 
 mark , which be over two million pound in your english money . ' Prince 
 Eugen stop . he have no fancy for talk in this confidential manner 
 to financier , but he feel that circumstance demand it . 

 ' you see , it be like this , your Royal Highness , ' begin Mr Sampson Levi , 
 in his homely english idiom . ' it be like this . I say I could keep that 
 bit of money available till the end of June , and you be to give I an 
 interview here before that date . not have hear from your Highness , 
 and not know your Highness 's address , though my german agent make 
 every inquiry , I conclude , that you have make other arrangement , money 
 be so cheap this last few month . ' 

 ' I be unfortunately detain at Ostend , ' say Prince Eugen , with as 
 much haughtiness as he could assume , ' by - by important business . I have 
 make no other arrangement , and I shall have need of the million . if you 
 will be so good as to pay it to my London banker - ' 

 ' I be very sorry , ' say Mr Sampson Levi , with a tremendous and dazzling 
 air of politeness , which surprise even himself , ' but my syndicate 
 have now lend the money elsewhere . it be in South America - I do not   mind 
 tell your Highness that we have   lend it to the Chilean Government . ' 

 ' hang the Chilean Government , Mr Levi , ' exclaim the Prince , and he 
 go white . ' I must have that million . it be an arrangement . ' 

 ' it be an arrangement , I admit , ' say Mr Sampson Levi , ' but your 
 Highness break the arrangement . ' 

 there be a long silence . 

 ' do you mean to say , ' begin the Prince with tense calmness , ' that you 
 be not in a position to let I have that million ? ' 

 ' I could let your Highness have a million in a couple of year ' time . ' 

 the Prince make a gesture of annoyance . ' Mr Levi , ' he say , ' if you 
 do not place the money in my hand to - morrow you will ruin one of the 
 old of reign family , and , incidentally , you will alter the map 
 of Europe . you be not keep faith , and I have rely on you . ' 

 ' pardon I , your highness , ' say little Levi , rise in resentment , ' it 
 be not I who have not keep faith . I beg to repeat that the money be no 
 long at my disposal , and to bid your Highness good morning . ' 

 and Mr Sampson Levi leave the audience chamber with an awkward , aggrieved 
 bow . it be a scene characteristic of the end of the nineteenth 
 century - an overfed , commonplace , pursy little man who have be bear in 
 a Brixton semi - detached villa , and whose high idea of pleasure be 
 a Sunday up the river in an expensive electric launch , confront and 
 utterly rout , in a h"tel belong to an american millionaire , the 
 representative of a race of man who have finger every page of european 
 history for century , and who still , in their native castle , be 
 surround with every outward circumstance of pomp and power . 

 ' Aribert , ' say Prince Eugen , a little later , ' you be right . it be all 
 over . I have only one refuge - ' 

 ' you do not   mean - ' Aribert stop , dumbfound . 

 ' yes , I do , ' he say quickly . ' I can manage it so that it will look like 
 an accident . ' 






 Chapter Twenty - one the return of FÉLIX BABYLON 

 on the evening of Prince Eugen 's fateful interview with Mr Sampson Levi , 
 Theodore Racksole be wander somewhat aimlessly and uneasily about 
 the entrance hail and adjacent corridor of the Grand Babylon . he have 
 return from Ostend only a day or two previously , and have endeavour 
 with all his might to forget the affair which have carry he there - to 
 regard it , in fact , as do with . but he find himself unable to do so . 
 in vain he remark , under his breath , that there be some thing which 
 be well leave alone : if his experience as a manipulator of market , a 
 contriver of gigantic scheme in New York , have teach he anything 
 at all , it should surely have teach he that . yet he could not feel 
 reconcile to such a position . the mere presence of the prince in his 
 h"tel rouse the fighting instinct of this man , who have never in his 
 whole career be beat . he have , as it be , take up arm on their 
 side , and if the prince of Posen would not continue their own battle , 
 nevertheless he , Theodore Racksole , want to continue it for they . to a 
 certain extent , of course , the battle have be win , for Prince Eugen have 
 be rescue from an extremely difficult and dangerous position , and the 
 enemy - consist of Jules , Rocco , Miss Spencer , and perhaps other - have 
 be put to flight . but that , he conceive , be not enough ; it be very 
 far from be enough . that the criminal , for criminal they decidedly 
 be , should still be at large , he regard as an absurd anomaly . and 
 there be another point : he have say nothing to the police of all that 
 have occur . he disdain the police , but he could scarcely fail to 
 perceive that if the police should by accident gain a clue to the real 
 state of the case he might be place rather awkwardly , for the simple 
 reason that in the eye of the law it amount to a misdemeanour 
 to conceal as much as he have conceal . he ask himself , for the 
 thousandth time , why he have adopt a policy of concealment from the 
 police , why he have become in any way interested in the Posen matter , 
 and why , at this present moment , he should be so anxious to prosecute it 
 far ? to the first two question he reply , rather lamely , that he 
 have be influence by Nella , and also by a natural spirit of adventure ; 
 to the third he reply that he have always be in the habit of carry 
 thing through , and be now actuate by a mere childish , obstinate 
 desire to carry this one through . moreover , he be splendidly conscious 
 of his perfect ability to carry it through . one additional impulse he 
 have , though he do not admit it to himself , be by nature adverse to 
 big word , and that be an abstract love of justice , the Anglo - Saxon 's 
 deep - find instinct for help the right side to conquer , even when 
 grave risk must thereby be run , with no corresponding advantage . 

 he be turn these thing over in his mind as he walk about the vast 
 h"tel on that evening of the last day in July . the Society paper have 
 be state for a week past that London be empty , but , in spite of the 
 Society paper , London persist in seem to be just as full as ever . 
 the Grand Babylon be certainly not as crowd as it have be a month 
 early , but it be do a very passable business . at the close of 
 the season the gay butterfly of the social community have a habit of 
 hover for a day or two in the big h"tel before they flutter away to 
 castle and country - house , meadow and moor , lake and stream . the great 
 basket - chair in the portico be well fill by old and middle - aged 
 gentleman engage in enjoy the varied delight of liqueur , cigar , 
 and the full moon which float so serenely above the Thames . here and 
 there a pretty woman on the arm of a cavalier in immaculate attire sweep 
 her train as she turn to and fro in the promenade of the terrace . 
 waiter and uniformed commissionaire and gold - braid doorkeeper move 
 noiselessly about ; at short interval the chief of the doorkeeper blow 
 his shrill whistle and hansom drive up with tinkle bell to take 
 away a pair of butterfly to some place of amusement or boredom ; 
 occasionally a private carriage draw by expensive and self - conscious 
 horse put the hansom to shame by its mere outward glory . it be a hot 
 night , a night for the summer wood , and save for the vehicle there be 
 no rapid movement of any kind . it seem as though the world - the world , 
 that be to say , of the Grand Babylon - be fully engage in the solemn 
 process of digestion and small - talk . even the long row of the 
 Embankment gas - lamp , stretch right and left , scarcely tremble in 
 the still , warm , caress air . the star overhead look down with 
 many blinking upon the enormous pile of the Grand Babylon , and the moon 
 regard it with bland and changeless face ; what they think of it 
 and its inhabitant can not , unfortunately , be record . what Theodore 
 Racksole think of the moon can be record : he think it be a 
 nuisance . it somehow fascinate his gaze with its silly stare , and 
 so interfere with his complex meditation . he glance round at the 
 well - dress and satisfied people - his guest , his customer . they 
 appear to ignore he absolutely . 

 probably only a very small percentage of they have the least idea 
 that this tall spare man , with the iron - grey hair and the thin , firm , 
 resolute face , who wear his american - cut evening clothe with such 
 careless ease , be the sole proprietor of the Grand Babylon , and 
 possibly the rich man in Europe . as have already be state , Racksole 
 be not a celebrity in England . 

 the guest of the Grand Babylon see merely a restless male person , whose 
 restlessness be rather a disturber of their quietude , but with whom , 
 to judge by his countenance , it would be inadvisable to remonstrate . 
 therefore Theodore Racksole continue his perambulation unchallenged , 
 and keep say to himself , ' I must do something . ' but what ? he could 
 think of no course to pursue . 

 at last he walk straight through the h"tel and out at the other 
 entrance , and so up the little unassuming side street into the roar 
 torrent of the narrow and crowded Strand . he jump on a Putney bus , and 
 pay his fair to Putney , fivepence , and then , find that the humble 
 occupant of the vehicle star at the spectacle of a man in evening 
 dress but without a dustcoat , he jump off again , oblivious of the 
 fact that the conductor jerk a thumb towards he and wink at the 
 passenger as who should say , ' there go a lunatic . ' he go into a 
 tobacconist 's shop and ask for a cigar . the shopman mildly inquire 
 what price . 

 ' what be the good you have   get ? ' ask Theodore Racksole . 

 ' five shilling each , sir , ' say the man promptly . 

 ' give I a penny one , ' be Theodore Racksole 's laconic request , and he 
 walk out of the shop smoke the penny cigar . it be a new sensation 
 for he . 

 he be inhale the aromatic odour of Eugene Rimmel 's establishment 
 for the sale of scent when a gentleman , walk slowly in the opposite 
 direction , accost he with a quiet , ' good evening , Mr Racksole . ' the 
 millionaire do not at first recognize his interlocutor , who wear a 
 travel overcoat , and be carry a handbag . then a slight , pleased 
 smile pass over his feature , and he hold out his hand . 

 ' well , Mr Babylon , ' he greet the other , ' of all person in the wide 
 world you be the man I would most have wish to meet . ' 

 ' you flatter I , ' say the little anglicized Swiss . 

 ' no , I do not , ' answer Racksole ; ' it be not   my custom , any more than 
 it be your . I want to have a real good long yarn with you , and lo ! 
 here you be ! where have you spring from ? ' 

 ' from Lausanne , ' say Felix Babylon . ' I have finish my duty there , 
 I have nothing else to do , and I feel homesick . I feel the nostalgia of 
 London , and so I come over , just as you see , ' and he raise the handbag 
 for Racksole 's notice . ' one toothbrush , one razor , two slipper , eh ? ' 
 he laugh . ' I be wonder as I walk along where I should stay - I , 
 Felix Babylon , homeless in London . ' 

 ' I should advise you to stay at the Grand Babylon , ' Racksole laugh 
 back . 

 ' it be a good h"tel , and I know the proprietor personally . ' 

 ' rather expensive , be it not ? ' say Babylon . 

 ' to you , sir , ' answer Racksole , ' the inclusive term will be exactly 
 half a crown a week . do you accept ? ' 

 ' I accept , ' say Babylon , and add , ' you be very good , Mr Racksole . ' 

 they stroll together back to the h"tel , say nothing in particular , 
 but feel very content with each other 's company . 

 ' many customer ? ' ask Felix Babylon . 

 ' very tolerable , ' say Racksole , assume as much of the air of the 
 professional h"tel proprietor as he could . ' I think I may say in the 
 storekeeper 's phrase , that if there be any business about I be do it . 

 to - night the people be all on the terrace in the portico - it be so 
 confoundedly hot - and the consumption of ice be simply enormous - nearly 
 as large as it would be in New York . ' 

 ' in that case , ' say Babylon politely , ' let I offer you another cigar . ' 

 ' but I have not finish this one . ' 

 ' that be just why I wish to offer you another one . a cigar such as 
 your , my good friend , ought never to be smoke within the precinct of 
 the Grand Babylon , not even by the proprietor of the Grand Babylon , and 
 especially when all the guest be assemble in the portico . the fume 
 of it would ruin any h"tel . ' 

 Theodore Racksole laughingly light the Rothschild Havana which Babylon 
 give he , and they enter the h"tel arm in arm . but no soon have they 
 mount the step than little Felix become the object of numberless 
 greeting . it appear that he have be highly popular among his quondam 
 guest . at last they reach the managerial room , where Babylon be 
 regale on a chicken , and Racksole assist he in the consumption of a 
 bottle of Heidsieck Monopole , Carte d'Or . 

 ' this chicken be almost perfectly grill , ' say Babylon at length . ' it 
 be a credit to the house . but why , my dear Racksole , why in the name of 
 Heaven do you quarrel with Rocco ? ' 

 ' then you have hear ? ' 

 ' heard ! my dear friend , it be in every newspaper on the continent . some 
 journal prophesy that the Grand Babylon would have to close its door 
 within half a year now that Rocco have desert it . but of course I know 
 well . I know that you must have a good reason for allow Rocco 
 to depart , and that you must have make arrangement in advance for a 
 substitute . ' 

 ' as a matter of fact , I have not make arrangement in advance , ' say 
 Theodore Racksole , a little ruefully ; ' but happily we have find in 
 our second sous - chef an artist inferior only to Rocco himself . that , 
 however , be mere good fortune . ' 

 ' surely , ' say Babylon , ' it be indiscreet to trust to mere good fortune 
 in such a serious matter ? ' 

 ' I do not   trust to mere good fortune . I do not   trust to anything except 
 Rocco , and he deceive I . ' 

 ' but why do you quarrel with he ? ' 

 ' I do not   quarrel with he . I find he embalm a corpse in the state 
 bedroom one night - ' 

 ' you what ? ' Babylon almost scream . 

 ' I find he embalm a corpse in the State bedroom , ' repeat Racksole 
 in his quiet tone . 

 the two man gaze at each other , and then Racksole replenish Babylon 's 
 glass . 

 ' tell I , ' say Babylon , settle himself deep in an easy chair and 
 light a cigar . 

 and Racksole thereupon recount to he the whole of the Posen episode , 
 with every circumstantial detail so far as he know it . it be a long and 
 complicated recital , and occupy about an hour . during that time little 
 Felix never speak a word , scarcely move a muscle ; only his small eye 
 gaze through the bluish haze of smoke . the clock on the mantelpiece 
 tinkle midnight . 

 ' time for whisky and soda , ' say Racksole , and get up as if to ring the 
 bell ; but Babylon wave he back . 

 ' you have tell I that this Sampson Levi have an audience of Prince Eugen 
 to - day , but you have not tell I the result of that audience , ' say 
 Babylon . 

 ' because I do not yet know it . but I shall doubtless know to - morrow . in 
 the meantime , I feel fairly sure that Levi decline to produce Prince 
 Eugen 's require million . I have reason to believe that the money be 
 lend elsewhere . ' 

 ' H'm ! ' muse Babylon ; and then , carelessly , ' I be not at all surprised 
 at that arrangement for spy through the bathroom of the State 
 apartment . ' 

 ' why be you not surprised ? ' 

 ' oh ! ' say Babylon , ' it be such an obvious dodge - so easy to carry out . 
 as for I , I take special care never to involve myself in these affair . 
 I know they exist ; I somehow feel that they exist . but I also feel 
 that they lie outside my sphere . my business be to provide board and 
 lodging of the most sumptuous kind to those who do not   mind pay for 
 it ; and I do my business . if anything else go on in the h"tel , under 
 the rose , I long determine to ignore it unless it should happen to be 
 bring before my notice ; and it never be bring before my notice . 
 however , I admit that there be a certain pleasurable excitement in this 
 kind of affair and doubtless you have experience that . ' 

 ' I have , ' say Racksole simply , ' though I believe you be laugh at 
 I . ' 

 ' by no mean , ' Babylon reply . ' now what , if I may ask the question , be 
 go to be your next step ? ' 

 ' that be just what I desire to know myself , ' say Theodore Racksole . 

 ' well , ' say Babylon , after a pause , ' let we begin . in the first place , 
 it be possible you may be interested to hear that I happen to see 
 Jules to - day . ' 

 ' you do ! ' Racksole remark with much calmness . ' where ? ' 

 ' well , it be early this morning , in Paris , just before I leave there . 
 the meeting be quite accidental , and Jules seem rather surprised at 
 meet I . he respectfully inquire where I be go , and I say that 
 I be go to Switzerland . at that moment I think I be go to 
 Switzerland . it have occur to I that after all I should be happy 
 there , and that I have well turn back and not see London any more . 
 however , I change my mind once again , and decide to come on to London , 
 and accept the risk of be miserable there without my h"tel . then 
 I ask Jules whither he be bind , and he tell I that he be off to 
 Constantinople , be interested in a new french h"tel there . I wish 
 he good luck , and we part . ' 

 ' Constantinople , eh ! ' say Racksole . ' a highly suitable place for he , I 
 should say . ' 

 ' but , ' Babylon resume , ' I catch sight of he again . ' 

 ' where ? ' 

 ' at Charing Cross , a few minute before I have the pleasure of meeting 
 you . 

 Mr Jules have not go to Constantinople after all . he do not see I , 
 or I should have suggest to he that in go from Paris to 
 Constantinople it be not usual to travel via London . ' 

 ' the cheek of the fellow ! ' exclaim Theodore Racksole . ' the gorgeous 
 and colossal cheek of the fellow ! ' 




 Chapter Twenty - Two in the WINE cellars of the GRAND BABYLON 

 ' do you know anything of the antecedent of this Jules , ' ask Theodore 
 Racksole , help himself to whisky . 

 ' nothing whatever , ' say Babylon . ' until you tell I , I do not   think I 
 be aware that his true name be Thomas Jackson , though of course I know 
 that it be not Jules . I certainly be not aware that Miss Spencer be 
 his wife , but I have long suspect that their relation be somewhat 
 more intimate than the nature of their respective duty in the h"tel 
 absolutely demand . all that I do know of Jules - he will always be 
 call Jules - be that he gradually , by some mysterious personal force , 
 acquire a prominent position in the h"tel . decidedly he be the 
 clever and most intellectual waiter I have ever know , and he be 
 specially skilled in the difficult task of retain his own dignity 
 while not interfere with that of other people . 

 I be afraid this information be a little too vague to be of any practical 
 assistance in the present difficulty . ' 

 ' what be the present difficulty ? ' Racksole query , with a simple air . 

 ' I should imagine that the present difficulty be to account for the 
 man 's presence in London . ' 

 ' that be easily account for , ' say Racksole . 

 ' how ? do you suppose he be anxious to give himself up to justice , or 
 that the chain of habit bind he to the h"tel ? ' 

 ' neither , ' say Racksole . ' Jules be go to have another try - that be 
 all . ' 

 ' another try at what ? ' 

 ' at Prince Eugen . either at his life or his liberty . Most probably the 
 former this time ; almost certainly the former . he have guess that 
 we be somewhat handicapped by our anxiety to keep Prince Eugen 's 
 predicament quite quiet , and he be take advantage , of that fact . as he 
 already be fairly rich , on his own admission , the reward which have be 
 offer to he must be enormous , and he be absolutely determined to get 
 it . he have several time recently prove himself to be a daring fellow ; 
 unless I be mistaken he will shortly prove himself to be still more 
 dare . ' 

 ' but what can he do ? surely you do not   suggest that he will attempt the 
 life of Prince Eugen in this h"tel ? ' 

 ' why not ? if Reginald Dimmock fall on mere suspicion that he would turn 
 out unfaithful to the conspiracy , why not Prince Eugen ? ' 

 ' but it would be an unspeakable crime , and do infinite harm to the 
 h"tel ! ' 

 ' true ! ' Racksole admit , smile . little Felix Babylon seem to brace 
 himself for the grasping of his monstrous idea . 

 ' how could it possibly be do ? ' he ask at length . 

 ' Dimmock be poison . ' 

 ' yes , but you have Rocco here then , and Rocco be in the plot . it be 
 conceivable that Rocco could have manage it - barely conceivable . but 
 without Rocco I can not think it possible . I can not even think that 
 jule would attempt it . you see , in a place like the Grand Babylon , as 
 probably I need not   point out to you , food have to pass through so many 
 hand that to poison one person without kill perhaps fifty would be 
 a most delicate operation . moreover , Prince Eugen , unless he have 
 change his habit , be always serve by his own attendant , old Hans , and 
 therefore any attempt to tamper with a cooked dish immediately before 
 serve would be hazardous in the extreme . ' 

 ' grant , ' say Racksole . ' the wine , however , might be more easily get 
 at . 

 have you think of that ? ' 

 ' I have not , ' Babylon admit . ' you be an ingenious theorist , but I 
 happen to know that Prince Eugen always have his wine open in his own 
 presence . no doubt it would be open by Hans . therefore the wine theory 
 be not tenable , my friend . ' 

 ' I do not see why , ' say Racksole . ' I know nothing of wine as an expert , 
 and I very seldom drink it , but it seem to I that a bottle of wine 
 might be tamper with while it be still in the cellar , especially if 
 there be an accomplice in the h"tel . ' 

 ' you think , then , that you be not yet rid of all your conspirator ? ' 

 ' I think that Jules might still have an accomplice within the building . ' 

 ' and that a bottle of wine could be open and recorke without leave 
 any trace of the operation ? ' Babylon be a trifle sarcastic . 

 ' I do not   see the necessity of open the bottle in order to poison the 
 wine , ' say Racksole . ' I have never try to poison anybody by mean 
 of a bottle of wine , and I do not   lay claim to any natural talent as a 
 poisoner , but I think I could devise several way of manage the trick . 
 of course , I admit I may be entirely mistake as to Jules ' intention . ' 

 ' ah ! ' say Felix Babylon . ' the wine cellar beneath we be one of the 
 wonder of London . I hope you be aware , Mr Racksole , that when you 
 buy the Grand Babylon you buy what be probably the fine stock of 
 wine in England , if not in Europe . in the valuation I reckon they at 
 sixty thousand pound . and I may say that I always take care that the 
 cellar be properly guard . even Jules would experience a serious 
 difficulty in break into the cellar without the connivance of the 
 wine - clerk , and the wine - clerk be , or be , incorruptible . ' 

 ' I be ashamed to say that I have not yet inspect my wine , ' smile 
 Racksole ; ' I have never give they a thought . once or twice I have take 
 the trouble to make a tour of the h"tel , but I omit the cellar in my 
 excursion . ' 

 ' impossible , my dear fellow ! ' say Babylon , amuse at such a confession , 
 to he - a great connoisseur and lover of fine wine - almost incredible . 
 ' but really you must see they to - morrow . if I may , I will accompany 
 you . ' 

 ' why not to - night ? ' Racksole suggest , calmly . 

 ' to - night ! it be very late : Hubbard will have go to bed . ' 

 ' and may I ask who be Hubbard ? I remember the name but dimly . ' 

 ' Hubbard be the wine - clerk of the Grand Babylon , ' say Felix , with 
 a certain emphasis . ' a sedate man of forty . he have the key of the 
 cellar . he know every bottle of every bin , its date , its quality , 
 its value . and he be a teetotaler . Hubbard be a curiosity . no wine can 
 leave the cellar without his knowledge , and no person can enter the 
 cellar without his knowledge . at least , that be how it be in my time , ' 
 Babylon add . 

 ' we will wake he , ' say Racksole . 

 ' but it be one o'clock in the morning , ' Babylon protest . 

 ' never mind - that be , if you consent to accompany I . a cellar be the 
 same by night as by day . therefore , why not now ? ' 

 Babylon shrug his shoulder . ' as you wish , ' he agree , with his 
 indestructible politeness . 

 ' and now to find this Mr Hubbard , with his key of the cupboard , ' say 
 Racksole , as they walk out of the room together . although the hour 
 be so late , the h"tel be not , of course , close for the night . a few 
 guest still remain about in the public room , and a few fatigued 
 waiter be still in attendance . one of these latter be despatch in 
 search of the singular Mr Hubbard , and it fortunately turn out that 
 this gentleman have not actually retire , though he be on the point of 
 do so . he bring the key to Mr Racksole in person , and after he 
 have have a little chat with his former master , the proprietor and the 
 ex - proprietor of the Grand Babylon h"tel proceed on their way to the 
 cellar . 

 these cellar extend over , or rather under , quite half the superficial 
 area of the whole h"tel - the longitudinal half which lie next to the 
 Strand . 

 owe to the fact that the ground slop sharply from the Strand to the 
 river , the Grand Babylon be , so to speak , deep near the Strand than 
 it be near the Thames . towards the Thames there be , below the entrance 
 level , a basement and a sub - basement . towards the Strand there be 
 basement , sub - basement , and the huge wine cellar beneath all . after 
 descend the four flight of the service stair , and traverse a 
 long passage run parallel with the kitchen , the two find themselves 
 opposite a door , which , on be unlocked , give access to another flight 
 of stair . at the foot of this be the main entrance to the cellar . 
 outside the entrance be the wine - lift , for the ascension of delicious 
 fluid to the upper floor , and , opposite , Mr Hubbard 's little office . 
 there be electric light everywhere . 

 Babylon , who , as be most accustomed to they , hold the bunch of key , 
 open the great door , and then they be in the first cellar - the first 
 of a suite of five . Racksole be strike not only by the icy coolness 
 of the place , but also by its vastness . Babylon have seize a portable 
 electric handlight , attach to a long wire , which lie handy , and , 
 wave it about , disclose the dimension of the place . by that flash 
 illumination the subterranean chamber look unutterably weird and 
 mysterious , with its row of numbered bin , stretch away into the 
 distance till the radiance be reduce to the occasional far gleam of 
 the light on the shoulder of a bottle . then Babylon switch on 
 the fix electric light , and Theodore Racksole enter upon a 
 personally - conduct tour of what be quite the most interesting part of 
 his own property . 

 to see the innocent enthusiasm of Felix Babylon for these store of 
 exhilarate liquid be what be call in the North ' a sight for sair 
 een ' . 

 he display to Racksole 's bewildered gaze , in their due order , all the 
 wine of three continent - nay , of four , for the superb and luscious 
 Constantia wine of Cape Colony be not want in that most catholic 
 collection of vintage . begin with the unsurpassed product 
 of Burgundy , he continue with the claret of Médoc , Bordeaux , and 
 sauterne ; then to the champagne of Ay , hautvillier , and Pierry ; 
 then to the hock and moselle of Germany , and the brilliant imitation 
 champagne of Main , Neckar , and Naumburg ; then to the famous and 
 adorable Tokay of Hungary , and all the austrian variety of french 
 wine , include Carlowitz and Somlauer ; then to the dry sherry of 
 Spain , include purest Manzanilla , and Amontillado , and Vino de Pasto ; 
 then to the wine of Malaga , both sweet and dry , and all the ' spanish 
 red ' from Catalonia , include the dark ' tent ' so often use 
 sacramentally ; then to the renowned port of Oporto . then he proceed 
 to the italian cellar , and descant upon the excellence of Barolo from 
 Piedmont , of Chianti from Tuscany , of Orvieto from the Roman States , of 
 the ' Tears of Christ ' from Naples , and the commoner Marsala from Sicily . 
 and so on , to an extent and with a fullness of detail which can not be 
 render here . 

 at the end of the suite of cellar there be a glaze door , which , as 
 could be see , give access to a supplemental and small cellar , an 
 apartment about fifteen or sixteen foot square . 

 ' anything special in there ? ' ask Racksole curiously , as they stand 
 before the door , and look within at the seine end of bottle . 

 ' ah ! ' exclaim Babylon , almost smack his lip , ' therein lie the 
 cream of all . ' 

 ' the good champagne , I suppose ? ' say Racksole . 

 ' yes , ' say Babylon , ' the good champagne be there - a very special 
 Sillery , as exquisite as you will find anywhere . but I see , my friend , 
 that you fall into the common error of put champagne first among 
 wine . that distinction belong to Burgundy . you have old Burgundy in 
 that cellar , Mr Racksole , which cost I - how much do you think ? - eighty 
 pound a bottle . 

 probably it will never be drunk , ' he add with a sigh . ' it be too 
 expensive even for prince and plutocrat . ' 

 ' yes , it will , ' say Racksole quickly . ' you and I will have a bottle up 
 to - morrow . ' 

 ' then , ' continue Babylon , still rid his hobby - horse , ' there be a 
 sample of the rhine wine date 1706 which cause such a sensation at the 
 Vienna Exhibition of 1873 . there be also a singularly glorious persian 
 wine from Shiraz , the like of which I have never see elsewhere . also 
 there be an unrivalled vintage of Romanée - Conti , great of all modern 
 Burgundies . if I remember right Prince Eugen invariably have a bottle 
 when he come to stay here . it be not on the h"tel wine list , of course , 
 and only a few customer know of it . we do not precisely hawk it about 
 the dining - room . ' 

 ' indeed ! ' say Racksole . ' let we go inside . ' 

 they enter the stone apartment , render almost sacred by the 
 preciousness of its content , and Racksole look round with a strangely 
 intent and curious air . at the far side be a grating , through which 
 come a feeble light . 

 ' what be that ? ' ask the millionaire sharply . 

 ' that be merely a ventilation grating . good ventilation be absolutely 
 essential . ' 

 ' look break , do not   it ? ' Racksole suggest and then , put a 
 finger quickly on Babylon 's shoulder , ' there be someone in the cellar . 
 can not   you hear breathing , down there , behind that bin ? ' 

 the two man stand tense and silent for a while , listen , under the 
 ray of the single electric light in the ceiling . half the cellar be 
 involve in gloom . at length Racksole walk firmly down the central 
 passage - way between the bin and turn to the corner at the right . 

 ' come out , you villain ! ' he say in a low , well - nigh vicious tone , and 
 drag up a cower figure . 

 he have expect to find a man , but it be his own daughter , Nella 
 Racksole , upon whom he have lay angry hand . 




 Chapter Twenty - three further event in the CELLAR 

 ' well , Father , ' Nella greet her astounded parent . ' you should make 
 sure that you have get hold of the right person before you use all 
 that terrible muscular force of your . I do believe you have break my 
 shoulder bone . ' she rub her shoulder with a comical expression of 
 pain , and then stand up before the two man . the skirt of her dark grey 
 dress be tear and dirty , and the usually trim Nella look as though 
 she have be shoot down a canvas fire - escape . mechanically she smooth 
 her frock , and give a straighten touch to her hair . 

 ' good evening , Miss Racksole , ' say Felix Babylon , bow formally . 
 ' this be an unexpected pleasure . ' Felix 's drawing - room manner never 
 desert he upon any occasion whatever . 

 ' may I inquire what you be do in my wine cellar , Nella Racksole ? ' 
 say the millionaire a little stiffly he be certainly somewhat annoyed 
 at have mistaken his daughter for a criminal ; moreover , he hat to 
 be surprised , and upon this occasion he have be surprised beyond any 
 ordinary surprise ; lastly , he be not at all pleased that Nella should 
 be observe in that strange predicament by a stranger . 

 ' I will tell you , ' say Nella . ' I have be read rather late in my 
 room - the night be so close . I hear Big Ben strike half - past twelve , 
 and then I put the book down , and go out on to the balcony of my 
 window for a little fresh air before go to bed . I lean over the 
 balcony very quietly - you will remember that I be on the third floor 
 now - and look down below into the little sunk yard which separate the 
 wall of the h"tel from Salisbury Lane . I be rather astonished to see a 
 figure creep across the yard . I know there be no entrance into the 
 h"tel from that yard , and besides , it be fifteen or twenty foot below 
 the level of the street . so I watch . the figure go close up against 
 the wall , and disappear from my view . I lean over the balcony as far 
 as I dare , but I could not   see he . I could hear he , however . ' 

 ' what could you hear ? ' question Racksole sharply . 

 ' it sound like a saw noise , ' say Nella ; ' and it go on for quite 
 a long time - nearly a quarter of an hour , I should think - a rasping sort 
 of noise . ' 

 ' why on earth do not   you come and warn I or someone else in the h"tel ? ' 
 ask Racksole . 

 ' oh , I do not   know , Dad , ' she reply sweetly . ' I have get interested in 
 it , and I think I would see it out myself . well , as I be say , 
 Mr. Babylon , ' she continue , address her remark to Felix , with a 
 dazzle smile , ' that noise go on for quite a long time . at last it 
 stop , and the figure reappear from under the wall , cross the 
 yard , climb up the opposite wall by some mean or other , and so over 
 the railing into Salisbury Lane . I feel rather relieved then , because I 
 know he have not   actually break into the h"tel . he walk down Salisbury 
 Lane very slowly . a policeman be just come up . " goodnight , officer , " 
 I hear he say to the policeman , and he ask he for a match . the 
 policeman supply the match , and the other man light a cigarette , and 
 proceed far down the lane . by crick your neck from my window , 
 Mr Babylon , you can get a glimpse of the Embankment and the river . I see 
 the man cross the Embankment , and lean over the river wall , where he 
 seem to be talk to some one . he then walk along the Embankment to 
 Westminster and that be the last I see of he . I wait a minute or two 
 for he to come back , but he do not   come back , and so I think it be 
 about time I begin to make inquiry into the affair . I go downstairs 
 instantly , and out of the h"tel , through the quadrangle , into Salisbury 
 Lane , and I look over those railing . there be a ladder on the other 
 side , by which it be perfectly easy - once you have get over the 
 railing - to climb down into the yard . I be horribly afraid lest 
 someone might walk up Salisbury Lane and catch I in the act of 
 negotiate those railing , but no one do , and I surmount they , with 
 no bad damage than a tear skirt . I cross the yard on tiptoe , and I 
 find that in the wall , close to the ground and almost exactly under my 
 window , there be an iron grating , about one foot by fourteen inch . I 
 suspect , as there be no other ironwork near , that the mysterious 
 visitor must have be saw at this grating for private purpose of 
 his own . I give it a good shake , and I be not at all surprised that a 
 good part of it come off in my hand , leave just enough room for a 
 person to creep through . I decide that I would creep through , and now 
 wish I have not . I do not   know , Mr Babylon , whether you have ever try to 
 creep through a small hole with a skirt on . have you ? ' 

 ' I have not have that pleasure , ' say little Felix , bow again , and 
 absently take up a bottle which lie to his hand . 

 ' well , you be fortunate , ' the imperturbable Nella resume . ' for quite 
 three minute I think I should perish in that grating , Dad , with my 
 shoulder inside and the rest of I outside . however , at last , by the 
 most amazing and agonizing effort , I pull myself through and fall 
 into this extraordinary cellar more dead than alive . then I wonder 
 what I should do next . should I wait for the mysterious visitor to 
 return , and stab he with my pocket scissor if he try to enter , or 
 should I raise an alarm ? first of all I replace the break grating , 
 then I strike a match , and I see that I have get land in a wilderness 
 of bottle . the match go out , and I have not   another one . so I sit 
 down in the corner to think . I have just decide to wait and see if the 
 visitor return , when I hear footstep , and then voice ; and then you 
 come in . I must say I be rather take aback , especially as I recognize 
 the voice of Mr Babylon . you see , I do not   want to frighten you . 

 if I have bob up from behind the bottle and say " Booh ! " you would 
 have have a serious shock . I want to think of a way of break my 
 presence gently to you . but you save I the trouble , Dad . be I really 
 breathe so loudly that you could hear I ? ' 

 the girl end her strange recital , and there be a moment 's silence 
 in the cellar . Racksole merely nod an affirmative to her concluding 
 question . 

 ' well , Nell , my girl , ' say the millionaire at length , ' we be much 
 oblige for your gymnastic effort - very much oblige . but now , I think 
 you have well go off to bed . there be go to be some serious trouble 
 here , I will lay my last dollar on that ? ' 

 ' but if there be to be a burglary I should so like to see it , Dad , ' 
 Nella plead . ' I have   never see a burglar catch red - handed . ' 

 ' this be not   a burglary , my dear . I calculate it be something far bad 
 than a burglary . ' 

 ' what ? ' she cry . ' murder ? Arson ? dynamite plot ? how perfectly 
 splendid ! ' 

 ' Mr Babylon inform I that Jules be in London , ' say Racksole quietly . 

 ' Jules ! ' she exclaim under her breath , and her tone change instantly 
 to the utmost seriousness . ' switch off the light , quick ! ' spring to 
 the switch , she put the cellar in darkness . 

 ' what be that for ? ' say her father . 

 ' if he come back he would see the light , and be frighten away , ' say 
 Nella . ' that would not   do at all . ' 

 ' it would not , Miss Racksole , ' say Babylon , and there be in his voice 
 a note of admiration for the girl 's sagacity which Racksole hear with 
 high paternal pride . 

 ' listen , Nella , ' say the latter , draw his daughter to he in the 
 profound gloom of the cellar . ' we fancy that Jules may be try to 
 tamper with a certain bottle of wine - a bottle which might possibly be 
 drunk by Prince Eugen . now do you think that the man you see might have 
 be Jules ? ' 

 ' I have not   previously think of he as be Jules , but immediately you 
 mention the name I somehow know that he be . yes , I be sure it be 
 Jules . ' 

 ' well , just hear what I have to say . there be no time to lose . if he 
 be come at all he will be here very soon - and you can help . ' Racksole 
 explain what he think Jules ' tactic might be . he propose that if 
 the man return he should not be interfere with , but merely watch 
 from the other side of the glass door . 

 ' you want , as it be , to catch Mr Jules alive ? ' say Babylon , 
 who seem rather take aback at this novel method of deal with 
 criminal . ' surely , ' he add , ' it would be simple and easy to inform 
 the police of your suspicion , and to leave everything to they . ' 

 ' my dear fellow , ' say Racksole , ' we have already go much too far 
 without the police to make it advisable for we to call they in at this 
 somewhat advanced stage of the proceeding . besides , if you must know 
 it , I have a particular desire to capture the scoundrel myself . I will 
 leave you and Nella here , since Nella insist on see everything , and 
 I will arrange thing so that once he have enter the cellar Jules will 
 not get out of it again - at any rate through the grating . you have well 
 place yourselves on the other side of the glass door , in the big cellar ; 
 you will be in a position to observe from there , I will skip off at 
 once . all you have to do be to take note of what the fellow do . if he 
 have any accomplice within the h"tel we shall probably be able by that 
 mean to discover who the accomplice be . ' 

 light a match and shade it with his hand , Racksole show they 
 both out of the little cellar . ' now if you lock this glass door on the 
 outside he can not   escape this way : the pane of glass be too small , and 
 the woodwork too stout . so , if he come into the trap , you two will have 
 the pleasure of actually see he frantically writhe therein , without 
 any personal danger ; but perhaps you would well not show yourself . ' 

 in another moment Felix Babylon and Nella be leave to themselves in the 
 darkness of the cellar , listen to the recede footfall of Theodore 
 Racksole . but the sound of these footfall have not die away before 
 another sound greet their ear - the grating of the small cellar be 
 be remove . 

 ' I hope your father will be in time , ' whisper Felix 

 ' hush ! ' the girl warn he , and they stoop side by side in tense 
 silence . 

 a man cautiously but very neatly worm his body through the aperture 
 of the grating . the watcher could only see his form indistinctly in the 
 darkness . 

 then , be fairly within the cellar , he walk without the least 
 hesitation to the electric switch and turn on the light . it be 
 unmistakably Jules , and he know the geography of the cellar very well . 
 Babylon could with difficulty repress a start as he see this bold 
 and unscrupulous ex - waiter move with such an air of assurance and 
 determination about the precious cellar . jule go directly to a small 
 bin which be number 17 , and take there from the topmost bottle . 

 ' the Romanee - Conti - Prince Eugen 's wine ! ' Babylon exclaim under his 
 breath . 

 jule neatly and quickly remove the seal with an instrument which he 
 have clearly bring for the purpose . he then take a little flat box from 
 his pocket , which seem to contain a sort of black salve . rub his 
 finger in this , he smear the top of the neck of the bottle with it , 
 just where the cork come against the glass . in another instant he have 
 deftly replace the seal and restore the bottle to its position . 
 he then turn off the light , and make for the aperture . when he be 
 half - way through Nella exclaim , ' he will escape , after all . Dad have 
 not have time - we must stop he . ' 

 but Babylon , that embodiment of caution , forcibly , but nevertheless 
 politely , restrain this Yankee girl , whom he deem so rash and 
 imprudent , and before she could free herself the lithe form of Jules have 
 disappear . 




 Chapter Twenty - Four THE BOTTLE of WINE 

 as regard Theodore Racksole , who be to have catch his man from the 
 outside of the cellar , he make his way as rapidly as possible from 
 the wine - cellar , up to the ground floor , out of the h"tel by the 
 quadrangle , through the quadrangle , and out into the top of Salisbury 
 Lane . now , owe to the vastness of the structure of the Grand Babylon , 
 the mere distance thus to be traverse amount to a little short of 
 a quarter of a mile , and , as it include a number of stair , about two 
 dozen turning , and several passage which at that time of night be in 
 darkness more or less complete , Racksole could not have be expect to 
 accomplish the journey in less than five minute . as a matter of fact , 
 six minute have elapse before he reach the top of Salisbury Lane , 
 because he have be delay nearly a minute by some question address 
 to he by a muddled and whisky - laden guest who have get lose in the 
 corridor . as everybody know , there be a sharp short bend in Salisbury 
 Lane near the top . Racksole run round this at good racing speed , but he 
 be unfortunate enough to run straight up against the very policeman 
 who have not long before so courteously supply Jules with a match . the 
 policeman seem to be scarcely in so pliant a mood just then . 

 ' Hullo ! ' he say , his naturally suspicious nature be doubtless 
 arouse by the spectacle of a bareheaded man in evening dress run 
 violently down the lane . ' what be this ? where be you for in such a 
 hurry ? ' and he forcibly detain Theodore Racksole for a moment and 
 scrutinize his face . 

 ' now , officer , ' say Racksole quietly , ' none of your lark , if you 
 please . 

 I have   no time to lose . ' 

 ' beg your pardon , sir , ' the policeman remark , though hesitatingly and 
 not quite with good temper , and Racksole be allow to proceed on his 
 way . the millionaire 's scheme for trap Jules be to get down into 
 the little sunk yard by mean of the ladder , and then to secrete himself 
 behind some convenient abutment of brickwork until Mr Tom Jackson 
 should have get into the cellar . he therefore nimbly surmount the 
 railing - the railing of his own h"tel - and be gingerly descend the 
 ladder , when lo ! a rough hand seize he by the coat - collar and with a 
 ferocious jerk urge he backwards . the fact be , Theodore Racksole have 
 count without the policeman . that guardian of the peace , mistrust 
 Racksole 's manner , quietly follow he down the lane . the sight of the 
 millionaire climb the railing have put he on his mettle , and 
 the result be the ignominious capture of Racksole . in vain Theodore 
 expostulate , explain , anathematize . only one thing would satisfy the 
 stolid policeman - namely , that Racksole should return with he to the 
 h"tel and there establish his identity . if Racksole then prove to 
 be Racksole , owner of the Grand Babylon , well and good - the policeman 
 promise to apologize . so Theodore have no alternative but to accept the 
 suggestion . to prove his identity be , of course , the work of only a few 
 minute , after which Racksole , annoyed , but cool as ever , return to 
 his railing , while the policeman go off to another part of his beat , 
 where he would be likely to meet a comrade and have a chat . 

 in the meantime , our friend Jules , sublimely unconscious of the 
 altercation go on outside , and of the special risk which he run , be 
 of course actually in the cellar , which he have reach before Racksole 
 get to the railing for the first time . it be , indeed , a happy chance 
 for Jules that his exit from the cellar coincide with the period during 
 which Racksole be absent from the railing . as Racksole come down the 
 lane for the second time , he see a figure walk about fifty yard in 
 front of he towards the Embankment . instantly he divine that it be 
 Jules , and that the policeman have throw he just too late . he run , and 
 Jules , hear the noise of pursuit , run also . the ex - waiter be fleet ; 
 he make direct for a certain spot in the Embankment wall , and , to the 
 intense astonishment of Racksole , jump clean over the wall , as it 
 seem , into the river . ' be he so desperate as to commit suicide ? ' 
 Racksole exclaim as he run , but a second later the puff and snort of a 
 steam launch tell he that Jules be not quite drive to suicide . as 
 the millionaire cross the Embankment roadway he see the funnel of the 
 launch move out from under the river - wall . it swerve into midstream and 
 head towards London Bridge . there be a silent mist over the river . 
 Racksole be helpless .... 

 although Racksole have now be twice worst in a contest of wit within 
 the precinct of the Grand Babylon , once by Rocco and once by Jules , 
 he could not fairly blame himself for the present miscarriage of his 
 plan - a miscarriage due to the meddlesomeness of an extraneous person , 
 combine with pure ill - fortune . he do not , therefore , permit the 
 accident to interfere with his sleep that night . 

 on the follow day he seek out Prince Aribert , between whom and 
 himself there now exist a feeling of unmistakable , frank friendship , 
 and disclose to he the happening of the previous night , and 
 particularly the tampering with the bottle of Romanée - Conti . 

 ' I believe you din with Prince Eugen last night ? ' 

 ' I do . and curiously enough we have a bottle of Romanée - Conti , an 
 admirable wine , of which eugen be passionately fond . ' 

 ' and you will dine with he to - night ? ' 

 ' most probably . to - day will , I fear , be our last day here . eugen wish 
 to return to Posen early to - morrow . ' 

 ' has it strike you , Prince , ' say Racksole , ' that if Jules have succeed 
 in poison your nephew , he would probably have succeed also in 
 poison you ? ' 

 ' I have not think of it , ' laugh Aribert , ' but it would seem so . it 
 appear that so long as he bring down his particular quarry , Jules 
 be careless of anything else that may be accidentally involve in the 
 destruction . however , we need have no fear on that score now . you know 
 the bottle , and you can destroy it at once . ' 

 ' but I do not propose to destroy it , ' say Racksole calmly . ' if Prince 
 Eugen ask for Romanée - Conti to be serve to - night , as he probably will , 
 I propose that that precise bottle shall be serve to he - and to you . ' 

 ' then you would poison we in spite of ourselves ? ' 

 ' scarcely , ' Racksole smile . ' my notion be to discover the accomplice 
 within the h"tel . I have already inquire as to the wine - clerk , Hubbard . 
 now do it not occur to you as extraordinary that on this particular 
 day Mr Hubbard should be ill in bed ? Hubbard , I be inform , be 
 suffer from an attack of stomach poisoning , which have supervene 
 during the night . he say that he do not know what can have cause it . 
 his place in the wine cellar will be take to - day by his assistant , a 
 mere youth , but to all appearance a fairly smart youth . I need not say 
 that we shall keep an eye on that youth . ' 

 ' one moment , ' Prince Aribert interrupt . ' I do not quite understand how 
 you think the poisoning be to have be effect . ' 

 ' the bottle be now under examination by an expert , who have instruction 
 to remove as little as possible of the stuff which Jules put on the rim 
 of the mouth of it . it will be secretly replace in its bin during the 
 day . my idea be that by the mere action of pour out the wine take 
 up some of the poison , which I deem to be very strong , and thus become 
 fatal as it enter the glass . ' 

 ' but surely the servant in attendance would wipe the mouth of the 
 bottle ? ' 

 ' very carelessly , perhaps . and moreover he would be extremely unlikely 
 to wipe off all the stuff ; some of it have be ingeniously place just 
 on the inside edge of the rim . besides , suppose he forget to wipe the 
 bottle ? ' 

 ' Prince Eugen be always serve at dinner by Hans . it be an honour which 
 the faithful old fellow reserve for himself . ' 

 ' but suppose Hans - ' Racksole stop . 

 ' han an accomplice ! my dear Racksole , the suggestion be wildly 
 impossible . ' 

 that night Prince Aribert din with his august nephew in the superb 
 dining - room of the Royal apartment . Hans serve , the dish be 
 bring to the door by other servant . Aribert find his nephew 
 despondent and taciturn . on the previous day , when , after the futile 
 interview with Sampson Levi , Prince Eugen have despairingly threaten to 
 commit suicide , in such a manner as to make it ' look like an accident ' , 
 Aribert have compel he to give his word of honour not to do so . 

 ' what wine will your Royal Highness take ? ' ask old Hans in his 
 soothe tone , when the soup be serve . 

 ' Sherry , ' be Prince Eugen 's curt order . 

 ' and Romanée - Conti afterwards ? ' say Hans . Aribert look up quickly . 

 ' no , not to - night . I will try Sillery to - night , ' say Prince Eugen . 

 ' I think I will have Romanée - Conti , Hans , after all , ' he say . ' it suit 
 I well than champagne . ' 

 the famous and unsurpassable Burgundy be serve with the roast . Old 
 Hans bring it tenderly in its wicker cradle , insert the corkscrew 
 with mathematical precision , and draw the cork , which he offer for his 
 master 's inspection . eugen nod , and tell he to put it down . Aribert 
 watch with intense interest . he could not for an instant believe 
 that Hans be not the very soul of fidelity , and yet , despite himself , 
 Racksole 's word have cause he a certain uneasiness . at that moment 
 Prince Eugen murmur across the table : 

 ' Aribert , I withdraw my promise . observe that , I withdraw it . ' Aribert 
 shake his head emphatically , without remove his gaze from Hans . the 
 white - haired servant perfunctorily dust his napkin round the neck of 
 the bottle of Romanée - Conti , and pour out a glass . Aribert tremble 
 from head to foot . 

 Eugen take up the glass and hold it to the light . 

 ' do not   drink it , ' say Aribert very quietly . ' it be poison . ' 

 ' poison ! ' exclaim Prince Eugen . 

 ' Poisoned , sire ! ' exclaim old Hans , with an air of profound amazement 
 and concern , and he seize the glass . ' impossible , sire . I myself open 
 the bottle . no one else have touch it , and the cork be perfect . ' 

 ' I tell you it be poison , ' Aribert repeat . 

 ' your Highness will pardon an old man , ' say Hans , ' but to say that this 
 wine be poison be to say that I be a murderer . I will prove to you that 
 it be not poison . I will drink it . ' and he raise the glass to his 
 trembling lip . in that moment Aribert see that old Hans , at any rate , 
 be not an accomplice of Jules . spring up from his seat , he knock 
 the glass from the aged servitor 's hand , and the fragment of it fall 
 with a light tinkle crash partly on the table and partly on the floor . 
 the Prince and the servant gaze at one another in a distressing and 
 terrible silence . 

 there be a slight noise , and Aribert look aside . he see that Eugen 's 
 body have slip forward limply over the left arm of his chair ; the 
 Prince 's arm hang straight and lifeless ; his eye be close ; he be 
 unconscious . 

 ' Hans ! ' murmur Aribert . ' han ! what be this ? ' 




 Chapter Twenty - Five the steam LAUNCH 

 MR TOM JACKSON 's notion of make good his escape from the h"tel by 
 mean of a steam launch be an excellent one , so far as it go , but 
 Theodore Racksole , for his part , do not consider that it go quite far 
 enough . 

 Theodore Racksole opine , with peculiar glee , that he now have a tangible 
 and definite clue for the catching of the Grand Babylon 's ex - waiter . he 
 know nothing of the Port of London , but he happen to know a good deal 
 of the far more complicated , though somewhat small , Port of New York , 
 and he be sure there ought to be no extraordinary difficulty in get 
 hold of Jules ' steam launch . to those who be not thoroughly familiar 
 with it the River Thames and its dock , from London Bridge to gravesend , 
 seem a vast and uncharted wilderness of craft - a wilderness in which it 
 would be perfectly easy to hide even a three - master successfully . to 
 such people the idea of look for a steam launch on the river would be 
 about equivalent to the idea of look for a needle in a bundle of hay . 
 but the fact be , there be hundred of man between St Katherine 's Wharf 
 and Blackwall who literally know the Thames as the suburban householder 
 know his back - garden - who can recognize thousand of ship and put a 
 name to they at a distance of half a mile , who be inform as to every 
 movement of vessel on the great stream , who know all the captain , all 
 the engineer , all the lighterman , all the pilot , all the licensed 
 waterman , and all the unlicensed scoundrel from the Tower to gravesend , 
 and a lot far . by these expert of the Thames the slight unusual 
 event on the water be notice and discuss - a wherry can not change 
 hand but they will guess shrewdly upon the price pay and the 
 intention of the new owner with regard to it . they have a habit of 
 watch the river for the mere interest of the sight , and they talk 
 about everything like housewife gather of an evening round the 
 cottage door . if the first mate of a Castle Liner get the sack they 
 will be able to tell you what he say to the captain , what the old man 
 say to he , and what both say to the Board , and have finish off 
 that affair they will cheerfully turn to discuss whether Bill Stevens 
 sink his barge outside the West indian no.2 by accident or on purpose . 

 Theodore Racksole have no satisfactory mean of identify the steam 
 launch which carry away Mr Tom Jackson . the sky have cloud over soon 
 after midnight , and there be also a slight mist , and he have only 
 be able to make out that it be a low craft , about sixty foot long , 
 probably paint black . he have personally keep a watch all through the 
 night on vessel go upstream , and during the next morning he have 
 a man to take his place who warn he whenever a steam launch go 
 towards Westminster . at noon , after his conversation with Prince 
 Aribert , he go down the river in a hire row - boat as far as the Custom 
 House , and poke about everywhere , in search of any vessel which could 
 by any possibility be the one he be in search of . 

 but he find nothing . he be , therefore , tolerably sure that the 
 mysterious launch lie somewhere below the Custom House . at the Custom 
 House stair , he land , and ask for a very high official - an official 
 inferior only to a Commissioner - whom he have entertain once in New 
 York , and who have meet he in London on business at Lloyd 's . in the large 
 but dingy office of this great man a long conversation take place - a 
 conversation in which Racksole have to exercise a certain amount of 
 persuasive power , and which ultimately end in the high official 
 ring his bell . 

 ' Desire Mr Hazell - room no . 332 - to speak to I , ' say the official to 
 the boy who answer the summon , and then , turn to Racksole : ' I need 
 hardly repeat , my dear Mr Racksole , that this be strictly unofficial . ' 

 ' agree , of course , ' say Racksole . 

 Mr Hazell enter . he be a young man of about thirty , dress in blue 
 serge , with a pale , keen face , a brown moustache and a rather handsome 
 brown beard . 

 ' Mr Hazell , ' say the high official , ' let I introduce you to Mr 
 Theodore Racksole - you will doubtless be familiar with his name . Mr 
 Hazell , ' he go on to Racksole , ' be one of our outdoor staff - what we 
 call an examine officer . just now he be do night duty . he have 
 a boat on the river and a couple of man , and the right to board and 
 examine any craft whatever . what Mr Hazell and his crew do not   know about 
 the Thames between here and Gravesend be not   knowledge . ' 

 ' glad to meet you , sir , ' say Racksole simply , and they shake hand . 

 Racksole observe with satisfaction that Mr Hazell be entirely at his 
 ease . 

 ' now , Hazell , ' the high official continue , ' Mr Racksole want you to 
 help in a little private expedition on the river to - night . I will give 
 you a night 's leave . I send for you partly because I think you would 
 enjoy the affair and partly because I think I can rely on you to regard 
 it as entirely unofficial and not to talk about it . you understand ? I 
 dare say you will have no cause to regret have oblige Mr Racksole . ' 

 ' I think I grasp the situation , ' say Hazell , with a slight smile . 

 ' and , by the way , ' add the high official , ' although the business be 
 unofficial , it might be well if you wear your official overcoat . see ? ' 

 ' decidedly , ' say Hazell ; ' I should have do so in any case . ' 

 ' and now , Mr Hazell , ' say Racksole , ' will you do I the pleasure of 
 lunch with I ? if you agree , I should like to lunch at the place you 
 usually frequent . ' 

 so it come to pass that Theodore Racksole and George Hazell , outdoor 
 clerk in the Customs , lunch together at ' Thomas 's Chop - House ' , in 
 the city of London , upon mutton - chop and coffee . the millionaire soon 
 discover that he have get hold of a keen - witted man and a person of 
 much insight . 

 ' tell I , ' say Hazell , when they have reach the cigarette stage , ' be 
 the magazine writer anything like correct ? ' 

 ' what do you mean ? ' ask Racksole , mystify . 

 ' well , you be a millionaire - " one of the good " , I believe . one often 
 see article on and interview with millionaire , which describe their 
 private railroad car , their steam yacht on the Hudson , their marble 
 stable , and so on , and so on . do you happen to have those thing ? ' 

 ' I have a private car on the New York Central , and I have a two thousand 
 ton schooner - yacht - though it be not   on the Hudson . it happen just now 
 to be on East River . and I be bind to admit that the stable of my 
 uptown place be fit with marble . ' Racksole laugh . 

 ' ah ! ' say Hazell . ' now I can believe that I be lunch with a 
 millionaire . 

 it be strange how fact like those - unimportant in themselves - appeal to 
 the imagination . you seem to I a real millionaire now . you have   give I 
 some personal information ; I will give you some in return . I earn three 
 hundred a year , and perhaps sixty pound a year extra for overtime . I 
 live by myself in two room in Muscovy Court . I have   as much money as I 
 need , and I always do exactly what I like outside office . as regard the 
 office , I do as little work as I can , on principle - it be a fight between 
 we and the Commissioners who shall get the good . they try to do we down , 
 and we try to do they down - it be pretty even on the whole . all be fair 
 in war , you know , and there be not   no ten commandment in a Government 
 office . ' 

 Racksole laugh . ' can you get off this afternoon ? ' he ask . 

 ' certainly , ' say Hazell ; ' I will get one of my pal to sign on for I , 
 and then I shall be free . ' 

 ' well , ' say Racksole , ' I should like you to come down with I to the 
 Grand Babylon . then we can talk over my little affair at length . and may 
 we go on your boat ? I want to meet your crew . ' 

 ' that will be all right , ' Hazell remark . ' my two man be the idle , 
 most soul - less chap you ever see . they eat too much , and they have an 
 enormous appetite for beer ; but they know the river , and they know their 
 business , and they will do anything within the fair game if they be 
 pay for it , and be not   ask to hurry . ' 

 that night , just after dark , Theodore Racksole embark with his new 
 friend George Hazell in one of the black - paint Customs wherry , 
 man by a crew of two man - both the later freeman of the river , a 
 distinction which carry with it certain privilege unfamiliar to 
 the mere landsman . it be a cloudy and oppressive evening , not a star 
 show to illumine the slow tide , now just past its flood . the 
 vast form of steamer at anchor - chiefly those of the General Steam 
 Navigation and the Aberdeen Line - heave themselves high out of the 
 water , strain sluggishly at their mooring buoy . on either side the 
 naked wall of warehouse rise like grey precipice from the stream , 
 hold forth quaint arm of steam - crane . to the west the Tower Bridge 
 span the river with its formidable arch , and above that its suspend 
 footpath - a hundred and fifty foot from earth . 

 down towards the east and the Pool of London a forest of funnel and 
 mast be dimly outline against the sinister sky . huge barge , each 
 steer by a single man at the end of a pair of giant oar , lumber 
 and swirl down - stream at all angle . occasionally a tug snort busily 
 past , flash its red and green signal and drag an unwieldy tail 
 of barge in its wake . then a Margate passenger steamer , its electric 
 light gleam from every porthole , swerve round to anchor , with its 
 load of two thousand fatigued excursionist . over everything brood an 
 air of mystery - a spirit and feeling of strangeness , remoteness , and 
 the inexplicable . as the broad flat little boat bobbed its way under 
 the shadow of enormous hulk , beneath stretched hawser , and past buoy 
 cover with green slime , Racksole could scarcely believe that he be in 
 the very heart of London - the most prosaic city in the world . he have a 
 queer idea that almost anything might happen in this seeming waste of 
 water at this weird hour of ten o'clock . it appear incredible to he 
 that only a mile or two away people be sit in theatre applaud 
 farce , and that at Cannon Street Station , a few yard off , other people 
 be calmly take the train to various highly respectable suburb whose 
 name he be gradually learn . he have the uplift sensation of be 
 in another world which come to we sometimes amid surrounding violently 
 different from our usual surrounding . the most ordinary noise - of 
 man call , of a chain run through a slot , of a distant 
 siren - translate themselves to his ear into terrible and haunt 
 sound , full of portentous significance . he look over the side of the 
 boat into the brown water , and ask himself what frightful secret 
 lie hide in its depth . then he put his hand into his hip - pocket 
 and touch the stock of his Colt revolver - that familiar substance 
 comfort he . 

 the oarsman have instruction to drop slowly down to the Pool , as 
 the wide reach below the Tower be call . these two man have not be 
 previously inform of the precise object of the expedition , but now 
 that they be safely afloat Hazell judge it expedient to give they 
 some notion of it . ' we expect to come across a rather suspicious steam 
 launch , ' he say . ' my friend here be very anxious to get a sight of she , 
 and until he have see she nothing definite can be do . ' 

 ' what sort of a craft be she , sir ? ' ask the stroke oar , a fat - face 
 man who seem absolutely incapable of any serious exertion . 

 ' I do not   know , ' Racksole reply ; ' but as near as I can judge , she be 
 about sixty foot in length , and paint black . I fancy I shall recognize 
 she when I see she . ' 

 ' not much to go by , that , ' exclaim the other man curtly . but he say 
 no more . he , as well as his mate , have receive from Theodore Racksole 
 one English sovereign as a kind of preliminary fee , and an English 
 sovereign will do a lot towards silence the natural sarcastic 
 tendency and free speech of a Thames waterman . 

 ' there be one thing I notice , ' say Racksole suddenly , ' and I forget 
 to tell you of it , Mr Hazell . her screw seem to move with a rather 
 irregular , lame sort of beat . ' 

 both waterman burst into a laugh . 

 ' oh , ' say the fat rower , ' I know what you be after , sir - it be Jack 
 Everett 's launch , commonly call " Squirm " . she be get a four - bladed 
 propeller , and one blade be break off short . ' 

 ' ay , that be it , sure enough , ' agree the man in the bow . ' and if it be 
 she you want , I seed she lie up against Cherry Gardens Pier this very 
 morning . ' 

 ' let we go to Cherry Gardens Pier by all mean , as soon as possible , ' 

 Racksole say , and the boat swing across stream and then begin to creep 
 down by the right bank , feel its way past wharf , many of which , 
 even at that hour , be still busy with their crane , that descend 
 empty into the belly of ship and come up full . as the two waterman 
 gingerly manoeuvre the boat on the ebb tide , Hazell explain to the 
 millionaire that the ' squirm ' be one of the most notorious craft on the 
 river . it appear that when anyone have a nefarious or underhand 
 scheme afoot which necessitate river work Everett 's launch be always 
 available for a suitable monetary consideration . the ' squirm ' have get 
 itself into a thousand scrape , and out of those scrape again with 
 safety , if not precisely with honour . the river police keep a watchful 
 eye on it , and the chief marvel about the whole thing be that old 
 Everett , the owner , have never yet be seriously compromise in any 
 illegal escapade . not once have the officer of the law be able to prove 
 anything definite against the proprietor of the ' squirm ' , though 
 several of its quondam hirer be at that very moment in various of her 
 Majesty 's prison throughout the country . latterly , however , the launch , 
 with its damaged propeller , which Everett consistently refuse to have 
 repair , have acquire an evil reputation , even among evil - doer , 
 and this fraternity have gradually come to abandon it for less easily 
 recognizable craft . 

 ' your friend , Mr Tom Jackson , ' say Hazell to Racksole , ' commit 
 an error of discretion when he hire the " squirm " . a scoundrel of his 
 experience and calibre ought certainly to have know well than that . 
 you can not fail to get a clue now . ' 

 by this time the boat be approach Cherry Gardens Pier , but 
 unfortunately a thin night - fog have sweep over the river , and object 
 could not be discern with any clearness beyond a distance of thirty 
 yard . as the Customs boat scrap down past the pier all its occupant 
 strained eye for a glimpse of the mysterious launch , but nothing could 
 be see of it . the boat continue to float idly down - stream , the man 
 rest on their oar . 

 then they narrowly escape bump a large norwegian sailing vessel at 
 anchor with her stem pointing down - stream . this ship they pass on the 
 port side . just as they get clear of her bowsprit the fat man cry out 
 excitedly , ' there be her nose ! ' and he put the boat about and begin 
 to pull back against the tide . and surely the miss ' squirm ' be 
 comfortably anchor on the starboard quarter of the norwegian ship , 
 hide neatly between the ship and the shore . the man pull very 
 quietly alongside . 




 Chapter Twenty - Six the night CHASE and the MUDLARK 

 ' I'LL board she to start with , ' say Hazell , whisper to Racksole . 
 ' I will make out that I suspect they have   get dutiable good on board , and 
 that will give I a chance to have a good look at she . ' 

 dress in his official overcoat and peak cap , he step , rather 
 jauntily as Racksole think , on to the low deck of the launch . ' anyone 
 aboard ? ' 

 Racksole hear he cry out , and a woman 's voice answer . ' I be a Customs 
 examine officer , and I want to search the launch , ' Hazell shout , 
 and then disappear down into the little saloon amidship , and Racksole 
 hear no more . it seem to the millionaire that Hazell have be go 
 hour , but at length he return . 

 ' can not   find anything , ' he say , as he jump into the boat , and then 
 privately to Racksole : ' there be a woman on board . look as if she might 
 coincide with your description of Miss Spencer . Steam be up , but there be 
 no engineer . I ask where the engineer be , and she inquire what 
 business that be of mine , and request I to get through with my own 
 business and clear off . seem rather a smart sort . I poke my nose into 
 everything , but I see no sign of any one else . perhaps we would well pull 
 away and lie near for a bit , just to see if anything queer occur . ' 

 ' you be quite sure he be not   on board ? ' Racksole ask . 

 ' quite , ' say Hazell positively : ' I know how to search a vessel . see 
 this , ' and he hand to Racksole a sort of steel skewer , about two foot 
 long , with a wooden handle . ' that , ' he say , ' be one of the Customs ' 
 aid to search . ' 

 ' I suppose it would not   do to go on board and carry off the lady ? ' 
 Racksole suggest doubtfully . 

 ' well , ' Hazell begin , with equal doubtfulness , ' as for that - ' 

 ' where be ' e orf ? ' it be the man in the bow who interrupt Hazell . 

 follow the direction of the man 's finger , both Hazell and Racksole 
 see with more or less distinctness a dinghy slip away from the forefoot 
 of the norwegian vessel and disappear downstream into the mist . 

 ' it be Jules , I will swear , ' cry Racksole . ' after he , man . ten pound 
 apiece if we overtake he ! ' 

 ' lay down to it now , boy ! ' say Hazell , and the heavy Customs boat shoot 
 out in pursuit . 

 ' this be go to be a lark , ' Racksole remark . 

 ' depend on what you call a lark , ' say Hazell ; ' it be not much of a 
 lark tear down midstream like this in a fog . you never know when 
 you may not   be in kingdom come with all these barge knock around . I 
 expect that chap hide in the dinghy when he first catch sight of we , and 
 then slip his painter as soon as I have go . ' 

 the boat be move at a rapid pace with the tide . steering be a matter 
 of luck and instinct more than anything else . every now and then Hazell , 
 who hold the line , be oblige to jerk the boat 's head sharply round to 
 avoid a barge or an anchored vessel . it seem to Racksole that vessel 
 be anchor all over the stream . he look about he anxiously , but 
 for a long time he could see nothing but mist and vague nautical form . 
 then suddenly he say , quietly enough , ' we be on the right road ; I can 
 see he ahead . 

 we be gain on he . ' in another minute the dinghy be plainly visible , 
 not twenty yard away , and the sculler - scull frantically now - be 
 unmistakably Jules - Jules in a light tweed suit and a bowler hat . 

 ' you be right , ' Hazell say ; ' this be a lark . I believe I be get 
 quite excited . it be more exciting than play the trombone in an 
 orchestra . I will run he down , eh ? - and then we can drag the chap in from 
 the water . ' 

 Racksole nod , but at that moment a barge , with her red sail set , 
 stand out of the fog clean across the bow of the Customs boat , which 
 narrowly escape instant destruction . when they get clear , and the usual 
 interchange of calm , nonchalant swearing be over , the dinghy be barely 
 to be discern in the mist , and the fat man be breathe in such 
 a manner that his sigh might almost have be hear on the bank . 
 Racksole want violently to do something , but there be nothing to do ; 
 he could only sit supine by Hazell 's side in the stern - sheet . gradually 
 they begin again to overtake the dinghy , whose one - man crew be 
 evidently tiring . as they come up , hand over fist , the dinghy 's nose 
 swerve aside , and the tiny craft pass down a water - lane between two 
 anchor mineral barge , which lie black and desert about fifty yard 
 from the Surrey shore . ' to starboard , ' say Racksole . ' no , man ! ' 

 Hazell reply ; ' we can not   get through there . he be bind to come out 
 below ; it be only a feint . I will keep our nose straight ahead . ' 

 and they go on , the fat man pound away , with a face which glisten 
 even in the thick gloom . it be an empty dinghy which emerge from 
 between the two barge and go drift and revolve down towards 
 Greenwich . 

 the fat man gasp a word to his comrade , and the Customs boat stop 
 dead . 

 " E be all right , ' say the man in the bow . ' if it be ' I m you want , ' e 's 
 on one o ' they barge , so you have   only get to step on and take ' I m orf . ' 

 ' that be all , ' say a voice out of the depth of the near barge , and 
 it be the voice of Jules , otherwise know as Mr Tom Jackson . 

 " ear ' I m ? ' say the fat man smile . " E be a good ' un , ' e be . but if I 
 be you , Mr Hazell , or you , sir , I should not   step on to that barge so 
 quick as all that . ' 

 they back the boat under the stem of the near barge and gaze 
 upwards . 

 ' it be all right , ' say Racksole to Hazell ; ' I have   get a revolver . how can 
 I clamber up there ? ' 

 ' yes , I dare say you have   get a revolver all right , ' Hazell reply 
 sharply . 

 ' but you must not   use it . there must not   be any noise . we should have the 
 river police down on we in a twinkling if there be a revolver shot , 
 and it would be the ruin of I . if an inquiry be hold the Commissioners 
 would not   take any official notice of the fact that my superior officer 
 have put I on to this job , and I should be request to leave the 
 service . ' 

 ' have no fear on that score , ' say Racksole . ' I shall , of course , take 
 all responsibility . ' 

 ' it would not   matter how much responsibility you take , ' Hazell retort ; 
 ' you would not   put I back into the service , and my career would be at an 
 end . ' 

 ' but there be other career , ' say Racksole , who be really anxious to 
 lame his ex - waiter by mean of a judiciously - aim bullet . ' there be 
 other career . ' 

 ' the Customs be my career , ' say Hazell , ' so let us have no shooting . 
 we will wait about a bit ; he can not   escape . you can have my skewer if you 
 like ' - and he give Racksole his search instrument . ' and you can do 
 what you please , provide you do it neatly and do not   make a row over 
 it . ' 

 for a few moment the four man be passive in the boat , surround by 
 swirling mist , with black water beneath they , and tower above they 
 a half - load barge with a desperate and resourceful man on board . 
 suddenly the mist part and shrivel away in patch , as though 
 before the breath of some monster . the sky be visible ; it be a clear 
 sky , and the moon be shin . the transformation be just one of those 
 meteorological quick - change which happen most frequently on a great 
 river . 

 ' that be a sight well , ' say the fat man . at the same moment a head 
 appear over the edge of the barge . it be Jules ' face - dark , sinister 
 and leer . 

 ' be it Mr Racksole in that boat ? ' he inquire calmly ; ' because if so , 
 let Mr Racksole step up . Mr Racksole have catch I , and he can have I 
 for the asking . here I be . ' he stand up to his full height on the barge , 
 tall against the night sky , and all the occupant of the boat could see 
 that he hold firmly clasped in his right hand a short dagger . ' now , Mr 
 Racksole , you have   be after I for a long time , ' he continue ; ' here 
 I be . why do not   you step up ? if you have not   get the pluck yourself , 
 persuade someone else to step up in your place ... the same fair 
 treatment will be accord to all . ' and Jules laugh a low , penetrate 
 laugh . 

 he be in the midst of this laugh when he lurch suddenly forward . 

 ' what'r ' you do of aboard my barge ? off you go ! ' it be a boy 's 
 small shrill voice that sound in the night . a ragged boy 's small form 
 have appear silently behind Jules , and two small arm with a vicious 
 shove precipitate he into the water . he fall with a fine gurgling 
 splash . it be at once obvious that swimming be not among Jules ' 
 accomplishment . he flounder wildly and sink . when he reappear he 
 be drag into the Customs boat . Rope be produce , and in a minute or 
 two the man lie ignominiously bind in the bottom of the boat . with the 
 aid of a mudlark - a mere barge boy , who probably have no more right on 
 the barge than Jules himself - Racksole have win his game . for the first 
 time for several week the millionaire experience a sensation of 
 equanimity and satisfaction . he lean over the prostrate form of Jules , 
 Hazell 's professional skewer in his hand . 

 ' what be you go to do with he now ? ' ask Hazell . 

 ' we will row up to the landing step in front of the Grand Babylon . he 
 shall be well lodge at my h"tel , I promise he . ' 

 Jules speak no word . 

 before Racksole part company with the Customs man that night Jules 
 have be safely transport into the Grand Babylon h"tel and the two 
 waterman have receive their L10 apiece . 

 ' you will sleep here ? ' say the millionaire to Mr George Hazell . ' it be 
 late . ' 

 ' with pleasure , ' say Hazell . the next morning he find a sumptuous 
 breakfast await he , and in his table - napkin be a Bank of England 
 note for a hundred pound . but , though he do not hear of they till much 
 later , many thing have happen before Hazell consume that sumptuous 
 breakfast . 




 Chapter Twenty - Seven the CONFESSION of MR TOM JACKSON 

 it happen that the small bedroom occupy by Jules during the year he 
 be head - waiter at the Grand Babylon have remain empty since his sudden 
 dismissal by Theodore Racksole . no other head - waiter have be formally 
 appoint in his place ; and , indeed , the absence of one man - even the 
 unique Jules - could scarcely have be notice in the enormous staff 
 of a place like the Grand Babylon . the function of a head - waiter be 
 generally more ornamental , spectacular , and morally impressive than 
 useful , and it be so at the great h"tel on the Embankment . Racksole 
 accordingly have the excellent idea of transport his prisoner , with as 
 much secrecy as possible , to this empty bedroom . there prove to be no 
 difficulty in do so ; Jules show himself perfectly amenable to a 
 show of superior force . 

 Racksole take upstairs with he an old commissionaire who have be 
 attach to the outdoor service of the h"tel for many year - a 
 grey - haired man , wiry as a terri and strong as a mastiff . enter the 
 bedroom with Jules , whose hand be bind , he tell the commissionaire 
 to remain outside the door . 

 jule ' bedroom be quite an ordinary apartment , though perhaps slightly 
 superior to the usual accommodation provide for servant in the 
 caravanserais of the West End . it be about fourteen by twelve . it 
 be furnish with a bedstead , a small wardrobe , a - mall washstand and 
 dressing - table , and two chair . there be two hook behind the door , 
 a strip of carpet by the bed , and some cheap ornament on the iron 
 mantelpiece . there be also one electric light . the window be a 
 little square one , high up from the floor , and it look on the inner 
 quadrangle . 

 the room be on the top storey - the eighth - and from it you have a view 
 sheer to the ground . twenty foot below run a narrow cornice about a foot 
 wide ; three foot or so above the window another and wide cornice jut 
 out , and above that be the high steep roof of the h"tel , though you 
 could not see it from the window . as Racksole examine the window and 
 the outlook , he say to himself that Jules could not escape by that 
 exit , at any rate . he give a glance up the chimney , and see that the 
 flue be far too small to admit a man 's body . 

 then he call in the commissionaire , and together they bind Jules 
 firmly to the bedstead , allow he , however , to lie down . all the 
 while the captive never open his mouth - merely smile a smile of 
 disdain . finally Racksole remove the ornament , the carpet , the chair 
 and the hook , and wrench away the switch of the electric light . then 
 he and the commissionaire leave the room , and Racksole lock the door on 
 the outside and put the key in his pocket . 

 ' you will keep watch here , ' he say to the commissionaire , ' through the 
 night . you can sit on this chair . do not   go to sleep . if you hear the 
 slight noise in the room blow your cab - whistle ; I will arrange to 
 answer the signal . if there be no noise do nothing whatever . I do not 
 want this talk about , you understand . I shall trust you ; you can trust 
 I . ' 

 ' but the servant will see I here when they get up to - morrow , ' say the 
 commissionaire , with a faint smile , ' and they will be pretty certain to 
 ask what I be do of up here . what shall I say to them ? ' 

 ' you have   be a soldier , have not   you ? ' ask Racksole . 

 ' I have   see three campaign , sir , ' be the reply , and , with a gesture of 
 pardonable pride , the grey - haired fellow point to the medal on his 
 breast . 

 ' well , suppose you be on sentry duty and some meddlesome person in 
 camp ask you what you be do - what should you say ? ' 

 ' I should tell he to clear off or take the consequence , and pretty 
 quick too . ' 

 ' do that to - morrow morning , then , if necessary , ' say Racksole , and 
 depart . 

 it be then about one o'clock a.m. the millionaire retire to bed - not 
 his own bed , but a bed on the seventh storey . he do not , however , sleep 
 very long . shortly after dawn he be wide awake , and think busily 
 about Jules . 

 he be , indeed , very curious to know Jules ' story , and he determine , if 
 the thing could be do at all , by persuasion or otherwise , to extract 
 it from he . with a man of Theodore Racksole 's temperament there be no 
 time like the present , and at six o'clock , as the bright morning sun 
 bring gaiety into the window , he dress and go upstairs again 
 to the eighth storey . the commissionaire sit stolid , but alert on his 
 chair , and , at the sight of his master , rise and salute . 

 ' anything happen ? ' Racksole ask . 

 ' nothing , sir . ' 

 ' servant say anything ? ' 

 ' only a dozen or so of them be up yet , sir . one of them ask what I be 
 play at , and so I tell she I be look after a bull bitch and a 
 litter of pup that you be very particular about , sir . ' 

 ' good , ' say Racksole , as he unlock the door and enter the room . all 
 be exactly as he have leave it , except that jule who have be lie 
 on his back , have somehow turn over and be now lie on his face . he 
 gaze silently , scowl at the millionaire . Racksole greet he and 
 ostentatiously take a revolver from his hip - pocket and lay it on the 
 dressing - table . then he seat himself on the dressing - table by the side 
 of the revolver , his leg dangle an inch or two above the floor . 

 ' I want to have a talk to you , Jackson , ' he begin . 

 ' you can talk to I as much as you like , ' say Jules . ' I shall not 
 interfere , you may bet on that . ' 

 ' I should like you to answer some question . ' 

 ' that be different , ' say Jules . ' I be not go to answer any question 
 while I be tie up like this . you may bet on that , too . ' 

 ' it will pay you to be reasonable , ' say Racksole . 

 ' I be not go to answer any question while I be tie up . ' 

 ' I will unfasten your leg , if you like , ' Racksole suggest politely , 
 ' then you can sit up . it be no use you pretend you have   be 
 uncomfortable , because I know you have not . I calculate you have   be 
 treat very handsomely , my son . there you be ! ' and he loosen the 
 low extremity of his prisoner from their bond . ' now I repeat you 
 may as well be reasonable . you may as well admit that you have   be fairly 
 beat in the game and act accordingly . I be determined to beat you , by 
 myself , without the police , and I have   do it . ' 

 ' you have   do yourself , ' retort Jules . ' you have   go against the law . 
 if you have have any sense you would not   have meddle ; you would have leave 
 everything to the police . they would have muddle about for a year or two , 
 and then do nothing . who be go to tell the police now ? be you ? 
 be you go to give I up to them , and say , " here , I have   catch he 
 for you " . if you do they will ask you to explain several thing , and then 
 you will look foolish . one crime do not   excuse another , and you will find 
 that out . ' 

 with unerre insight , Jules have perceive exactly the difficulty of 
 Racksole 's position , and it be certainly a difficulty which Racksole 
 do not attempt to minimize to himself . he know well that it would have 
 to be face . he do not , however , allow Jules to guess his thought . 

 ' meanwhile , ' he say calmly to the other , ' you be here and my prisoner . 

 you have   commit a variegate assortment of crime , and among they be 
 murder . you be due to be hung . you know that . there be no reason why 
 I should call in the police at all . it will be perfectly easy for I 
 to finish you off , as you deserve , myself . I shall only be carry out 
 justice , and rob the hangman of his fee . precisely as I bring you 
 into the h"tel , I can take you out again . a few day ago you borrow or 
 steal a steam yacht at Ostend . what you have do with it I do not   know , 
 nor do I care . but I strongly suspect that my daughter have a narrow 
 escape of be murder on your steam yacht . now I have a steam yacht 
 of my own . suppose I use it as you use your ! suppose I smuggle you on 
 to it , steam out to sea , and then ask you to step off it into the ocean 
 one night . such thing have be do . 

 such thing will be do again . if I act so , I should at least , have 
 the satisfaction of know that I have relieve society from the incubus 
 of a scoundrel . ' 

 ' but you will not , ' Jules murmur . 

 ' no , ' say Racksole steadily , ' I will not   - if you behave yourself this 
 morning . but I swear to you that if you do not   I will never rest till you 
 be dead , police or no police . you do not   know Theodore Racksole . ' 

 ' I believe you mean it , ' Jules exclaim , with an air of surprised 
 interest , as though he have discover something of importance . 

 ' I believe I do , ' Racksole resume . ' now listen . at the good , you will 
 be give up to the police . at the bad , I shall deal with you myself . 
 with the police you may have a chance - you may get off with twenty 
 year ' penal servitude , because , though it be absolutely certain that 
 you murder Reginald Dimmock , it would be a little difficult to prove 
 the case against you . but with I you would have no chance whatever . I 
 have a few question to put to you , and it will depend on how you answer 
 they whether I give you up to the police or take the law into my own 
 hand . and let I tell you that the latter course would be much simple 
 for I . and I would take it , too , do I not feel that you be a very 
 clever and exceptional man ; do I not have a sort of sneak admiration 
 for your detestable skill and ingenuity . ' 

 ' you think , then , that I be clever ? ' say Jules . ' you be right . I be . 
 I should have be much too clever for you if luck have not be against 
 I . 

 you owe your victory , not to skill , but to luck . ' 

 ' that be what the vanquished always say . Waterloo be a bit of pure luck 
 for the English , no doubt , but it be Waterloo all the same . ' 

 jule yawn elaborately . ' what do you want to know ? ' he inquire , with 
 politeness . 

 ' first and foremost , I want to know the name of your accomplice inside 
 this h"tel . ' 

 ' I have no more , ' say Jules . ' Rocco be the last . ' 

 ' do not   begin by lie to I . if you have no accomplice , how do you 
 contrive that one particular bottle of Romanée - Conti should be serve to 
 his Highness Prince Eugen ? ' 

 ' then you discover that in time , do you ? ' say Jules . ' I be afraid 
 so . 

 let I explain that that need no accomplice . the bottle be topmost in 
 the bin , and naturally it would be take . moreover , I leave it stick 
 out a little furth than the rest . ' 

 ' you do not arrange , then , that Hubbard should be take ill the night 
 before last ? ' 

 ' I have no idea , ' say Jules , ' that the excellent Hubbard be not 
 enjoy his accustomed health . ' 

 ' tell I , ' say Racksole , ' who or what be the origin of your vendetta 
 against the life of Prince Eugen ? ' 

 ' I have no vendetta against the life of Prince Eugen , ' say Jules , ' at 
 least , not to begin with . I merely undertake , for a consideration , 
 to see that Prince Eugen do not have an interview with a certain Mr 
 Sampson Levi in London before a certain date , that be all . it seem 
 simple enough . I have be engage in far more complicated transaction 
 before . I be convince that I could manage it , with the help of Rocco 
 and Em - and Miss Spencer . ' 

 ' be that woman your wife ? ' 

 ' she would like to be , ' he sneer . ' please do not   interrupt . I have 
 complete my arrangement , when you so inconsiderately buy the h"tel . 
 I do not   mind admit now that from the very moment when you come 
 across I that night in the corridor I be secretly afraid of you , 
 though I scarcely admit the fact even to myself then . I think it 
 safe to shift the scene of our operation to ostend . I have mean to 
 deal with Prince Eugen in this h"tel , but I decide , then , to 
 intercept he on the continent , and I despatch Miss Spencer with some 
 instruction . trouble never come singly , and it happen that just 
 then that fool Dimmock , who have be in the swim with we , choose to prove 
 refractory . the slight hitch would have upset everything , and I be 
 oblige to - to clear he off the scene . he want to back out - he have a 
 bad attack of conscience , and violent measure be essential . I regret 
 his untimely decease , but he bring it on himself . well , everything 
 be go serenely when you and your brilliant daughter , apparently 
 determine to meddle , turn up again among we at Ostend . only 
 twenty - four hour , however , have to elapse before the date which have 
 be mention to I by my employer . I keep poor little eugen for the 
 allotted time , and then you manage to get hold of he . I do not deny 
 that you score there , though , accord to my original instruction , 
 you score too late . the time have pass , and so , so far as I know , it 
 do not   matter a pin whether Prince Eugen see Mr Sampson Levi or not . but 
 my employer be still uneasy . they be uneasy even after little Eugen 
 have lie ill in Ostend for several week . it appear that they fear 
 that even at that date an interview between Prince Eugen and Mr Sampson 
 Levi might work harm to they . so they apply to I again . this time 
 they want Prince Eugen to be - em - finish off entirely . they offer 
 high term . ' 

 ' what term ? ' 

 ' I have receive fifty thousand pound for the first job , of which 
 Rocco have half . Rocco be also to be make a member of a certain famous 
 european order , if thing go right . that be what he covet far more 
 than the money - the vain fellow ! for the second job I be offer a 
 hundred thousand . a tolerably large sum . I regret that I have not be 
 able to earn it . ' 

 ' do you mean to tell I , ' ask Racksole , horror - strike by this calm 
 confession , in spite of his previous knowledge , ' that you be offer a 
 hundred thousand pound to poison Prince Eugen ? ' 

 ' you put it rather crudely , ' say Jules in reply . ' I prefer to say 
 that I be offer a hundred thousand pound if Prince Eugen should die 
 within a reasonable time . ' 

 ' and who be your damnable employer ? ' 

 ' that , honestly , I do not know . ' 

 ' you know , I suppose , who pay you the first fifty thousand pound , and 
 who promise you the hundred thousand . ' 

 ' well , ' say Jules , ' I know vaguely . I know that he come via Vienna 
 from - em - Bosnia . my impression be that the affair have some bearing , 
 direct or indirect , on the project marriage of the King of Bosnia . 
 he be a young monarch , scarcely out of political leading - string , as it 
 be , and doubtless his Ministers think that they have well arrange 
 his marriage for he . they try last year , and fail because the 
 Princess whom they have in mind have cast her sparkle eye on another 
 Prince . that Prince happen to be Prince Eugen of Posen . the minister 
 of the King of Bosnia know exactly the circumstance of Prince Eugen . 
 they know that he could not marry without liquidate his debt , and 
 they know that he could only liquidate his debt through this Jew , 
 Sampson Levi . unfortunately for I , they ultimately want to make too 
 sure of Prince Eugen . they be afraid he might after all arrange his 
 marriage without the aid of Mr Sampson Levi , and so - well , you know the 
 rest .... it be a pity that the poor little innocent King of Bosnia can not 
 have the Princess of his Ministers ' choice . ' 

 ' then you think that the King himself have no part in this abominable 
 crime ? ' 

 ' I think decidedly not . ' 

 ' I be glad of that , ' say Racksole simply . ' and now , the name of your 
 immediate employer . ' 

 ' he be merely an agent . he call himself Sleszak - S - l - e - s - z - a - k. but 
 I imagine that that be not   his real name . I do not   know his real name . an 
 old man , he often use to be find at the H"tel Ritz , Paris . ' 

 ' Mr Sleszak and I will meet , ' say Racksole . 

 ' not in this world , ' say Jules quickly . ' he be dead . I hear only last 
 night - just before our little tussle . ' 

 there be a silence . 

 ' it be well , ' say Racksole at length . ' Prince Eugen live , despite all 
 plot . after all , justice be do . ' 

 ' Mr Racksole be here , but he can see no one , Miss. ' the word come 
 from behind the door , and the voice be the commissionaire 's . Racksole 
 start up , and go towards the door . 

 ' nonsense , ' be the curt reply , in feminine tone . ' move aside 
 instantly . ' 

 the door open , and Nella enter . there be tear in her eye . 

 ' oh ! Dad , ' she exclaim , ' I have   only just hear you be in the h"tel . 
 we look for you everywhere . come at once , Prince Eugen be die - ' 
 then she see the man sit on the bed , and stop . 

 later , when Jules be alone again , he remark to himself , ' I may get 
 that hundred thousand . ' 




 Chapter Twenty - Eight the state bedroom once MORE 

 when , immediately after the episode of the bottle of Romanée - Conti in 
 the State dining - room , Prince Aribert and old Hans find that Prince 
 Eugen have sink in an unconscious heap over his chair , both the former 
 thought , at the first instant , that Eugen must have already taste 
 the poison wine . but a moment 's reflection show that this be not 
 possible . if the Hereditary Prince of Posen be die or dead , his 
 condition be due to some other agency than the Romanée - Conti . Aribert 
 bend over he , and a powerful odour from the man 's lip at once 
 disclose the cause of the disaster : it be the odour of laudanum . 
 indeed , the smell of that sinister drug seem now to float heavily 
 over the whole table . across Aribert 's mind there flash then the true 
 explanation . Prince Eugen , take advantage of Aribert 's attention be 
 momentarily divert ; and yield to a sudden impulse of despair , have 
 decide to poison himself , and have carry out his intention on the 
 spot . 

 the laudanum must have be already in his pocket , and this fact go 
 to prove that the unfortunate Prince have previously contemplate such a 
 proceeding , even after his definite promise . Aribert remember now with 
 painful vividness his nephew 's word : ' I withdraw my promise . observe 
 that - I withdraw it . ' it must have be instantly after the utterance of 
 that formal withdrawal that Eugen attempt to destroy himself . 

 ' it be laudanum , Hans , ' Aribert exclaim , rather helplessly . 

 ' surely his Highness have not take poison ? ' say Hans . ' it be 
 impossible ! ' 

 ' I fear it be only too possible , ' say the other . ' it be laudanum . what 
 be we to do ? quick , man ! ' 

 ' his Highness must be rouse , Prince . he must have an emetic . we have 
 well carry he to the bedroom . ' 

 they do , and lay he on the great bed ; and then Aribert mix an 
 emetic of mustard and water , and administer it , but without any 
 effect . the sufferer lie motionless , with every muscle relaxed . his skin 
 be ice - cold to the touch , and the eyelid , half - draw , show that the 
 pupil be painfully contract . 

 ' go out , and send for a doctor , Hans . say that Prince Eugen have be 
 suddenly take ill , but that it be not   serious . the truth must never be 
 know . ' 

 ' he must be rouse , sire , ' Hans say again , as he hurry from the room . 

 Aribert lift his nephew from the bed , shake he , pinch he , flick 
 he cruelly , shout at he , drag he about , but to no avail . at 
 length he desist , from mere physical fatigue , and lay the Prince back 
 again on the bed . every minute that elapse seem an hour . alone with 
 the unconscious organism in the silence of the great stately chamber , 
 under the cold yellow glare of the electric light , Aribert become a 
 prey to the most despairing thought . the tragedy of his nephew 's 
 career force itself upon he , and it occur to he that an early 
 and shameful death have all along be inevitable for this good - nature , 
 weak - purpose , unhappy child of a historic throne . a little good 
 fortune , and his character , so evenly balance between right and wrong , 
 might have follow the proper path , and Eugen might have figure at any 
 rate with dignity on the european stage . but now it appear that all 
 be over , the last stroke play . and in this disaster Aribert see the 
 ruin of his own hope . for Aribert would have to occupy his nephew 's 
 throne , and he feel instinctively that nature have not cut he out for a 
 throne . by a natural impulse he inwardly rebel against the prospect 
 of monarchy . Monarchy mean so much for which he know himself to be 
 entirely unfitted . it mean a political marriage , which mean a forced 
 marriage , a union against inclination . and then what of Nella - Nella ! 

 Hans return . ' I have send for the near doctor , and also for a 
 specialist , ' he say . 

 ' good , ' say Aribert . ' I hope they will hurry . ' then he sit down and 
 write a card . ' take this yourself to Miss Racksole . if she be out of the 
 h"tel , ascertain where she be and follow she . Understand , it be of the 
 first importance . ' 

 han bow , and depart for the second time , and Aribert be alone 
 again . 

 he gaze at Eugen , and make another frantic attempt to rouse he from 
 the deadly stupor , but it be useless . he walk away to the window : 
 through the open casement he could hear the tinkle of pass hansom 
 on the Embankment below , whistle of door - keeper , and the hoot of steam 
 tug on the river . the world go on as usual , it appear . it be an 
 absurd world . 

 he desire nothing well than to abandon his princely title , and live 
 as a plain man , the husband of the fine woman on earth .... but now ! ... 

 pah ! how selfish he be , to be think of himself when Eugen lie die . 
 yet - Nella ! 

 the door open , and a man enter , who be obviously the doctor . a few 
 curt question , and he have grasp the essential of the case . ' Oblige 
 I by ring the bell , Prince . I shall want some hot water , and an 
 able - bodied man and a nurse . ' 

 ' who want a nurse ? ' say a voice , and Nella come quietly in . ' I be a 
 nurse , ' she add to the doctor , ' and at your order . ' 

 the next two hour be a struggle between life and death . the first 
 doctor , a specialist who follow he , Nella , Prince Aribert , and old 
 Hans form , as it be , a league to save the die man . none else in 
 the h"tel know the real seriousness of the case . when a Prince fall 
 ill , and especially by his own act , the precise truth be not issue 
 broadcast to the universe . 

 accord to official intelligence , a Prince be never seriously ill 
 until he be dead . such be statecraft . 

 the bad feature of Prince Eugen 's case be that emetic prove futile . 

 neither of the doctor could explain their failure , but it be only 
 too apparent . the league be reduce to helplessness . at last the great 
 specialist from Manchester Square give it out that there be no chance 
 for Prince Eugen unless the natural vigour of his constitution 
 should prove capable of throw off the poison unaide by scientific 
 assistance , as a drunkard can sleep off his potion . everything have be 
 try , even to artificial respiration and the injection of hot coffee . 
 have emit this pronouncement , the great specialist from Manchester 
 Square leave . it be one o'clock in the morning . by one of those strange 
 and futile coincidence which sometimes startle we by their subtle 
 significance , the specialist meet Theodore Racksole and his captive as 
 they be enter the h"tel . neither have the least suspicion of the 
 other 's business . 

 in the state bedroom the small group of watcher surround the bed . the 
 slow minute file away in dreary procession . another hour pass . then 
 the figure on the bed , hitherto so motionless , twitch and move ; the 
 lip part . 

 ' there be hope , ' say the doctor , and administer a stimulant which be 
 hand to he by Nella . 

 in a quarter of an hour the patient have regain consciousness . for the 
 ten thousandth time in the history of medicine a sound constitution have 
 accomplish a miracle impossible to the accumulate medical skill of 
 century . 

 in due course the doctor leave , say that Prince Eugen be ' on the 
 high road to recovery , ' and promise to come again within a few hour . 
 Morning have dawn . Nella draw the great curtain , and let in a flood of 
 sunlight . 

 Old Hans , overcome by fatigue , doze in a chair in a far corner of the 
 room . 

 the reaction have be too much for he . Nella and Prince Aribert look 
 at each other . they have not exchange a word about themselves , yet each 
 know what the other have be think . they clasp hand with a perfect 
 understanding . their brief love - making have be of the silent kind , and 
 it be silent now . no word be utter . a shadow have pass from over 
 they , but only their eye express relief and joy . 

 ' Aribert ! ' the faint call come from the bed . Aribert go to the 
 bedside , while Nella remain near the window . 

 ' what be it , eugen ? ' he say . ' you be well now . ' 

 ' you think so ? ' murmur the other . ' I want you to forgive I for all 
 this , Aribert . I must have cause you an intolerable trouble . I do it 
 so clumsily ; that be what annoy I . Laudanum be a feeble expedient ; 
 but I could think of nothing else , and I dare not   ask anyone for advice . 
 I be oblige to go out and buy the stuff for myself . it be all very 
 awkward . 

 but , thank goodness , it have not be ineffectual . ' 

 ' what do you mean , Eugen ? you be well . in a day or so you will be 
 perfectly recover . ' 

 ' I be die , ' say Eugen quietly . ' do not be deceive . I die because I 
 wish to die . it be bind to be so . I know by the feel of my heart . in a 
 few hour it will be over . the throne of Posen will be your , Aribert . 
 you will fill it more worthily than I have do . do not   let they know 
 over there that I poison myself . swear Hans to secrecy ; swear the 
 doctor to secrecy ; and breathe no word yourself . I have be a fool , 
 but I do not wish it to be know that I be also a coward . perhaps it 
 be not cowardice ; perhaps it be courage , after all - courage to cut 
 the knot . I could not have survive the disgrace of any revelation , 
 Aribert , and revelation would have be sure to come . I have make a 
 fool of myself , but I be ready to pay for it . we of Posen - we always 
 pay - everything except our debt . ah ! those debt ! have it not be 
 for those I could have face she who be to have be my wife , to have 
 share my throne . I could have hide my past , and begin again . with 
 her help I really could have begin again . but Fate have be against 
 I - always ! always ! by the way , what be that plot against I , Aribert ? 
 I forget , I forget . ' 

 his eye close . there be a sudden noise . Old Hans have slip from his 
 chair to the floor . he pick himself up , daze , and creep shamefacedly 
 out of the room . 

 Aribert take his nephew 's hand . 

 ' Nonsense , Eugen ! you be dream . you will be all right soon . pull 
 yourself together . ' 

 ' all because of a million , ' the sick man moan . ' one miserable million 
 english pound . the national debt of Posen be fifty million , and I , the 
 Prince of Posen , could not   borrow one . if I could have get it , I might 
 have hold my head up again . good - bye , Aribert .... who be that girl ? ' 

 Aribert look up . Nella be stand silent at the foot of the bed , 
 her eye moist . she come round to the bedside , and put her hand on the 
 patient 's heart . scarcely could she feel its pulsation , and to Aribert 
 her eye express a sudden despair . 

 at that moment han re - enter the room and beckon to she . 

 ' I have hear that Herr Racksole have return to the h"tel , ' he 
 whisper , ' and that he have capture that man Jules , who they say be 
 such a villain . ' 

 several time during the night Nella inquire for her father , but could 
 gain no knowledge of his whereabouts . now , at half - past six in the 
 morning , a rumour have mysteriously spread among the servant of the 
 h"tel about the happening of the night before . how it have originate no 
 one could have determine , but it have originate . 

 ' where be my father ? ' Nella ask of Hans . 

 he shrug his shoulder , and point upwards . ' somewhere at the top , 
 they say . ' 

 Nella almost run out of the room . her interruption of the interview 
 between Jules and Theodore Racksole have already be describe . as 
 she come downstairs with her father she say again , ' Prince Eugen be 
 die - but I think you can save he . ' 

 ' I ? ' exclaim Theodore . 

 ' yes , ' she repeat positively . ' I will tell you what I want you to do , 
 and you must do it . ' 




 Chapter Twenty - Nine THEODORE be call to the RESCUE 

 as Nella pass downstairs from the top storey with her father - the 
 lift have not yet begin to work - she draw he into her own room , and 
 close the door . 

 ' what be this all about ? ' he ask , somewhat mystified , and even alarm 
 by the extreme seriousness of her face . 

 ' Dad , ' the girl begin , ' you be very rich , be not   you ? very , very rich ? ' 
 she smile anxiously , timidly . he do not remember to have see that 
 expression on her face before . he want to make a facetious reply , but 
 check himself . 

 ' yes , ' he say , ' I be . you ought to know that by this time . ' 

 ' how soon could you realize a million pound ? ' 

 ' a million - what ? ' he cry . even he be stagger by her calm reference 
 to this gigantic sum . ' what on earth be you drive at ? ' 

 ' a million pound , I say . that be to say , five million dollar . how 
 soon could you realize as much as that ? ' 

 ' oh ! ' he answer , ' in about a month , if I go about it neatly enough . 
 I could unload as much as that in a month without scar Wall Street 
 and other place . but it would want some arrangement . ' 

 ' useless ! ' she exclaim . ' could not   you do it quick , if you really have 
 to ? ' 

 ' if I really have to , I could fix it in a week , but it would make thing 
 lively , and I should lose on the job . ' 

 ' could not   you , ' she persist , ' could not   you go down this morning and 
 raise a million , somehow , if it be a matter of life and death ? ' 

 he hesitate . ' look here , Nella , ' he say , ' what be it you have   get up 
 your sleeve ? ' 

 ' just answer my question , Dad , and try not to think that I be a stark , 
 star lunatic . ' 

 ' I rather expect I could get a million this morning , even in London . but 
 it would cost pretty dear . it might cost I fifty thousand pound , and 
 there would be the dicken of an upset in New York - a sort of grand 
 universal slump in my holding . ' 

 ' why should New York know anything about it ? ' 

 ' why should New York know anything about it ! ' he repeat . ' my girl , 
 when anyone borrow a million sovereign the whole world know about it . 
 do you reckon that I can go up to the Governors of the Bank of England 
 and say , " look here , lend Theodore Racksole a million for a few week , 
 and he will give you an iou and a covering note on stock " ? ' 

 ' but you could get it ? ' she ask again . 

 ' if there be a million in London I guess I could handle it , ' he reply . 

 ' well , Dad , ' and she put her arm round his neck , ' you have   just get to 
 go out and fix it . see ? it be for I . I have   never ask you for anything 
 really big before . but I do now . and I want it so badly . ' 

 he star at she . ' I award you the prize , ' he say , at length . ' you 
 deserve it for colossal and immense coolness . now you can tell I the 
 true inward meaning of all this rigmarole . what be it ? ' 

 ' I want it for Prince Eugen , ' she begin , at first hesitatingly , with 
 pause . 

 ' he be ruin unless he can get a million to pay off his debt . he be 
 dreadfully in love with a Princess , and he can not   marry she because of 
 this . 

 her parent would not   allow it . he be to have get it from Sampson Levi , 
 but he arrive too late - owe to Jules . ' 

 ' I know all about that - perhaps more than you do . but I do not   see how it 
 affect you or I . ' 

 ' the point be this , Dad , ' Nella continue . ' he be try to commit 
 suicide - he be so hipped . yes , real suicide . he take laudanum last night . 
 it do not   kill he straight off - he be get over the first shock , but he be 
 in a very weak state , and he mean to die . and I truly believe he will 
 die . now , if you could let he have that million , Dad , you would save 
 his life . ' 

 Nella 's item of news be a considerable and disconcerting surprise to 
 Racksole , but he hide his feeling fairly well . 

 ' I have not   the least desire to save his life , Nell . I do not   overmuch 
 respect your Prince Eugen . I have   do what I could for he - but only for 
 the sake of see fair play , and because I object to conspiracy and 
 secret murder . 

 it be a different thing if he want to kill himself . what I say be : let 
 he . 

 who be responsible for his be in debt to the tune of a million 
 pound ? he be only get himself and his bad habit to thank for that . I 
 suppose if he do happen to peg out , the throne of Posen will go to 
 Prince Aribert . and a good thing , too ! Aribert be worth twenty of his 
 nephew . ' 

 ' that be just it , Dad , ' she say , eagerly follow up her chance . 
 ' I want you to save Prince Eugen just because Aribert - Prince 
 Aribert - do not   wish to occupy the throne . he would much prefer not to have 
 it . ' 

 ' much prefer not to have it ! do not   talk nonsense . if he be honest with 
 himself , he will admit that he will be jolly glad to have it . throne be in 
 his blood , so to speak . ' 

 ' you be wrong , Father . and the reason be this : if Prince Aribert 
 ascend the throne of Posen he would be compel to marry a Princess . ' 

 ' well ! a Prince ought to marry a Princess . ' 

 ' but he do not   want to . he want to give up all his royal right , and 
 live as a subject . he want to marry a woman who be not   a Princess . ' 

 ' be she rich ? ' 

 ' her father be , ' say the girl . ' oh , Dad ! can not   you guess ? he - he love 
 I . ' her head fall on Theodore 's shoulder and she begin to cry . 

 the millionaire whistle a very high note . ' nell ! ' he say at length . 
 ' and you ? do you sort of cle to he ? ' 

 ' Dad , ' she answer , ' you be stupid . do you imagine I should worry 
 myself like this if I do not ? ' she smile through her tear . she know 
 from her father 's tone that she have accomplish a victory . 

 ' it be a mighty queer arrangement , ' Theodore remark . ' but of course 
 if you think it will be of any use , you have well go down and tell your 
 Prince Eugen that that million can be fix up , if he really need it . I 
 expect there will be decent security , or Sampson Levi would not   have mix 
 himself up in it . ' 

 ' thank , Dad . do not   come with I ; I may manage well alone . ' 

 she give a formal little curtsey and disappear . Racksole , who have the 
 talent , so necessary to millionaire , of attend to several matter 
 at once , the large with the small , go off to give order about the 
 breakfast and the remuneration of his assistant of the evening before , 
 Mr George Hazell . he then send an invitation to Mr Felix Babylon 's room , 
 ask that gentleman to take breakfast with he . after he have relate 
 to Babylon the history of Jules ' capture , and have a long discussion with 
 he upon several point of h"tel management , and especially as to the 
 guarding of wine - cellar , Racksole put on his hat , sally forth into 
 the Strand , hail a hansom , and be drive to the City . the order and 
 nature of his operation there be , too complex and technical to be 
 describe here . 

 when Nella return to the State bedroom both the doctor and the great 
 specialist be again in attendance . the two physician move away from 
 the bedside as she enter , and begin to talk quietly together in the 
 embrasure of the window . 

 ' a curious case ! ' say the specialist . 

 ' yes . of course , as you say , it be a neurotic temperament that be at the 
 bottom of the trouble . when you have   get that and a vigorous constitution 
 work one against the other , the result be apt to be distinctly 
 curious . 

 do you consider there be any hope , Sir Charles ? ' 

 ' if I have see he when he recover consciousness I should have say 
 there be hope . frankly , when I leave last night , or rather this morning , 
 I do not   expect to see the Prince alive again - let alone conscious , and 
 able to talk . accord to all the rule of the game , he ought to get 
 over the shock to the system with perfect ease and certainty . but I 
 do not   think he will . I do not   think he want to . and moreover , I think 
 he be still under the influence of suicidal mania . if he have a razor 
 he would cut his throat . you must keep his strength up . Inject , if 
 necessary . I will come in this afternoon . I be due now at St James 's 
 Palace . ' and the specialist hurry away , with an elaborate bow and a 
 few hasty word of polite reassurance to Prince Aribert . 

 when he have go Prince Aribert take the other doctor aside . ' forget 
 everything , doctor , ' he say , ' except that I be one man and you be 
 another , and tell I the truth . shall you be able to save his Highness ? 
 tell I the truth . ' 

 ' there be no truth , ' be the doctor 's reply . ' the future be not in our 
 hand , Prince . ' 

 ' but you be hopeful ? yes or no . ' 

 the doctor look at Prince Aribert . ' no ! ' he say shortly . ' I be not . I 
 be never hopeful when the patient be not on my side . ' 

 ' you mean - ? ' 

 ' I mean that his Royal Highness have no desire to live . you must have 
 observe that . ' 

 ' only too well , ' say Aribert . 

 ' and you be aware of the cause ? ' 

 Aribert nod an affirmative . 

 ' but can not remove it ? ' 

 ' no , ' say Aribert . he feel a touch on his sleeve . it be Nella 's 
 finger . 

 with a gesture she beckon he towards the ante - room . 

 ' if you choose , ' she say , when they be alone , ' Prince Eugen can be 
 save . 

 I have arrange it . ' 

 ' you have arrange it ? ' he bent over she , almost with an air of alarm . 
 ' go and tell he that the million pound which be so necessary to his 
 happiness will be forthcoming . tell he that it will be forthcoming 
 today , if that will be any satisfaction to he . ' 

 ' but what do you mean by this , Nella ? ' 

 ' I mean what I say , Aribert , ' and she seek his hand and take it in 
 her . 

 ' just what I say . if a million pound will save Prince Eugen 's life , it 
 be at his disposal . ' 

 ' but how - how have you manage it ? by what miracle ? ' 

 ' my father , ' she reply softly , ' will do anything that I ask he . do 
 not let we waste time . go and tell Eugen it be arrange , that all will 
 be well . 

 go ! ' 

 ' but we can not accept this - this enormous , this incredible favour . it be 
 impossible . ' 

 ' Aribert , ' she say quickly , ' remember you be not in Posen hold a 
 Court reception . you be in England and you be talk to an american 
 girl who have always be in the habit of have her own way . ' 

 the Prince throw up his hand and go back in to the bedroom . the 
 doctor be at a table write out a prescription . Aribert approach the 
 bedside , his heart beat furiously . eugen greet he with a faint , 
 fatigued smile . 

 ' eugen , ' he whisper , ' listen carefully to I . I have news . with the 
 assistance of friend I have arrange to borrow that million for you . 
 it be quite settle , and you may rely on it . but you must get well . do 
 you hear I ? ' 

 eugen almost sit up in bed . ' tell I I be not delirious , ' he exclaim . 

 ' of course you be not , ' Aribert reply . ' but you must not   sit up . you 
 must take care of yourself . ' 

 ' who will lend the money ? ' eugen ask in a feeble , happy whisper . 

 ' never mind . you shall hear later . devote yourself now to get 
 well . ' 

 the change in the patient 's face be extraordinary . his mind seem to 
 have put on an entirely different aspect . the doctor be startle 
 to hear he murmur a request for food . as for Aribert , he sit down , 
 overcome by the turmoil of his own thought . till that moment he feel 
 that he have never appreciate the value and the marvellous power of mere 
 money , of the lucre which philosopher pretend to despise and man sell 
 their soul for . his heart almost burst in its admiration for that 
 extraordinary Nella , who by mere personal force have raise two man out 
 of the deep slough of despair to the blissful height of hope and 
 happiness . ' these anglo - saxon , ' he say to himself , ' what a race ! ' 

 by the afternoon Eugen be noticeably and distinctly well . the 
 physician , puzzle for the third time by the progress of the case , 
 announce now that all danger be past . the tone of the announcement 
 seem to Aribert to imply that the fortunate issue be due wholly to 
 unrivalled medical skill , but perhaps Aribert be mistaken . anyhow , he 
 be in a most charitable mood , and prepare to forgive anything . 

 ' Nella , ' he say a little later , when they be by themselves again in 
 the ante - chamber , ' what be I to say to you ? how can I thank you ? how can 
 I thank your father ? ' 

 ' you have well not thank my father , ' she say . ' Dad will affect to 
 regard the thing as a purely business transaction , as , of course , it be . 
 as for I , you can - you can - ' 

 ' well ? ' 

 ' kiss I , ' she say . ' there ! be you sure you have   formally propose to 
 I , mon prince ? ' 

 ' ah ! Nell ! ' he exclaim , put his arm round she again . ' be mine ! 
 that be all I want ! ' 

 ' you will find , ' she say , ' that you will want Dad 's consent too ! ' 

 ' will he make difficulty ? he could not , Nell - not with you ! ' 

 ' well ask he , ' she say sweetly . 

 a moment later Racksole himself enter the room . ' go on all right ? ' 
 he enquire , point to the bedroom . ' excellently , ' the lover answer 
 together , and they both blush . 

 ' ah ! ' say Racksole . ' then , if that be so , and you can spare a minute , 
 I have   something to show you , Prince . ' 




 Chapter thirty CONCLUSION 

 ' I'VE a great deal to tell you , Prince , ' Racksole begin , as soon as they 
 be out of the room , ' and also , as I say , something to show you . 
 will you come to my room ? we will talk there first . the whole h"tel be 
 hum with excitement . ' 

 ' with pleasure , ' say Aribert . 

 ' glad his Highness Prince Eugen be recover , ' Racksole say , urge by 
 consideration of politeness . 

 ' ah ! as to that - ' Aribert begin . ' if you do not   mind , we will discuss that 
 later , Prince , ' Racksole interrupt he . 

 they be in the proprietor 's private room . 

 ' I want to tell you all about last night , ' Racksole resume , ' about 
 my capture of Jules , and my examination of he this morning . ' and 
 he launch into a full account of the whole thing , down to the least 
 detail . ' you see , ' he conclude , ' that our suspicion as to Bosnia be 
 tolerably correct . but as regard Bosnia , the more I think about it , the 
 surer I feel that nothing can be do to bring their criminal 
 politician to justice . ' 

 ' and as to Jules , what do you propose to do ? ' 

 ' come this way , ' say Racksole , and lead Aribert to another room . a 
 sofa in this room be cover with a linen cloth . Racksole lift the 
 cloth - he could never deny himself a dramatic moment - and disclose the 
 body of a dead man . 

 it be Jules , dead , but without a scratch or mark on he . 

 ' I have send for the police - not a street constable , but an official 
 from Scotland Yard , ' say Racksole . 

 ' how do this happen ? ' Aribert ask , amazed and startled . ' I understand 
 you to say that he be safely immure in the bedroom . ' 

 ' so he be , ' Racksole reply . ' I go up there this afternoon , chiefly 
 to take he some food . the commissionaire be on guard at the door . he 
 have hear no noise , nothing unusual . yet when I enter the room jule 
 be go . 

 he have by some mean or other loosen his fastening ; he have then 
 manage to take the door off the wardrobe . he have move the bed in front 
 of the window , and by push the wardrobe door three part out of the 
 window and lodge the inside end of it under the rail at the head 
 of the bed , he have provide himself with a sort of insecure platform 
 outside the window . all this he do without make the least sound . he 
 must then have get through the window , and stand on the little platform . 
 with his finger he would just be able to reach the outer edge of the 
 wide cornice under the roof of the h"tel . by main strength of arm he 
 have swing himself on to this cornice , and so get on to the roof proper . 
 he would then have the run of the whole roof . 

 at the side of the building face Salisbury Lane there be an iron 
 fire - escape , which run right down from the ridge of the roof into a 
 little sink yard level with the cellar . jule must have think that 
 his escape be accomplish . but it unfortunately happen that one rung 
 in the iron escape - ladder have rust rotten through be badly paint . 
 it give way , and Jules , not expect anything of the kind , fall to the 
 ground . that be the end of all his cleverness and ingenuity . ' 

 as Racksole cease , speak he replace the linen cloth with a gesture 
 from which reverence be not wholly absent . 

 when the grave have close over the dark and tempestuous career of Tom 
 Jackson , once the pride of the Grand Babylon , there be little trouble 
 for the people whose adventure we have describe . Miss Spencer , that 
 yellow - haired , faithful slave and attendant of a brilliant scoundrel , 
 be never hear of again . possibly to this day she survive , a 
 mystery to her fellow - creature , in the pension of some cheap foreign 
 boarding - house . as for Rocco , he certainly be hear of again . several 
 year after the event set down , it come to the knowledge of Felix 
 Babylon that the unrivalled Rocco have reach Buenos Aires , and by his 
 culinary skill be there make the fortune of a new and splendid h"tel . 
 Babylon transmit the information to Theodore Racksole , and Racksole 
 might , have he choose , have put the force of the law in motion against 
 he . but Racksole , see that everything point to the fact that Rocco 
 be now pursue his vocation honestly , decide to leave he alone . the 
 one difficulty which Racksole experience after the demise of Jules - and 
 it be a difficulty which he have , of course , anticipate - be connect 
 with the police . the police , very properly , want to know thing . 
 they desire to be inform what Racksole have be do in the Dimmock 
 affair , between his first visit to Ostend and his send for they to 
 take charge of Jules ' dead body . and Racksole be by no mean incline 
 to tell they everything . beyond question he have transgress the law of 
 England , and possibly also the law of Belgium ; and the moral excellence 
 of his motif in do so be , of course , in the eye of legal justice , 
 no excuse for such conduct . the inqu upon Jules arouse some bother ; 
 and about ninety - and - nine separate and distinct rumour . in the end , 
 however , a compromise be arrive at . Racksole 's first aim be to pacify 
 the inspector whose clue , which by the way be a false one , he have so 
 curtly decline to follow up . that do , the rest need only tact and 
 patience . he prove to the satisfaction of the authority that he have 
 act in a perfectly honest spirit , though with a high hand , and that 
 substantial justice have be do . also , he subtly indicate that , if it 
 come to the point , he should defy they to do their bad . lastly , he 
 be able , through the medium of the United States Ambassador , to bring 
 certain soothing influence to bear upon the situation . 

 one afternoon , a fortnight after the recovery of the Hereditary Prince 
 of Posen , Aribert , who be still stay at the Grand Babylon , express 
 a wish to hold converse with the millionaire . Prince Eugen , accompany 
 by Hans and some Court official whom he have send for , have depart with 
 immense éclat , arm with the comfortable million , to arrange formally 
 for his betrothal . 

 touch the million , Eugen have give satisfactory personal security , 
 and the money be to be pay off in fifteen year . 

 ' you wish to talk to I , Prince , ' say Racksole to Aribert , when they 
 be seat together in the former 's room . 

 ' I wish to tell you , ' reply Aribert , ' that it be my intention to 
 renounce all my right and title as a Royal Prince of Posen , and to be 
 know in future as Count Hartz - a rank to which I be entitle through my 
 mother . 

 also that I have a private income of ten thousand pound a year , and a 
 château and a town house in Posen . I tell you this because I be here 
 to ask the hand of your daughter in marriage . I love she , and I be vain 
 enough to believe that she love I . I have already ask she to be my 
 wife , and she have consent . we await your approval . ' 

 ' you honour we , Prince , ' say Racksole with a slight smile , ' and in 
 more way than one , may I ask your reason for renounce your princely 
 title ? ' 

 ' simply because the idea of a morganatic marriage would be as repugnant 
 to I as it would be to yourself and to Nella . ' 

 ' that be good . ' the Prince laugh . ' I suppose it have occur to you 
 that ten thousand pound per annum , for a man in your position , be a 
 somewhat small income . Nella be frightfully extravagant . I have know 
 she to spend sixty thousand dollar in a single year , and have nothing 
 to show for it at the end . why ! she would ruin you in twelve month . ' 

 ' Nella must reform her way , ' Aribert say . 

 ' if she be content to do so , ' Racksole go on , ' well and good ! I 
 consent . ' 

 ' in her name and my own , I thank you , ' say Aribert gravely . 

 ' and , ' the millionaire continue , ' so that she may not have to reform 
 too fiercely , I shall settle on she absolutely , with reversion to your 
 child , if you have any , a lump sum of fifty million dollar , that be 
 to say , ten million pound , in sound , select railway stock . I reckon 
 that be about half my fortune . Nella and I have always share equally . ' 

 Aribert make no reply . the two man shake hand in silence , and then it 
 happen that Nella enter the room . 

 that night , after dinner , Racksole and his friend Felix Babylon be 
 walk together on the terrace of the Grand Babylon H"tel . 

 Felix have begin the conversation . 

 ' I suppose , Racksole , ' he have say , ' you be not   get tired of the 
 Grand Babylon ? ' 

 ' why do you ask ? ' 

 ' because I be get tired of do without it . a thousand time since 
 I sell it to you I have wish I could undo the bargain . I can not   bear 
 idleness . will you sell ? ' 

 ' I might , ' say Racksole , ' I might be induce to sell . ' 

 ' what will you take , my friend ? ' ask Felix 

 ' what I give , ' be the quick answer . 

 ' eh ! ' Felix exclaim . ' I sell you my h"tel with Jules , with Rocco , with 
 Miss Spencer . you go and lose all those three inestimable servant , 
 and then offer I the h"tel without they at the same price ! it 
 be monstrous . ' the little man laugh heartily at his own wit . 
 ' nevertheless , ' he add , ' we will not quarrel about the price . I accept 
 your term . ' 

 and so be bring to a close the complex chain of event which have 
 begin when Theodore Racksole order a steak and a bottle of Bass at the 
 table d'h"te of the Grand Babylon H"tel . 


