imperial Palace 

 Arnold Bennett 

 Chapter 1 

 4 A.M. 

 Evelyn come down by the lift into the great front - hall . one of the clock there show seven minute to four ; the other show six minute to four . he think : " I should have have time to shave . this punctuality business be get to be a mania with I . " he smile sympathetically , forgivingly , at his own weakness , which the smile transform into a strength . he have bath ; he have drunk tea ; he be correctly dress , in the informal style which be his - lounge - suit , soft collar , soft hat , light walking - stick , no glove ; but he have not shave . no matter . there be dark man who must shave every twelve hour ; their chin be blue . Evelyn be neither dark nor fair ; he might let thirty hour pass without a shave , and nobody but an inquisitive observer would notice the negligence . 

 the great front - hall be well light ; but the lamp be island in the vast dusky space ; at 2 a.m. the chandeliers - sixteen lamp apiece - which hang in the square of the panel ceiling cease to shower down their spendthrift electricity on the rug and the concrete floor impressively pattern in huge lozenge of black and white . behind the long counter to the right of the double revolve door at the main entrance shine the two illuminated sign , " reception " and " enquiry , " always at the same strength day and night . the foyer down the step , back beyond the hall , have one light . the restaurant down the step beyond the foyer have one light . the reading - room , cut out of the hall by glass partition , have no light . the grill - room , which give on a broad corridor opposite the counter , have several light ; in theory it open for breakfast at 6 a.m. , but in fact it be never close , nor its kitchen close . 

 Reyer , the young night - manager , in stiff shirt and dinner - jacket , be sit at the Reception counter , his fair , pale , bored , wistful face bent over a little pile of document . an Englishman of french extraction , he be turn night into day and day into night in order to learn a job and something about human nature . he would lament , mildly , that he never know what to call his meal ; for with he dinner be breakfast and breakfast dinner ; as for lunch , he know it no more . he have be night - manager for nearly a year ; and Evelyn have an eye on he , have hope of he - and he have hope of Evelyn . 

 as Evelyn approach the counter Reyer respectfully rise . 

 " Morning , Reyer . " 

 " good morning , Mr. Orcham . you be up early . " 

 " anything on the night - report ? " Evelyn ask , ignore Reyer 's remark . 

 " nothing much , sir . a lady leave suite 341 at three o'clock . " 

 " taxi or car ? " 

 " walk , " say Reyer the laconic . 

 " let I see the book . " 

 Reyer open a manuscript volume and push it across the counter . Evelyn read , without any comment except " um ! " at 10 a.m. the night - report would be place before he , typewrite , in his private office . he move away . near the revolve door stand Samuel Butcher   refer to , behind his back , as Long Sam , the head night - porter , and a couple of his janissary , all in blue and gold . 

 " well , Sam , " Evelyn greet the giant cheerfully . 

 " Morning , sir , " Sam salute . 

 the janissary , not have be accost , take care not to see Evelyn . 

 " I gather you have not   have to throw anyone out to - night ? " Evelyn wave his cane . 

 " no , sir . " Sam laugh , proud of the directorial attention . Evelyn pull out a cigarette . instantly both the janissary leapt to different small table on which be match . the winner strike a match and hold it to Evelyn 's cigarette . 

 " thank , " Evelyn murmur , and , puffing , stroll towards the back of the hall , where he glance at himself in a mighty square column face with mirror . 

 2 . 

 no ! the nascent beard be completely invisible . suit correct , stylish . handkerchief peep correctly out of the pocket . necktie - he adjust the necktie ever so little . shoe correct - not a crease in they . well , perhaps the feature lack distinction ; the angle of the nose be a bit too acute ; the low lip heavy , somewhat sensual . but what friendly keen brown eye ! what delicate ear ! and the chin - how enigmatic ! the chin would puzzle any reader of the human countenance . forty - seven . do he feel forty - seven ? could he even believe that he be forty - seven ? he feel thirty - thirty - one . and the simpleton think that he look at most thirty - five . in two and a half year , however , he would be fifty . God ! what a prospect ! well , he do not   care one damn how old he be , or look , so long as he feel ... on the whole , quite a presentable creature . but nobody would glance twice at he in the street . nobody could possibly guess that he be anyone out of the ordinary . a pity , possibly . yet what be , be , and must be accept with philosophy . nevertheless , he be acquaint with idiot , ass , greenhorn and charlatan whose appearance be so distinguished that they could not enter a restaurant without arouse respectful curiosity . funny world . 

 the séance at the mirror last three second - time to adjust the necktie , no more . he move off . the clock over the counter show five minute to four . clock have their mood ; they race , they stand still , in discordance with the mood of the beholder , maliciously intent on exasperate he . 

 within recent month Evelyn have hang the wall of the great hall with large , old coloured print of antique , sunk or break - up Atlantic liner , and underneath each a small photograph of a modern vessel . he glance at an american print of a french liner of the sixty , paddle and sail . he read the quaint legend beneath : " length 375 foot . breadth of beam 46.depth of hold 33 . burthen 3,500 ton . horse - power , 1,250."burthen . comic ! yet in her time this ship have be a crack . under the print be a photograph of the " Ile - de - France . " yes , this idea of his of marine print in the hall have be extremely successful . it be aim at american visitor , who constitute sixty per cent . of the clientele , and it hit they all day and every day . difficult at certain hour to pass through the great hall without see an american gazing entrance at a marine print . 

 that contrarious clock still show five minute to four . Long Sam stand moveless ; his janissary stand moveless ; young Reyer sit moveless . the electric lamp burn with the stoical endurance of organism which have pass beyond time into eternity . the great hall seem to lie under an enchantment . its darkened extension , the foyer and the immeasurable restaurant , seem to lie under an enchantment . the bright corridor and grill - room seem to lie under an enchantment . diminished man await with exhaustless patience the birth of day , as they might have await the birth of a child . 

 content 
 chapter 2 

 arrival 

 sound and light of a big car , hear and see through the glaze frontage of the hall ! revolution of the door ! Long Sam be already outside ; his janissary be outside ; the door be whiz with the speed of the man 's exit . Reyer come round the counter . the enchantment be smash to bit : phenomenon as swift and unexpected as a street - accident . Evelyn wonder who could be arrive with such a grandiose pother at four o'clock in the morning . but his chief concern be the clock , which now show three minute to four . if Jack Cradock do not appear within three minute the stout , faithful little man would be late for his rendezvous . and it be Jack 's business to be not merely on time but before time . Evelyn be uneasy . uneasily he glance down the dim vista of the foyer and the restaurant , his back to the door through which Jack ought to enter . he hear voice : Long Sam 's , Reyer 's and another 's . 

 he turn , in spite of himself , at the tone of that third voice , polite , but curt , assured , authoritative . between a feel hat and a huge overcoat he see a face with which he be not unacquainted , Sir Henry Savott 's   baronet . then he remember that Sir Henry , passenger by the " Caractacus " - 45,000 ton - from New York , have reserve two suite overlook the park . a small , spry , rather desiccated face , with small , search eye , a clip , iron - grey military moustache , and a bony , imperious chin . star curiously about as he talk to Reyer , Sir Henry descry Evelyn , and , unceremoniously leave Reyer , step spryly towards the Director , who advance to meet he in the middle of the hall . false youthfulness , think Evelyn , proud of his own comparative youthfulness . the fellow must be fifty - seven , and pretend to be forty - seven - unsuccessfully ! the two shake hand with mutual smile . 

 " hope you have not   get up specially to meet we , " say Sir Henry . " too bad ! " 

 " no , " say Evelyn quietly and carelessly . 

 the infernal impudence of these spoilt millionaire ! to imagine that he , Evelyn , would get up specially to meet anybody on earth ! 

 " I be glad , " say Sir Henry , who be sorry , hide all consciousness of a rebuff . 

 " see . you have   come by the ' Caractacus ' ? " 

 " yes . my daughter have drive I and her maid and some of the light stuff up from Southampton . she be the devil 's own driver , Gracie be , particularly at night . there be two or three car behind we . but most of the passenger prefer to have their sleep out on the ship and wait for the boat - train . " 

 " you be three day late , " say Evelyn . 

 " yes , " Sir Henry admit . 

 " funny rumour about that ship , " say Evelyn . 

 " yes , " say Sir Henry darkly , in a manner definitely to close the subject of rumour . he be a large shareholder in the company which own the line . 

 Evelyn perceive two girl in conversation with an assiduous and impressed Reyer . the young man 's deportment be quite good , if a trifle too subservient . one of the girl wear a magnificent leather coat . Doubtless Gracie , celebrate in the illustrated press for her thrilling performance at the wheel at Brooklands . the other , less warmly clothe , must be the maid . 

 Gracie look suddenly round , and Evelyn see her face , which however he hardly recognise from the photograph of it in illustrated paper . at a distance of twenty foot he feel the charm of it - vivacious , agreeable , aware of its own power . perhaps very beautiful , but he could not be sure . anyhow , the face - and the gesture - of an individuality . Evelyn at once imagine she as a mistress ; and as he fence amiably with the amiable Sir Henry , who he have some reason to believe would one day soon be try to engage he in high finance , his mind dwelt upon the idea of she as a mistress . he be not an over - sensual man ; he be certainly not lascivious . he be guilty of no bad taste in conceive this girl , whom he now see for the first time , as a mistress in the privacy of his heart . what go on in a man 's heart be his own affair . and similar thought , on meet young and attractive woman , wander in and out of the heart of the most staid and serious person , unsuspecte by a world of beholder apt to reason too conventionally . Evelyn 's be an entirely serious soul , but it have a mortal envelope . he be starve of woman . for year woman have be his secret preoccupation . he desire intimacy with some entrance , perfect woman . not the marital intimacy . no . never again the marital intimacy . he would make sacrifice for the desire intimacy . but not the supreme sacrifice . work first , career first , woman second , even be she another Helen . 

 for nearly twenty year Evelyn have be a widower . six week after his marriage a daily series of inescapable fact have compel he to admit to himself that his wife be a furiously self - centre neurotic who demand as a natural right everything in exchange for nothing . an incurable . he have excuse she on the ground that she be not to be blame for her own mental constitution . he have tolerate she because he be of those who will chew whatever they may have bite off . he have protect himself by the application of the theory that all that happen to a man happen in his own mind and nowhere else , and therefore that he who be master of his own mind be fortify against fate . a dogma ; but it suit his case . at the end of three year Adela have die , an unwilling mother with a terrific grievance , in childbe ; and the child have not survive she . the whole experience be horrible . Evelyn mourn . his sorrow be also a sigh of transcendent relief . agonising relief , but relief . not till the episode be finish do he confess to his mind how frightfully he have suffer and how imperfectly he have be master of his mind . he have never satisfactorily answer the great , humiliating question : " how could I have be such a colossal fool , so blind , so deaf , so utterly mistake in my estimate of a woman ? " he be leave with a quiet but tremendous prejudice against marriage . I have have luck this time , he think . once be enough . never again ! never again ! he divide wife into those who be an asset and those who be a liability ; and his strong inclination be to conclude , in the final judgment , that of all the wife he know not one be an asset . one or two of they might have the appearance of an asset , yet if you could penetrate to essential , if you could learn the inner conjugal secret , be there one who be not a liability ? he try to stand away from himself and see that he be prejudiced , but he could never honestly convict himself of a prejudice in this matter . 

 he see the maid and Reyer pass towards the lift like apparition . he notice that the pretty but tired maid be well - dress , probably in clothe that a few month early her mistress have be wear ; but that nevertheless every nervous movement and glance of the girl divulge her station . he hear Sir Henry 's voice and his own like faint echo . he see the janissary pass towards the lift like apparition carry ghostly suit - case . he see Miss Savott herself go towards the door like an apparition , then hesitate and glide towards her father like an apparition . and in those brief second the sole reality of his mind be the three year of marriage with Adela , year whose thousand day and a day sweep in detail through his memory with the miraculous rapidity of a life re - live by a drown man . 

 " Gracie , this be my friend , Mr. Orcham , the king of his world - I have   tell you . my daughter . " 

 and now Gracie be the reality . instinctively he put one hand to his chin as he raise his hat with the other . why have he not shave ? the hair on his enigmatic chin seem half an inch long . 

 " I do hope you have not   get up specially to meet we , " say Gracie . 

 her father 's word , but speak differently ! what a rich , low , emotional , sympathetic voice , full of modulation ! a voice like shot silk , change at every syllable ! 

 " no , I do not , " he reply . " but if I have know you would be here so early I certainly might have do . the fact be , I have   get up to go with my meat - buyer to Smithfield Market . " 

 he look and see the faithful Cradock standing meekly expectant at the entrance . the dilatory clock at last show four . 

 " I must just lock up the car , " say Gracie . " shall not   be two minute . " she run off . 

 " I be go to bed , " Sir Henry call after she . 

 " all right , daddy , " she call back , not stop . 

 " I be fortunate enough to be able to sleep whenever I want to ! " say Sir Henry to Evelyn . " useful , eh ? " 

 " very , " Evelyn agree . 

 wonderful with what naive satisfaction these millionaire attribute to themselves the characteristic of Napoleon ! he accompany Napoleon to the lift , and stay for a moment chat about the hotel . it be as if they be manouvre for place before cross the line in a yacht race . 

 2 . 

 when Evelyn return to the hall Gracie Savott also be return . she now carry the leather coat on her arm , reveal a beige frock . 

 " no , no , " she say when he offer to take the coat . " but have you get a gasper ? " 

 " I never smoke anything else , " say Evelyn . 

 " neither do I , " say Gracie . " thank . " 

 he think : " what next ? " 

 the next be that Gracie move a few foot to a table , Evelyn following , and put the newly light cigarette on an ash - tray , open her bag , and begin to titivate her face . she be absorb in this task , earnest over it ; yet she could talk the while . he somehow could not examine her feature in detail ; but he could see that she have a beautiful figure . what slim ankle ! what wrist ! Les attach fine . she have a serious expression , as one engage on a matter of grave importance . she dab ; she critically judge the effect of each dab , gaze closely at her face in the hand - mirror . and Evelyn unshave ! 

 " have daddy really go to bed ? " she ask , not take her eye off the mirror . 

 " he have . " 

 " he be a great sleeper before the Lord . I suppose he tell you about our cockleshell the ' Caractacus . ' " 

 " not a word . what about it ? we do hear she have be roll a bit . " 

 " roll a bit ! when we be a day out from New York , she roll the dining - room window under water . the fiddle be on the table , but she throw all the crockery right over the fiddle . I be the only woman at dinner , and there be not   absolutely a legion of man either . they say that roll smash seventeen thousand pound ' worth of stuff . I think she would never come up again . the second officer tell daddy next day that he never think she would come up again . it be perfectly thrilling . but she do come up . everyone say she be the bad roller that ever sail the sea . " 

 during this narration Gracie 's attention to the mirror do not relax . 

 " well , " say Evelyn calmly . " of course it must have be pretty bad weather to make a big ship like that three day late . " 

 " Weather ! " say Gracie . " the weather be awful , perfectly dreadful . but it be not   the weather that make she three day late . she split right across . yes , split right across . the observation - deck . a three - inch split . anyhow I could put my foot into it . of course it be rope off . but they show it to daddy . they have to . and I see it with he . " 

 " do you mean to say - " Evelyn begin , incredulous . 

 " yes , I do mean to say , " Gracie stop he . " you ask daddy . ask anyone who be on board . that be why she be go to be lay up for three month . they talk about 're - conditioning . ' but it be the split . " 

 " but how on earth - ? " Evelyn be astound more than he have ever be astound . 

 " oh ! Strain , or something . they saidit be something to do with they put two new lift in , and remove a steel cross - beam or whatever they call it . but daddy say do not   you believe it . she be too long for her strength , and she will not   stand it in any weather worth talk about . of course she be german build , and the Germans can not   build like we . do not   you agree ? " 

 " no . I do not , " say Evelyn , with a smile to soften the contradiction , slightly lift his shoulder . 

 " oh , you do not ? that be interesting now . " 

 Evelyn raise his cane a few inch to greet Jack Cradock , who reply by raise his greenish hard hat . 

 " now , " think Evelyn , somewhere in the midst of the brain - disturbance due to Gracie 's amazing news . " this be all very well , but what about Smithfield ? she be not   quite a young girl . she must be twenty - five , and she know that I have not   get up at four o'clock for small - talk with woman . yet she behave as if I have not   anything to do except listen to she . she may stay chatter here for half an hour . " 

 he resent this egotistical thoughtlessness so characteristic of the very rich . at the same time he be keenly enjoy her presence . and he like her expensive stylishness . the sight of a really smart woman always give he pleasure . in his restaurant , when he occasionally inspect it as a spy from a corner behind a screen , he always look first for the fashionable , costly frock , and the more there be the well he be pleased . he relish , too , the piquancy of the contrast between Gracie 's clothe and the rough masculinity of her achievement on Brooklands track in the monstrous car which Sir Henry have have specially build for she , and her night - driving on the road from Southampton . only half an hour ago she have probably be steer a big car at a mile a minute on a dark curve road . and here with delicate hand she be finish the minute renewal of her delicate face . her finger - nail be stain a bright red . 

 so the roll from which nobody hop that the ship would recover , the roll which have break seventeen thousand pound ' worth of stuff , be merely ' thrill ' to she . and she have put she little foot into the split across the deck . what a sensation that affair ought to cause ! what unique copy for the press ! nevertheless , would it cause a sensation ? would the press exploit it ? he fancy not . the press would give descriptive column to the marvel and luxury of a new giant liner . but do anybody ever read in any paper - even in any anti - capitalistic paper - that a famous vessel roll , or vibrate , or shake ? never ! never a word in derogation ! as for the incredible cross - split , result of incorrect calculation of the designer , no editor would dare to refer to it in print . to do so would damage Atlantic traffic for a whole season - and incidentally damage the hotel business . the four - million - pound crack be protect by the devoted adherence of the press to the dogma that transatlantic liner be perfect . and let no one breathe a word concern the relation between editor and advertisement - manager . 

 Miss Savott have keep the leather coat on her arm while do her face . the face do , and her bag shut again , she drop the cloak on the small table by her side . womanish ! proof of a disordered and inconsequent mind . she resume the cigarette , which have be steadily send up a vertical wavering wisp of smoke . 

 " Mr. Orcham , " she say ingratiatingly , intimately , step near to he , " will you do something for I ? . . .I simply dare not   ask you . " 

 " if I can , " he smile .   have experience teach she that she be irresistible ? 

 " oh , you can ! I have   be die for year to see Smithfield Market in the middle of the night . would you mind very much take I with you ? I would drive you there . the car be all ready . I do not   lock it up after all . " 

 here be his second amazement . these people be incredible - as incredible as the split in the ' Caractacus . ' how do she suppose he could transact his business at Smithfield with a smart young woman hang on to he ? 

 she add , like an implore child : 

 " I will not   be in the way . I would be as small as a mouse . " 

 they read your thought . 

 not ' as quiet as a mouse . ' ' as small as a mouse . ' well . she have a gift for make her own phrase . 

 " but surely you must be terribly tired . I have   have four and a half hour ' sleep . " 

 " I ! tired ! I be like father - and you - I be never tired . besides , I sleep my head off on the ship . " 

 she look appealingly up at he . yes , irresistible ! and she well know it ! 

 " well , if you really be not   too tired , I shall be delighted . and the market be very interesting . " 

 and in fact he be delighted . there be grave disadvantage , naturally ; but he dismiss they from his mind , to make room for the anticipation of be drive by she through the night - street of London . sit by she ! he be curious to see one of these expert racing driver , and especially the fast woman - driver in the world , at the wheel . 

 " you be frightfully kind , " say she . " I will just - " 

 " how do you know I be never tired ? " he interrupt she . 

 " I could see it in your shoulder , " she answer . " you be not , be you ? " 

 " not often , " he say , proud , thrilled , feverish . 

 " see it in my shoulder , " he think . " odd little creature . her brain 's impish . that be what it be . well , perhaps she can see it in my shoulder . " indeed he be proud . 

 " I will just fly upstairs one moment . shall not   keep you . where be the lift ? " but she have descry the lift and be go . 

 " Reyer , " he call . " just see Miss Savott to her suite . " 

 Reyer run . the lift - man judiciously wait for he . 

 and Evelyn , Nizam of the immense organism of the hotel , reflect like an ingenuous youth : 

 " I know everyone think I be very reserved . and perhaps I be . but she be get right through that , into I . and she be the first . she must have take a liking to I . here I have   only know she about six minute and she be - " somewhere within he a point of fire glow . he advance rather self - consciously towards the wait Cradock . and , advance , he remember that , on her first disappearance , after say she would be two minute , Gracie Savott have be away only half a minute . she be not the sort of girl to keep a man wait . no ! . . . but barely half his own age . 

 content 
 chapter 3 

 the meat - BUYER 

 Jack Cradock 's age be fifty - nine . he be short , stoutish , very honest , and very shrewd . his clothe be what be call ' good , ' that be to say , of good everlasting cloth well sew ; but they have no style except Jack 's style . his income nearly touch a thousand a year . with his saving he buy house - property . no stock and share for he . he have as fine an eye for small house - property as for a lamb 's carcass . he have always be in the Smithfield trade . his father have be a drover when cattle stroll leisurely to London over road otherwise empty . he go to bed at eight o'clock , and rise at three - save on Sundays . Daylight London seem to he rather odd , unnatural . 

 he have be meat - buyer to the hotel in the year when it be merely a hotel among hotel , before Evelyn take control of it . in those year there exist in the buying department abuse which irk Jack 's honesty . he see they completely abolish . he see the hotel develop from a hotel among hotel into the unique hotel , whose sacred name be utter in a tone different from the tone use for the name of all other hotel . he recognise in Evelyn a fellow - devotee of honesty in a world only passably honest ; a man of scrupulous fairness , a man of terrific industry , a man of most various ability and most quiet authority , a real swell . Jack have hear that Evelyn give lecture on wine to his own wine - waiter , that he taste every wine before purchase , and choose every brand of cigar himself ; and Jack marvel thereat . he have hear , far , that Evelyn know everything about vegetable ; but Covent Garden , which he regard as a den of thief , have no interest for Jack . apart from potato and occasional broad bean and spring onion , he never eat vegetable ; salad he could not bear . 

 of course Evelyn do not know as much about meat as Jack - who do ? - but he know a lot , and he do not pretend to more knowledge than he possess . that be what Jack like in Evelyn : absence of pretence . he adore Evelyn with a deep admiration and a humble , sturdy affection equally deep . Evelyn often ask after his wife , and the boy in the navy . 

 he be now wait for his august governor with impatience well conceal . he see Gracie run off to the lift . he himself have never be in any but the service - lift . he have never see the restaurant except when it be empty and the table - tops dark green instead of white , and the chair pack ; but he know the restaurant - kitchen , and have frequent interview with the gesticulatory and jolly french chef in the chef 's office outside whose door two clerk work . he have never be in any bedroom . he imagine all manner of strange and even unseemly happening in the suite . he rarely have glimpse of the hotel 's clientele , and his shrewd notion be that he would be antipathetic to it . still , it want the good meat , and he provide the good meat ; and that be something . he strove conscientiously to think well of the clientele . 

 he do not like the look of Miss Gracie Savott . she coincide too closely with what he would describe in his idiom as ' a bit too tasty . ' he be aware that woman , more correctly lady , smoke , but he object to their smoking , especially the young one ; his married daughter , nevertheless a fine and capricious piece , do not smoke , and have she attempt to do so would probably have be dissuade from persevere by physical violence at the joint hand of her father and her husband . as a boy he have see ancient hag smoke short clay pipe on the house - step of large village . a hag , however , be a hag , and a cutty pipe suit her indrawn lip . but that a fresh young girl , personable , virginal , should brazenly puff tobacco - that be different . 

 nor could he approve of Gracie 's general demeanour towards the governor . too bold , too insinuating , too impudent . hardly decent ! most shocking of all be the spectacle of Gracie daring - dare to paint and powder her saucy face in the presence of the governor . shameless ! and the governor tolerate it ! if the governor have not be above all criticism Jack would have venture in his heart to criticise the demeanour of the governor towards Gracie . too boyish , too youthful ; a hint of the swain about it ! well , the chit be go now . 

 2 . 

 the governor stroll slowly down the hall to the door where Jack stand wait . a little self - conscious , the governor be , in his walk . seldom before have Jack see the governor self - conscious . his confidence in the governor be a great solid rock . he feel a momentary tremor in the rock . it cease ; it be not a tremor ; it be imperceptible : he have be mistake . yet ... 

 " Morning , Jack . sorry to keep you . shall not   be a minute . " 

 " Morning , governor . no hurry , but we ought to be get along . I have a taxi waiting . " the customary tranquil benevolence of the governor 's tone reassure he . 

 " just tell I again about that Jebson young man . I want to know exactly before I see he . you say he be only recently come into the business . " 

 " yes , sir , " Jack begin . " and if you ask I , he think he be the emperor of Smithfield . his uncle be a tough ' un , but nothing to young Charlie Jebson . I get on pretty comfortably with everybody in the market except he . try to make out he do not   care whether he do business or not . but he can not   put that across I . no ! and everybody but he know he can not . his uncle know it . ten shill a stone 's the right price for the good Scotch . and Charlie know that too . but ' ten and six , ' he say . ' ten and two , ' I say , wish to meet he . ' ten and two ! you have   get the b. ten and two fever , Cradock , ' he say . ' and you have   get the b. half - guinea fever . ' I say . ' do not   ask I to come back , ' I say . ' because I shall not . I have   get my good coat on , ' I say . then he turn on I and give I a basinful , and I give he one . nothing do , governor . and his uncle 's afraid of he . it be all over the market . " 

 " well , " say Evelyn , with a faint , mild smile . " we will give he a miss in future . " 

 " yes , governor , " say Jack anxiously . " but suppose he take it , suppose he accept of it ! jebson have the fine Scotch beef in the market . it be Charlie 's grandfather as start the Scotch beef trade in Smithfield . and the good Scotch - it be none so easy to come by . sometimes three day and I do not   see a side I fancy - not what you may call the good . " 

 " try he with ten and four . " 

 " yes , governor , and have all the rest of them jump at I . besides , I tell he ten and two be my last word . " 

 " that be enough , " say Evelyn . " if you say it you say it , and we shall not   go back on you , even if we have to buy Argentine ! " he soothingly pat Jack 's shoulder . 

 Jack be more than soothe - he be delighted . this be the rock , and never have it quiver . 

 " the fact be , " say Jack in an easy tone , " Charlie 's get it into his head that I be make a bit on it . and that be why when you say you would come up with I one morning and show yourself , I think it ' ud be a good move . if that will not   settle Master Charlie , I do not   know what will . " 

 to himself Jack be think : " well then , why do not   he come ? I could have tell he all this in the taxi . and this be the first time I have   ever have to tell he anything twice . I be go to be late . " 

 " listen ! " say Evelyn , after some more unnecessary talk . " you go on . take the taxi you have   get . I will follow . I will ask for Jebsons ' , and you will find I somewhere near it . Sir Henry Savott - very important customer and a very important man too , in the City - want I to take his daughter and show her Smithfield . bit awkward . could not   refuse though . they have a car here . I might get there before you , Jack . " Evelyn laugh . 

 Jack mistrust the laugh . he have no suspicion that the paragon of honesty have tell he a lie ; but he mistrust the tone of voice as well as the laugh . something a wee bit funny about it . 

 " do you mean that young lady you be talk to , governor ? " Jack ask in a voice that vibrate with apprehension . 

 " yes , that be the one . off you go now . " 

 Jack pass quickly in silence through the revolve door . he be thunderstruck . he could hardly have be more perturb if the entire hotel have fall about his ear . the entire hotel have indeed fall about his ear . the governor , the pattern , the exemplar , the perfect serious man , take that prance hussy into Smithfield Market ! of all place ! there be never a woman to be see in Smithfield before nine o'clock , unless it might be a street - singer with her man go home after give a show outside the Cock Tavern . the talk to - morrow morning ! the joke he would have to hear afterwards - and answer with well joke ! Rock ? the rock be wobble from side to side , ready to crash , ready to crush he . he climb heavily into the taxi , sigh . 

 content 
 Chapter 4 

 the drive 

 for the first ten minute of wait Evelyn forgave the girl . during the second ten minute he grow resentful . it be just like these millionaire to assume that nothing really matter except their own convenience . do she suppose that he have rise at three - thirty for the delight of fritter away twelve , sixteen , nineteen irrecoverable minute of eternity while she loll around in her precious suite ? monstrous ! bad , he be become a marked man to Reyer , Long Sam , and the janissary . they do not yet know that he be wait for a girl ; but they would know the moment she appear and go off with he . worse still , she be destroy the character with which he have privately endow she . she arrive , smile . and in an instant he have forget the twenty minute , as one instantly forget twenty day of bad weather when a fine day dawn . 

 " sorry to keep you . complication , " say she , with composure . 

 he wonder whether the complication have be cause by a forbidding father . 

 she have change her hat , and put on a thin , dark , inconspicuous cloak . 

 the car be Leviathan . a landaulette body , close . she open one of its front - door , and pick up a pair of loose glove from the driver 's seat . an attendant janissary find himself forestall , and have to stand unhelpful . 

 " open ? " she ask , in a tone expect an affirmative answer . 

 " rather . " 

 " no . I will do it . this be a one - girl hood . you might just wind down the window on your side . " 

 in ten second the car be open . 

 " but I be go to sit by you , " say Evelyn . 

 she be lower the glass partition behind the driver 's seat . 

 " of course , " say she . " but I like it all open so that the wind can blow through . " 

 by the manner in which she manouvre Leviathan out of the courtyard , which an early cleaner have encumber with a long gush hose - pipe , Evelyn know at once that she be an expert of expert . in a moment they be in Birdcage Walk . in another moment they be out of Birdcage Walk , and slip into Whitehall . in yet another moment they be in the Strand . it be still night . the sun have not give the faint announcement to the revolving earth 's sombre eastern sky that he be mount towards the horizon . there be an appreciable amount of traffic . she never hesitate , not for the fraction of a second . her judgment be instantaneous and infallible . her acceleration and deceleration , her braking , could hardly be perceive . Formidable Leviathan be silent . not a murmur beneath the bonnet . but what speed - in traffic ! Evelyn see the finger of the speedometer rise to forty - forty - two . 

 " do you know the way ? " he ask . 

 " I do , " she reply . 

 strange that she should know the way to Smithfield . 

 suddenly she say : 

 " what bring you into the hotel business ? " 

 he reply as suddenly : 

 " the same thing that bring you to motor . Instinct . I be always fond of handle people , and organise . " 

 " always ? do you mean even when you be a boy ? " 

 " yes , when I be a boy . you know , club and thing , and field - excursion . I manage the refreshment department at Earl 's Court one year . then through some wine - merchant I get the management of the Wey Hotel at Weybridge . I rebuild that . then I have to add two wing to it . " 

 " but this present show of your ? " 

 " oh ! well . they want a new manager here , and they send for I . but I would not   leave the Wey . so to get I they buy the Wey . " 

 " and what happen to the Wey ? " 

 " nothing . I be still run it . go down there this morning . can not   go every day . when you have   get the large luxury - hotel in the world on your hand - " 

 " the large ? " 

 " the large . " 

 " have you be to America ? I think in America - " 

 " yes . all over America . I expect to learn a bit in America , but I do not . you mean those ' 2,000 bedroom - 2,000 bathroom ' affair . ever stay in one ? no , of course you have not . not your sort . too wholesale and rough - and - ready . not what we call luxury - hotel . rather behind the time . they have not   get past ' period'-furnishe . Tudor style . jacobean style . Louis Quinze room . and so on . and as for bathroom - well , they have to come to my ' show ' to see bathroom . " 

 he speak as it be ruthlessly , but very simply and quietly . when she speak she do not turn her head . she seem to be speak in a trance . he could examine her profile at his ease . yes , she be beautiful . 

 2 . 

 at Ludgate Circus , a white - armed policeman be direct traffic under electric lamp just as in daylight . 

 " how funny ! " she say , swing round to the left so acutely that Evelyn 's shoulder touch her . 

 in no time they would reach their destination . for this reason and no other he regret the high speed . the fresh wind that precede the dawn invigorate and sharpen all his sens . he recall Dr. Johnson 's remark that he would be content to spend his life drive in a postchaise with a pretty woman . but the pretty woman would not have be drive . this girl be drive . she profoundly know the job . Evelyn always have a special admiration for anybody who profoundly know the job . she even know the street of commercial and industrial London . before he be aware of it , the oddest thought shoot through his mind . 

 " her father might object . but I could handle her father . besides - what a girl ! lovely , and can do something ! no one who drive like she could possibly not have the stuff in she . I have   never meet anybody like she . she like I . no nonsense about she ! what a voice ! her voice be enough . it be like a bloom orchestra , soft and soothing , but so . . . here ! what be this ? what be all this . it be not   an hour since I meet she . I be the wild idiot ever bear . marriage ? never . a mistress ? impossible . neither she nor any other woman . the head of a ' show , ' as she call it , like mine with a mistress ! " 

 he laugh inwardly , awake out of a dream . and as he awake he hear her beautiful voice say , while her eye star straight ahead : 

 " what I admire in you be that you do not   act . I know you must be a pretty biggish sort of a man . well , father 's pretty big - at least I be always be tell so - but father can not   help act the big man , act what he be . he be always feel what he be . you be big and so you must know you be big ; but you just let it alone . it do not   worry you into act the part . I know . I have   see lot of big man . " 

 " oh ! " murmur Evelyn , cautious , non - committal , and short of the right word . but he be think rapidly again : 

 " and she have not   meet I an hour ago ! what a girl ! no girl ever say anything as extraordinary as what she be just say . and it be true , what she say . do not   I see it in her father ? I be afraid I might have seem boastful , the way I talk about I and my ' show . ' but apparently she do not   misunderstand I . Most girl would have misunderstood . really she be a bit out of the ordinary . " 

 Smithfield Markets with their enclose light avenue shine out twinkle in the near distance , on the other side of a large , dark , irregular open space of ground . Gracie glance to right and leave , decide where she would draw up , and , describe a long , evenly sustained curve , draw up in a quiet corner , slow , slow , slow - motion expiring without a jar into immobility . she click the door and jump down with not a trace of fatigue after a bedless night nearly end . her tongue say nothing , but her demeanour say : " and that be that ! that be how I do it ! " 

 " well , " remark Evelyn , still in the car . " you say something about I . I will say something about you . you can drive a car . " 

 Gracie answer : " I do not   drive any more . " 

 " what do you mean - you do not   drive any more ? " 

 " I mean race - track driving . I have   give it up . this be not   drive . " 

 " have an accident ? " 

 " an accident ? no ! I have   never touch a thing in my life . but I might have do . I think it be not   good enough - the risk . so I give it up . I think I might as well keep the slate clean . " she smile ingenuously , smooth her cloak . 

 " and what a slate ! what a nerve to retire like that ! " Evelyn reflect , and say aloud : " you be amazing ! " he have again the sensation of the romantic quality of life . he be uplifted high . 

 " so here we be , " say Gracie , suddenly matter - of - fact . 

 a policeman stroll into the vicinity . 

 " can I leave my car here , officer ? " she question he briskly , authoritatively . 

 the policeman pause , peer at she in the die night . 

 " yes , miss . " 

 " it will be quite safe ? " 

 " I will keep an eye on it , miss . " 

 " thank you . " 

 Evelyn , accustom to take charge of all interview , parley , and pow - wow , have to be a silent spectator . as he lead she into the market , he tremble at the prospect of the excitement , secret and overt , which her appearance would cause there . 

 content 
 chapter 5 

 GRACIE AT SMITHFIELD 

 Gracie , though for different reason , feel perhaps just as nervous as Evelyn himself when they enter the meat - market ; but within the first few moment her nervousness be utterly dissolve away in the strong sense of romance which surge into her mind and destroy everything else therein . 

 the illimitable interior have four chief colour : bright blue of the paint constructional ironwork , all column and arch ; red - pink - ivory of meat ; white of the salesman 's long coat ; and yellow of electricity . hundred of bay , which might or might not be call shop , line with thousand of great steel hook from each of which hang a carcass , salesman stand at the front of every bay , and far at the back of every bay a sort of shanty - office in which lurk , crouch and peer forth , clerk pen in hand , like devilish accountant of some glitter , chill inferno . 

 one long avenue of bay stretch endless in front , and other on either hand , produce in the stranger a feeling of infinity . many people in the avenue , loitering , chat , chaff , bickering ! and at frequent interval market - porter bear carcass on their leather - protect shoulder , or porter push truck full of carcass , speed with bent head feverishly through the avenue , careless of whom they might throw down or maim or kill . an impression of intense , cheerful vitality , contrast dramatically with the dark somnolence of the street around ! a dream , a vast magic , set in the midst of the prosaic reality of industrial sleep ! you be dead ; you step at one step into the dream ; you be alive . 

 everything be incredibly clean . the blue paint be shin clean ; the carcass be clean ; the white coat of the salesman be clean ; the chin of the salesman be clean and smooth ; many of they show white , starched collar and fancy necktie under the white coat . very many of they have magnificent figure , tall , burly , immense , healthy , jolly . none of they have any air of fatigue or drowsiness or unusualness . the hour be twenty minute to five , and all be as customary as the pavement of Bond Street at twenty minute to noon . and the badinage between acquaintance , between buyer and seller , be more picturesque than that of Bond Street . Gracie catch fragment as she pass . " you dirty old tea - leaf . " " go on , you son of an unmarried woman . " 

 Gracie be delighted . a world of male , of enormous and solid male . she be the only woman in the prodigious , jostle market . a million male , and one girl . she savour the contrast between the one and the million , belittle neither . of course Evelyn and she be mark for inquisition by curious , glint eye . they puzzle curiosity . they ought to have be reveller , out to see the night - life of London . but the sedate , reserve Evelyn look no reveller , nor do she in her simple , dark cloak . but , she think , they know a thing or two , do those male ! with satisfaction she imagine the free imagining behind their eye . she be proud to be the one against the million . let they think ! let their imagination work ! she feel her power . and never , not even at 100 m.p.h . on the race - track , have she live more exultantly . she be always demand life , and seldom get it . now she be get it - the full cup and overflowing . 

 2 . 

 Withal , at a deep level than these dionysiac sensation , be a sensation nobler , which rise up through they . the desire for serious endeavour . at the wheel of a racing - car , build specially for she to her father 's order , Gracie have be conscious of a purpose , of a justification . the track involve an austere rule of life ; abstinence , regularity , early hour , the care of nerve , bodily fitness . eight or ten month ago she have exhaust the moral potentiality of racing . racing hold nothing more for she . she have tired of it as a traveller tire of an island , once unknown , which he have explore from end to end . she have abandon it . her father have say : " you can not   stick to anything . " but her father do not understand . 

 she have fall into sloth and self - indulgence , aimless , restless , unhappy . her formidable engine - power be waste itself . she have rejoin her smart friend , form the habit of never want to go to bed and never want to get up , scatter her father 's incalculable affluence with both hand , eat , drunk , gamble , refuse herself no fantastic luxury   Sir Henry be negligently , perhaps cynically , compliant , live the life furiously . and the life be death . against his inclination , her father have take she with he to America . she have have hope of the opportunity and the energy of America . they be frustrate . in New York she have live the life still more furiously . and it be bad than death . while in New York Sir Henry have put through one of his favourite transaction : sell his splendid London house at a rich profit . he have a fondness for sell London home over the head of himself and Gracie . he have two country - house ; but the country mean little to Gracie , and less to he . hence , this night , the hotel . the man would reside in hotel for month together . 

 Gracie have reach the hotel , in the middle of the night , without any clear purpose in mind . she have love with violence more than once , but never wisely . she have now no attachment - and only one interest : reading . she have suddenly discover reading . Shakspere have enthral she . on the atlantic voyage she have gulp down two play of Shakspere a day . at present , for she , it be Shakspere or nothing . the phenomenon be beyond her father ; but it flatter his paternal vanity , demonstrate to he that he have beget no common child . first racing , now Shakspere ! something Homeric about Gracie , and she his daughter ! out of Shakspere and other special reading , a project be begin to shape in the girl 's soul , as nebulae coalesce into a star . but it be yet too vague to be formulate . then the hotel . then Evelyn Orcham , whose name Sir Henry have casually mention to she with candid respect . then the prospect of fabled Smithfield before dawn . Evelyn have impress she at the first glance : she do not know why . and she divine that she in turn have impress he . she admire he the more because he have not leapt at her suggestion of go with he to Smithfield , because for a few moment he have show obvious reluctance to accept it . not a man to be sweep off his foot . a self - contain , reserved man . Shy . quiet . almost taciturn , with transient mood of be confidential , intimate . mysterious . dangerous , beneath a conventional deportment . you never know what might be hide in the depth of a man like that . enigmatic . diffident ; but very sure of himself . in short . . . be he marry ? have he a hinterland ? well , his eye do not   look as if he have . 

 and now she be in Smithfield , and her prophetic vision of it , her hope of it , have be right . Smithfield have not deceive she . a romantic microcosm of mighty male , with a redoubtable language of their own . a rude , primeval , clean , tonic microcosm , where work be fierce and impassione . a microcosm where people get up early and think nothing of get up early , and strove and haggle and sweat , rejoice in the purchase and sale of beef and mutton and pork . to get up early and strive , while the dull world be still asleep : this it be that appeal to Gracie . freshness and sanity of early dark cool morning ! she want to bathe in Smithfield as in a bath , to drench herself in it , to yield utterly to it . Smithfield be paradise , and a glorious hell . 

 content 
 Chapter 6 

 birth of day 

 " ah ! there be Cradock , " say Evelyn . " he be our buyer . I will introduce he to you . the little man there . the one that be stick a skewer into that lamb . " 

 Gracie recognise the man who have be wait in the great hall of the hotel . have stick the skewer into the carcass , Jack pull it out and put it to his nose . then , while Evelyn and Gracie watch , he stick a skewer into the next lamb , and finally leave a skewer in each lamb : sign that they be his choose . 

 " Chines and end , " Gracie hear he say , as he scribble in a note - book . 

 he see Evelyn . 

 " here we be , Cradock , " say Evelyn . " this be Miss Savott . know all about motor - racing . now she want to know all about Smithfield . " 

 Jack clasp her slim hand in his thick one . 

 " I do think your market be marvellous , Mr. Cradock ! " Gracie greet he , genuine enthusiasm in her emotional low voice . her clasp tighten on the thick hand , and hold it . 

 " glad to meet you , miss . " 

 " it be so big and so clean . I love this blue paint . " 

 " glad to hear that , miss . there be some of them would soon have the old green . . . a bit of it over there . " he point . 

 " that be nice too . but I prefer the blue , myself . " 

 Jack be conquer at once , not by her view on blue and green paint , but by her honest manner , by her beauty , and by the warmth of her trifling , fragile , firm finger . he think , " Governor know what be what . trust he ! " and since the relation of man and woman be essentially the same in all class , and his idea concern they have be make robust and magnanimous by many contact with meat - salesman of terrific physique , he begin privately to wish the governor well in whatever the governor might be about . anyhow it be none of his business , and the governor could indeed be trust , have nothing to learn . 

 " you see those lamb , sir , " he murmur . " I guarantee there be not   ten lamb like they in all London to - day ! " 

 Evelyn nod . the carcass be already lift off their hook . Gracie see they put on a huge carving block , and watch a carver in bloody blue divide they with a long razor - knife and a saw . in a moment the operation be perform , and so delicately and elegantly that it have no repulsiveness . the carver be finish surgeon for Gracie , not butcher . 

 " that be get to be serve , for lunch at the hotel this morning , " say Jack to she . " we hang the beef for five or six day - use to hang it for twelve or fourteen . but you lady and gentleman alter your taste , you see , miss , and we have to follow . you see all that calf ' liver there . not so many year ago , I could buy as much as I want at sixpence a pound . would you believe I , it cost I two shilling these day ! all because they Harley Street doctor say it be good for anamia . " he turn to Evelyn : " that be Charlie Jebson , governor . next door . " he jerk his head . 

 " let us go and talk to he , " say Evelyn , easily . 

 Mr. Charles Jebson be a very tall man , with a good figure , and dandiacal in dress . 

 " this be my governor , Mr. Orcham , Charlie . and this be Miss Savott , come to see what we do up here . Mr. Charles Jebson . " 

 Charles become exceedingly deferential . he shake hand with Gracie like a young peer in swallow - tail determine to ingratiate himself with a chorus - girl . Gracie smile to herself , think : " what a dance I could lead he ! " 

 " you do get up early here , Mr. Jebson , " she say . " when do you sleep ? " 

 " I do not , miss , " he reply , smirk . " at least - well , three or four hour . make it up Sundays . perhaps you know the Shaftesbury , in Shaftesbury Avenue . express lunch and supper counter . that be mine . they call I ' the governor ' there , when I go in of a night to tackle the book and keep an eye on thing . not so much time for sleep , you will freely admit . " Gracie 's notion of he be enlarge . white coat before dawn . Restaurateur in the centre of theatre - land at supper - time ! a romantic world ! 

 " it be all too marvellous ! " she say admiringly . 

 Charlie show pride . a procession of four laden porter charge blindly down the avenue , shout . Gracie receive a glancing blow on the shoulder . she spin round , laugh . Jack move she paternally away to shelter . a nun , hand join in front , eye downcast , walk sedately along the avenue , a strange , exotic visitant from another sphere . the spectacle startle Gracie , shake all her ideal , somehow sham she . 

 " why be she here ? " she demand of Jack with false casualness . 

 " I could not   say , miss , for sure . little Sister of the Poor , or something . come for what she can get . food for orphan , I should not   be surprised . they be very generous in the market . " he add discreetly , as Gracie make as if to return to Evelyn , " Governor 's get a bit of business with Mr. Jebson . " 

 " oh yes . " and she ask he some question about what she see . 

 " Refrigerators , " he say . " thirty year ago when I first come here there be not   an ice - box in the place . " 

 Gracie could overhear part of the conversation between Charlie and Evelyn . Evelyn laugh faintly . Charlie laugh loudly . it go on . 

 " I hope we shall be able to continue to do business together , Mr. Jebson , " Evelyn say at length . 

 " it will not   be my fault if we do not , sir , " Charlie deferentially reply . 

 " that be good , " say Evelyn . " I know there be no beef well than your . I do not   know you have a restaurant . I have   often notice the Shaftesbury . one night I shall come in . I be rather interested in restaurant . " he laugh . 

 " thank you , sir . it will be a great honour when you do . " 

 General handshaking , which leave Charlie Jebson well satisfied with the scheme of the universe . the three proceed along the avenue . 

 2 . 

 " that will be all right now , I think , " Gracie hear Evelyn murmur to Jack Cradock . and she recall what Evelyn have say to she about an instinct for handle people . as it be extremely difficult to walk three abreast in the throng avenue , Jack , now elate , walk ahead . but sometimes he lag behind . everybody know he . everybody address he as Jack .   the Smithfield world be as much a world of christian name as Gracie 's own .   nevertheless the affectionate familiarity towards Jack be mask by the respect due to a man who be incapable of be deceive as to the quality of a carcass , who represent the swell hotel in London , who have a clerk , who spend an average of a hundred pound sterling a day , and who would take nothing but the good . 

 Cradock stop dead , in the rear . 

 " hello , Jim . I want a hundred pound of fat . " 

 " two and four , " be the reply . 

 " that be where you be wrong . two shilling . " 

 " and that be where you be wrong . " 

 " two and two , " say Jack . 

 " oh , " say Jim , with feigned disgust . " I will give it you for your birthday . I know how hard up you be . " 

 Jack scribble in his book and strode after the waiting pair . but a heavy hand be lay on his shoulder . 

 " hello , Jack . not see you lately . have a fair holiday ? " 

 " yes , " say Cradock . " I have have a fair holiday . I be not like some of you chap . when I go for a holiday I take my wife . " he hurry on . 

 " excuse I , miss , " he apologise to Gracie . 

 the trio arrive at a large fence lift . 

 " Miss Savott might like to go down , " Evelyn suggest . 

 Cradock speak to the guardian , and the chain be unfastened . 

 " if you will excuse I , governor . I will see you afterwards . " and to Gracie , with a grin : " I have   get a bit to do , and time 's get on . if I do not   keep two ton o ' meat in stock down at the Imperial Palace the governor would pass I a remark . " with a smile kindly and sardonic , benevolent and yet reserve , Jack Cradock stand at the edge of the deep well as the rough platform , slowly descend , carry the governor and young lady beyond his sight . 

 " what a lovely man ! " say Gracie , appreciative . 

 " you hear that phrase in America ! " be Evelyn 's comment . 

 they smile at one another . the hubbub and brightness of the vast market vanish away above their head . the lift shudder and stop . they be in silence and gloom . they be in a crypt . and the crypt be a railway station , vaster even than the market , and seem still vast than it be by reason of the lowness of its roof . 

 " as big ? " say the lift - attendant disdainfully in response to an enquiry . " it be a lot big than Euston or St. Pancras or King 's Cross . if you ask I , it be the long station in London ... no , the meat train be all come and go an hour ago . " an engine puff slowly in the further obscure twilight . " no , that be only some empty . " 

 Vague , dull sound echo under the roof : waggon be haul to and fro by power - winch , waggon swing round on turn - table . man like pigmy dot the endless slatternly expanse . the untidy platform be litter with package : a crate of live fowl , a case of dead rabbit , a pile of tarpaulin . the pair walk side by side along a platform until they be hold up by a chasm through which a waggon be be drag by a hawser . when the chasm be cover again they walk on , right to the aldersgate end of the station , whence the Farringdon Road end be completely invisible in the gloom . neither speak . both be self - conscious . 

 " what be you think about ? " Gracie ask curtly . 

 " if you want to know , I be think about that split ship of your . and you ? " 

 Gracie 's low , varied voice waver as she reply : 

 " I be only think of those lamb , when they be in the field , wag their silly little tail while they suck milk in . " 

 Evelyn see the gleam of tear in her eye . he offer no remark . nervously Gracie pull her cloak off and put it on her arm . 

 " it be so hot . I mean I be so hot , " she say . 

 she have indeed for a moment thought of the lamb . but the abide sensation in her mind , in her heart and soul , be the sensation of the forlorn sadness of the desert dark crypt , call by the unimaginative a railway station , and of the bright , jostle back - chat world of man suspend over it on a magical system of steel girder . all the accomplishment of adventurous and determine laborious man - man whom her smart girl friend would not look twice at , because of the cut of their coat , or their accent , or their social deportment ! she want ardently to be a man among man ; she feel that she be capable of be a man among man . her ideal , shake before , be throw down and smash . she like Evelyn for his sympathetic silence . she persuade herself that he know all her thought . by a shameless secret act , she try to strip her mind to he , tear off every rag of decency , expose it to he , nude . and not a word say . 

 " ah ! " she reflect with a yearning . " his instinct for handle people ! could he handle I ? could he handle I ? " ... 

 when they regain the surface , Jack Cradock be wait for they . she be astounded to see by the market - clock that the hour be after half - past six . then something disturbingly go out . a whole row of electric light in the broad arched roof of the central avenue ! new shadow take the place of the old . she glance at the roof . Grey light show through its glass . Dawn have begin . never in Gracie 's experience be a dawn so mysterious , so disconcert , so heartrende . Jack Cradock be very amiable , respectful , self - respect , and matter - of - fact . 

 outside she resume her dark cloak , tip the policeman before Evelyn could do so , and slowly climb into the car . she drive to the hotel slowly , not because of the increase traffic in the lighten street , but as it be meditatively . 

 " I might write down my impression of all that , " she murmur to Evelyn once , half - emerge for an instant from her meditation . 

 content 
 Chapter 7 

 the HOTEL wake up 

 in the courtyard of the hotel a lorry load with luggage be grind and pulsate its way out . the courtyard have dry after its morning souse . 

 " that be the last of the big luggage for the ' Leviathan ' , " Evelyn explain , as Gracie bring the car to a standstill in front of the revolve door and the two janissary . " special train leave Waterloo at 8.20 . passenger hate to have to catch it , but they always do manage to catch it - somehow . " 

 Gracie make no reply . a chauffeur , who have be lean against the rail of the luggage - hoist in a corner of the yard , advanced towards the car . 

 " good morning , Compton , " Gracie greet he , as she follow Evelyn out of the car . " how long have you be here ? " 

 " about an hour , miss . " 

 " have you have the big stuff send upstairs ? " 

 " oh yes , miss . " 

 " there be the beginning of a rattle in the bonnet here . have a look at it . " 

 " yes , miss . certainly , miss . any order , miss ? " 

 " not to - day . but I do not   know about Sir Henry . " 

 " no , miss . " 

 " well put the car in the hotel garage , and tell they to clean she . if I want she I will get she out myself . I be go to bed . you ought to get some sleep , too . " 

 " very good , miss . " 

 in her beautiful voice Evelyn notice the nonchalance of fatigue . he be glad she be tired , just as early he be glad she have not be tired . 

 on the step under the marquise she take off her cloak ; then precede Evelyn to the spin door . 

 " there be something at the back of your left shoulder , " say Evelyn , in the doorway . 

 " what ? " she do not turn round . 

 " a stain . why ! it be blood . " 

 " blood ? " 

 " yes . you must have get it after we come up into the market again . you be not   wear your cloak then . you be wear it before . and you could not   have get it down in the station . " 

 " what a detective you be ! " she say , still not turn round . 

 Evelyn see a deep flush gradually suffuse her neck . how sensitive she be ! no doubt she hat the thought of blood on her frock . 

 " the valet will take it out for you , if your maid can not . they be very good at that , our valet be . " 

 " at get out blood - stain ? " 

 " any stain . " Evelyn give one of his short laugh , though her tone have rather disturb he . the blood - stain be obscene upon she . he hat it . 

 she glance back , not at Evelyn , but at the janissary , who , well - train , avert their eye . he wish that she would put on her cloak again , and in the same instant she put it on , while her bag slap against her corsage . then she enter . on the outer mahogany of the head - porter 's desk hang a framed card : ' s.s . Leviathan . the special boat - train will leave Waterloo at 8.20a.m . , " follow by the date . 

 " how many departure by the ' Leviathan ' this morning , Sam ? " Evelyn ask . Long Sam be half - hide within his lair . 

 " Eighteen , sir , " say Sam , consult a book that lie open on the desk . 

 " Hm ! " 

 the great hall have much the same nocturnal aspect as when they have leave it , but with a new touch of lugubriousness , and a more intense expectancy - expectancy of the day , impatient now and restless . day have begin in the street and road and in St. James 's Park , but not in the hall . the fireman be hand to Reyer his time - clock , which check the performance of his duty more exactly and ruthlessly than any overseer could have do . Reyer , comatose and pale from endless hour of tedium , accept it negligently . 

 a high pile of morning newspaper lie on the counter near the still - close book - and - news shop . Evelyn strode eagerly towards it , and examine paper after paper . 

 " not a word , " he call to Gracie . 

 " not a word about what ? " 

 " your split ship . I look at the poster in Fleet Street . nothing on they . of course there would not   be . terrific thing , and yet they can hush it up . and there be not   a newspaper office in London that do not   know all about it by this time . and you will see it will not   be in the evening paper either . " 

 Gracie , stand hesitant , say nothing . she be too weary , or too depressed , to be interested any more , even in her complexion . reaction ! but Evelyn feel no fatigue . his imagination be now no long responsively awake to the fatigue of Gracie . on the contrary he feel extraordinarily alive . 

 " see , " he say , point through glass wall to the grill - room , where a couple of man , attend by two waiter , be already breakfast , " my hotel be wake up for the day . you be just in time to see my hotel wake up . it be a great moment . " 

 he love to watch his hotel wake up . something dramatic , poignant , in the spectacle of the tremendous monster stir out of its uneasy slumber . 

 a youngish woman in a short black frock approach through the dark vista of the restaurant and the foyer . she trip vivaciously up the first flight of step , then up the second . she enter the hall . 

 " good morning , Miss Maclaren . " 

 " good morning , sir . " bright scottish accent , but serious . 

 " Housekeeper , " he murmur to Gracie . " that be to say , one of our housekeeper . we have eight , not count the head - housekeeper , who be the mother of we all . " affection in his eager voice . 

 gracie star and say nothing . 

 " be not   Miss Brury on duty to - day , Miss Maclaren ? " he continue . 

 " she be unwell , sir . " 

 " sorry to hear that . thing be a bit late this morning . " 

 " yes , sir . something wrong with the clocking apparatus . Turnstile would not   turn . Mr. Maxon could not   explain it , but he get it put right . " 

 " everyone except head of department have to clock in , " Evelyn explain to Gracie . " Thirteen hundred of them , not count the Laundry and the works department - outside . " 

 " what a swarm ! " Gracie speak at last ; there be no answer enthusiasm in her tone , but Evelyn be not dash . he have forget the split ship and the blood - stain . he be the creative artist survey and display his creation - the hotel . he be like a youth . 

 a procession of girl and woman follow Miss Maclaren through the vista of the restaurant and the foyer into the great hall . they wear a blue uniform with brown apron , and carry pail , broom , brush and duster . some of they swerve off into the corridor lead towards the grill - room . other begin to dust the Enquiries and reception counter . other be soon on their knee , in formation , clean the immense floor of the hall . Miss Maclaren speak sharply , curtly , now and then to one or other of they . 

 " you always have to be at they , but they be a very decent lot , " she murmur as it be apologetically to Evelyn , her hand fold in front of she , nun - like , while surreptitiously she sum up Gracie with hostility . 

 " yes , " think Evelyn , enjoy the scene as though he have never witness it before . " the woman - guest be fast asleep on their private embroider pillow upstairs , all in silk pyjama and nightie , and these woman here have clean their home and get breakfast and wash child and be swear at probably , some of they , and walk a mile or two through the street , and put on their overall , and here they be swill and dust like the devil ! " and aloud he say to Gracie : " come and see the restaurant . will not   take a moment . " 

 they go down step and down step .   the earth 's surface be level beneath , but the front part of the hotel have be build over a basement ; the back part have not .   one lamp still keep watch over the main part of the dead restaurant ; but in a far corner be another lamp , and beneath it a fat man be furiously clean about a thousand electroplate cruet . row of cruet . tray of cruet . beyond , a corridor lead to the ball - room in the West Wing . 

 " yes , " say Gracie feebly . 

 they return . 

 " here be the lady ' cloak - room , " say Evelyn , even more animate , and turn aside . 

 he take her arm and lead she in . room after room . table after table . chair after chair . mirror after mirror . clock after fancy clock . in the dim twilight of rare lamp the long suite of highly decorate apartment look large even than it be . a woman be polish a mirror . 

 " it be a wonderful place , " say Gracie politely . " I think I must go to bed , though . " 

 he escort she to the lift . leave the liftman to wait , she stand back from the ornate cage - such a contrast with the shudder wooden platform at Smithfield - and glance up at Evelyn , her eye and face suddenly as shin and vivacious as his , she say to he in her rich voice , low , emotional , teasing : 

 " do you know what you be ? " 

 " what be I ? " 

 " you be a perfect child with a toy ! " 

 what would his co - director , the head of department , the head - housekeeper , Jack Cradock , have think , to hear he thus familiarly and intimately address by a smart chit who be also a stranger ? 

 " be I ? I do believe I be , " he answer , enrapture . 

 2 . 

 but when the lift have take she up out of sight , he think , though lightly : " who do she think she be , cheek I , after invite herself to Smithfield and all that ? never see she in my life until this morning , and she have the nerve to call I a child ! " nevertheless , her impudent remark do please he . he indeed admit , proudly , that he be a child - one part of he , which part have carelessly forget to grow up . 

 the mishap with the turnstile be prominent in his mind . the organisation of the hotel be divide into some thirty department , and the head of each have a fix conviction that his department be the corner - stone of the success of the hotel . Evelyn , Machiavellian , impartially support every one of these conviction , just as he consistently refrain from discourage the weed of interdepartmental jealousy inevitably sprout from time to time in the soil of strenuous emulation which he be always fertilise . thus the head floor - waiter do not conceal his belief that the room - service be the basis of prosperity ; the restaurant - manager know that the restaurant be the life - blood of the place ; the manager of the grill - room be not less sure that the grill , where at lunch and at supper the number of celebrity and notoriety far surpass that of the restaurant   though it cost the hotel not a penny for band , be the chief factor of prosperity ; the Audit - manager be aware that without his department the hotel would go to hell in six month ; the Bills - manager have no need to emphasise his supremacy ; the head of the Reception , who could draw from memory a plan of every room with every piece of furniture in it , and who know by sight and name and number every guest , and have a file - record of every guest , include the dubious , with particular of his sojourn , desire , eccentricity , rate of spending , payment - even to dishonour cheque , who could be welcome , non - committal , cool , cold and ever tactful in five language - this marvel have never a doubt as to the identity of the one indispensable individual in the hierarchy of the hotel . and so on . 

 and there be other - especially those mightiness the french , italian and viennese chef . Evelyn always remember the ingenuous , sincere remark of the chief engineer , who pass his existence in the low entrail of our revolve planet , where daylight be utterly unknown . " you see those thing , " the chief engineer have say to a visitor . " if they shut up , the bless hotel would have to shut right up . " ' those thing ' be the boiler , which make the steam , which actuate the engine , which draw the water from the artesian well , make the electric light and the electric power , heat the hall , restaurant and room , freeze or chill perishable food , bake the bread , cook the meat , boil the vegetable , cleanse and dry the very air , do everything except roast the game over a wood fire . 

 Evelyn have admit , to himself , the claim to pre - eminence of the chief engineer . but now he begin to wonder whether the turnstile and clocking - in satrap be not entitle to precedence over even the chief engineer . for if the hotel depend on the engine - hall the engine - hall depend on the presence of its workman . he smile at the fanciful thought as he descend by tile and concrete slope and narrow iron staircase , glimpse non - uniformed humble toiler of both sex in soil , airless room and enclosure , towards the cave of the Staff - manager 's second - in - command who watch and permit or forbid the entrance and exit of thirteen hundred employee . 

 the cave be a room of irregular shape , full of machine and pigeon - hole and cognate phenomenon . the second - in - command , a dignified and authoritative speciman of the middleclass age fifty or so , sit on one side of a counter . on the other side stand a young woman start on her day out , dressed and hatted and shod and powder and rouge for the undoing or delight of some young male : in her working - hour a chamber - maid . between they , on the counter , lie a dispatch case , on which the girl keep a gloved hand . 

 " you can not   leave with that thing until I have   see inside it , " say authority . 

 " but why ? it be mine . " 

 " how long have you be here ? not long , eh ? " 

 " a month . " 

 " well , when you have   be here a month of Sundays you will have get into your head that nobody can take anything out of here without I see what it be . " 

 " I call it a wicked shame . " 

 " it may be . but it be the rule of the hotel . last year I catch a girl slip out with a pair of sheet where they ought not   to be . " 

 " this despatch - case will not   hold a pair of sheet , " say the girl . " anyone can see that . " 

 Authority make no reply , but glance inquisitively at a small group of man who be clock in . the girl sulkily open the despatch - case . Authority look into it . 

 " that necklace yours ? " 

 " yes . " 

 " where do you get it from ? " 

 " a lady give it I . " 

 " what floor ? what number ? what name ? be she still here ? " 

 question and answer ; question and answer . 

 " off you go , " say authority , have write down the detail on the slip - permit which the girl have hand to he : 

 " you will know next time . " 

 off the girl go , haughtily . Evelyn feel sorry for she , as he emerge from the doorway where he have be listen to the encounter . 

 " good morning , sir . " Authority have suddenly change to subservience . 

 " I hear you have some trouble with the turnstile this morning , Maxon , " say Evelyn benevolently . 

 " Trouble , sir ? turnstile ? " reply subservience , as if quite at a loss to understand the sinister allusion . 

 " yes . some charwoman be keep wait . " 

 " oh ! I see what you mean , sir . that be not   turnstile , sir . they have   tell you wrong . I will show you what it be . " Subservience spring round the counter . 

 the two bent together over a steel contraption , and subservience explain . 

 " no turnstile about that , sir . clock . " 

 " why do not   you let them through , for once ? " Evelyn ask . 

 " well , sir , I think I should get it right every minute . only a touch . and it be not   long . it be not   above five minute . and it will not   happen again . and if it do happen again , and it be your wish , sir - " 

 Evelyn change the subject . after some general chat , whose sole object be to indicate to the excellent Maxon that Maxon enjoy his special regard , he depart , have first jot a reminding note for himself . the rule about outgoing package irk his feeling for decency . but it be absolutely necessary . there be simply no end to the running of a hotel . how would Gracie Savott have behave if confront with the rule ? a certain liveliness for authority ! she be get into bed now . nothing have be say as to a further meeting . 

 3 . 

 when Evelyn return to the great hall Monsieur Adolphe , the perfectly attire , rosy - cheeked Reception - manager , who be an Alsatian but who have submerge the characteristic of his origin under a cosmopolitanism acquire during twenty - five year of activity in continental and London hotel , be hurry busily about ; for the " Leviathan " departure have begin . 

 american woman , with the draw , set face of too - early rise , and great bouquet of flower , be appear , follow by placatory man who desire tranquillity even at the price of honour . if husband and father suffer unjustly from wife and daughter , the injustice be at once pass on by husband and father to baggage - porter and other official . Adolphe 's role be to establish an illusion of general love - kindness . he fulfil it : that be his life - work . but Evelyn stand always first in his mind , and for Evelyn 's sake he cut short the oration of a Chicago millionaire . 

 " Sir Henry Savott have just telephone down to enquire what time it would be convenient for you to see he to - day , sir . I have   send the message up to your room . " 

 " why do the message come to you , Adolphe ? " 

 " I suppose because you have be see once or twice in the hall , and you be not   in your room . excuse I , sir . " Adolphe hasten away into the courtyard , half run . 

 Day have at length dawn in the great hall , which live again , after the coma of the interminable night . 

 " if that fellow Savott really be Napoleon , " Evelyn reflect , " he ought to be fast asleep now , instead of pursue I with telephone - message that take everything for grant . how do he know that I have   not go to bed same as he have ? " he smile in anticipation of protract , fierce , and yet delicately manouvre tussle with Savott . the fight for and against the rumour hotel - merger be go to start soon than he have expect . he smile a second time , because he have firm hold of something that Sir Henry passionately want . great fun ! he reflect far : " it will do that fellow no harm to cool his heel for a day or two . " 

 then he go to the counter , and write a reply to Sir Henry : 

 " Mr. Orcham be very sorry to say that he have outside appointment which will keep he away from the hotel all day . " nothing about to - morrow or the next day ? no . more effective to say nothing about to - morrow or the next day . he have the good , and delay and uncertainty would only inflame the desirer and so impair the desirer 's skill in negotiation . 

 " what number - Sir Henry Savott ? " he demand , look up across the counter at a clerk . " Page ! " he call . " Telephone . Sir Henry Savott , 365 . " 

 Adolphe come in hurrying , explain with a laugh : " I have to give Senator Gooden an extra shake of the hand because he come to we from another hotel , and I do not   want he to go back there ever . " 

 " good , " say Evelyn . " I have   see to Sir Henry Savott . you know nothing . " 

 " quite , sir , " say Adolphe comprehendingly , and dash off . 

 car after car be now leave the courtyard for Waterloo . Mowlem , the day head - porter , be at his grandest at the revolve door . Evelyn ascend , and , look at his watch , enter his private apartment . 7.45 . at 7.45 he breakfast . there , on the centre - table in the sitting - room , be his breakfast , with the newspaper arrange in what Evelyn have decide be the order of their importance to he . there , on the buffet , the spirit - lamp burn under a silver dish . there , near the door , stand his own man , with a smile of greeting . Evelyn shut the door on the whole world . he have half - an - hour to himself . no mail be ever bring to his room . telephone be harshly discourage . punctuality . everything in its place . all the angle be right - angles . a logical orderliness . no will but his own function in those two room . he sit down , sip at iced water , open a newspaper , clear his throat , stretch his leg , tear up the now answer telephone - message from Sir Henry Savott . 

 " all right , Oldham , " he give the signal . " bit colder this morning , eh ? Autumn . " his voice be full of happy kindliness . 

 " yes , sir , " Oldham agree , content , and with ceremonious gesture serve the bacon and pour out the Costa Rica coffee . 

 fresh roll . fresh toast . pile of butter on ice . it be heaven , a heavenly retreat . 

 " I will shave after breakfast , Oldham . " 

 " yes , sir . I have put out the thing . " 

 " good . " 

 Evelyn be secure and at ease . he have many matter on his mind : the clocking - in ; the chambermaid - no insult intend ; Sir Henry Savott ; the relation between Jack Cradock and Charlie Jebson ; a hundred other big and little . but they do not trouble he , because he know he could deal with they all . he love they . he need they . they exhilarate he . they be his life . without they he would have sink into tedium . his life be perfect . nobody could interfere with it , nobody disarrange it . 

 and then the tiny thought sneak into his mind on tip - toe like a thief : be his life perfect ? yes ! it be perfect . and it be full . be it full ? be no corner of it empty ? do nothing lack ? yes ! no ! his life lack nothing . it be balance . its equilibrium be stable . suppose a woman , a beautiful woman , come into that sacrosanct room , as of right , flaunt her right , and begin fuss about his health , comment on his pallor , demand to look at his tongue , fuss about the flower and the exact disposition of the flower , open a newspaper and leave it inside out on the floor , complain of her loneliness in the world , complain of her dressmaker , ask he whether he think she look five year young than her real age , and , have be answer in the affirmative , ask he whether he really think she look five year young than her real age ; ask he whether he love she , suggest that he be disappoint in she ! and so on and so on . 

 he know it all . he have ' be there . ' intolerable ! Delicious at rare moment , hell the rest of the time ! his life be full . another drop , and the glass would splash over . he have for year be lightly dream of a mistress . silly ! Boyish ! a mistress would be a liability , not an asset . his career come first , with his usefulness to society , his duty to shareholder . he be a serious man with a conscience , not a gambler ; commerce with woman be the equivalent of gambling ; it be stake tranquillity of conscience , stake his very soul , against a smile , a kiss , an embrace , the elegance of frock and jewel . he open a paper , gaze at the line of type , and , engage secretly in the controversy which beyond all other have agitate ambitious and powerful man for thousand of year and never be satisfactorily settle , he could make absolutely no sense of the news . suddenly it occur to he that Sir Henry might be want to see he , not about the scheme for a merger , but about his excursion with Gracie Savott into the wild of London in the middle of the night . the girl might have waken and tell her father . 

 " another slice , sir ? " 

 " I think I will . I be up rather early . remind I to shave . " 

 content 
 chapter 8 

 the new life 

 when Gracie enter the drawing - room of her suite , she go straight to the window and open they wide , look at St. James 's Park below , along whose avenue man and girl be already hurry earnestly northward in the direction of the Green Park and Piccadilly ; she thirstily drink in large draught of the foliage - perfume air , for it seem to she that she could still smell Smithfield 's meat . the flame - tint new curtain wave their fold high into the room . naturally Tessa the maid have forget the stand instruction to open window on arrival . after a few cleansing moment Gracie pass into her bedroom . it be dark . she impatiently switch on the electricity . a suitcase , unfastened , lie on the floor , and a jewel - case , shut , on the bed . no other sign of habitation ! the dressing - table be bare , save for the customary hotel pin - cushion and small china tray . the curtain have not be open , nor the blind raise . 

 " Tessa ! " she call , after open the window . no answer . she have a qualm of apprehension . she pass into the bathroom . not a sign of habitation in the bathroom either . it might have be a dehumanise bathroom in a big furniture store . the next door , ajar , lead to a small bedroom , Tessa 's . Gracie push against it . darkness there too . Gracie turn the switch . Tessa be stretch asleep on , not in , the bed . gracie could see the left wrist which she herself have bandage two or three hour early , and on the bandage be a very faint reddish discoloration . Gracie , who several year early after witness rather helplessly a motor - accident at Brooklands have qualify for a first - aid certificate , examine the bandage in silence . no danger . the wrist have bleed since the bandaging , but be bleed no long . Tessa sleep undisturbed . her pretty face be so pale , tragic , and exhaust in sleep that Gracie creep out of the bedroom and softly close the door in a sudden passion of quasi - maternal pity . the qualm of apprehension recur . 

 in the bathroom she throw down her hat and cloak , and pull off the beige frock . yes , the blood on the shoulder be very plain . the swift , startling realisation of its origin have alone cause she to blush when Evelyn remark on it . that blood come not from Smithfield , nor be it the blood of any slain animal . when Gracie have come up to the suite for two minute before start for Smithfield she have find Tessa in the maid 's bedroom , a vague figure in the unlit gloom , and have summon she very sharply - sharpness of excitement work above secret fatigue . a sudden alarmed cry from Tessa : " oh ! I have   cut myself with the scissor ! " a hand knock against her shoulder in the gloom . how have the girl contrive to injure her wrist , and what be she do with the scissor in the dark ? gracie , too hurried to pursue the enquiry , have drag Tessa into the light of the bathroom , find the simple first - aid apparatus without which she never travel , and bind up the wrist . the wound be somewhat sanguinary , but not at all serious . Tessa be an efficient maid , but apart from the performance of her duty lackadaisical , characterless , and slothful . she could sit idle for hour , not even read , and when she read she read sentimental drivel . she be old by two year than Gracie , who always regard she as a junior . a doctor have once pronounce her anamic . the wrist duly nurse , Gracie have soothe and enheartene Tessa and tell she to sit down for a bit ; then , after change hat and cloak , have run out . thus in the suite have be spend the twenty minute that Evelyn have spend wait in the great hall . 

 flicker of suspicious surmising have gleam at interval in Gracie 's mind . she recall have explain to Tessa , many month ago , a few picturesque detail of anatomy learn in the first - aid course - how there be a certain part of the wrist which , etc . , etc . - how an incision upon that part would be just as effective , and assuredly less painful and messy , than an attack on the throat with a razor , etc . playful teasing . nothing more . forget as soon as say . remember now . have not Tessa 's manner be sometimes strange on board the ship ? have not Gracie sometimes fancy that she might be victimise by an unrequited love - in the style of her novelette ? absurd . yet not wholly absurd . no one more capable of a desperate act when rouse than your silly , taciturn , lackadaisical anamic . Gracie be render solemn , be snatch momentarily away from self - contemplation , by the idea that she have perhaps for day be terribly close to a mortal tragedy without guess it ... however , Tessa be asleep . the peril of a tragedy , if peril there have be , be over . no wonder that , quit the bedroom , Gracie have gaze on the maid as a mature mother on a senseless child . 

 2 . 

 in her own bedroom Gracie knelt down and unpack the suit - case ; then arrange the toilet - table ; then undressed completely , turn on the water in the bathroom and bath . she open the door of Tessa 's room to make sure that the noise of the water have not waken the girl . not a sound there . she put on blue silk pyjama , and survey herself , move to and fro , in the wardrobe mirror . she lay her small , elaborately embroider travel pillow on the hotel pillow , light the bed - lamp , draw the blind , close the curtain , get into bed , switch off the lamp . she shut her eye . 

 she be intensely conscious of her body , of the silkiness of her pyjama , of the soft ridge of embroidery in the pillow . luxurious repose . extreme exhaustion ; not merely physical ; emotional . exhaustion induce by the violence of her sensation and her aspiration in Smithfield Central Market and in the crypt below it . thought of Tessa have recede . once again she be absorb in self - contemplation . despite fatigue , an impulse to initiate immediately her secret project grow in she . it become imperious . she fight it , be beat . she light the lamp , hesitate , arose , put on the rich dressing - gown from the foot of the bed , pass into the drawing - room , carry with she the jewel - case . it be lock - of course . the key be probably in Tessa 's bag . she be bind to go back to Tessa 's room . still no sound nor movement there . she find the bag ; she find the key - chain . now , she be no more interested in Tessa . 

 in the drawing - room she open the jewel - case , and take from it a morocco manuscript - book , virginal , which she have buy in New York . it have a lock , and the tiny key hung from the lock by a silk thread colour to match the binding of the gilt - edge book . she sit herself at the desk , with the book open in front of she , and seize a pen . the moment , she judge , be critical in her life . it might , it should and would , mark the beginning of a new life . 

 slowly have be form in she the resolution to write - to write literature . she have write one or two poem , and tear they up . no doubt they be worthless . but she know they by heart . and perhaps they be not worthless . she have determine to write a journal of her impression . she write the word ' London , ' with the date , and underline it , her hand tremble slightly from excitement , her mind thrill by the memory of acute sensation feel in Smithfield . her sensation seem marvellous , unique . if only she could put they on paper . formidable enterprise ! 

 her eye fall on a three - signal bell - tablet on the desk , ' waiter , valet , maid . ' she must have some tea . she press the little knob for the waiter . true , she need tea , but what influence she as much as the need be a wish to delay the effort of write the first momentous sentence in the book , the inception of the new life . 

 when the waiter have receive her order he say : 

 " if you please , miss , there be a telephone - message for Sir Henry ; he do not answer the telephone and his bedroom door be lock . " 

 " what next ? " think Gracie , startle ; and ask the waiter in a casual tone : 

 " what be the message ? " 

 the waiter give she a telephone - slip . she read : " Mr. Orcham be very sorry to say that he have outside appointment which will keep he away from the hotel all day . " she say to the waiter : " all right . I will see that Sir Henry get the message . " 

 she be alarmed . she know her father . if he have be suggest an interview with Mr. Orcham , and this be the reply to the suggestion , there would certainly be an explosion , and trouble between the two man . the Napoleonic Henry Savott be just about the last man to tolerate such a curt message - especially from a hotel - manager ! and somehow she could not bear the prospect of trouble between these two powerful individuality .   " why can not   I ? " she ask herself .   after she have drink the celestial tea , she ring up her father in the next suite . fortunately Napoleon have waken . 

 " I say , dad - yes , it be I - do you know you have   be fast asleep and they have   be try to get a message to you , from Mr. Orcham . he say he will let you know as soon as possible later in the day . he be frightfully sorry , but he be just have to go out on very urgent business . " she ring off . 

 well , there it be ! she would do it . she have ravel the skein , and she would have to unravel it . how ? she would face the problem later . such be Gracie 's method . anyhow she would have to communicate with Mr. Orcham . but later . a rush of the most vivid impression of Smithfield , sensation at Smithfield , sweep from her brain down her right arm . she could actually feel their passage . she begin to write . she write slowly , with difficulty , with erasure . everything but Smithfield vanish from her mind . the concentration of her mind be positively awful ; that be to say , it awe she . the new life have open for she . 

 content 
 chapter 9 

 conference 

 that morning Evelyn call the ten o'clock daily conference of head of department in his own office . in the absence of instruction to the contrary , it be hold in the office of Mr. Cousin . Emile Cousin , the hotel - manager   whose name be pronounce in the hotel in the english way , be a Frenchman , similar to Evelyn in build , and of about Evelyn 's age , but entirely grow up , whereas bit of the boy remain obstinately embed in Evelyn 's adult constitution . 

 ' Director ' be Evelyn 's official title , short for ' managing director ' - the medium of communication between the organism of the hotel and the Board of Directors of the company which own both the Palace and the Wey . the authority of the Board   of which Evelyn be vice - chairman   stand above Evelyn 's in theory , though not in practice . 

 it be out of a sort of private bravado that Evelyn preside that morning at the conference , which have not see he for over a week . he have be up extremely early ; he have be to Smithfield ; he have trot about the place ; he have accomplish all the directorial correspondence ; and a full day 's work lie before he . but his appointment at the Laundry be not till eleven o'clock . he have , as usual , time in hand , and he would not waste it ; he would expend it remuneratively . he be tired . more correctly , he would have be tired if he have permit himself to be tired . he do not permit . he exult in the exercise of the function of management , and especially under difficulty . could any private preoccupation , could any hidden fatigue , impair his activity ? to ask be to answer . nothing could disconcert , embarrass , hamper , frustrate his activity . " you understand , " he would joyously , proudly , say to himself , " nothing ! " it be in the moment which make the heavy demand upon his varied faculty that he live most keenly ; and it be in those moment , too , that his demeanour be light . 

 the room be spacious ; it have be enlarge some year early by the removal of a wall , and so change from an oblong into the shape of an L. it have two vas of flower , and there be plant in a box on the window - sill .   the spacious window frame a view of the picturesque back of a Queen Anne house and the garden thereof .   Evelyn do not particularly want the flower and the plant . but Miss Cass do . 

 Miss Cass be Evelyn 's personal secretary , age an eternal thirty , well dress , with earnest feature and decide movement . she have a tremendous sense of Evelyn 's importance . she be his mother , his amanuensis , and his slave . she could forge his signature to perfection . among her seventy and seven duty , two of the chief , for she , be the provision of flower , and the maintenance of a supply of mineral water on Evelyn 's huge , flat desk . she have to make a living , and her salary be good ; but the rich reward of her labour come on the infrequent occasion when Evelyn pull a blossom from a vase and stick it in his button - hole . 

 at conference Evelyn sit behind the desk , with his back to the window ; Miss Cass sit on his left at the desk , and Mr. Cousin on his right . the other member of the conference - being , principally , the reception - manager , the Audit - manager , the staff - manager , the banqueting - manager , the chief engineer , the chief Stocktaker , the Bands - and - cabaret - manager , the publicity - manager , the Works - manager , and the white - haired head - housekeeper   only woman in the conference , for secretarial Miss Cass be not in the conference but at it   - sit about the room in odd chair . two of they be perch like twin each on the arm of an easy - chair . neither the restaurant - manager nor the Grill - room manager be in attendance , both have be at work very late . their statistic , however , be in the hand of Miss Cass . the nationality represent be italian , french , swiss and British , the last be in a minority . Evelyn and the sedate , reserve Mr. Cousin be smoke cigar . the rest - such as smoke - content themselves with cigarette . subtle distinction between seraphim and cherubim in the hierarchy ! 

 " who be no . 341 , 2 and 3 ? " ask Evelyn , glance casually at a paper - the typed night - report . 

 " a Mr. Amersham - Australian , " answer the reception - manager instantly . " why , sir ? " 

 " nothing . I only happen to notice that a lady could not   persuade herself to leave his room till three o'clock this morning . colonial be always so attractive , " Evelyn continue without a pause , extinguish several smile : " give I yesterday 's figure for the restaurant , Miss Cass . " 

 Miss Cass obey . " ah ! nineteen pound up on last year , but twenty - one more meal serve . so it can not   be that people be not   satisfied with the music or the cabaret . average bill slightly less , and consumption of champagne per head distinctly less than last year . if we go on at this rate our l100,000 stock of wine will last for about fifty year . in fact prohibition would serve no purpose . might suggest to Maître Planquet that he ought to season his dish with a view to induce thirst . " 

 Maître Planquet be the chef and grand vizier of the restaurant kitchen , and have be decorate by the French Government with the Academic Palms . 

 General deferential mirth . everybody love the Director 's occasional facetiousness . even Mr. Cousin , who never laugh , would smile his mysterious , scarcely perceptible smile . everybody be relieve that the Director could joke about those statistic . a discussion break out , for the most part in imperfect if very fluent English . 

 " I would like to see the comparative graph to - night , Miss Cass , " Evelyn try to end it , interrupt the wordy banqueting - manager . 

 Evelyn know , and they all know , that the public tendency towards sobriety at meal could not be check . the clientele be a wind which blow where it list . but there be good comfort in the fact that the clientele , if increasingly austere , continue to grow in number . Evelyn , however , perceive that he could not end the discussion ; at any rate he could not end it without a too violent use of his power . it proceed . he listen , watchful , and with satisfaction . Most of those man , and the woman , he have train in their duty . and he have train all of they in the great principle of loyalty to the hotel . they show indeed more than loyalty ; they show devotion ; they live devotion . 

 the majority of they have home , wife , child , in various part of London ; real enough , no doubt ; cherish ; perhaps love . but see from within the hotel these domestic background be far distant , dim , shadowy , insubstantial . when the interest of the hotel clash with the interest of the background , the background give way , eagerly , zealously . the departmental head have their hour of daily service , but these hour be elastic ; that be to say , they would stretch indefinitely - never contract . urgently summon back too soon from a holiday , the head would appear , breathless - and smile ; eager for the unexpected task . one or other of they be continually be tempt to a new and more splendid post ; but nobody ever yield to the temptation unless Evelyn , frankly consult , advise yielding .   he do occasionally so advise , and the hotel and restaurant of Europe , and some in America , be dot with important man whose prestige spring from their service at the Imperial Palace .   there be many post , but there be only one Imperial Palace on earth . the Palace be their world and their religion ; its pre - eminence their creed , its welfare their supreme aim . they respect and adore Evelyn . he be their god . or , if the Palace be the god , Evelyn be the god - maker , above god . 

 there they sit , fiercely dispute , some in the correctness of morning - coat , other   who have no contact with the clientele , in undandiacal lounge - suit , smoking , gesticulate , wrangling , the Englishmen and Mr. Cousin taciturn , the other foreigner shoot new foreign light on the enigma of the idiosyncrasy of the british and american clientele : not one of they advance a single constructive suggestion for foster the appetite of the exasperating clientele and there sit Evelyn , the creator of the modernised Palace , and of the religion of the Palace , and of the corporate spirit of its high - priest ; a benevolent expression on his face , but an expression with a trace of affectionate derision in it . he let they rip , not because they be further the cult of the god by their noise , but because he enjoy the grand spectacle of their passion . he deeply feel , then , that he have create something more marvellous than even the hotel . he know that he be far their superior in brain , enterprise , ingenuity , tact ; and this conviction lurk in his steady , good - humour smile ; but he know also that in strenuous selfless loyalty he be not their superior . after all , the rewarding glory of success be his , not theirs . 

 2 . 

 the altercation flag , and , see her chance , Mrs. O'Riordan , the head - housekeeper , sixty - two year of age and as slim and natty as a girl in her black artificial silk , kill it with a question . Mrs. O'Riordan , who live her whole life in two small room on the eighth floor , could only simulate an interest in the appetite of the incomprehensible clientele . what occupy her incessant attention be the upholstery of the chair on which people sit , the carpet which they trod , the room in which they sleep , the cloak - room to which the lady retire , etc . she eat little , and somewhat despise cookery . 

 " I have not   get much time , " say Mrs. O'Riordan . " what be go to be do about that mink - fur business ? " and her glance say : " you be male . you ought to know . answer I . " 

 Mrs. O'Riordan , though she have no disinclination for the society of man , exhibit always a certain slight sex - bias , half - defensive , half - challenging . she be a widow Yorkshire gentlewoman , have have two irish military husband , and still possess three son , one of whom regularly send flower to she with his good love on her birthday , while the other two , in India , only write to she in reply to her rare letter to they . in the solitude of she eyrie on the eighth floor , absorb morning and night in the direction of her complex department , she sometimes find a minute to regret that neither of her husband have give she a daughter . she would have like a girl in those house in County Meath . together , she and a daughter would have form a powerful opposition to the male ascendancy . 

 " mink ? " ask Evelyn , his tone conveying astonishment that he should be in ignorance of any happening within the hotel . 

 " I only hear of it myself an hour since , " say Mr. Cousin . 

 " you be not in your office at half - past twelve last night , Mr. Cousin , " Mrs. O'Riordan address the french manager , with a polite implication of reproach for slackness . 

 " no , " say Mr. Cousin . " I go home at a quarter to twelve . " 

 " ah ! " say Mrs. O'Riordan drily . " this happen at twelve - thirty . " 

 she then relate to Evelyn how a lady who have be din with two other lady have present a ticket in the lady ' cloak - room , and on receive a fur in exchange for it have ask for her ' other fur , ' allege positively that she have deposit two fur , the second one a priceless mink , give to she by a deceased friend in Chicago . the head of the cloak - room   who be well acquaint with the secret nature of woman than the most experienced man in the universe , while admit the deposit of several mink that evening by other guest   who have reclaim they and depart , deny any knowledge of the fur from Chicago . unfortunately , the ground - floor housekeeper , Miss Brury , be by chance in the cloak - room , and , be the head - attendant 's official superior , she have take charge of the dispute on behalf of the hotel . unfortunately - because Miss Brury be very tired and nervous after an exhausting day of battle with the stupidity and obstinacy of subordinate and she have be over - candid to the guest , who have surpass she in candour . the episode have finish with a shocking display of mutual recrimination . both woman have have hysteric . guest of both sex have pause at the open door of the cloak - room to listen to the language ; and finally the owner of the alleged miss fur have burst through they , and rush frantically across the hail cry aloud that the hotel be the resort of thief , that the hotel - staff be in league with thief , and that she would have the law on the lot of they . 

 Mrs. O'Riordan conclude : 

 " Long Sam tell I that by the time she reach the door she be demand about a million pound damage . no , she have not   a car and she would not   have a taxi - say she would not , not for a million pound - another million pound - be beholden to the hotel for anything ... oh yes , I come downstairs . I be read . they fetch I - for Alice Brury ... no , the two companion of the infuriate lady have leave early . she would stay talk to someone ... Miss Brury 's in bed today . " 

 even Evelyn blench at this terrible story , unique in the annal of the hotel . it be utterly incredible , but he have to believe it . and it be less incredible than the fact that he have be about , off and on , since four in the morning and yet no rumour of it have reach he . it be not on the night - report . well , it could not have be on the night - report , whose record do not begin till one o'clock . but Reyer must have hear of the thing . Long Sam also . suddenly the obvious explanation of the mystery occur to he . everybody have be assume that he be already familiar with the detail of the episode , he who always know everything . and if he keep silence about the horror , what underling would care or dare to refer to it in his presence ? 

 he see shame on every face in the room . and well might there be shame on every face , for the pride of every person be profoundly humiliate . 

 " I have   just be talk to O'Connor , " say Mr. Cousin , impassible . " he be come at once . he say he think he may have hear of the lady before . he be call at the yard . " 

 O'Connor be the private detective of the hotel . 

 " I daresay he have , " Evelyn observe . " the woman be almost certainly - well , do not   matter what she be . she may get away with it . and if we have to pay she her million pound or the National Debt , of course we shall pay it and look pleasant , and that will be that . it be that scene that matter . you be sure Miss Brury start it , Mrs. O'Riordan ? " 

 " she admit it herself , " answer the Irishwoman . " but when you think of the provocation - " 

 " there can not   be any such thing as provocation in this hotel , " Evelyn interrupt she blandly . " there never have be before , and there must not   be again . if the customer be Judas Iscariot , he be still the customer till he be safely outside the hotel . that be a principle . the hotel turn the other cheek every time . I be afraid we shall have to find another job for Miss Brury . " 

 murmur of assent . 

 " the poor thing say she would not   stay on here for anything . " 

 " well then , " say Evelyn . " we must struggle on as good we can without she . " 

 " yes , " retort Mrs. O'Riordan , render audacious and contrarious by nerve . " it be all very well for you man to talk like that . but if you know the difficulty - " she glance at Mr. Semple , the staff - manager , as if for moral support . but the prudent Mr. Semple give no response . 

 " we will have a chat later , " say Evelyn . 

 he be think that at least a year be require for the training of a housekeeper , and that Mrs. O'Riordan have refer not long ago to the dearth of really good candidate . Mrs. O'Riordan be in favour of engage woman of her own class , her theory be that gentlewoman could exercise well authority over chambermaid and valet , and also could deal more effectively with peevish and recalcitrant visitor ; and Evelyn have agree with she , have think that he agree with she ; at any rate he have express agreement . Miss Brury be of a low origin . she have fail to stand the racket . her failure have seriously smirch the hotel . would a gentlewoman have do well ? possibly , he think . but he be by no mean sure . still , he would support Mrs. O'Riordan 's desire for gentlewoman on the Floors . Mrs. O'Riordan , invaluable , irreplaceable   not quite , of course , but nearly , show the independent attitude which come from the possession of a small private income . he have know himself to accept her idea against his own judgment . the fact be that she have a certain quality of formidableness ... 

 delicate situation , this , arise out of the scene and out of the dearth of good candidate . but he have complete confidence in his ability to resolve it . what a damned nuisance woman be , gentlewoman as well as their social inferior ! he know that the banqueting - manager be boil up for a commotion with the head - housekeeper about the use of a room near the ball - room . Tact - the telephone bell ring , and Miss Cass answer it . 

 " S o s from Weybridge , sir , " say Miss Cass to Evelyn . 

 " some difficulty with the contractor over the alteration to the restaurant . the work be at a standstill . Mr. Plott would be very much oblige if you could run down there at once , instead of this afternoon . but you can not . you be due at the Laundry at eleven . it be after half - past ten . " 

 " why can not   I ? " say Evelyn instantly . " I could go to the Laundry this afternoon . tell they I will be there at three - no , four . and tell Mr. Plott I be come to he now . and ask if my car be wait . " 

 " it be bind to be , sir . Brench be always early . " 

 " I will leave the rest to you , Cousin , " Evelyn murmur to the hotel - manager . 

 in twenty second he be quit the office , with gay nod and smile , and a special smile for Mrs. O'Riordan . he be not gravely alarmed about the Wey restaurant . nor be he flinch from problem at the Palace . nor be his gaiety assume . problem be his meat and drink . he see in the longish drive to Weybridge an opportunity for full happy reflection . he know that he would return to the Palace , with detailed solution whose ingenuity would impress everybody . his life be of enthral interest to he . no other kind of life could be as interesting . to - morrow , in addition to the General Meetings of the Company , there would be Sir Henry Savott to manipulate . perhaps if he confer with Sir Henry in the latter 's suite , as he properly might , he would encounter Gracie again . but the figure of Gracie have slip away , like a ship stand out to sea . 

 content 
 chapter 10 

 LAUNDRY 

 the already famous Imperial Palace Hotel Laundry occupy part of a piece of freehold ground in a broad , tram - enliven street in Kennington . the part unbuilt upon be a rather wild garden in which be many flower . Evelyn foresee the time when the Laundry would have to be enlarge , and the garden would cease to be . but at present the garden flourish and bloom , and work - girl be take their tea and bread - and - butter in it under the bright , warm September sun . 

 the spectacle of the garden and the lolling , lounge tea - spill work - girl delight Evelyn on his arrival that afternoon , as it always delight he . he would point out to visitor the curve flagged path , the scientifically design bench , the pond with authentic gold - fish gliding to and fro therein , and the vine . the vine bore grape , authentic grape . true , they be small , hard , sour and quite uneatable , but they be grape , grow in the open air of Kennington , within thirty foot of roaring , red tram . he be perhaps prouder of the garden as a pleasance for work - girl than of the Laundry itself . he have create the Laundry . he have not design the building nor the machinery , nor lay brick on brick nor weld pipe to pipe , nor dig the artesian well nor pave the yard . but he have think the whole place and its efficiency and its spirit into be - against some opposition from his Board of Directors . 

 it be a success . it draw over half a million gallon of water a week from the exhaustless well ; it often use six thousand gallon of water in an hour . it employ over two hundred immortal soul , chiefly the enigmatic young feminine . it feed these girl . it teach they to sing and to act and to dance and to sew and to make frock . it keep a doctor and a dentist and a nurse for they . it wash all the linen of the Imperial Palace and the Wey hotel and all the linen that the hotel guest choose to entrust to it . it serve also three hundred private customer , and its puce - tint motor - van be begin to be recognise in the street . it pay ten per cent . on its capital , and , with the aid of the late ingenuity of american and english machinery , it be estimate to increase the life of linen by one - third . and consider the price of linen ... Americans who inspect the Imperial Palace Hotel Laundry say that while there be far large laundry in the United States , there be no laundry comparable with Evelyn 's , either industrially or socially . Evelyn believe they . what he have difficulty in realise be that without his own creative thought and his perseverance in face of obstruction , the Laundry would never have exist . to he it always have the air of a miracle . such as it be , it be his contribution towards the millennium , towards a heaven on earth . 

 as he enter the precinct a few of the uniformed girl smile diffidently to greet he , and he smile back and wave his stick , and pass into the building . he be a quarter of an hour late , but this lamentable fact do not disturb he . for he have do over four hour ' concentrated hard work down at Weybridge . he have telephone for the architect and for the principal partner of the contracting firm of builder , and they have both obey the summon . he and they and the manager of the Wey have measure , argue , eat together , argue again and measure again , and finally by dint of compromise have satisfactorily emerge from a dilemma which , Evelyn softly maintain , common sense and foresight ought to have be able to avoid . oh yes , he award part of the blame to himself ! he have quit the Wey in triumph . he have leave the manager thereof in a state of worship relief , and the architect and the contractor in a state of very deferential admiration . he be content with Evelyn Orcham . a hefty fellow , Evelyn Orcham ! 

 the one stain on the bright day be that he have settle nothing in his mind on the way down about the Miss Brury calamity ; and on the way up to London he have be too excited by his achievement in the suburb to think about anything else .   assuredly he be not completely grow up .   however , there be time enough yet to think constructively upon the Miss Brury calamity . he be conscious of endless reserve of energy , and as soon as he have deal with the simmer trouble at the Laundry he would seize hold of the Palace problem and shake it like a rat ! 

 and there stand Cyril Purkin , the manager of the Laundry , in the doorway lead to the staff dining - room . a short , fairly thin figure ; a short but prominent pawky nose ; small , cautious , ' downy , ' even suspicious eye ; light ruffle hair ; and a sturdy , half - defiant demeanour . a Midlander , age thirty - eight , Evelyn sometimes wonder where the man buy his suit . they be good and well - fitting suit , but they have nothing whatever of a West End cut . the origin of his very neat necktie be similarly a mystery to Evelyn . his foot be small and almost elegant . 

 Mr. Purkin have begin life as a chemical engineer ; he have go on to soap - making , then laundry management , then soap - making again , then laundry management again . one day , when the foundation of the Imperial Palace Hotel Laundry have hardly be lay , Evelyn have receive a letter which begin : " Sir - have be apprise that you be about to inaugurate a laundry on modern line , I beg respectfully to offer my service as manager . I be at present ... " the phrasing of the letter be succinct , the calligraphy very precise , regular and clear , and the signature just as formal as the rest of the writing . the letter attract Evelyn . how have the man be clever enough to get himself ' apprise ' of the advent of a new laundry on modern line ? and how come he to have the wit to write to Evelyn personally ? Evelyn 's name be never give out as the manager of the Imperial Palace . Mr. Purkin 's qualification prove to be ample ; his testimonial be beyond cavil . his talk in conversation be intelligent , independent , very knowledgeable ; and he have strong notion concern the ' welfare ' side of laundry , which notion specially appeal to Evelyn . he be engage . he give immense satisfaction . his one weakness be that he be the perfect man , utterly expert , utterly reliable , superhuman . 

 he be still the chemical engineer . he seldom mention sheet , chemise , collar , towel , stocking , and such - like common concrete phenomenon . he would discourse upon the ' surface tension ' of water ' break down , ' albuman , ' Base Exchange , ' centrifugal cleansing , the sequence of water , ' residual alkali , ' chlorine , warps and woof , ' efflorescence , ' etc . , etc . he have establish a research department , in which he be the sole worker . 

 as he deferentially shake hand with the great man his attitude say : 

 " of course you be my emperor , but between ourselves I be as good as you , and you know it , and you know also that I have always deliver the good . " 

 and yet somewhere behind Mr. Purkin 's shrewd little eye there be something of the defensive as well as of the sturdy defiant , together with a glimmering of an uneasy consciousness that he have not always deliver the good and that he too be imperfect - though no fault of his own . 

 " I must really show you this , sir , " say he , introduce Evelyn into the small managerial room where on the desk lie a pile of examination paper . " question , " he read out , pick up a paper , " why be white fabric blue in order to procure a general appearance of whiteness ? ' answer : ' white fabric be blue because there be more yellow ray in the spectrum , and we use blue to counteract the yellow ray . ' would not   you say , sir , that that be rather well and tersely put for a girl of sixteen and a half ? these exam . paper be useful as an index to character as well as to attainment . " 

 Evelyn heartily agree , and for courtesy 's sake glance at the paper . 

 " I see you have   get all the painting finish , " say he . " look much well . " 

 " ah ! " reply Mr. Purkin . " ah ! I must show you one thing that I think of . an idea I have , and I have   carry it out . " 

 he draw Evelyn into the Laundry itself , walk with short , decide step . they pass though two large and lofty interior fill with machine and with uniformed girl   the girl do not all have their tea simultaneously , girl iron , girl fold , girl carry , girl sort , amid steel in movement , beat , moisture , and a general gleam whiteness . he halt , direct Evelyn 's attention to a row of pipe near the ceiling , paint in different colour . 

 " red for hot water , blue for cold water , yellow for steam . the three primary colour . when a minor repair be necessary it be not   always easy to tell at a glance everywhere which pipe be which . by this system you can not   make a mistake . cost no more . I think you would approve . " 

 " Brilliant , " say Evelyn . " Brilliant . I congratulate you . " possibly a trace of derision in Evelyn 's benevolent laudatory tone . 

 " and there be the new drier , " Mr. Purkin continue , and lead his chief to a room where two woman , one mature , overblown and beautiful , and the other young but as plain as a suet pudding , be work in a temperature of 119 degree . Evelyn have to admire and marvel again . nor be that the end of the tour of novelty . Mr. Purkin 's ingenuity and his passion for improvement be endless . and as Evelyn go from table to table and from machine to machine and from group to group of girl , busy either individually or in concert , and from pile to grow or lessen pile of linen , and as he seek for the private life and the character of girl in the lowered , intent face of girl , he sardonically think : " this chap be put off the fatal moment on purpose . and do it very well too . create all this atmosphere of approval . damn clever fellow ! pity he be not   clever enough to see that I can see though he . " 

 but , back in Mr. Purkin 's prim , stuffy , excessively neat little office , the Midlander boldly summon the moment . 

 " I be glad you be able to come to - day , sir , because I be get anxious for you to see for yourself we be not   stand still here . I know you be always interested , very interested , but we like to see you here , all of them like to see you . it make we all feel that we kind of ' belong' ... oh ! upon my word , I be forget to tell you that the number of piece from private customer pass the twenty thousand mark last week - at last . you will receive the figure to - morrow . " 

 " good ! good ! you always say it would . " 

 " but there be another thing I want to see you about . " 

 " oh ! " Evelyn exclaim , feign ignorance . 

 " yes . about those frille dress - shirt last Thursday . " 

 " oh ! that ! " 

 " yes , " continue Mr. Purkin . " yes , sir . you may have forget , but I can assure that I have not . " 

 now the affair of the frille shirt be one of those molehill which be really mountain . in a few hour it have swell itself into a Mont Blanc . a guest who be a public character and who have be stay at the Palace for week and spend quite a lot of money , have complain about the ironing of his frille evening shirt . Mrs. O'Riordan herself have take the matter up . Mrs. O'Riordan have give her word that the frille shirt should be iron to the owner 's satisfaction , and at the end of ten day Mrs. O'Riordan have redeem her word . Triumph for the hotel . smile from the guest . and for Mr. Immerson , the hotel 's publicity - manager , material for one or two piquant newspaper paragraph . on the last day of his sojourn the guest have reach the state of be convince that his celebrated frille shirt have never be so perfectly do before . no laundry like the Imperial Palace Hotel Laundry ! his desire be to leave the Palace with the large possible stock of frille shirt iron by its Laundry . " can I rely on have these three shirt back to - night ? " he have ask . of course!could he doubt it ? be it not a basic principle of the Laundry that all linen consign in the morning be deliver absolutely without fail the same evening ? it be . 

 but the unique shirt have not be deliver , and the next morning the guest , disillusioned , wound , inconsolable , have have to depart without they . a child disappoint of a promise toy , a religionist whose faith have be suddenly strike from under he , could not have exhibit more woe than the deceive guest . true , the shirt be send after he by airmail to Paris and get there first . but inefficiency remain inefficiency and the Laundry 's lapse have shock every housekeeper at the Palace . the foundation of the Palace have for an instant tremble . the unimaginative individual who snort that three shirt ought not to be enough to shake the foundation of a nine - storey building simply do not understand that such edifice as the Imperial Palace be not build with hand . 

 Evelyn have by no mean forget the affair . a minor purpose of his visit to Kennington have indeed be to get to the bottom of it . he know that Mr. Purkin guess this , and that Mr. Purkin know that Evelyn know that he guess . nevertheless the two man continue to pretend . 

 " I be under the impression that it have be explain , " say Evelyn . " you have only one girl who specialise in these preposterous shirt , and she be take ill or something at the very moment when your need of she be most desperate . " 

 " no , sir , " say Mr. Purkin with brave candour , " the matter have not be explain - to you ; at least not satisfactorily . the girl , Rose , be not take ill . she merely walk out and leave we in the lurch . we have the good class of girl here . I remember when laundry staff have to be recruit from riff - raff . we have   alter all that , by improve the condition . I know Rose ; I think highly of she ; I know her father , a house - painter , most respectable . and yet she walk out ! she will never walk in again , I may say , not as long as I be manager here . naturally I get the shirt do , in a way , next morning . but that be not the point . " 

 the drama of Mr. Purkin 's deep but restrained indignation genuinely affect Evelyn . it seem to produce vibration in the physical atmosphere of the office . 

 " what a man ! " think Evelyn appreciatively . " such loyalty to the I.P.H.L. be priceless . of course his sense of proportion be a bit askew ; but you can not   have everything . " he say aloud , gently : " why do this Rose walk out ? " 

 " ah ! " reply Mr. Purkin . " I will tell you , sir . " he go to a file - cabinet , and choose a card from two or three hundred card , and offer it to Evelyn . " that be why she walk out . " 

 on the card be a chart of the wicked girl 's mouth , of her upper jaw and her low jaw . " look at it , Mr. Orcham . you see the number of bad tooth on it . I order she the dentist . she make an excuse twice - something about her mother 's wish , I be certain it be not   the father . as you know well than anyone , every girl who be engage by I here have to promise she will allow we to keep she in good health , mother or no mother . on that afternoon I tell she I have make an appointment for she with the dentist for the next morning , and that she positively must keep it . I speak very quietly . well , as soon as my back be turn out of this Laundry she walk ! without notice ! of course it be the staff - manageress 's business to see to it . but as she have fail twice , I have to take the matter up myself . no alternative . Discipline be discipline . and just look at the chart of that mouth ! " 

 " quite ! " say Evelyn . he be laugh , but not visibly . " quite ! " 

 " the truth be , " Mr. Purkin continue , " there would have be no bother - I be sure of it - if only I have have a little more moral support . " 

 at this point Mr. Purkin pull out his cigarette - case and actually offer it to the panjandrum . probably no other member of the Palace staff , no matter how exalt , with the possible exception of Mr. Cousin , would have venture upon such a familiarity with Evelyn . but Mr. Purkin be exceedingly if secretly perturb , and the offering of a cigarette to the great man be his way of try to conceal his perturbation ; it be also a way of demonstrate the purkinian conviction that he be as good as anybody - even Evelyn . 

 " thank , " say Evelyn , take a cigarette , not because he do not fear Mr. Purkin 's cigarette , but because he sympathetically understand the manager 's motive - or the first part of it . " you mean support from the staff - manageress ? " 

 " I mean Miss - er , " mutter Mr. Purkin , and he blush . he would have give a vast sum not to blush ; but he blush , this pawky , self - confident , disciplinary Midlander . he have open his mouth with the intention of boldly say Miss Violet Powler , the staff - manageress 's name ; but his organ of speech , basely betray he , refuse their office . a few second of restraint ensue . 

 " Sex ! " think Evelyn . " Sex ! here it be again . " 

 he do not object to sex as a factor in the problem of a great organism . he rather like it . and he know that anyhow it be and must be a factor ever recur in those problem . he have hear , several month early , that an ' affair ' be afoot between Mr. Purkin and Violet Powler . how do these rumour get abroad ? he could not say . nobody could say . in the present case a laundry - girl might have see a gesture or a glance , or catch a tone - nothing , less than nothing - as the manager and the staff - manageress pass together though the busy room . the laundry - girl might have mention it slily to another laundry - girl . the rumour be bear . the rumour spread with the rapidity of fire , or of an odour , or of influenza . it rise from stratum to stratum of the social structure . finally it reach the august ear of Evelyn himself . for it could not be lose ; it could not die ; and it could not cease to rise till it could rise no higher . 

 Evelyn have gather that the affair be a subject for merriment , that people regard as comic the idea of amorous tenderness between the manager and the staff - manageress of the Laundry . in his own mind he do not accept this view . to he there be something formidable , marvellous , and indeed beautiful in the mystic spectacle of Aphrodite spring from the hot dampness of the Laundry and lodge herself in the disciplinary soul of Cyril Purkin . nor do be foresee harm to the organism in the marriage of Cyril and Violet . 

 " I would not   say one word against she , " say Mr. Purkin , exert all his considerable power of self - control . " I choose she out of score , and probably a well woman for the job of staff - manageress could not   be find . but in this matter - and in one or two other similar - I be bind to admit I have   be a bit disappointed . Discipline be the foundation of everything here , and if it be not   enforce , where be you ? I be bind to say I do not   quite see ... she be inclined to be very set in her view . " he lift his eyebrow , imply imminent calamity . 

 " curse this sex ! " think Evelyn . " she be refuse he . or they have   have a row . or something else have happen . he want she to go . he will make she go . he can not   bear she here . she be on his nerve . but he be still in love with she , even if he do not   know it . what a complication ! how the devil can you handle it ? curse this sex ! " 

 but he be move by the sudden disclosure of Mr. Purkin 's emotion , and he admire Mr. Purkin 's mastery of it . he have never feel more esteem for the man than just then . 

 Mr. Purkin light both cigarette , and the pair talk , without too closely grip the thorn of the situation . 

 " well , " say Evelyn at length gently . " we would well leave thing for a while . if I do get a chance perhaps I might have a chat with Miss Powler - " 

 " well , Mr. Orcham , if anybody can do anything you can . " but Mr. Purkin 's accent give a clue to his private opinion that not even Mr. Orcham could do anything . 

 soon afterwards Evelyn leave , say that he would ' see . ' for the moment he could not ' see . ' as he walk away , the last batch of girl be quit the garden . he get into his car . 

 " Home . " 

 Brench touch his hat . 

 " wait , " say Evelyn suddenly , and descend from the car . 

 2 . 

 he have change his mind . why postpone the interview with Violet Powler ? be he afraid of bring the trouble to the stage of a crisis ? he be not . 

 he re - enter the building by the ' A ' gate , which admit van load with soiled linen . the linen , have pass through the Laundry and become clean , be baskete and pile into van which drive out through the ' b ' gate . he wander alone , apparently aimless , in the warm , humid , pale department , until he recognise the door letter " Staffmanageress . " it be half open . 

 without touch it he glance in . Miss Violet Powler sit face the window , her back to the door . she be talk to a young tall woman . a small table separate they , and on this table lie a finished shirt and some coloured thread . 

 " but Lilian , " Miss Powler be say . " you know well enough that a red thread mean starch ; you know that no article from no . 291 have to be starch , and yet you put a red thread into this one . why ? there must be some explanation , and I want you to tell I what it be . " her tone be soothing , persuasive . 

 " but , miss , " say the woman , hold up a red thread , " this be not   a red thread - it be green - not starch . " 

 " that be a green thread ? " 

 " yes , miss . " 

 " take it to the window and look at it . " the woman obey . " yes , miss . it be green all right , " say she , turn her head and confidently smile . 

 Miss Powler pause , and then she begin to laugh . 

 " very well . never mind , Lilian . you come and see I before you start work to - morrow , will you ? " 

 Lilian , puzzle , leave the room , and Evelyn stand aside for she to pass out . 

 " colour - blind , eh ? " Evelyn walk straight into the small office laughing . " I happen to hear . door open . do not   want to break in . so I wait . " 

 " yes , Mr. Orcham . please excuse I . I have not   the slight idea you be at the door . yes , colour - blind . " 

 Evelyn put his hat on the small table and sit down . Miss Powler shut the door . 

 " as a funny coincidence I really think that ought to have the first prize . " Evelyn laugh again , and Miss Powler smile . " I suppose she be the one woman in the place who ought to be able to be rely on to tell green from red , and she be colour - blind ! no , not first prize . no . it deserve a gold medal . " his stick join in the laughter by tap on the floor . " sort of thing you can not   possibly foresee , therefore can not   guard against , eh ? unless Mr. Purkin decide to institute eye - test for the staff . but of course those delightful coincidence never happen twice . how be the Dramatic Society get along ? " 

 Miss Powler sit down at her desk . 

 it be her way of smile , her way - at once dignified and modest - of sit down , and her way of answer his question about the Laundry A.D.S. , that suggest to he a wild , absurd , fantastical scheme for kill two bird with one stone . 

 Miss Powler wear a plain , straight blue frock , quite short .   the hotel rule prescribing black for head of department do not obtain in the Laundry .   as she sit down her knee have be visible for an instant . her brown hair be lay flat , but glossy . without be pretty , her feature be agreeable , and her habitual expression be very agreeable . her eye , dark brown , be sedate , with some humour somewhere behind they , wait a chance to get out . no powder , no paint . an appearance which mingle attractiveness with austerity . 

 Evelyn have in his office a private card - index of all the Company 's principal employee . he rarely forgot anything once learn , and now he have no difficulty in recall that Miss Powler live in Battersea , the daughter of a town - traveller in tin comestible - certainly a humble town - traveller . but there be woman who when they leave the home lose their origin , just as a woman 's hat lose its price when it leave the shop . only an expert could say with assurance of a hat on a woman 's head in the street whether it cost five guineas or two . Miss Powler might have be the daughter of a humble town - traveller , or of a successful dentist , or even of a solicitor . 

 " well , " Evelyn begin , " you be the staff - manageress , accord to the label on your door , and I must tell you that I think you manage the lilian member of the staff very nicely . very nicely . " Miss Powler smile . " but all case be not   so simple , be they ? " 

 " they be not , sir . " 

 " I have   be ask Mr. Purkin about the Rose member . Mrs. O'Riordan , our head - housekeeper at the Palace , be particularly anxious for I to enquire into Rose 's case . in fact , between ourselves , that be one of the reason why I come down here to - day . " two fib and a semi - fib ! he have not ask Mr. Purkin . Mr. Purkin have start the subject and volunteer all information . Mrs. O'Riordan have show no anxiety whatever for he to investigate the affair . and the affair be not strictly one of the reason for his visit , see that he have not hear of it until after the visit have be definitely arrange . but the two and a half fib do not irk Evelyn 's conscience . they be diplomatically righteous fib , good and convincing fib , design to prevent possible friction . on a busy day he might tell as many as fifty such fib : and he have never be find out . Miss Powler give no sign of constraint or self - consciousness . to all appearance she have no nerve . 

 " I be sorry to lose Rose , " say Miss Powler . " she be a first - rate fancy ironer . but of course if she have not   go of her own accord she would have have to go all the same . because she would never have let the dentist attend to she . she be too fond of her mother for that . she adore she . the mother 's rather pretty and really very young . when she be Rose 's age she be a chorus - girl in a tour company for six month . she ought to have keep on be a chorus - girl . she certainly be not   fit to be a mother . her head 's full of the silly idea , poor thing ! one of her idea be that dentist pull tooth out for the sake of do it . make they feel proud , she think . no use argue with that sort of a woman . they really believe whatever they want to believe . " 

 " I know what you mean . " 

 " she make Rose promise not to see the dentist , say it be slave - driving for an employer to force a girl to see a dentist . and all that . she will go on the stage , Rose will , and her father will not   be able to stop she . I be very sorry for the girl . naturally , if Mr. Purkin make a rule and give an order , there be nothing more to be say . I quite see his point of view . yes . I agree with he - I mean about discipline . but I do think you can not   improve silly people when they get obstinate . if they can not   understand , they can not , and you can not   make they . it could not   be help , but I always sympathise with the girl in Rose 's position . I wish you could have hear her talk about her mother . she never mention her father . always her mother . she worship her mother . and yet she give you the idea too that she be mother to her mother , not her mother 's daughter . " 

 Evelyn have several time before have casual chat with Miss Powler , on Laundry affair . but now he feel as if he be meet she for the first time . the interview have all the freshness of a completely new revelation : like the rise of a curtain on a scene whose nature have be almost completely unsuspected . she have say not a word against the disciplinary Mr. Purkin . she have on the contrary support his authority without reserve . Withal she have somehow leave Mr. Purkin strip of every shred of his moral prestige . she have be respond to the humanity of the Rose problem , while for Mr. Purkin the humanity have have no existence . she have face the fact of the silliness of Rose 's mother , and yet have warm to the passion of Rose for the foolish creature . 

 far , Evelyn now have knowledge in two case , of her attitude towards woman under her control and direction , and there be in it no least evidence of that harsh , almost resentful inflexibility which nearly always characterise such a relation . and her attitude towards himself be either distinguish by a tact approach the miraculous , or be the natural , unstudied result of a disposition both wise and kindly in an exceptional degree ; perhaps she have no need for the use of tact , do not know , practically , what tact be . Evelyn begin to think that he have be under - estimate the physical quality of her face and form . five minute early he would have describe she as comely . but now he be ready to say that she be beautiful - because she must be beautiful , because , be what she be , she could not be other than beautiful . he have to enlarge his definition of feminine beauty in order to make room for she in it . then her foot . perhaps large or largeish . but a girl like she ought surely to have something to stand on ! and be not small foot absurd , a witness of decadence ? then her ankle . not slim . sturdy . suddenly be remember the museum at Naples . an excursion which have not revisit his memory for a dozen year . he see the classical sculpture . not one of the ideal female figure in those sculpture have be give slim ankle . every ankle be robust , sturdy ; the fashionable darling of to - day would call they thick . yes , Miss Powler have classical ankle . 

 but he would not argue about her ankle , or her foot , or her figure , or her face . in his reckoning of she he could afford to neglect their value . what principally count be her expression , her demeanour , her tone , the gentle play of her feature , and the aura of tranquil benevolence and commonsense which radiate from her individuality . Mr. Purkin be a clumsy simpleton . he have not know how to make her love he . she do not love he . he do not deserve that she should love he . why in God 's name should such a girl love a Mr. Purkin ? 

 then her accent ; a detail , but he consider it . Miss Brury have acquire a West End accent , with all the transmogrify vowel sound of the West End accent . Miss Powler 's accent be not West End . neither be it East End , nor South . one might properly say that she have no accent . be she educate ? not possibly in the sense in which Miss Brury be educate . but she be educate in human nature . her imagination have be educate . and she possess accomplishment assuredly not possess by Miss Brury . could she not dance , act , sing , direct a stage ? be not hers the energy which have vitalise the Imperial Palace Hotel Laundry Amateur Dramatic   and Operatic   Society ? it be no exaggeration to say that she be well educate than Miss Brury . anyhow she would be incapable of Miss Brury 's fatal hysteria . 

 Evelyn rise . Miss Powler rise . he move . he stop move . 

 " I have another reason for call to - day , " he say , yield happily to a strong impulse .   fourth fib .   " we may soon be need someone rather like you at the Palace . " he smile . " I can not   say anything more just now . but perhaps it would not   be a bad thing if you consider whether you would care for a change . do not   answer . good - bye . " 

 but her face answer , discreetly , in the affirmative . he depart . he flatter himself that he have discover the solution of two entirely unrelated problem . 

 content 
 chapter 11 

 SHADES 

 Evelyn 's car have not move three hundred yard from the Laundry before it be stop by an oncoming car which sinfully swerve across the street , threaten a bonnet - to - bonnet collision . fortunately this amazing and inexcusable assault take place in a fairly empty space of road . Evelyn do not at first realise what have happen . his chauffeur , grandly conscious of be in the right , and with a strong sex - bias which have persuade he that woman - driver be capable of any enormity , sit impassive and even silent , prepare to await development and a policeman . 

 Evelyn put his head out of his saloon window . the driver of the other car smile and wave a hand freely . it be Gracie Savott . Gracie back her car a few foot and then swerve forward again to her proper side and draw up at the kerb . Evelyn , fully share for the moment Brench 's sex - bias , get down and walk across the street between approach tram to Gracie 's car . 

 " I have   write all my impression of Smithfield , " she gaily call out to he as he pass in front of she and gain the security of the pavement . 

 Evelyn be startle by her astonishing performance with the car , and so resentful , that he could hardly bring himself to raise his hat . 

 " be it to tell I that that you stop I ? " he ask stiffly .   by heaven , what next ? 

 " do not   crush I . " she pout . 

 " how do you know it be my car ? " the second question be soft than the first . 

 " that be nice , " she say , smile . 

 he think that her tone be damn intimate . but fairness make he immediately admit to himself that his own brusque tone have set the example of precocious intimacy . 

 Gracie say : 

 " I ask the number of your car before I leave the hotel . how else ? and I be about five minute in get it . they tell I you would probably be at the Laundry , and they give I the address . I have an instinct I might meet you on the way ; that be why I ask the number . and a good thing I do ! " 

 Evelyn 's resentment be now submerge by a complete bewilderment . be the girl pursue he , and if so to what end ? his bewilderment in turn be lose in dismay , in alarm for the demi - god Orcham 's reputation . what would his staff think of this young woman demand his whereabouts and the number of his car ? what couldthe staff think ? he have be first see with she at 4 a.m. all the upper grade of the staff must have hear that he have escort she to Smithfield , bring she back , show she the ground - floor of the hotel at early morn . and now she have be recklessly betray an urgent desire to chase he , run he to earth , and capture he ! she , a girl , a notorious racing - motorist ! he , the sedate , staid panjandrum of the Palace ! it be incredible , unthinkable , inconceivable . the whole hotel must be hum like telegraph - wire with the scandalous tiding . could he re - enter the hotel without self - consciousness ? 

 Clever of she to think of obtain the number of the car before starting! ... have she really intend to enquire for he at the Laundry ? and why ? what be her business ? and if her business be so cursedly urgent , have not   she enough ordinary gumption to telephone ? she be evidently an adventuress - in the sense that she love adventure for its own sake . she be a wild girl . have she not positively invite he , a stranger , to take she to Smithfield ? 

 " be anything the matter ? " he ask . 

 " not yet . but I must talk to you . " 

 " well ? " 

 " not here . we can not   talk here , " she say . " and not at the hotel either . " 

 " certainly not at the hotel , " he silently agree . and aloud - " where , then ? " 

 " if you will get in - " 

 " but what about my car ? " 

 " send it home . I would come with you in your car , but I can not   leave mine here in the street , can I ? " 

 Mist be gather in South London . Dusk be fall . tram with their ear - shatter roar sweep by , loom large than life in the vagueness of the mist . 

 Evelyn cross the road again . 

 " I shall not   want you any more to - night , " he say with an exaggerated nonchalance to Brench . 

 the imperturbable man touch his cap , and glide away . 

 " she look a bit well now . I have   have she clean , " say Gracie as she curve her own car into a side street in order to turn back eastward . 

 she be wear the leather coat , and loose glove to match it . she push the car along at great speed among the traffic , drive with all the assured skill of which Evelyn have have experience twelve hour early in the day . once again he be at her side . a few minute ago he have be in the prosaic industrial environment of the hotel Laundry . and now he be under the adventurous hand of this incalculable girl on another earth . he feel as helpless as a piece of flotsam in some swift shadowy tideway of that other earth . his masculinity rebel , assert itself . he must somehow get control of the situation . 

 " well ? " he repeat , uncompromisingly . 

 " not yet . " second time she have use those mysterious word . " I know a place . " still more mysterious ! and there be nothing the matter ' yet ' ! 

 Evelyn 's thought be : " what have to be will be . " 

 Philosophical ? Worthy of a man ? no ! only a pretence of the philosophical . as for Gracie , she utter not a syllable more . she drive and drive . 

 in Westminster Bridge Road a large public - house gleam in the twilight . it have just open to customer , and Labour be pass through its swing - door . and through the door , and through the window , frost into a pattern , could be see glimpse of mahogany and glaze interior , with counter and bottle and beer - handle and shabby tippler of both sex , and barman in shirt - sleeve roll up . the public - house stand on a corner . Gracie twist the car round the corner and stop it , opposite a protruding sign which say " Shades . " 

 " here it be , " say Gracie , with a slight movement towards he which indicate that he be expect to get out of the car . 

 " here ? " he question . 

 " yes . " 

 " do you know the place ? " he question far . 

 " no . but I happen to notice it as I drive down . it call itself the Prince of Wales 's feather . " 

 " do you mean you want to go in here ? " 

 " yes . to talk . why not ? we could not   have a safe place . " Evelyn have never enter a London public - house . he shrug his shoulder - those shoulder which she have admire . his faculty of amazement be wear out . he descend . Gracie lock the steering . then she glance into the body of the car . nothing there to tempt thief . 

 " that ought to be all right , " she murmur . 

 2 . 

 she stand at the heavy , narrow double door , expectant that he should open they for she . he push hard against one of they . as soon as Gracie have squeeze through the door bang back on Evelyn . then he have to push it a second time . he too squeeze through , and the door give a short series of quick bang , diminuendo . 

 a small room . a counter in front of they . shelf full of bottle behind the counter . no barman at the counter . to the left a glaze mahogany partition , very elaborate . a panel mahogany wall opposite the partition , and another opposite the counter , and advertisement of alcohol across the panel . a very heavily sculptured ceiling . a sanded floor . along the two panel wall run two mahogany bench , with a small round barrel , its top stain in circle , at the angle . a powerful odour of ale . sound of rough voice , strident or muttering , over the curved summit of the partition . 

 " oh ! what a horrible lovely place ! " say Gracie , sit down on a bench near the barrel . " but it be exactly what I think it would be . " 

 a barman appear at the counter . 

 " this be mine , " say Gracie to Evelyn , and to the barman : 

 " two light sherry , please . " and to Evelyn : " that right ? " 

 " right you be , miss , " say the barman with cheerful heartiness , and reach down a bottle from one of the shelf . 

 Evelyn have be afraid that she might order beer ; but she have order the only correct , the only possible , thing ; sherry have at least an air of decorum ; also it be the only wholesome aperitif . the girl know her way about ; he suppose that all these girl do ; he suppose it be proper that they should , and although he do not quite like it he strove to broaden his view concern girl in order to like it . " a bit too much of the oriental attitude about I about young woman ! " he think . 

 " here you be , sir , " say the barman , address Evelyn this time . and Evelyn have to fetch the two full glass from the counter . 

 " one and four , sir . " 

 Evelyn pay . 

 the counter be wet with sherry . the barman rub it hard with a towel that have once be clean . the hearty , hail - fellow - well - meet barman in his shirt - sleeve , to say nothing of the dirty towel , make a rude contrast with the manner which obtain at the celebrated Imperial Palace american bar , where the celebrated head - barman be a strict teetotaller with a head like that of a presbyterian minister and a dispense knowledge in the head of a hundred and thirteen different cocktail . at the Palace drink be ceremoniously bring to seated customer by young man in immaculate white jacket - and Evelyn know the exact sum per dozen debit by the Laundry to the hotel for the washing and get - up of the white jacket . and no waiter there would venture to name the price of a drink until ask . 

 " you give I that twopence , " say Gracie , fumble in her bag , as Evelyn sit down with his change in his hand . " and I will give you eighteenpence . " 

 he accept the suggestion without argument . why should not girl pay if they choose ? as for the particular case of Gracie , she probably spend on herself the equivalent of Evelyn 's entire income , which nevertheless yield a considerable super - tax to the state . evidently her big baggage have arrive at the Palace , for she be wear another frock and still another hat . beneath and above the stern chic of the leather coat be visible the frivolous chic of the frock and the hat . 

 " your ! " say Gracie , raise her glass . " you be not   cross , be you ? " 

 " no . why should I be ? " 

 " I do not   know , " say Gracie . " but you look so severe I be frightened . " 

 " take more than that to frighten you , " Evelyn retort , force a grim smile . 

 " not a bad sherry this , " he add , enquire with his brain into the precise sensation of his palate . he be proud that he and no other select the wine for the Palace . he recall some good phrase from his formal lecture to the wine - waiter upon their own subject . 

 " but it be rather a jolly place , be not   it ? " say Gracie . " do come down off the roof to the ground - floor . " 

 he smile less grimly . why not be honest ? it be indeed rather a jolly place : strange , exotic , romantic . and he do like the freedom of the barman , after the retire , artificial , costive politeness of the Palace service . he see charm even in the dirty towel .   and she have discover the place , and have have the enterprise to enter it .   he be see London , indigenous London . the Palace be no part of London . why not for a change yield to the attraction of the moment ? of course if he be catch sit with a smart young woman in a corner of the Prince of Wales 's feather in Westminster Bridge Road , his friend or his customer or his head of department might lift an eye - brow . but he could not be catch . moreover the feather would be the height of respectability to ninety - nine decent londoner out of a hundred . and even if it be not respectable - well , Gracie be above respectability . Violet Powler would not be . but Gracie be . she have robust idea about thing . he be bind to admire her robust taste , and her adventurous enterprise . Violet Powler would shrink from the invitation of the feather . he himself have shrink from it . he suffer from masculine timidity and conventionality . Gracie and her sort have something to teach he . 

 " you know the telephone - message you send to daddy this morning . " Gracie begin her business . " well , daddy be fast asleep , and it come to I . " she tell he quite frankly what she have do . " that be why I want to see you . " here she light a cigarette , and Evelyn , determine to surpass she , light a cigar . she explain to he her father 's napoleonic sensitiveness . " I would like you to do something . I could not   bear any trouble between you and daddy , " she finish , with eagerness . her rich , change voice fall enchantingly on his ear . 

 what do that mean : could not   bear any trouble between he and Sir Henry ? do it mean that any such trouble might compromise the relation between she and himself , and that be what she could not   bear ? Odd , flattering , insidious , specious implication ! he lean close to she : 

 " what would you like I to do ? " 

 Intimacy be suddenly increase . how be it that they have become so intimate in a dozen hour of spasmodic intercourse ? he know . it be because they have go off together on a romantic excursion in what be for she the middle of the night . one visit to strange Smithfield before dawn would create more familiarity , demolish more barrier between soul and soul , than ten exquisite dinner exquisitely serve within the trammel of a polite code . never again could they be mere acquaintance . 

 " could not   you ask daddy to dinner to - night - and I ? he would appreciate it frightfully . " 

 Evelyn be astounded afresh . what on earth would the incredible girl say next ? he could not phrase a reply . 

 fortunately at this juncture four man enter the bar . they be clothe somewhat in the style of Mr. Cyril Purkin , but more flashily . they have glitter watch - chain , jewelled ring , rakish hat and necktie and tie - pin , and assurance . if not prosperous , they look prosperous . they glance casually at Eve1yn and Gracie , and glance away . man of the world , whom vast experience of the world have carry far beyond the narrow curiosity of hard - work person - person who have to look twice at sixpence . Evelyn be decidedly more interested in they than they be interested in he and Gracie . they lean against the counter , call , " jock , " " jock , " and when Jock come they order four double whisky . they be discuss the day 's racing . then they talk about the secret significance of ' acceptance . ' they sip the whisky . 

 one of they , the fat , have sip , and gaze at his glass , say in a meditative hoarse voice : 

 " when I have   have a drop over night , do you know what I do ? I get up early and I go down to my cellar in my nighty , and I draw myself a port - glass of gin , and I drink that and it put I right . yes . that put I right . " 

 " well , give I Eno every time , " say another gravely . at length in a murmur Evelyn answer Gracie 's suggestion : 

 " no . " 

 " no ? " 

 " no . that would not   suit my book at all . your father would misunderstand it . " 

 a pause . 

 " he would think I would mean what I should not   mean , " Evelyn add . 

 " I see , " say Gracie . " I have not   think of that . " she do see . " well , if daddy ask you to dinner to - night , will you come ? " Gracie demand . 

 why should not   he ? if anybody 's pitch be likely to be queer by the invitation and the acceptance thereof , it would be Sir Henry 's , not Evelyn 's . but what a girl ! what an incomprehensible feminine , unfeminine creature ! 

 " yes , " say Evelyn . " with pleasure . but in the restaurant , not upstairs but he will not   ask I ? " 

 " oh ! will not   he ? you leave that to I . " 

 a horn toot outside . 

 " that be child play with the car ! " Gracie exclaim , jump up and drain her sherry . 

 Evelyn rise quietly also . he laugh . Gracie laugh . yes , how thrillingly exotic she seem in the heavy , frowsy , smoke - laden , fume - poison interior ! they hurry out like child merrily excited by the prospect of a new escapade . the real child round the car run off , bound and shriek with mischief . 

 " we may as well go , " Gracie suggest . 

 " yes , I ought to be go . " 

 near the junction of Bridge Street and Whitehall Evelyn ask Gracie to stop . 

 " why ? " 

 " because I want to get out , " say Evelyn . 

 " but I will drive you to the hotel . " 

 " no , thank ! " Evelyn answer very drily and firmly . and get out . he have no intention of be see by his door - porter drive up to the Imperial Palace in Gracie 's car with Gracie at the wheel . it simply would not do . and Gracie yield with a sweet , acquiescent , almost humble smile . that be the only way to treat young woman . firmness . let they be as capricious and arbitrary as they choose ; what they really like be to be compel to obey . 

 have move forward a couple of score yard , Gracie halt the car again and wait for Evelyn to come up with it 

 " you be afraid of be see with I in my car , " she say , smile not humbly but mischievously , half - resentfully . 

 " I be . " Evelyn be blunt and careless , but secretly a trifle surprised by the accuracy of her thought - reading . 

 Gracie drive on . this curt exchange seem to Evelyn to be far startling proof of intimacy . 

 he take deep breath . he be conscious of a much - increase sense of be alive . 

 content 
 chapter 12 

 daughter and FATHER 

 Gracie have no soon enter her sitting - room at the Imperial Palace , leave the door ajar as she leave most door ajar , than her father push open the door and peep in . she be just drop her leather coat on to a chair , which be already encumber with a rug . Sir Henry infer from the coat that his daughter have be out in the car . he wonder why , but ask no question . the relation between these two be peculiar , yet logical enough , consider their character . before he get his title his wife have divorce he , and obtain the custody of the child , then aged seventeen . she obtain also an alimony of five thousand a year . she have try for ten thousand , and fail . five thousand or ten thousand : the figure have no practical interest for Henry Savott , but he have fight she ruthlessly . 

 after three week of live with her mother , Gracie have walk into her father 's office one day , and say : " daddy , I understand now . " " understand what ? " " you know . " Henry Savott have look harshly at she and growl : " well late than never . " Gracie have then announce that she have not the least intention of live any long with her mother . " I be not go to be in anybody 's ' custody ' ! what a word ! " Henry Savott have remind she that she be a minor , and that the decree of the High Court of Justice explicitly put she in her mother 's power . gracie , frequently a realist , have merely laugh . " I would love to see the Court that could make I live with anybody I do not   want to live with . I be come to live with you , daddy . " 

 Henry Savott have be tremendously flattered . his daughter 's unsolicited testimonial be the fine gift ever bestow upon he , and he instantly see that it would do much to restore his damaged prestige in the social world . he offer objection to Gracie 's plan , but not convincingly . his maiden sister , who hat his wife , be induce to take theoretical charge over his household . 

 Gracie have enjoy freedom from the very beginning of her new life ; for her father be absorb in his vast financial scheme , and her aunt , a hypochondriac with a magnificent constitution , be absorb in the complex ritual of the treatment of her imagine disease . as a rule hypochondriac live for ever . but Miss Savott prove not to be immortal . she die suddenly , untimely , of a malady whose existence have conceal itself even from the hypochondriac 's ferret morbidness . attire in black on the evening of the funeral , father and daughter have have one of their short , clear , monosyllabic conversation , the result of which be that Gracie at twenty become the head of Sir Henry 's household . the unspoken but perfectly understand undertaking on Sir Henry 's part be : 

 " do not   make a fool of yourself , and I will not   make a fool of myself or of you . you leave I alone and I will leave you alone . " twenty year early such an arrangement would have be regard as immoral , but the Savotts be of those rather rare person who look often at the calendar , not to know the day of the month , but to remind themselves of the Annus Domini . and the arrangement , be between two realist , work . it suit both of they . both possess the faculty of not see what it might be inconvenient to see . Sir Henry in his old - fashioned way sometimes feel transient qualm ; Gracie never . 

 Sir Henry have an immense admiration for his daughter , and especially for her worldly common sense . he be proud of her racing achievement , which have cost he a lot of money in the building of monstrously engine car . in every department of expenditure she be an extremely costly child . but he be free ; she be free ; she be a capable hostess ; and domestic extravagance never disturb he ; for he have a sense of proportion . 

 the miscarriage of a financial operation in the City might well in a day reduce his resource by more than Gracie could possibly squander in twenty year . 

 such be their situation , and it explain why Sir Henry hide whatever curiosity he might have feel about the leather coat . 

 two book lie on the floor of the littered , luxurious room . Sir Henry pick they up ; for though he have learn that his daughter 's enormous untidiness be incurable , his own instinct for order would out . 

 " the Bible and Shakspere , " he murmur . " still ? " 

 " the Bible and Shakspere still . and I do not   know which be good , " say Gracie . 

 " why this surprising passion for the classic ? " he twit she . 

 " I only like they - that be all , " say Gracie negligently . " I be just read the Psalms . " 

 " why the Psalms ? " he continue to twit the girl , " I should have think the biography of David would be more in your line - as a contemporary young woman . " 

 " the Psalms be David 's biography , " Gracie reply . 

 he reflect : 

 " how do the kid think of these remark of her . something in that . I never think of it . " he be not an ardent reader . 

 " oh ! " he say . 

 " yes . the fine thing in all the Bible be in the Psalms . " 

 " oh ! " he repeat , smile . " what be that ? I would like to hear . " 

 Gracie quote with a certain solemnity : 

 " be still , and know that I be God . ' be still . "sombrely contemplative , she gaze at her parent , so dapper , so physically fresh in his age , so earthly , so active in his unende material scheme , so deaf and blind to the spiritual , so regardless of all that be incalculable by an add machine . he fancy that her eye be fix upon his magnificent , regular white tooth , which she have once call cruel , and instinctively he close his lip on they , thus cease to smile . 

 " shall I ever get to the bottom of this kid 's mind ? " he ask himself , puzzle , uneasy , as it be intimidate ; but still admire . he drop the book on to a table . 

 2 . 

 then there be a second swift disconcert change in Gracie 's mood . 

 " what be you go to do to - night , daddy ? " 

 " I be go to bed . you know I never do anything the first day , anywhere . " 

 she seem not to be listen to he . 

 " because , " she continue , " I have   just see Mr. Orcham . " 

 " I be wait to hear from he , " say Sir Henry drily . 

 " he be only this minute come back into the hotel . be out all day . " 

 " how do you know ? " 

 " do not   I say I have   just see he ? " 

 " you seem to be very friendly with he ? " Sir Henry quiz she . 

 " oh ! I be ! he take I to Smithfield Market this morning . " 

 " he ask you to go to Smithfield with he ! " 

 " no . I ask he to take I . " 

 " when ? " 

 " after you go off to bed . " 

 " I hope he do not   think I would put you up to it , " say Sir Henry , disturb . 

 " how could he have think that ? I do not   know he be go to Smithfield until a minute before you go off . I be glad I ask he . it be most frightfully amusing . and if I have go to bed I should not   have be able to sleep . it fill in the time perfectly . I be think you might invite he to dinner tonight . " 

 " I invite he to dinner ! and in his own hotel ! no fear ! the last thing I want be for he to think I be run after he . you can understand that . if he do not   suggest anything , after my message to he , I shall not   suggest anything . " 

 Gracie say with absolute tranquillity : 

 " then you go to bed , and I will ask he . I like he . " Sir Henry exercise the self - restraint which experience of Gracie have teach he . 

 " he will not   accept . " 

 " I will bet ten to one he will . " 

 " in the restaurant ? he will not . " 

 " well , we will see . " 

 Sir Henry reconsider the position . if Orcham accept an invitation from Gracie alone , it would mean that he might be get wrong notion into his head . if he decline , undesirable complication might ensue . Sir Henry go to the door . 

 " you ask he for both of we . nine o'clock . send a note down . let I know the reply . " Sir Henry depart without wait for Gracie to speak . 

 " Father , " she run to the door and call out after he in the corridor : 

 " what be his christian name ? " 

 she write , in her large hand : " dear Mr. Evelyn Orcham . Father and I would be so glad if you would dine with we tonight in the restaurant . nine o'clock . please do not   disappoint we . your sincerely , G. S. " 

 she ring for the waiter . 

 Mrs. O'Riordan , the head - housekeeper , brightly sustain the care of her kingdom , enter , in front of the waiter , to pay one of those state - visit which she vouchsafe only to very important guest or very angry guest . she enquire whether Gracie 's comfort and satisfaction be complete and without flaw . gracie , recognise at once a superior member of the hotel - hierarchy , invite Mrs. O'Riordan to sit down . the two have quite a long chat . then Gracie lavish more than an hour and a half upon her evening toilette , melancholy Tessa help she as well as a bandaged wrist permit . 

 content 
 chapter 13 

 green PARROT 

 Evelyn enter the foyer at one minute to nine . certainly one of his god be Punctuality , though there be great god in his pantheon . when master of his movement he be never late , nor early ; his knowledge of the hour , and of the minute of the hour , be almost continuous . 

 a thin stream of guest be pass from the great hall through the foyer into the restaurant . other guest be sip cocktail at the small table in the foyer ; and still other be seat on the sofas , contribute naught to the night 's receipt of the foyer , but safeguard their stomach . not a single guest recognise Evelyn ; Mr. Cousin would have be recognise and salute by several of they ; Evelyn 's personality be more recondite . only the knowing one know that Mr. Cousin , the manager , have a superior . 

 in the lounge be two cloak - room attendant , knee - breeched and gorgeous , who look as if they have escape from the Court of the Prince Regent , two cocktail page in white and gold , a foyer - waiter dress as a waiter , and two head - waiter of the restaurant , who stand on the low stair to receive diner ; for every arrive party be personally conduct to its table and not abandon by the conductor until the head - waiter of the table have receive it into his hand . all these employee be immediately and acutely aware of the unusual presence of Evelyn , but , under standing order , they ignore it : not an easy feat . 

 at nine o'clock Sir Henry Savott appear ; he glance at his watch , and his austere face betray a high consciousness that punctuality be the politeness of emperor . he descry Evelyn . the two smile , mutually approach , shake hand , and as it be take position for a duel . 

 " I be just go to telephone up to you , and suggest an appointment for to - morrow , " say Evelyn genially , " when I get your daughter 's most kind invitation . " 

 " very good of you to accept at such short notice , " say Sir Henry . " have a cocktail ? " 

 " yes , thank , " say Evelyn simply , and indicate an empty table . 

 " what be the matter with the bar ? " ask Sir Henry . " ihear you have   have it redecorate . " 

 " but Miss - er - gracie ? " 

 " Gracie have never be know to be less than a quarter of an hour late for lunch or dinner , " say Sir Henry . " like most woman she have a disorderly mind . not disorder , " he add . 

 the two male exchange a complacent , condescend look which relegate the entire female sex to its proper place , and stroll side by side up the stair , along the broad corridor which lead past the grill - room into the american bar . 

 the cocktail department comprise two large room : the first be permit to lady ; the second , contain the majestic bar , be forbid to they . by a common impulse Sir Henry and his guest for the evening walk without hesitation into the second room and sit down in a corner . each wait for the other to open . neither know that the mind of the other be preoccupy with one sole image : that of Gracie . Evelyn be think : " she say she would fix it , and she be fix it . " Sir Henry be think : " what be the meaning of this whim for get this fellow to dinner? ... 'Be still , and know that I be God . ' good God ! "   but naive pride be mingle with his non - comprehension . 

 Sir Henry glance around with feigned curiosity at the floodlighting , the silvern ceiling , the Joseph's - coat wall decorate in rhomboidal shape which bar - frequenter describe as cubistic or futuristic or both . he do not like it . 

 " very original , " he comment . " Charming . I expect it be good for a bit of useful publicity , this be . " 

 " it be , " say Evelyn . " change from the traditional british bar , eh ? " he see himself and Gracie incredibly hobnob in the Prince of Wales 's feather in Westminster Bridge Road . 

 a white - jacket , black - trousere youth ceremoniously approach . 

 " Maddix , " Evelyn murmur to he before Sir Henry could speak . 

 the youth hurry away . 

 there be four solemn reveller at the bar , and a priest and an acolyte behind it . the ascetic priest be a thin , short , middle - aged man with a semi - bald cranium , a few close - cropped grey hair , and an enormous dome of a forehead above grey eye . leave the bar and his customer to the care of the acolyte , the priest come trip with dignity across the room and halt in silence at Evelyn 's elbow . 

 " well , Maddix , what be your late ? Apollo ? " Evelyn ask , hardly smile . 

 " the Apollo be quite new , sir . but my late I have   christen Green Parrot . I only really finish it last night . " 

 " not on the market yet ? " 

 " not as you might say , sir . " 

 " well , Sir Henry , will you try a Green Parrot ? " 

 " good evening , Sir Henry , " say Maddix , his tone a mixture of deference and self - respect . 

 " why of course it be Maddix ! " Sir Henry exclaim , hold out his hand . " how be you , Maddix ? have not   see you since God know when - at the Plaza in New York . you be a very famous figure there . " 

 Maddix take the offer hand with reserve . 

 " yes , sir , " he agree placidly . " I suppose I be . I suppose I be the well - know barman in New York for twenty year . prohibition and Mr. Orcham bring I back home . " 

 " and how be the boy ? " Sir Henry enquire . 

 " which boy , Sir Henry ? the general bar population ? " 

 " no . your two son of course . " a swift change transform the impassive countenance of the legendary world - figure , the formidable man whose demeanour divide the general bar population of the two great capital in history into two group , the group which venture to address he as ' Maddix , ' with or without familiar addition , and the group which do not venture . the countenance relax and show human emotion . 

 " thank you for remember they , Sir Henry . the eld be still over there . Fur trade . seem to be dollar in it . the other one be with I and his mother , here . " 

 " and what be he do ? " 

 " well , Sir Henry , you may think it queer . but I have   get a tennis court back of my little house at Fulham , and the boy be go mad on tennis . he mean to be a professional player . his mother be not   very pleased . but I say , ' what can you do - if he be make up his mind ? ' between parent and child thing be not   what they use to be , be they , Sir Henry ? " 

 " they be not , " the millionaire concur , think of Gracie . 

 " a Green Parrot then , Sir Henry ? " 

 " I will risk it . " 

 " and you , sir ? " 

 Evelyn say : 

 " Soft . " 

 " excuse I , gentleman , " say Maddix . " I should prefer to mix that Green Parrot myself . " he go away . 

 " a character ! " observe Sir Henry . " how do you manage to get he away from New York ? " 

 " I see he once or twice when I be over there , " Evelyn answer placidly . " he say he would like to come home . I believe he . consider prohibition ! a man who can live for twenty year behind a New York bar and never pick up an american accent - and never use a word of american slang - well , there must be something incurably English about he . I tell he I have the fine american bar in the world , and I want the fine barman in the world to take charge of it . he come . of course he get the salary of an Under - Secretary of State . so he ought to . " 

 " not quite the cocktail hour here , be it ? " say Sir Henry , again glance around at the large , half - empty room . 

 " no . it be too late and too early . but it will soon be the liqueur hour . Extraordinary how many man prefer to come in here for a drink at the end of a meal . they feel more at home near a bar , even if they do not   stand at it . " 

 2 . 

 two fat man in lounge - suit wander in . the first word that Evelyn catch in their self - conscious conversation be the word ' Acceptances . ' he know and care absolutely nothing about race ; but he have the wit to gather that Acceptances be one of the few human phenomenon capable of make all man kin . the talk among the leaner against the bar suddenly rise to loudness . " and I say that gin be the - " he hear , from an affected and disputatious voice .   he would have like to hear a profound remark concern woman from some other quarter of the room ; but he be disappoint .   he think : 

 " there be a quality about that wigwam in the Westminster Bridge Road that this place have not   get . the free - and - easy ! this place be too stiff . " and he begin to wonder how the Prince of Wales 's feather ' quality could be add to the quality of the Imperial Palace american bar . " no ! " he decide . " could not   be do . would not   do , either . " but he regret its absence from the too correct and august atmosphere of the place . 

 then a procession move from the bar in the direction of Evelyn and Sir Henry : an acolyte solemnly bear a tray upon which be two small glass , one green , one yellow , follow by the priestly Maddix . Evelyn take the yellow glass , Sir Henry the green . the acolyte bow and retire . Maddix stand await in silence the verdict of Sir Henry . Evelyn absurdly wish that Maddix , with roll - up shirt - sleeve expose hairy forearm , might have exclaim freely : " well , what abaht it , guv'nor ? " 

 observe that Sir Henry 's eye be on Evelyn 's glass , not on his own , Maddix allow himself to remark : 

 " Mr. Orcham be not much for cocktail . " 

 " I be much more for cocktail than you be , Maddix , " Evelyn say . and to Sir Henry : " Maddix be a strict teetotaller . " 

 " then how do you manage to invent these thing ? " ask Sir Henry , gaze now at the green glass . 

 " I taste . I never swallow . " 

 Sir Henry both taste and swallow , and put on the air of a connoisseur , amiably deliver judgment : " very original . very good . " 

 Maddix bow his gratitude - a bow hardly perceptible ; he have divine that to the millionaire all cocktail be more or less the same cocktail . the experience of decade , the inventive imagination of a genuine creator , and some good luck have go into the conceiving of the Green Parrot cocktail , and the millionaire recke not , sympathise not , understand not ! he have be friendly enough about the human offspring of the cocktail genus , but to the miracle of cocktail art God have decree that he should be insensible . as a fact Maddix do not know more than ten man in London who truly comprehend the great classical principle of the cocktail . Evelyn be one of the ten . 

 Sir Henry begin to talk to Evelyn . Maddix sedately walk away , the artist sardonic because unappreciated by a barbaric public . 

 presently Evelyn glance at his watch . 

 " perhaps we ought to go back to the foyer . ' 

 " lot of time , " say Sir Henry soothingly . 

 at that moment the whole room , from the bar to the furth corner , become agitated with a unique agitation , and every masculine face seem to be say : " strange thing have happen , but this be the strange . " oblivious of the print notice prominently display at the entrance , a woman be intrude . and not merely a woman , but a young woman , a beautiful woman , proud of bear , clothe in a magnificent frock of mauve and pink , and glint with jewel . and neither apology nor challenge in her mien . Maddix start instinctively into protest at this desecration ; then stop , think : " a great than I be here . let he deal with the unparalleled outrage . " and yet the outrage be delicious to every beholding male , even to Maddix himself . the woman go straight to Evelyn and Sir Henry , who both rise quickly . Sir Henry at any rate feel that she must be remove at once . Evelyn do not care whether she be remove or not : in the Palace he be above all law ; the one law be his own approval . 

 " I get tired of wait for you in the foyer , " the smile woman greet they with entirely unresentful charm . " so I ask where you be . " 

 the two man be like sixth - form boy convict of an impropriety . 

 " be wait long ? " ask Sir Henry . 

 " oh no ! not more than an hour . this place be more old - fashioned than I think it be . " such be her indication of awareness that she be where she know she have no right to be . " I think a public - house would be more up - to - date than this . I know I should adore public - house . do not   you adore they , Mr. Orcham ? " 

 " I be not very well acquainted with public - house , " say Evelyn . 

 " never be in one ? " 

 " oh yes . once . " 

 " how long ago ? " 

 " oh ! not very long ago . " 

 Evelyn see in her something of the woman who at the banked corner of the Brooklands track have many time stake her life on the accuracy of an instantaneous appraisal of position , speed and distance . he perceive that she like his reply . he admire she tremendously . he be dazzle by she . he know that she know he be dazzle by she . Sir Henry also be somewhat overset , and quite incapable of reproach she for the wilful audacity of her invasion . she have put he in the wrong . she triumphantly lead out the two man as though they have be captive to an Amazon . she vanish from the view of the room , and to all the seat , entrance male the room seem to be suddenly darken . 

 content 
 chapter 14 

 VOLIVIA 

 in the american bar the hour for cocktail have nearly finish , but guest be still drink they , though perhaps with more refined gesture , in the foyer ; and people be still pass down through the foyer into the restaurant . 

 Dinner - time at the Imperial Palace , if still not as late as in Venice , Paris , Madrid , be get later , and near and nearer to supper - time . a crowd , confused scene of smart frock , dowdy frock , jewel genuine and sham , black coat , white shirt , white table - cloth , silver , steel , glass , coloured chair , coloured carpet , parquet in the midst , mirror , melody , and light glint through the crystal of chandelier . 

 a tall and graceful youngish man , with an expression of gentle smile melancholy on his dark face , greet Gracie , Sir Henry and Evelyn on the low step , and lead they to a table on the edge of the empty parquet . have seat they , he stand with bent , attentive head at Sir Henry 's elbow . 

 " you be do some business here to - night , Cappone , " say Evelyn , lose the self - consciousness which usually afflict he on the rare occasion when as a diner he descend those broad step into the restaurant . Cappone 's response be a soft triumphant smile . Sir Henry , always self - conscious at first in a public place , conceal his constraint as well as he could under a napoleonic brusquerie . gracie , star at by a hundred eye until she sit down , be just as much at her ease as a bride at a wedding . create by heaven to be a cynosure , rightly convince that she be the well - dress woman in the great , glittering , humming room , her spirit float on wave of admiration as naturally as a goldfish in water . Evelyn , impress , watch she surreptitiously as she drop on to the table an inlaid vanity - case which have cost her father a couple of hundred pound . 

 " same girl , " think Evelyn , " who be hobnob with I in a leather coat about two minute since in the Prince of Wales 's feather ! " 

 surely in the wide world that night there could not be anything to beat she ! idle , luxurious rich , but a masterpiece ! maintain in splendour by the highly skilled and expensive labour of other , materially useless to society , she yet justify herself by her mere appearance . and she know it , and her conscience be clear . 

 Mr. Cappone have accept three menu from a man who stand behind he with a tablet in his hand , distribute they among his guest . 

 " well now , let us see , " say Sir Henry , apply eye - glass to his nose , and pause . " oh ! look here , Cappone , I think we will leave it all to you . " 

 " very well , Sir Henry . thank you , " say Mr. Cappone , gather up the menu , and depart with his subaltern . 

 " that be right , be not   it , Orcham ? " Sir Henry question . 

 " you could not   have do well , Savott , " say Evelyn , curt and confident . 

 " I suppose he be the head - waiter , " say Gracie , indicate Mr. Cappone . 

 " head - waiter ! " Evelyn exclaim , with an intonation somewhat sardonic , laugh drily . " I be glad he do not   hear you . there be thirty head - waiter in this room . no . Cappone be the manager of the restaurant . " the more Gracie dazzle he , the more be he determined to keep these Savotts in their place . after all , be he not old enough to be the girl 's father ? it be as if he resent her dominion equally with her ignorance of hotel terminology . 

 " and all he have to do be to look romantic and be exquisitely polite ? " Gracie go on , quite wilfully unaware of her place . 

 " yes . that be all , " Evelyn agree , and pause . " well , there may be one or two other thing he have to do . settle the menu with the chef . attend conference . watch the graph curve of the average bill every day . explain satisfactorily the occasional presence of a worm in a lettuce - not so simple , that ! know the name and private history and weakness and vanity and doing of every regular customer . talk four language . keep the peace among his staff over the distribution of the tip . know exactly how every dish be cook . persuade every customer that he have get the good table in the place . prevent customer who prefer the prix fixe from choose more expensive thing than the price will stand . find new waiter , because even waiter die and quarrel and so on . that be one of his worry , the waiter question . you can not   bring foreigner into the country , and english lad simply refuse to go abroad to finish their education . Cappone say that english waiter would be as good as any , and well in some way ; only there be one thing they can not   learn , and it be the most important thing . " 

 " ha ! what be that ? " Sir Henry demand . 

 " that the customer be always right , of course . it be that terrible british sense of justice ! well , those be a few of the odd trifle that our graceful friend have to think about , besides look romantic , " Evelyn end with a faint sneer . he think : 

 " why be I talk like this ? why have I get the note wrong ? " 

 " it be perfectly thrilling , " say Gracie , with an enchanting , excited , modest smile . 

 Evelyn say to himself : 

 " she understand . she have imagination . More than daddy have . " 

 " yes , yes , " Sir Henry grunt absently , his inquisitive small eye pry into the far corner of the restaurant . 

 " do tell we some more , " Gracie plead , lean eagerly towards Evelyn across the table , her beautiful face all light up . 

 " about waiter ? " 

 " about anything . yes , about waiter . " Evelyn 's tone have apparently not in the least ruffle she . she be admire he . she be kiss the rod . 

 " well , " say Evelyn . " Cappone say that english waiter look very smart in the street , off duty , but in the restaurant they do not   care how they look , whereas his precious Italians look very smart on duty , and do not   look like anything on earth in the street . I mean the commis of course , the youth in the long apron . not the chefs de rang . English or not , they have to look smart on duty . " 

 he force Sir Henry to meet his gaze . these people have get to know the sort of man they have ask to dinner , and he would teach they . if daddy fancy he be go to buy the Imperial Palace for nineteen and eleven - 

 Mr. Cappone reappear , to lay an orchid on the table in front of Gracie , who glance up at he , and without a speak word give the restaurant - manager such a smile as Evelyn have never before see . and Mr. Cappone give she a smile , respectful and yet adoringly masculine , that make Evelyn say to himself : " I could not   smile like that to save my life . " 

 " he be a dear , " Gracie murmur , pick up the exotic flower . and to Evelyn : " go on . go on . " 

 but at that moment a waiter arrive with a dish of caviare on a carriage , and another with three tiny glass on a tray . 

 " hello ! what be this ? " ask Sir Henry , suddenly attentive . " Vodka , " say Evelyn . " I hope it be vodka . " and his tone say : " no doubt you think it be gin . " 

 the repast begin . they be all hungry . the unique caviare , the invaluable vodka , rapidly work a miracle in the immortal spirit of Sir Henry . Gracie eat and drink with exclamatory delight . as for Evelyn , his testy mood fade away in fifteen second . the table now participate in the festivity of the great room . God reign . the earth be perfect . no stain upon it , no sorrow , no injustice , no death ! and life be worth live . Beauty abound . civilisation be at its full bloom . there be no yesterday , and there would be no to - morrow . and all because the pickle ovarian part of a fish , and a liquid distil from plain rye , be smoothly pass into the alimentary tract of the three ravenous diner . 

 2 . 

 then in the orchestra a drum roll solemnly , warningly , even menacingly ; and everyone look towards the orchestra , expectant . the orchestra , have for more than an hour draw out of a series of hungarian melody the last wild , melancholy sweetness , begin to play russian dance music . the high curtain at the end of the room move mysteriously apart , reveal a blaze of light behind . in the midst of this amber radiance stand a dark woman , half - clothe or quarter - clothe in black and white : costume of an athlete , cease abruptly at the arm - pit and the top of the thigh . she be neither beautiful nor slim nor elegant as she stand there , nor be her performer 's smile well than good - natured . 

 " so you have   fall for it , " say Gracie , under the loud applause which welcome the apparition . 

 " Fallen for what ? " ask Evelyn . 

 " Cabaret . " 

 " we have   have a cabaret here for two year , " say Evelyn . 

 it be true , however , that for a very long time the Imperial Palace have set its face against cabaret . the Palace have be above cabaret , be too refined and dignified for cabaret , need no cabaret , flourish as it do on its prestige , its food , and the distinction of its clientele . but Evelyn have recognise that the Time - Spirit be irresistible , and cabaret have come to the Palace . of course not the ordinary run of cabaret . inconceivable that the Palace cabaret should be that ! 

 Soup and hock be unobtrusively deliver at Sir Henry 's table . waiter on the edge of the room be unobtrusively insert new table between table . 

 the woman step into the centre of the dancing - floor with all the mien of a victor ; for , although this be only her third evening ; she know that she be a success . everybody know that she be a success . waiter glance aside at she as they do their work . in the distance guest be stand up to watch . in two day the tale of Volivia 's exhibition of herself have spread like a conflagration through what be call the town - without the help of the press . when she open Volivia have be nobody . now , because she have so unmistakably succeed at the Palace , she could get contract throughout the entire western world of luxury . her muscle know it as they contract and expand , make ripple on her olive skin . 

 she flow into a dance , which soon develop into a succession of abrupt , short , violent motion . ugly ! Evelyn be witness the turn for the first time . he be puzzle . " the public be an enigma , " he think . " they like it ; but what do they like in it ? I would not   look twice at it myself . " nevertheless the woman hold his gaze . he snatch a glance at Gracie , who be completely absorb in the spectacle , her vermilion lip apart ; at Sir Henry , whose eye be humid . then his gaze be drag back to the dancer . she be now begin to circle round the floor ; fast and fast , in gyration of the body , stooping , rising , whirling : arm uplifted , disclose the secret of the arm - pit . in her course , she come close to the table , so close to Sir Henry 's table that Evelyn could have touch she . he see her rapt face close ; he hear her breathing . the sexual , sinister quality of her body frighten and enchant he . she pass along . his desirous thought be : 

 " she will be round again in a moment . " he understand then why she be a success , why the rumour of she run from mouth to mouth through the town . fast and fast . someone applaud . applause everywhere , louder and louder . waiter stand still . fast and fast . her face be see alternately with her bare back : swift alternation that sight could hardly follow . louder and loud applause . a kind of trial of endurance between Volivia and the applause . at last she manouvre herself into the centre of the floor , and suddenly drop on to the hard floor in a violent entrechat . and keep the pose , smile , her bosom heaving in rapid respiration , her tremendous leg stretch out at right - angle to her torso . and , keep the pose , ugly as in itself it be , she now appear graceful , elegant , beautiful and young . the applause roar about the great room , wave of it respond to every invisible wave of conquer sensual sexuality which effuse powerfully from her accomplished body . 

 Sir Henry applaud loudly ; Gracie applaud without any reserve . Evelyn want to applaud , but he restrain himself ; he do not want to be see applaud - not that anyone would have notice he in the excited din . 

 Volivia rise , bow and retire : Aphrodite , Ariadne , Astarte . the applause persist . Volivia return , and , with she , two male dancer , boyish , say by the learn to be her brother , and by the more learned to be her nephew , or even her son . they come into the category of the grotesque , dance on their ankle , on the outer side of their calf , with their knee seldom unbent . they have a reception whose enthusiasm be little less warm than that of Volivia 's . then Volivia , whose departure from the floor have hardly be observe , return again , for a final trio or ensemble with the youth . this conclusion be the apogee of the number . nothing whatever of the anti - climax about it . call it a tumult , a typhoon , a tangle dervish confusion , so sensational in its mingling of two sex that diner neglect to dine and forget to breathe . 

 " the roof'll be off in a minute , " shout Sir Henry , furiously clap , in the deafen clamour . again Evelyn do not applaud . after the three have retire , Volivia reappear alone , to accept that which be her . the curtain join their fold and hide she . the diner breathe , but do not yet eat . they be sorry that the number be over , but also relieve that it be over . 

 the next and last number be a clown , who translate the classical tradition of the english music - hall droll into French . he be an artist in the comic , and the diner laugh , but with more amiability than sincerity . and they eat . 

 Evelyn think : 

 " what on earth have Jones Wyatt be think about ? this clown fellow have be set an impossible task . it be not fair to he . he must come before Volivia , not after . I will have it alter for the midnight performance . " 

 " you know , really , " say Sir Henry , while the clown be clown . " those boy be well than the girl . " Evelyn nod carelessly , reflect : " do he mean it ? or be he just pretend to be judicial , save his face for we and for himself too ? after the exhibition he be be make of himself ! " if Sir Henry be try to save his face there be other in the restaurant make a similar attempt . 

 " where do you pick she up ? " Sir Henry continue , as if indifferently curious . 

 " Prague , I believe . Praha 's its new name , be not   it ? I have a man always run about the continent after really good turn . they be not so easy to find . " 

 " cost you a lot ? " 

 Evelyn hesitate . he be on the point of say " oh ! a goodish bit . I do not   remember the exact figure . " just to keep Sir Henry in his place ! then he change his mind . there be a more effective way of keep Sir Henry in his place . the way of the fact . " yes . Volivia and Co. stand we in for eighty pound a week . the other turn forty or fifty . band and cabaret come to not a penny less than twelve hundred a week . " and he add to himself : " get that into your head , my friend . " 

 " band so much ? " Sir Henry give an excellent imitation of imperturbability . 

 " yes . " 

 " how many band ? " 

 " Three . " 

 " one 's American ? " 

 " yes . here they be . " Evelyn wave towards the bustle and the glitter of new instrument on the bandstand . 

 " I know they get biggish money in New York , " say Sir Henry . 

 " they get biggish money in London , " Evelyn retort . " why ! I happen to be go out by the Queen Anne entrance the other day , and the whole alley be block with car . I ask the porter about it - he be a waggish sort of a chap . he tell I they be the car of ' the gentleman of the orchestra ' ! " 

 " by Jove ! " Sir Henry exclaim , glance round . " there be Harry Matcham . the very man I want to see . that big round table . " 

 " Lord Watlington ? " 

 " yes . gracie , I think I would well step over to he now and fix a date . excuse I , Orcham - one second . " 

 mahomet go to mountain . 

 during this interlude of chat , Gracie have not utter one word . nor have she eat . she be play , meditative , with the chain of her vanity - case . 

 " step over , daddy , " she say . 

 " Lord Watlington have not   have a dinner - party here for quite a long time , " say Evelyn . " Cappone be begin to think he would desert we . " Gracie do not speak . Evelyn go on : " I see Mrs. Penkethman with he , and Lady Devizes and the two Cheddars . rather Renaissance young man , those Cheddars , do not   you think ? " Gracie still do not speak . Evelyn go on : 

 " I do not   recognise any of the other . " 

 " you know , " say Gracie suddenly , look up into Evelyn 's eye with a soft smile , " that would not   do in a drawing - room . " 

 " what would not   do ? " 

 " that Volivia show . " 

 " no . Scarcely , " Evelyn agree . " a drawing - room would be a bit too intimate for it . but if it please people in a restaurant - well , there you be ; it please they . Volivia 's the big cabaret success we have   ever have here . now before the war that turn would not   have be respectable . I do believe it would have empty any restaurant - or fill it with exactly the sort of person we do not   want . but we give it now , and the Palace be just as respectable as ever it be . More , even . look at the people here ! " 

 " it be shameless , " say Gracie . 

 " perhaps too shameless , " Evelyn reply . " I admit I should have have my doubt about it if I have see it on the first night . but the proof of the pudding be in the eating . it be audience that make a show respectable - or not . I have   hear our cabaret - manager say it take two to settle that point - the show and the audience . but I do not   think so . the audience settle it . I be sure some of these variety artist start out to be - well , questionable . " he be choose his word so as to avoid abrade Gracie 's girlish susceptibility . he mean ' indecent . ' " but sufficient applause , frank , unreserved applause , will make they feel absolutely virtuous with the very same show . " 

 he be defend his Imperial Palace against the delicious girl who have use the adjective ' shameless . ' she have change now from the invader of the cocktail bar . 

 " I be sorry you think it be shameless , " he say . 

 Gracie smile at he still more exquisitely and more softly . " I love it for be shameless , " she say , not with any protest in her rich , dark voice , but persuasively . " why should not   it be shameless ? we be not   shameless enough . what be the matter with the flesh anyway ? do not   we all know what we be ? if I could give a performance like Volivia 's , would not   I just go on the stage ! nobody should stop I , I tell you that . " some emphasis in the voice . then she restrain the emphasis , murmur : " I be rather like Volivia . only she be bear to perform , and I be not . " 

 Evelyn be very seriously take aback , partly by the realisation that he have completely misjudge her attitude , and partly by the extraordinary candour with which she have reveal herself . if she have avert her gaze , if her voice have be uncertain , he would have be less disconcert . but she have continue to face he boldly , and her tone , though low , have give no sign of any inward tremor . and she have not make a confession , she have make a statement . she be indeed as shameless as Volivia . but how virginally , and how unanswerably ! 

 Evelyn think : 

 " I suppose this be the modern girl . I must not   lose my presence of mind . " he say , try to copy her serenity : " and yet you say Volivia would not   do in a drawing - room ! why not ? " 

 " simply because in a drawing - room she would make I feel uncomfortable . if I feel uncomfortable I always know something be wrong . but here I do not   feel a bit uncomfortable . you do , and so do daddy . but not I . besides , you would not   agree that what can not   be do in a drawing - room ought not   to be do at all . a big restaurant 's much the same as a bedroom . you see what I mean ? " 

 " not quite . " 

 " well , you will , " say Gracie with gentle assurance . " be not   you go to ask I to dance ? " 

 " in the middle of dinner ? " 

 " why not ? what a question , from you ! " 

 3 . 

 the californian " Big Oak Band , " with its self - complacent leader Eleazer Schenk at a green and yellow grand piano , be just emit its first wild woodland note ; the first professional dancing couple be just take the floor beneath the patronising glance of the dandiacal , tight - waiste bandsman ; and Sir Henry 's wine - waiter be just pour forth champagne from a magnum bottle . the general gay noise of chatter have increase . for not only at Sir Henry 's table , but everywhere up and down the room , great wine after elaborate year of preparation be reach their final , glorious , secret goal , quicken heart as well as tickle palate . and under the influence of these superfine golden and ruby and amber liquid , value at as much as five shilling a glassful , quaff sometimes in a moment , the immortal tendency to confuse indulgence with happiness be splendidly maintain . the graph - curve of alcohol consumption per head might be downwards , to the grief of the hierarch of the Imperial Palace ; but on this Volivia night the sad decline be certainly arrest for a space . Mr. Cappone and his cohort of head - waiter and humbler aproned commis know all about that . 

 " I do not   dance , " say Evelyn shortly . 

 he rarely do dance , and never on his own floor . for he , there would have be something improper in he , Director of the Imperial Palace , deity of thirteen hundred employee , disport himself on the Palace floor . and far , he have not yet in the least recover from the shock of Gracie 's shatter remark upon the moral excellence of shamelessness . ' we all know what we be , ' etc . there she sit , to the left of he , lovely , radiant , elegant , fabulously expensive , with her soft smile , her gentle , thrill tone , her clear , candid gaze , her modest demeanour - liken restaurant to bedroom , and - ' we all know what we be ' ! and he , Evelyn , monarch of the supreme luxury hotel of the world , have ingenuously be think that in his vast and varied experience he have nothing to learn about human nature ! 

 " oh ! so you do not   dance ! " say she most sweetly . 

 she might , Evelyn reflect , be a bewilder mixture of contradiction , but she be the most enchanting creature he have ever meet . she have bow her glory in instant acquiescence . 

 " why do you have american band here ? " she enquire in a new tone , as if conversationally to set he at ease after his curt refusal to dance . yes , she be the ideal companion . he recall the obstinacy of his dead wife . 

 " because they be the good , " he reply , in relieve , bright accent . " we be mile behind they in this country . you see , the dance craze start early over there than here . they be well discipline , and they have a well rhythm . they have   teach we a lot . an english player who take his work seriously will give his head to play next to an American for a month . rather ! of course we get the good even of the Americans , because we give the good treatment , to say nothing of the good advertisement - not direct advertisement . oh no ! never ! the tall fellow with the saxophone - he earn fifty pound a week . we give they a sitting - room and dressing - room , and a valet , and two porter to carry their instrument about . we even press their clothe for they free of charge . they behave like duke , and we behave to they as if they be duke . but we would not   look at them if we could find any english band as good , or nearly as good . " 

 he have speak with earnestness , for he be very sensitive on the subject of engage american band in a London hotel . italian and french and swiss manager , chef , waiter - yes ! they need no defence . but american band have to be defend . 

 " well , I never know that , " say Gracie , her voice full of understanding and sympathy . " I think it be a question of fashion , and please american customer . " 

 " not in the least ! " say Evelyn with fire . " we make fashion here . we do not   follow fashion . and we do not   kowtow to Americans or anybody else . the Palace be the Palace . " he laugh . " excuse I , " he add , lightly apologetic . 

 " I like to hear you , " say Gracie , and Evelyn feel that she do like to hear his vehemence . she be a girl of quick comprehension . 

 Sir Henry return to his table . Gracie immediately rise . 

 " Mr. Orcham and I be go to have just one dance , daddy , " she say calmly . " you get on with your trout . then we shall be level again . " and she look down at seat Evelyn with an expectant , beseech , marvelously smile glance . 

 " but - " 

 Evelyn check himself , master his amazement at her wanton duplicity . as for shamelessness! ... he might have resist , but for the half - timid supplication in her smile . no ! he know that he could not anyhow have resist . he be catch . mixture of contradiction ! she be utterly incalculable ! he rise in silence , force a smile in response to hers , and take the hand of the baffle enigma . and no soon have he take her hand than he think : " after all , why should not   I dance on my own floor ? it be not   as if her father be not   here . " they embark upon the sea of the floor , which be very rapidly fill with craft . from time to time in their circumnavigation they pass close by Mr. Eleazar Schenk , who , neglect his finger in a tune which they have be play twice nightly for six or seven month , look at Evelyn with a glance of condescend and naughty recognition . " I wish that fellow 's contract be over , " think Evelyn , ignore the glance . 

 at first neither he nor Gracie speak . then Gracie say : 

 " be you do it on purpose ? " 

 " what ? " 

 " hold I off ? " she put the question with a cordial , delicately appeal upturned smile . no criticism in it . a mere half - diffident suggestion . 

 " sorry , " say Evelyn , and draw her body nearer to his , so that they be touching , so that in the step his foot be between her foot . 

 " you be a fibster , " she say , with the same upturned smile . " you dance beautifully . " 

 " I do not   know any step except this one , " Evelyn mutter . " it be too monotonous for you . " 

 " I be love it , " say she , and for a moment shut her eye , as if to exclude all sensation save those of the music and of be in motion with he , enclose in his arm . 

 he could feel her leg against his , her body against his , her back against his right hand , and the clasp of her finger upon his left hand . but there be nothing of Volivia in her contact , only a delectable , yield innocence . or so it appear to he . he desire not to enjoy the dance , but he be enjoy it . he would have be resentful of her trickery , but he could not summon resentment . he think : " be it possible that she have take a fancy to I ? if not , what can be the explanation of her game ? " then he privately withdraw the word ' game . ' she be not a flirt , or , if a flirt , she have lift flirtation to the plane of genius . he be intensely flattered , for , though she have trap and annoy he , he admire she tremendously . he admit to himself that she be the most surprising , wondrous creature he have ever encounter . she be unique . a man can not be more flattered than by the confiding , devotional acquiescence of a beautiful and stylish young woman . yes , her mien be devotional . and all the while he could feel the firmness of her leg under the filmy frock . his emotion be well hide , but it surpass anything in his experience . 

 a voice say behind he : 

 " hello , darling ! " 

 " hello , Nancy darling , " say Gracie . 

 the much - picture Nancy Penkethman , dance with one of the Cheddar brother . the two couple sail almost side by side . 

 " when be I go to see you , darling ? " ask Nancy . " I be perish to hear all about New York . " 

 Evelyn could feel upon he the inquisitive peering of Nancy and one of the Cheddar brother . 

 " what be wrong with to - night , darling ? " say Gracie . " up in my room . I be stay here . so 's father . Eleven - thirty , say . bring the other along . we will have a time . " 

 " the Lord Harry will not   come . he be get a political date with the P.M. " 

 " never mind . bring whoever'll come . " 

 the two couple separate in diverge curve .   Evelyn 's manouvre . 

 the Big Oak Band cease . dancer clap , Gracie hesitate . Evelyn loose his partner . he have be chill by the fact that Gracie be capable of be waken out of the ecstasy of the dance by the sight of a friend , and of be at once sufficiently prosaic to arrange a meeting . 

 " thank you very much , " he say conventionally . 

 " I love it , " Gracie repeat . 

 " good band , eh ? " Sir Henry greet they loudly . he have dispose of his trout , and grouse be be serve . 

 " the good , " say Evelyn . 

 " I say , daddy . do you order a sweet ? " 

 " no , " Sir Henry reply . " I order nothing , and I never do order a sweet . " 

 " but I want one , " say Gracie . 

 " well , have one . the Imperial Palace be yours . " 

 " what about a soufflé ? " 

 " that will take twenty to twenty - five minute , " Evelyn put in . 

 " what do that matter , sweetie ? "   ' Sweetie ' ! however , Evelyn know that in Gracie 's universe the word have no more significance than ' darling ' ; and he let it slip away .   " and while we be wait could not   we just go and see the kitchen ? I have   never see a hotel kitchen , and I be crazy about hotel now . ' crazy ' ! Pardon ! " Gracie laugh , place her hand on her mouth . " Reminiscence of New York , of course . " 

 " crazy about hotel now ! " Evelyn repeat in his mind . " that be not a bad notion , " say Sir Henry , obviously attract by the notion . 

 Evelyn say that he would have the great pleasure in show they the kitchen . one of his fib . 

 content 
 chapter 15 

 CUISINE 

 the kitchen of the Imperial Palace restaurant be on the same floor as the restaurant itself , and immediately adjoin it . you pass through an open door , hide like a guilty secret from all the dining - table , then up a very short corridor , and at one step you be in another and a different world : a super - heated world of steel glistening and dull , and bare wood , and food in mass raw and cooked , and bustle , and hurry to and fro , and run to and fro , and call and even raucous shouting in French and italian : a world of frenzied industry , whose denizen have leisure and inclination for neither the measured eloquence nor the discreet deferential murmuring nor the correct and starched apparelling of the priest and acolyte of the restaurant . a world of racket , which racket , reverberate among metal and earthenware , rise to the low ceiling and be bounce down again on to the low table and up again and down again . a world without end , a vista of kitchen one behind the other , beyond the range of vision . the denizen be all clothe in white , or what have be white that morning , and wear high white cap , with sometimes a soiled towel for kerchief loosely fold round the neck ; professional attire , of which none would have permit himself to be deprive . 

 the shock of the introduction into the Dantesque Latin microcosm , of the transition from indolent luxury to feverish labour , be show in Gracie 's feature . 

 " you will soon get use to it , " say Evelyn , think with admiration how sensitive be the puzzling creature . " see here ! " he examine a board stud with hook , near the entrance , and pull from one of they an oblong of flimsy pink paper . " see ? " he point to the scrawl word ' soufflé . ' " ' 37 . ' that be your table . " 

 " and what be that ? " ask Gracie , put her finger on certain perforate figure . 

 " ' 10.12 . ' that be the time of the order . we stamp it . there be the machine that do it . " 

 " good ! good ! " ejaculate Sir Henry , tersely . 

 Evelyn restore the paper to its hook . 

 " oh ! " cry Gracie , suddenly childlike . " do let us see the soufflé make . " 

 " we will ! " answer Evelyn eagerly , also childlike in sympathy . but he think : " have she come here because she be really interested , or because she want to persuade I that she be interested ? " his mind be people with sinister suspicion which , previously squat in dark corner , have on a sudden sprung upright and into the open . " but what a marvellous figure she make here in her finery ! " he think . 

 " oh ! " Gracie cry again , perceive a tank into which fresh water be spurt . " what be this ? " 

 a cook spring forward and , seize a long handle with a net at the end , plunge it into the water and lift out the net full of struggle fish . 

 " des truite , " say he proudly . 

 " they little know the recent fate of three of their brother ! " say Sir Henry with gaiety . 

 " how horrible ! how can you , father ? put they back , please do . " Gracie have lay a protest hand on Sir Henry 's arm . 

 the trout be drop into the water . 

 two waiter at the delivery - counter snatch up two loaded tray which have mysteriously be place there , and hasten off into the other world . 

 " you be pretty busy here ! " say Sir Henry , survey the noisy scene . 

 " this be nothing , " Evelyn reply negligently . " you should see the place at a quarter to two when everyone want lunch at the same moment , and watch the battle at that counter . there would be sixty cook here then . this be comparatively a slack time . " 

 then approach down the vista a youngish , plump , jolly man , not to be distinguish by his attire from anybody else . 

 he have hear by the inexplicable telegraph which function in workshop that the Director be in the kitchen , with guest ; and he be hurry . 

 " ah ! " say Evelyn . " here be Planquet , the chef of chef . " 

 the man arrive , bow . 

 " let I introduce Maître Planquet , " Evelyn begin the ceremonial of presentation . 

 the master - cook protect himself against the hazard of contact with the extraneous world by a triple system of defence . Outermost come the cushion of his amiable jollity . next , a cushion of punctilious decorum - obeisance , deferential smile , handshaking , which express his formal sense of a great honour receive ; for he need no one to tell he that only visitor of the high importance would be introduce by the Director himself . third , and innermost , a steel breastplate forge from the tremendous conviction that the kitchen of the Imperial Palace restaurant be the fine kitchen in the universe , and that he , Planquet , a Frenchman , be the head of the fine kitchen in the universe , and therefore the head of his ancient profession . 

 when he genially admit , in response to a suggestion in French from alert Gracie , that he be a Frenchman from the South of France , his tone have in it a note of interrogation , imply : " surely you do not imagine that any but a Frenchman of the Midi could possibly be the head of my profession ? " his tone also indicate a full appreciation of the fact that Gracie be an exceed pretty woman . behind the steel breastplate dwelt unseen the inviolable vital spark of that fragment of the divine which be the master 's soul . 

 while Sir Henry vouchsafe to he in the way of preliminary small - talk that he and his daughter and Mr. Orcham be in the middle of dinner in the restaurant , his unregarding , twinkle gaze seem negligently to recognise that a restaurant , and perhaps many floor of a hotel , might conceivably be exist somewhere beyond the frontier of the kitchen , and that these phenomenon be a corollary of the kitchen - but merely a corollary . 

 " ah ! " say Gracie , over a dishful of many uncooked cutlet , meek and uniform among various dishful of the raw material of art . " they have not yet acquire their individuality . " 

 the master give she a sudden surprised glance of sympathetic approbation ; and Evelyn know that the master be say to himself , as Evelyn be say to himself : " she be no ordinary woman , this ! " and for an instant the Director feel jealous of the master , as though none but the Director have the right to perceive that Gracie be no ordinary woman . the master 's demeanour change , and henceforth he speak to Gracie as to one to whom God have grant understanding . he escort she to the enormous open fire of wood in front of which a row of once - feather vertebrate be slowly revolve on a horizontal rod . 

 " we return always to the old method , mademoiselle , " say he . " here in this kitchen we cook by electricity , by gas , by everything you wish , but for the volaille we return always to the old method . wood fire . " 

 the intense heat halt Gracie . the master , however , august showman , walk right into it , seize an iron spoon fit for sup with the devil , and , have scoop up an immense spoonful of the fat which have drip drop by drop from the roast bird , pour it tenderly over they , and so again and again . then he come back with his jolly smile to Gracie , as cool as an explorer return from the arctic zone . 

 " nothing else be worth the old method , " say he , and make a polite indifferent remark to Sir Henry . 

 but the next minute he be display , far up the vista , a modern machine for whip cream . and later , ice - making by hand . 

 " the good method of a hundred year since . " then , far , far from the frontier , in the very hinterland of the kitchen , be hear a roar of order . two loud - speaker suspend from a ceiling over a table ! 

 " yes , " the master admit to Gracie 's questioning , ironic look . " it be bizarre , it be a little bizarre , this mixture . but what would you , mademoiselle ? " 

 two shabby young man be work like beaver beneath the loud - speaker and round about , occasionally bawl acknowledgment of receipt of order to colleague in some distant county of the master 's kingdom . 

 the party go in and out of room hot and room cold , room large and room small , room crowd with industry and room where one man toil delicately alone . and the master explain his cuisine to Gracie , as one artist explain an art to another artist who be ignorant but who have instinctive comprehension . down by a spiral staircase into the bakery and the cakery . up into an office with intent clerk and typewriter . and everywhere white employee raise eye for a second to the Director and his wandering charge and the master , and drop they again to their task . 

 2 . 

 Evelyn , with Sir Henry , be behind the other two . he watch the change expression on Gracie 's face as she turn , and try to read they , and could not . then Sir Henry leave he and with an authoritative query draw the master from Gracie 's side . Evelyn join she . they have mysteriously get back to the kitchen of the wood fire and the revolving game - but not the same game be revolve . Gracie approach the huge hearth , beckoning , and he stand close to she . 

 " what be she go to say ? " he think . he half - expect , after the exposure of the reality of cookery which she have be witness , that she would say that never again could she enjoy a meal . she confront he with a swift movement ; then pause , her lip apart . he see Sir Henry cross - examine the master across the busy , reverberate kitchen . and on the edge of his field of vision be see Gracie 's beauty , and the dazzle smartness of her frock . 

 " I must work ! " she exclaim , in a rich , passionate whisper . " I must work ! this place make I ashamed . Ashamed . I wish I could put a pinafore on , and work here , with all these man , instead of go back to that awful restaurant full of greedy rotter . why can not   I work ? I must begin my life all over again . " then , more quietly : " well , I do start some work this morning , after Smithfield . oh ! I tell you , do not   I ? I swear I will keep it up . do not   you believe I ? " her tone be now wistfully appeal for confidence and encouragement . 

 " yes , I believe you . of course you will keep it up , " say Evelyn , stagger by the astonishing outburst . he recall that in the morning she have make a vague brief reference to writing . be write , then , to be her work ? 

 " there be no ' of course ' about it , " she say sadly . 

 a man stride through the kitchen carry a pale dish on a tray . 

 " oh ! my soufflé ! " cry Gracie . " it be . I know it be . I would forget all about it , and you never remind I ! " 

 she almost run to the master . 

 " good - bye , maître ! Au revoir . you have be all that be most amiable to we . thank you . thank you . " 

 " but - " 

 " thank you again . " 

 her tone be definite , imperative . 

 the master , puzzle , take the proffer highly manicure hand . she be reduce he to his proper social level , after all this pretence about maîtrise . but the master bring his defence into action . 

 " too honour ! " he say , with geniality , with deference ; and yet the steel breastplate glint through . the touch of his hand round hers indicate the proud reserve which as the prince of his great world he be entitle to show to no matter whom . and the master console his pride far by a Gallic reflection upon the nature of beautiful girl . toy ! still , Gracie have very much impressed he . 

 Gracie scurry off towards the frontier , Evelyn follow . 

 " my soufflé ! it be go ! " 

 and indeed a waiter be now disappear with it over the frontier . the tail of Gracie 's brilliant skirt disappear after he . the whole kitchen be momentarily agitate by the fly spectacle . 

 when Evelyn and Gracie reach table no . 37 , have traverse the star restaurant in a scarcely dignified dash , the soufflé be already magically deposit on the side - table from which no.37 be serve . 

 Sir Henry do not arrive till quite five minute later . what remain of the soufflé be then cold . but Sir Henry do not fancy souffle . 

 " that fellow have a nerve ! " think Evelyn , " pump the ingenuous Planquet before my face , and behind my back too ! " 

 content 
 chapter 16 

 ESCAPE 

 at ten minute to eleven Evelyn say that urgent work compel he to leave they . he have not ask Gracie to dance again , and she have give not the slight sign that she wish he to do so . Time have pass quickly . Evelyn have be relate the somewhat melodramatic professional history of Maître Planquet . also quite a number of minute have go to the business , suddenly undertake by Gracie , of write a note and send it across to Nancy Penkethman and obtain a reply . 

 " but you be come upstairs to my little party later , " she say to Evelyn with a confident inviting smile . " you come , daddy ? " she add negligently to Sir Henry . 

 " no , " say Sir Henry , promptly , positively and curtly . 

 Gracie keep her smile wait for Evelyn 's answer . a smile which could not reasonably have be describe otherwise than as irresistible . since the visit to the kitchen she demeanour to the guest have be even more exquisitely agreeable than before . forgotten , apparently , be the short passionate outburst concern work ! 

 " I be afraid I must not , " Evelyn say quietly . he have no intention whatever of go to her party , to meet people whom he do not personally know , and of the frivolous , notorious sort , which he have no desire to know . indeed he have be wonder how a unique girl such as Gracie , and a public power such as Lord Watlington , could have arrive at intimacy with smart , merely ornamental futility such as Nancy Penkethman , Lady Devizes and the two tall Cheddars . far , his sense of proportion , of the general plan of a day and of a life , make he hostile to the very idea of these suddenly , capriciously arrange festivity . still far , he be tired , and he think that Gracie ought to be tired too . 

 but he have a far strong motive for refuse . he emphatically do not want to placard himself too strikingly with a famous girl like Gracie . already   he recall again and again   the entire upper - staff of his hotel be certainly aware that he have take she to Smithfield at an ungodly hour that morning , and that immediately on their return to the Palace he have show she over part of the hotel . also that she have be enquire for he in the afternoon and have ask for the number of his car . and have he not din with she that night ? be he not still , in full publicity , sit at her father 's table ? have she not dance with he ? have he not exhibit to she the kitchen of Maître Planquet ? impossible that he should add fatuity to indiscretion , and increase tittle - tattle , by go to her infantile party , which probably he would not be permit to leave till 2 or 3 a.m. ! and why should he imperil his next day 's work by turn night into day ? he be a serious man , admire , love and fear by other serious man . he hat any form of notoriety for himself . and he would not yield to this bewildering , lovely chit . 

 " oh ! but you can not   say ' no , ' " Gracie protest sweetly . 

 " Afraid I must , " Evelyn insist , and rise to depart . " so many thank for your hospitality , " he say in a formal tone , address equally to father and daughter . 

 " but I have   tell they you be come ! " say Gracie . 

 " whom ? " 

 " Nancy Penkethman . in my note . I have   promise you to they . " 

 Evelyn laugh a little , say : " a young woman as beautiful as you be be entitle to break any promise . I be so sorry . good night . I be fearfully sorry . " 

 " I say , Orcham , " Sir Henry stop he . 

 " yes ? " 

 " you be not   forget my message to you this morning ? " 

 Evelyn act shame and alarm . 

 " upon my soul I be ! " he exclaim . " old age ! old age . do forgive I . you want to see I - be not   it ? " 

 " I would like to have five minute some time . " 

 " you and your five minute ! " think Evelyn . " do you imagine I can not   see through you ? " and aloud : " I will be delighted if I can be of any use . " 

 " I be busy to - morrow morning , " say Sir Henry . 

 " and my afternoon 's full up , " Evelyn instantly retort ; and add , in a tone intentionally sardonic : " our Annual Meeting . " 

 " oh , really ! well , there be no frantic hurry , " say Sir Henry , very calm . " shall we say day after to - morrow , or the day after that . I shall be here for a few day , might be here for a few week . " Evelyn draw out his pocket engagement - book and they fix a rendezvous . 

 " it be come at last , " say Evelyn to himself as he walk away . " as if the man do not   know I know he know all about the shareholder ' meeting ! " he be only sardonic , not apprehensive . 

 as for Gracie , the girl 's smile , at parting , have lose none of its delicious , acquiescent sweetness . she might be erratic , wayward , unpredictable ; but she have manner . 

 Evelyn go straight to his private office , satisfied with his own fortitude , but uncomfortable . he see a thin line of light under the shut door . Miss Cass , hat and coat , bag in one hand , be tidy his great desk . he be not expect in his office that night , and in the morning he like the desk to be absolutely clear , save for a bottle of mineral water and a glass and some flower . 

 " anything urgent ? " he demand . 

 " no , sir . nothing . " 

 the next moment Miss Cass be go , have show her usual reluctance to quit work . three day a week she enjoy evening - duty till 11 p.m. - for the hidden life of the Palace , never dream of by visitor , extend daily over a period of sixteen hour , and more - but Miss Cass would willingly have serve every night till eleven o'clock , or even twelve ; indeed , she hat to leave her subaltern in command of the Director 's sacred welfare . 

 2 . 

 Evelyn take a cigar out of a box of Partagas in the middle drawer of the desk . have light it , he telephone to the manager 's room , and instruct the assistant - manager , M. Cousin not be there , to see what could be do about change the order of the two turn in the midnight cabaret . then for some minute he devote himself to a cigar worthy of devotion . then there be a knock at the door , and , without wait for permission , enter - gracie . Evelyn be really disturb , by the thought not of a danger to come , but of a danger past . if Miss Cass have be present at this astounding incursion ! if Miss Cass have meet Gracie even near the door in the corridor ! a beautiful , stylish girl , unannounced , without an appointment , a girl with whom he be already far too closely associate in the mind of the upper - staff , invade the holy of holy after eleven o'clock at night ! and to find the secret retreat , she must have make an enquiry . therefore some member of the staff know of her visit ! therefore many other of the staff would soon know ! monstrous ! incredible ! he have live dangerously in his time ; but among man of business , not in this fashion . 

 " may I come in ? " 

 " but you be in ! " Evelyn smile humorously . 

 " then you do not   want to see I ? " 

 " I be delighted to see you . " 

 Evelyn be stand . Gracie approach the desk , and sit down opposite to he . Evelyn sit down . 

 " now why will not   you come to my tiny party ? " she begin at once . " you be not   work . you be only smoke . " 

 " yes , I be work , " he say . " you know , there be quite a lot of work go on in this head of mine . " 

 he be rapidly recover from the shock of her unlawful irruption . she make an enchanting picture in front of he . before speak again she open her bag , and critically behold her face in the mirror thereof . 

 " do you know - I must tell you , " she say , " I be sure you would prefer I to be straight with you . I must tell you you be misjudge I . " 

 " misjudge you ? " 

 " yes . or you would not   have say what you do about I be so beautiful I be entitle to break any promise . if I be rather good - look , I can not   help it . and I loathe the idea that good look ' entitle ' a girl to behave in a way that a plain girl would not   dare to behave in . I say I loathe it , and I do . I be not that sort . I do hope you understand . " she be implore comprehension . 

 " yes , " Evelyn admit sedately . " quite . I ought not   to have say it . but I be only joke . I never once think you be that sort . " he would have prefer that their intimacy should not grow . but there it be , grow like the bean - stalk . and in spite of himself he be help it to grow . " but I have   get something to say , too , " he proceed . " why do you make that promise to your friend without ask I ? I be there while you be write the note . you might just as easily have ask I . " 

 " I might , " she murmur , as it be absently . she be now busy at her face , act upon her own criticism of it . " I ought . but I do not . I be frightfully sorry . it be cheek . but as I have   get myself into a hole , you will not   leave I in it . you will just lift I out of it like a perfect dear . do not   be a spoiled darling . it would not   suit you . " 

 Evelyn shake his head , smile . 

 " I can not   make out why you want I to come , " he say . 

 " no , of course you can not . that be why you be such a dear . I want you to come because you be wonderful . " her eye leave the mirror and gaze at he . 

 " I be not a bit wonderful , " he say . 

 " I know you mean that . but you be not   a judge . I be a judge , and I tell you you be wonderful . and I be die to have you at my party . " 

 " well , " he think , ' she be an enchantress all right . but not for I . and she can not   come it over I . why the devil should I go to her party if I do not   want to ? I be not a friend of her , and it be no use she pretend I be . I will not   go . and I will not   and I will not . " 

 but also he be think again , obscurely , that he must in some strange way have make an impression on she . and that she be bring something new into his life . he be an extremely successful man . he have achieve his ambition . he have a passion for his work . he be at the very top of his world , secure . he have scale Mount Everest , and there be no high peak on earth . what else have he to live for , he , still under fifty ? but she be bring something new into his life . he have glimpse of vista hitherto unnoticed . be it conceivable that she be in love with he ? or be he a fatuous ass ? if the former , what then ? no , he be a mere hotel - keeper . true , her father have rise , and he have be an early riser , like Evelyn . but her father , though he have rise from a low level than Evelyn , be a financier , immensely wealthy - if only on paper . and her father have beget a daughter who in the last few year have raise he higher even than he be before . through the magic of his daughter , he consort on equal term with the - well , with the smart individual in London . Evelyn try to disdain smartness , but be do not completely succeed in disdain it . smartness have prestige for he . and he be a mere hotel - keeper . what absurd nonsense ! yes , absurd nonsense , but there it be ! she be a marvellous girl . in two second he live again through the whole of his day with she . marvellous ! he be free to marry . but as a wife , what a hade of a nuisance would the marvellous girl be ! liability ; not asset . 

 " and I have   be think these ridiculous thought for hour ! " he say to himself , admit that his mind be as disorderly as any girl 's . 

 he say lightly to she : 

 " I hope you be not   really die . I hope you will not   die : because I honestly can not   come . I have   get an appointment in ten minute from now . I should love to come , but - " he break off . " you do believe I , do not   you ? " 

 " I be not sure , " she reply quietly , sadly . " I be terribly suspicious , I can not   help it , but I have   a feeling you be treat I the same as you do when we begin to dance . " 

 " oh ! how ? " 

 " hold I off . I be more frank than you like , and it make you afraid . " 

 here indeed be candour - candour either brazen or magnificently courageous ! he be shake by the strong , sudden force of a temptation to yield , to go to her party . why not ? he have no appointment ; he have nothing to do ; and the sense of fatigue have leave he . her candour have express the exact truth about he , whether she know it be the truth or not . he now desire to go to the party , to throw up his hand and say comically : " come along . upstairs . the lift ! the lift ! I can not   wait . " it be not that he be the least bit in love with she . if she attract he , he do not know why . she have beauty , but he be not a man to over - estimate the value of feminine beauty ; he have hold beauty in his arm . she have brain , or what in a woman pass for brain ; but he be alive enough to the defect of her brilliant mental apparatus , and he esteem that her brain be much inferior to his own . he have , in fact , a certain sex - bias . 

 nevertheless he desire to go to her impromptu party . that be to say , he desire to stay in her company , hat to let she out of his sight , fear that if he do he would regret have do so . she intrigue he considerably ; and he admire her manner , and keenly savour her admiration : that be all . but be it not sufficient ? the party would assuredly be amusing , and if it be not amusing he could leave it . as for the gossip of the staff , to think twice about such a trifle be childish . every one of his reason for refuse she be either false or utterly silly . the trouble perhaps be that he be too proud to go , too proud to withdraw his word and surrender . he have say he could not go , and he would not go - not if he should have to regret his obstinacy for evermore . why the devil could she not take ' no ' for an answer? ... force herself into his private office as she have do ! 

 " I must ask you to forgive I , " he say , with a smile as sad as her smile . 

 " you have   be very patient with I , " she sigh , and snap her bag to , and rise . " good night . " 

 " good night . " he follow she to the door and open it . 

 " I will see you to the lift , " he say . she turn on he , transform . 

 " no , please ! I could not   bear that ! " 

 fury , resentment , anger be in her rich voice . she bang the door , wrench the handle out of his hand . 

 what an escape - for he , not for she ! but an iron weight seem to have settle in his stomach . and he be blanket in a heavy melancholy . he say aloud in the empty , desolate office : " have I ruin my life ? be this the turning - point ? " 

 content 
 chapter 17 

 2 A.M. to 3 A.M. 

 Evelyn wake up in a state of some bewilderment . his foot feel cramp . he look at they and see that he be still wear his evening shoe ; also his dress - suit ; also that many light be burn ; and finally , that instead of be in bed , as he have assume , he lie on the sofa in the sitting - room of his private suite . then , gradually pass into full wakefulness , he remember that he have sink on the sofa , not to sleep , but to reflect , to clear his thought , before get to bed . he glance at the clock , which announce twenty minute to two , and at first he be sceptical as to its reliability ; but his watch confirm the clock . Characteristic of the man of order that he at once wound up his watch ! 

 he rise uncertainly to his cramped foot , and light a cigarette . he have sleep without a dream for nearly two hour and a half ; surprising consequence of extreme fatigue ! his body appear to he to be as refresh and restore as though he have sleep the usual six hour . he must now really get to bed . 

 but his brain be furiously active , engage in an unending round of thought : 

 " that damned party be still go on . there be pro and con , but I ought to have accept the invitation . I be a fool to refuse . it be nothing after all . only a little improvise party . surely I be entitle to refuse . surely she might have take no for an answer . her outburst be inexcusable , and it show what she be capable of . the damned party be still go on . there be pro and con , but I ought - " 

 and so on without end . revolution of an enormous fly - wheel in his brain , dangerously too big for his brain , leave no space therein for such matter large and small as the substitution of Miss Powler for Miss Brury and vice versa , the change about of the two cabaret turn , the vague machiavellian menace of Sir Henry Savott , the everlasting problem of the downward curve in expenditure per head of customer in the restaurant , etc . 

 he glance around the sitting - room , where everything exactly fit his personality and everything be in its place ; home of tranquillising peace ; but now disturb by a mysterious influence . no peace in the room now . he have hold the room to be inviolable ; but it have be violate - and by no physical presence . and Evelyn be no long , as formerly , in accord with the infinite scheme of the universe , with the supreme creative spirit . he have never consciously feel that he have be in such accord . only now that he be in disaccord do he realise that till then he have be in accord . disconcert perception ! curse and curse and curse the girl ! she carry hell and heaven about with she , portable ! she be just not good enough . she continually flout heaven 's first law ... no hope of sleep . to get to bed would be absurd and futile . he would go downstairs . to do so might stop the fly - wheel . 

 he open the door , extinguish all the light , shut the door , open it to be sure that he have extinguish all the light . the dark room seem to be full of minatory intimidation : a microcosm of invisible force hitherto unsuspecte . he shut the door on they ; but soon he would have to open it again . 

 descend a short flight of stair , he walk along the main corridor of the floor below his own , under the regularly recur lamp in the ceiling , past the numbered door , each with a bunch of electric signal bulb over its lintel . inhabited room , many of they - not all , for it be the slack season - transient home , nest , retreat of solitary or of couple . shut away in darkness , or in darkness mitigate by a bed - lamp . some sleep : some lie awake . Pathos behind the closed , blind door . not only on that floor , but on all the Floors . floor below floor . he always feel it on his nocturnal perambulation of the Imperial Palace . and he could never decide whether the solitary or the couple , the sleeper or the sleepless , be the more pathetic . the unconsciousness of undefended sleep be pathetic . the involuntary vigil be pathetic . salt of the earth these wealthy resident in the large and most luxurious luxury hotel on earth , deferentially serve by bow waiter , valet , maid ! they press magic button , and their caprice be instantly gratify . but to Evelyn they be as touch as the piteous figure crouch and shiver in the lamp - light night on the bench of the Thames Embankment . 

 he ring for the lift . up it promptly come , and a pale , sprightly , young uniformed human being in it , who not long since have be a page - boy and be now promote to the distinguished status of liftman . night be common day to he ; for , as hair grow night and day , so do the service of the Palace function night and day , heedless of sun and moon . 

 " Evening , Ted . " 

 " good evening , sir . " 

 " let I see , how many year have you be with we ? " 

 " Six , sir . " 

 " Excellent ! excellent! ... ground - floor , please . " Evelyn notice the no . 3 on the lift - well as the cage fall from floor to floor . the third floor be the floor of the party . renew disturbance in his brain ! " when do you come on day - work ? " 

 " I hope in five week , sir . " 

 " ah ! " 

 the mirrored lift stop . the grille slide backwards . Evelyn step out . 

 " thank you , sir , " say Ted , sit down , and resume the perusal of thrilling fiction . 

 the great hall be empty of guest ; the scintillate foyer too . the entrance to the lady ' cloak - room glow with brilliant light . a footman stand at the entrance to the dark gentleman 's cloakroom , and within , at the counter , the head - attendant there be count out money from a box . and in the still glitter restaurant only one table be effectively occupy - by two man and a woman . all the other table be oblong or round expanse of bare white cloth . eight or nine waiter shift restlessly to and fro . a gigolo and his female colleague - the last remain on duty of a corps of six - sit at a tiny table apart . 

 the orchestra , which Evelyn could not see from his peep place , begin to play a waltz , which reverberate somehow mournfully in the vast , nearly deserted interior . the professional dancer rise , attendant , then advance . the gigolo take the woman from the table of three , his companion take one of the man . the second man stay at the table and pass the time in pay the bill . the waiter bow , ceremoniously grateful , as he receive back the plate with a note and a pile of silver on it . to Evelyn the waltz seem interminable , and the two lone couple on the floor the very image of pleasure struggle against fatigue and the burden of the night . the female gigolo be young and elegant ; she must get some handsome tip , Evelyn think . " Tips ! my God ! " he murmur to himself , recall that in one week in June the waiter ' tip in the restaurant have total more than eight hundred pound . the waiter keep their own account , but they be submit to Cousin , who submit they now and then to Evelyn . 

 the orchestra , after threaten never to cease , most startlingly cease . but at once it burst vivaciously and majestically into " God save the king . " the three male stand to attention ; the woman stand still . then the three guest sit down again at their table , and Evelyn could hear the murmur of their talk ; he could hear also the movement of the depart band . the professional dancer have vanish . the waiter wait . at length the trio of guest leave the sick scene of revelry , and come up the step into the foyer . Evelyn turn his back on they . in a moment the table be empty . in three more moment every cloth have be snatch off the row of table , and every table change from white to dark green . the two male guest continue to talk in the gentleman 's cloak - room . the woman have disappear into the lady ' cloak - room apparently for ever . but she come forth . the trio renew conversation . never would they go . they go , slowly , reluctantly , up the stair into the great hall . the restaurant and the foyer be dark now , save for one light in each . the head - attendant of the vestiaire be manipulate switch . the entrance to the lady ' cloak - room be black . 

 " Ludovico ! " Evelyn call to the last black - coat man , taunt the gloom of the restaurant . Ludovico span round , espy , and come hasten . 

 " Sir ? " 

 " do Volivia perform first or second in the second cabaret ? " 

 " first , sir . the other turn - clown , I forget his name , sir - refuse to appear first . " 

 " why ? " 

 Ludovico raise his shoulder . 

 " all right , thank . good night . " 

 and Ludovico run down the step again , and he too vanish . the gentleman 's cloak - room be black and empty . the great hall be silent , the foyer desert except by Evelyn . the public night - life of the Imperial Palace have finish . but not the private night - life . 

 refuse the lift , with a wave of the hand to the liftman , Evelyn begin to climb the stair ; but he be arrest by the sight of the gigolo   coat - collar turn up , and a grey muffler wrap thickly round his neck   and the girl - dancer   with a thin cloak hang loosely over her frail evening frock . the pair be walk about two yard apart , the woman a little in front of the man : bored , fatigued , weary . for the purpose of symbolise the graceful joy of life he have hold she in his arm a dozen time during the long spell of work ; but now each display candidly a complete indifference to the other ; each have have a surfeit of the other . they pass through the melancholy gloom of the foyer , up into the great hall , and at the revolve door thereof Long Sam negligently salute they - too negligently , think captious Evelyn . he follow , aimless , but feel a sickly interest in they . 

 approach the door , he acknowledge Long Sam 's impressive salute with rather more than the negligence which Long Sam have dispense to the work dancer - just to punish he ! through the glass Evelyn see the pair stand under the gigantic marquise , repute to weigh several ton . they exchange infrequent monosyllable . the gigolo shiver ; not the girl . then a taxi drive up , with a porter perch on the driver 's step . the gigolo open the taxi and the girl get in . Bang ! the taxi curve away and be lose in the darkness . 

 the gigolo depart on foot . his foot trace a path as devious as a field - path . fatigue ? and he also recede into invisibility . where do he live ? why do he not drive home , like the girl ? what be his private life ? and what the girl 's ? after all , they be not dance marionette ; they be human being , with tie of sentiment or duty . what be the old age of a gigolo ? there be something desolate in that slow , listless , meander departure . 

 2 . 

 " Morbid be the word for I to - night , " think Evelyn , as he turn towards the hall and nod amiably to Reyer , the night - manager , who stand behind the Reception - counter as listless as the dancer . his mind be not specially engaged with Gracie ; he be afflict by the conception of all mankind , of the whole mournful earthly adventure . he begin a second time to climb the stair . it be his practice to make at interval a nocturnal tour of inspection of the hotel ; so that the night - staff see nothing very unusual in his presence and movement . 

 he walk eastward the length of the first - floor main corridor all lighted and silent , and observe nothing that be abnormal . then up one flight of the east staircase , and westward the length of the second - floor main corridor . at the end of it , he look into the waiter ' service - room . it be light but empty . by day it would be man by two waiter . from midnight till 8 a.m. only two waiter with one valet and one chambermaid be on duty for all the hotel , and they range from floor to floor accord to demand . among they they contrive to make good the quiet boast of the Palace that hot and cold dish and cold and hot drink could be serve in any apartment at any hour of the night ; for the grill - room kitchen , unlike the restaurant kitchen , be open all night as well as all day . the sole difference between night and day on the floor be that in the night , instead of ring for a waiter , guest have to telephone their order to the central telephone office , which transmit they . 

 Evelyn minutely inspect and test the impeccably tidy service - room : the telephone to the central switchboard , the telephone phone direct to the bill - office , the gravity - tube which carry order - check to the kitchen and bill and cash to the bill - office , the geyser , the double lift with a hot shelf and a cold shelf ; the book of bill - form and order - check , the ice , the machine for shave ice to put round oyster , the dry tea , the milk , the mineral water , the fruit , the bread , the biscuit , the condiment , the crockery , the cocktail jug , the ice - water jug , the silver and cutlery all stamp with the number of the floor , the stock - list hang on the wall , and the electrically control clock which also hang on the yellow wall . nothing wrong .   once he have memorably discover fourth - floor silver in the fifth - floor service - room : mystery which disconcert all the floor - waiter , and which be never solve !   everything wait as in a trance for a life - give summon . he go out of the room content with the organisation every main detail of which he have invent or co - ordinated year ago , and which he be continually watchful to improve . 

 back again along the corridor , up another flight of stair to the third - floor corridor light and silent . room no . 359 . Rooms Nos . 360 - 1 . Rooms Nos . 362 - 3 - 4 . room Nos.365 - 6 - 7 - 8 not a sound through that door : which be hardly surprising , in view of another quiet boast of the Palace that no noise from a corridor could be hear in a room , and no noise from a room in a corridor . be she asleep , and in what kind of a night - dress - or would it be pyjama ? or be her party still drink , chattering , laughing , smoking , card - playing ? 

 then in the distance of the interminable corridor he descry two white table draw apart from the herd of table that stand at the door of every service - room . and then both night - waiter emerge from the service - room with dish , bottle and glass which they begin to dispose on the two table . Evelyn turn swiftly back , and conceal himself in the bay of a linen - closet . after a few moment he hear the trundling of indiarubber - tyre castor on the carpet of the corridor , the fitting of a pass - key into a door , the opening of a door , more trundling . then he look forth . Corridor empty . door of Nos . 365 - 6 - 7 - 8 half open . both waiter be doubtless within the suite . he come out of the bay , and walk steadily down the corridor . blaze of light in the lobby of the suite . hat and coat on the hat - stand . animate murmur of voice through the open door between the lobby and the drawing - room . impossible to distinguish her voice . he go on , and into the service - room , which be in all the disorder of use . the pink order - check book lie on the little desk near the telephone . he examine the last two carbon in it . Suite 365 . time , 1.51 . two bottle 43 .   he know that 43 be Bollinger 1917 .   one Mattoni . one China tea . one kummel . one consommé . six haddock C"te d'Azur . quite a little banquet before dawn : stirrup cup , no doubt ! what a crew of wastrel ! what untriumphant , repentant morning they must have ! but he feel exclude by his own act from paradise . he gaze and gaze . a telephone tinkle . he take up the receiver . " 421 - four , two , one - " 

 a waiter return into the cubicle , maintain at sight of the Director an admirable impassivity . 

 " here , Armand . Telephone , " say Evelyn , with equal impassivity . he hand over the receiver and leave . the other waiter be disappear at the other end of the corridor , on his way back to his permanent post on the fourth floor . 

 Evelyn march as it be defiantly , but on foot apparently not his own , past no . 365 . door shut . no sound of revelry by night ... he would not continue his tour of inspection . he could not go to bed . he descend , flight after flight of the light , silent staircase ; glimpse after glimpse of lighted and silent corridor , all so subtly alive with mysterious , dubious implication . the great hall have not change . Reyer lean patient on his counter , star at a book . Long Sam and one of his janissary stand mute and still near the door . the other janissary be examine the marine print on the wall . as soon as he see Evelyn he move from the wall as though catch in flagrant sin . 

 " what be it like outside , Sam ? " Evelyn call out loudly from the back of the hall . 

 " Fine , sir . a bit sharp ; 

 Evelyn would have go for a tranquillising walk , but he hesitate to travel back to the eighth floor for hat and overcoat , and he would not send for they . he speak to Reyer : 

 " I suppose there be no overcoat not work around here anywhere ? " 

 " I be afraid not , sir . " 

 " all right . never mind . I only think I would go out for a minute or two . " 

 " have mine , sir . may be on the small side , mais a la rigueur - " he smile . 

 while Evelyn be hesitate , Reyer dash through a door far behind the counter , and return with an overcoat and a hat . Long Sam help Evelyn into the difficult overcoat . 

 " not too bad , " say Reyer , flattered , proud , and above all exhilarate by this extraordinary and astonishing break in the terrible monotony of the night . 

 " Splendid ! " say Evelyn , nodding thank . 

 a showy , but cheap and flimsy overcoat . no warmth in it . very different from Evelyn 's overcoat .   unfamiliar thing in the pocket .   well , Reyer be only a young night - manager . fair salary . but not a sixteen - guinea - overcoat salary . a narrow , strictly economical existence , Reyer 's . the hat be too large , at least it be too broad , for Evelyn . now Evelyn have a broad head , and he believe in the theory that unusual width between the ear indicate sagacity and good judgment . strange he have not previously notice the shape of modest Reyer 's head ! he would keep an eye on Reyer . a janissary span the door for his exit . 

 3 . 

 the thoroughfare which separate the Imperial Palace from St. James 's Park be ill - lit . Evelyn have try to persuade Authority to improve the lighting ; in vain . but his effort to establish a cab - rank opposite the hotel have succeed , after prodigious delay . two taxi be now on the rank ; and there be two motor - car in the courtyard . the chauffeur doze ; the taxi - driver talk and smoke pipe . he cross the road and lean his back against the railing of the Park , and look up at the flood - light white tower over the centre of the Palace façade . 

 by that device of the gleam tower at any rate he have out - flank the defensive reaction of Authority . the tower be a landmark even from Piccadilly , across two park ; and simple provincial be constantly ask , " what be that thing ? " and know Londoners reply : " that ? that be the Imperial Palace Hotel . " but nowhere on any façade of the hotel do the word ' Imperial Palace ' appear . Evelyn would never permit they to appear . he believe deeply in advertising , but not in direct advertising . direct advertising be not suit to the unique prestige of the Imperial Palace . 

 in the façade a few window burn here and there , somehow mournfully . he know the exact number of guest stay in the hotel that night ; but their secret , misfortune , anxiety , hope , despair , tragedy , he do not know . and he would have like to know every one of they , to drench himself in the invisible fluid of mortal thing . he be depressed . he want sympathy , and to be sympathetic , to merge into humanity . but he be alone . he have no close friend , no lovely mistress - save the Imperial Palace . the Palace be his life . and what be the Palace , the majestic and brilliant offspring of his creative imagination and of his organising brain ? it have be everything . now , for the moment , it be naught . 

 " what a damned fool I be ! " he reflect . " why the devil be I so down ? I do not   care twopence about the confound girl . be I , the hotel - world - famous Evelyn Orcham , to go run around like a boy after a girl ? it be undignified . and I do not   mind who she be , or what she be ! anyway I have   teach she a lesson ! " 

 he withdraw his body from the support of the Park railing , and walk briskly westward . restlessness of the tree in the chill wind ! large rectilinear dim shape of the enormous Barracks   whose pierce early bugle make the sole flaw , in the marvellous tranquillity of the hotel . then the loom front of Buckingham Palace , the other Palace ! and even there , high up , a solitary window burn . why ? what secret do that illuminated square conceal ? he feel a sudden constriction of the throat , and after a long pause turn back . three motor - car in quick succession hum and drum eastward . eternal restlessness of tree beyond the railing ! he think he could detect the watery odour of the lake in the Park . the seagull have revisit it in score that day . he have see they circle in flock over the lake . very romantic . what a situation for a hotel in the midst of a vast city ! he walk as far as Whitehall , too melancholy and dissatisfied even to think connectedly . and at last he re - enter the Palace . one of the taxi have go , and both the motor - car . everything as usual in the great hall . Reyer behind his counter . 

 " much oblige , " he say , smile with factitious cheerfulness , as he give up the overcoat and the large soft hat . 

 " not at all , sir , " answer Reyer , please . 

 " that the night - book ? " 

 Reyer hand the book to he . he read , among other entry : 

 " three lady and two gentleman leave no . 365 at 3.5 . one of they be Lady Devizes . " 

 Evelyn think : " she be by herself now . perhaps she maid be undress she . she must be terribly exhaust , poor little thing . " she be pathetic to he . 

 " my floor , please , " he say to the liftman , and go to bed . next morning among the early departure he see the name of Miss Savott . 

 content 
 Chapter 18 

 the vacant situation 

 just before noon , on the morning of Gracie 's most unexpected departure , Evelyn be enter the Palace after a business interview in Whitehall . he feel tired , but he have sleep , and none but a close student of eye and of the facial muscle which surround they would have guess that he be tired . Evelyn could successfully ignore fatigue . indeed he now take pride in the fact that after two very short night and one very long and emotionally exhausting day , and with a critical day still in front of he , he have deliberately intensify the critical quality of the latter by add to his anxiety the inception of a new and delicate task : which task concern the future of Miss Violet Powler . 

 as for Gracie , he have learn that she have leave for the continent by the 9 a.m. train - not the more fashionable 11 a.m train - with the whole of her luggage and a maid whose arm be in a sling . Sir Henry have not see she off , and be remain in the hotel . Evelyn surmise that the impulsive girl have choose the early train because in the circumstance it be just as easy for she as the other , if not easy . Doubtless she have say to herself : " I be up late . I will stay up , and catch the first train . that will give I two hour less in his ghastly hotel , and two hour more in Paris . " for Paris be certainly her destination . where else should she go ? he surmise far that , if her maid be disabled , Gracie have do her own packing , and the maid 's too . he be sure that she be ' that sort . ' also she be the sort that could take pride in ignore fatigue . a point of resemblance between they ! he like to think of the resemblance . of course her departure be the result of pique . well , let it be ! he find a sardonic pleasure in her pique . do she good ! his emotion about she be evaporate with extreme rapidity in the fresh air and the common sense of morning . he need nobody to tell he , for he could tell himself , that no young woman , however enchanting , could make a lasting impression upon the susceptibility of a wise man old enough to be her father in an acquaintanceship of sixteen or seventeen hour . she have be calmly but firmly eject from his mind . nothing of the astounding episode stay in his mind except inevitable masculine self - satisfaction at a sentimental conquest , and shame for the absurd feeling which have disturb his soul after her resentful outburst until he finally settle for the night . one might call he a fish , not a warm - blooded man ; but such now be his mental condition , pleasing or the reverse . 

 pass through the ever - spin door into the great hall he give a benevolent nod to Mowlem , the day hall - porter , who render back the salute with equal benevolence and more grandeur . 

 Mowlem be one of about a dozen member of the staff each of whom consider himself the most important member of the staff - after Evelyn . he be quite as tall as Sam , and broad , but he pretend to no physical prowess . on the very rare occasion when law and order seem to be in danger in the great hall he have method subtler than Long Sam be of meet the situation . american citizen nearly always become his friend . once , an ex - President of the United States , suffer from the english climate and insomnia , have cause Mowlem to be rouse from bed , and the two coeval have spend a large part of a night in intimate converse . Mowlem be understand to be write , with expert assistance , a book of reminiscence of the Imperial Palace entrance - hall , for a comfortable sum of money . 

 while cross the hall , Evelyn hear his own name speak in a discreet feminine voice behind he . 

 " can you give I one minute ? " ask Mrs. O'Riordan , who also have be out on an errand . 

 the head - housekeeper in her street attire look as smart and as spry as any visitor , and she be modestly but confidently conscious of this momentous fact . 

 " Two , " say Evelyn , have glance at the clock . 

 he move towards a corner at the end of the Reception counter , and the irish ' mother ' of the Palace follow he . 

 " I think I have   find someone to take Miss Brury 's place , " say Mrs. O'Riordan , confidentially murmur . " she be young , but she be have experience , and - she be a gentlewoman . " 

 " that be good , " say Evelyn , cautiously , recall the head housekeeper 's theory about the advantage of engage gentlewoman as floor - housekeeper . 

 he divine at once that Mrs. O'Riordan be specially anxious to be persuasive . her grey hair never prevent she from exercise a varied charm , of which charm she be very well aware . as she stand before he , he could plainly see in she , not the widow age sixty - two , but a vivacious irish maiden of twenty - five or so . the maiden peep out of Mrs. O'Riordan 's bright eye , be hear in her lively though subdue voice , and apparent in the slight quick gesture of her gloved hand . at her good , and when she choose , Mrs. O'Riordan have no age . the accent which she have put on the word ' think ' be a diplomatic trick , to hide the fact that she have decide positively on the successor to Miss Brury . and the successor be no doubt a protégée of the head - housekeeper 's , a favour aspirant . Assuredly Mrs. O'Riordan have not discover the exactly right girl by chance in the last twenty - four hour . he foresee complication , a new situation to be handle ; the tentacle of his brain stretch out to seize the situation . 

 2 . 

 then he notice a young woman in converse with Mowlem . a young woman dignify , self - possess , neat , carefully and pleasingly clothe ; but at a glance obviously not a gentlewoman . Withal , Mowlem be treat she as a gentlewoman ; for the old man have the same demeanour towards everybody . never would Mowlem have be guilty of the half - disdainful demeanour which on the previous night Long Sam have adopt to the professional dancer . the young woman be Violet Powler , certainly tell Mowlem that she have an appointment with the Director for noon , and enquire the way to his office . 

 Evelyn , because he be tired and have a full day 's work before he , have boyishly determine to straighten out the Brury affair without any delay , and Miss Cass have receive early instruction to get Miss Powler on the telephone at the Laundry . he avert his face from the door so that Violet should not see he . 

 " perhaps you would like to have just a look at she ? " Mrs. O'Riordan suggest . 

 " yes , I should , " he smile . " but you can take her reference and have everything ready in the meantime . only do not   clinch it . I have someone in mind myself for the job . " 

 Mrs. O'Riordan do not blench , but that she be somewhat dash be clear to Evelyn . inevitably she be dash . 

 " oh , of course , " she say with sweet deference . " if that be it - " 

 " not at all ! " Evelyn smile again , and more lightly . " you go on with your , and we will see . I should not   be a bit surprised if yours be far more suitable than mine . " 

 " be she a gentlewoman , may I ask ? " Mrs. O'Riordan ask . 

 Evelyn 's eye quiz she . 

 " that depend on what you call a gentlewoman . she be have what I should call a very good education . " 

 " but her people ? " 

 " her father be a great traveller . " Evelyn want to laugh outright and boldly add : " a town - traveller . " but prudence stay he . 

 " oh ! " murmur Mrs. O'Riordan , indicate that she do not feel quite sure about the social status of great traveller , and indeed that there be great traveller and great traveller . 

 at this moment Evelyn be excusably startle by a most unexpected and strange sight : Sir Henry Savott talk to Violet Powler , three or four yard down the hall , away from the door . Sir Henry be smile ; Violet Powler be not ; but the two have an air of some intimacy . what next ? Evelyn keep his nerve . 

 " well , I shall be hear from you , " he say to Mrs. O'Riordan , and depart quietly in the direction of his office . 

 naturally he could appoint whomever he like to a floor - housekeepership in the Palace . and none would cavil . but peace , real peace , have to be maintain , and immense experience have teach he the difficulty of eliminate friction from the relation between woman , even gentlewoman ! there be nothing he fear more in the organism of the Imperial Palace than secret friction . moreover he know what he owe , of respect and fair dealing , to the faithful and brilliant Mrs. O'Riordan . but he be absolutely set on appoint Violet Powler . the idea of do so be his , and he have an intuition - he who deride intuition in other people - that it would prove satisfactory . he admit to himself that he have his work cut out . 

 content 
 chapter 19 

 POWDER and ROUGE 

 " this interview be unofficial , " say Evelyn . 

 Violet Powler be sit opposite to he on the other side of the big desk in the Director 's private office . she have loosen her black cloak , and Evelyn see under it the same blue frock which she have be wear on the previous afternoon . her hat be a plain feel . he could see nothing of she below the waist . he remember that her foot be not small , nor her ankle slim ; but he could not recall whether she have high - heeled shoe . as a housekeeper at the Imperial Palace she would have to wear black , and high heel , and he rather think that the force of public opinion among the housekeeper would corrupt she to make up her face . those pale pink lip would never do on the floor of the Palace . if she keep they untinted every floor - housekeeper would say on the quiet to every other floor - housekeeper that poor Violet - what a christian name ! Battersea or Peckham Rye all over ! - have be import from the Laundry , and what could you expect? ... no ! 

 he have be incline yesterday to regard she as beautiful ; but now , detach , render a little cynical by recent event , he decide that she be not beautiful . her feature be regular . she be personable . it be her facial expression - sensible , sober , calm , kindly , content - that please he . she would have no mood , no caprice . she be certainly not one of your yearner after impossible dream , your chronic dissatisfy , all up and down . even Mrs. O'Riordan have mood , despite her mature age . 

 " the matter be in the hand of Mrs. O'Riordan , our head - housekeeper , " Evelyn say far . " I have   really nothing to do with it . but I think I would well find out first whether you think the job would suit you . we want a new floor - housekeeper here . there be eight floor and eight floor - housekeeper . " 

 he then tell Miss Powler what be the duty of a floor - housekeeper . he tell she with an occasional faint glint of humour . her serious face do not once relax ; but he fancy that he could detect a faint answering glint in her brown eye . he be determined to see the glint in her eye , because he have discover she as a candidate for floor - housekeepership ; as such she be his creation ; therefore she simply have to be perfect , and without humour she could not be perfect .   not that many of the floor - housekeeper have humour . Mrs. O'Riordan generally have , but sometimes have not .   still , he be oblige to admit that Miss Powler 's eye be less promising to - day than yesterday . yesterday , however , she be at home in her own office . to - day she be in the formidable office of the Director , and might be nervous . yesterday he have acquit she of all nerve . 

 " it really all come down to a question of human relation , " he finish . " I be quite sure you could manage the chambermaid excellently . they be the same class as our laundry - maid , and you know they . but the visitor be a very different proposition , and quite as difficult . and partly for the same reason . the supply of chambermaid be not equal to the demand . neither be the supply of guest . " he almost laugh . 

 Miss Powler 's lip relax at the corner into a cautious momentary smile . 

 " you mean , sir , " say she , gravely , straighten she already straight back , " I have   be use to be give in to , and with guest I should have to give in . " 

 a crude phrase , but it show that she have get down to essential . 

 " not give in , only seem to give in , " he correct she . " say a bedroom 's cold because the visitor have not   have the sense to turn on the radiator . well you turn it on , and fiddle about with it , and then admit that there be something wrong with it , but you have   put it right , and if it be not   right you will send a man up to see to it . then just before you leave you say : ' these radiator be rather peculiar ' - they be not   - ' may I show you how they turn on ? ' you have   win , but the guest think she be win . it be always a she . no . that be not fair . it be not   always a she . Mrs. O'Riordan say there be nobody more exasperating than a New York stockbroker all string up after five day ' strenuous business life at sea in a liner . " Violet do smile . " it appear that american man be super - sensitive to the bugle - call in the morning . Wellington Barracks next door , you know . those bugle can not   be explain away . they would wake Pharaoh in his pyramid . I have   think of keep a graph to show the curve of explosion of temper due to those bugle . probably about half a dozen a week . well , you always say that the bugle be unusually loud that morning ; you have   never hear they so loud before ; and that I be negotiate with the War Office to get they do away with . I be not of course . but it soothe the awakened , especially if you admit that the bugle be absolutely inexcusable . as they be . put they in the right , and they will eat out of your hand , visitor will . if you argue you be lose . so be the hotel . now I have   give you a sort of general idea . what about it ? " 

 " I should like to try , " say Violet with composure . " I often have to do much the same with my laundry - maid . " 

 Evelyn laugh . 

 " if I may say so , " Violet add . 

 " I think you may , " say Evelyn . and to himself : " she be all right . but I would well not be too funny . " he say in a formal tone : " then I will mention you to Mrs. O'Riordan . " 

 " thank you , sir . I be very much oblige to you for thinking of I , " say Violet , with dignified gratitude . 

 " of course there would have to be a period of training . " 

 " yes , sir . I understand that . " 

 " but in your case it ought not   to be long ... in your place I would not   say a word at the Laundry . Mrs. O'Riordan might have somebody else she prefer . " 

 " no , sir . of course . " Violet speak here without conviction . her steady face seem to say : " you be not   go to tell I that this Mrs. O'Riordan will refuse anyone that be be mention to she by you . " 

 Sbe rise to leave , for Evelyn 's manner amiably indicate that the interview be over . Evelyn do not move from his chair . suddenly he decide that he would just touch on a detail which have be intrigue he throughout the interview , but which he have hesitate to bring into the conversation . 

 " I happen to see you talk to Sir Henry Savott in the hall . then you know the great man ? " he speak with bright friendliness , socially , as one human be to another , not as a prospective employer to a prospective employee . 

 " well , sir . I know he , if you call it know . he come up to I - in the hall . my sister be his housekeeper , at a house he have at Claygate - he sell it afterwards . my sister be ill in the house , and as I happen to be free , I be engage to do her work , for a month . of course I could see my sister every day , and she keep I right . I could always ask she . " Violet 's demeanour be perfectly natural and tranquil , but reserve . she add : " it be a small world ; but I have   hear it say you meet everyone in the hall of this hotel , soon or later . " she smile , look Evelyn straight in the face . 

 " but this be very interesting , " say Evelyn , animate . he be intrigue still more ; for , like many other people , he have hear all sort of story about Sir Henry 's domestic life . " then you do know something of housekeeping ? " 

 " a little , sir . I think I manage it all right . but of course , as I say , I have my sister to tell I thing . " 

 " a large staff ? " 

 " about forty , sir - indoor and outdoor . my sister have charge of everything , indoor and outdoor . " 

 " then you have charge of everything ? " 

 " yes , sir . but my sister be there . " 

 " Sir Henry entertain a lot ? " 

 " yes , sir . a very great deal , and often without warn we . " Evelyn open Miss Powler 's dossier , which contain , among other thing , her reference and testimonial . 

 " you do not   say anything about this , I see , when you come to we . " 

 " oh no , sir . " 

 " I suppose you do not   count it as a regular engagement . " 

 " no , sir . and it be so short . but if I have ask he I think Sir Henry would have give I a testimonial . " 

 " be Lady Savott there ? " 

 " oh no , sir . " just a slight betraying emphasis on the ' no . ' " I have   never see her ladyship . " 

 " then you leave , and your sister take on the work again . " 

 " yes , sir , for a bit . " 

 " she leave . no ? " 

 " my sister be dead , sir . " 

 " oh ! " Evelyn 's face show sympathy . " she be old than you ? " 

 " yes , sir . five year . nearly six . " 

 " do she die in the house ? " 

 " no , sir . after she would leave . Sir Henry ask I to go back . but I be very comfortable at the Laundry then . so I do not   go . I do not   believe much in chop and change . " 

 " quite . you know Miss Gracie ? " 

 " yes , sir . " 

 " she be live in the house ? " 

 " oh yes , sir . " 

 " an extraordinary young lady , be not   she ? " 

 " yes , sir , " Violet reply with imperturbable blandness ; but their eye somehow exchange a transient glance of implication - or Evelyn think so . 

 2 . 

 perhaps , he think , she should not have put any implication into her glance . on the other hand perhaps he himself should not have use the invite word ' extraordinary ' about Miss Gracie . the fact be , that when he like the person to whom he be talk , he have a tendency to speak too freely . he have often observe this in himself . he admit that Violet have take little or no advantage of his friendly social tone . no expansiveness in her short , guard answer to his inquisition ! discretion itself ! 

 he feel inclined to try to break down her discretion . not in order to get at secret , though he divine that there be secret , but simply for the pleasure of break down her discretion . a slight , impish wantonness in he . he check it . the disclosure about Miss Powler 's professional sojourn at Sir Henry 's house be very agreeable to he . it would help he in his handling of Mrs. O'Riordan . in his mind he instantly compose the tale which he would relate to Mrs. O'Riordan . she could never withstand its allurement . large house . House of a millionaire . staff of forty . everything manage by Violet , who have take control at a moment 's notice , and have give entire satisfaction . and have say nothing about her success to anyone . he would say nothing about the sister give counsel in the background . or he would only casually allude to the sister . he could make an irresistible story , and the more irresistible because of his now - strengthen conviction that Violet be a real ' find , ' and would soon prove herself a pearl among Palace floor - housekeeper . strange glance she have give he in accept his suggestion that Miss Gracie be an extraordinary young lady ! 

 he rise , gaily . yes , she have high heel . excellent . no need to say anything about the heel . and she have her own smartness . she be smart in her world ; she evidently give attention to her clothe . and if she could be smart in her world , why not in the world of the Palace ? she would be capable of anything . later , he would be able gently to tease the beloved Mrs. O'Riordan : " my discovery , Miss Powler ! not your , mother . mine ! " 

 Miss Powler go towards the door . her hand be on the knob . 

 " you know , " he say , on an impulse , " there would be one thing , rather important , if you do not   mind my mention it - " 

 " please . " 

 " if you do come here - powder and rouge . " he wave a hand . the lightness of his tone be mean to soothe she 

 she flush ever so little . he have get under her guard at last . the flush amuse and please he . she have no caprice , no mood , no nerve . yet the flush ! 

 she be equally different from the girl that Mrs. O'Riordan have once be , and from Gracie Savott . these two have feminine charm . they be design by heaven to tantalise and puzzle a man , to keep he for ever and ever alert in self - defence , alert against attack . whereas Miss Powler , sedate , cheerful , kindly , tactful , equable , serious , reserved ... but what be feminine charm ? it might have a wide definition than he have hitherto imagine . he have read somewhere that every woman without exception have charm . he like Miss Powler 's muscular shoulder , and the way she hold they ; and her sturdy ankle . " and that gracie girl like my shoulder , " he think . consider as an enigma , Miss Powler , with her impregnable reserve , be at least on a level with the Gracie girl . nothing on earth so interesting as the reaction of sex on sex . it be as if Gracie have pull a veil from his eye so that he be perceive the interestingness of all woman , for the first time . Revelation . 

 " yes , of course , sir , " say Miss Powler . " to tell the truth , I would think of that . it would be part of the business . " 

 " they would put you up to all that here . " 

 " yes , sir . if necessary . but I know something about make - up . " 

 " oh ? " Evelyn be surprised . 

 " well , sir . you see . our amateur dramatic society . I have   have to make up plenty of girl . they love it . and I have   have to make up myself too . " the flush disappear . 

 " of course ! " Evelyn exclaim . " I be forget that . " and indeed he have totally forget it . she have catch he out there . he feel humble . she might well know a bit more about make - up than any of the housekeeper . 

 she open the door . 

 " it would hardly do at the Laundry , " she say . " I should not   like it there . not but what a lot of the laundry - maid themselves do make up . but here I might like it . " 

 she smile . for one second she be a girl at large , not a laundry staff - manageress seek to improve her position . Evelyn do not shake hand with she . why not ? he ask himself . well , there be an etiquette in these ceremonial . a Director do not shake hand with a floor - housekeeper . he stand still near the closed door , think . 

 content 
 chapter 20 

 the BOARD 

 the Imperial Palace have a number of private room in the neighbourhood of the restaurant , use chiefly for lunch , dinner and supper , and each name after an english or british sovereign . at twenty minute past two on the day of Evelyn 's interview with Miss Powler , six man sit smoking in the Queen Elizabeth room round a table at which they have lunch - after a Board meeting . 

 at one end of the table be the West end celebrity and wit , old Dennis Dover ; at the other Evelyn . at the side be two youngish , exceedingly well - groom man , a much old man , and a middle - aged man . the last be Mr. Levinsohn , unmistakably a Jew , solicitor to the Imperial Palace Hotel Company Limited , and senior partner in the great ' company ' firm of Levinsohn and Levinsohn . the other three be Messrs. Lingmell   old , and Dacker and Smiss   the youngish dandiacal pair . except for Mr. Levinsohn , the company consist of director of the Imperial Palace Hotel Company Limited . the celebrate Dennis Dover be chairman of the Board , Evelyn be vice - chairman and managing - director of the Company . Youngish Dacker in addition to be on the Board work daily in the Company 's office as Evelyn 's representative and buffer . Youngish Smiss also work daily in the Company 's office , his special charge be the business side of the Wey Hotel and the Works Department in Craven Street off Northumberland Avenue .   " outpost in the enemy country ! " Mr. Dover have once call the Works Department .   Mr. Lingmell do little but attend Board meeting . he be a director because he have always be a director . twenty - five year early he have retire from hard labour with a sufficient fortune gain in the wholesale brandy trade , and he still have the facial characteristic which one would conventionally expect to find in a man who have deal on a vast scale in brandy because he like it . 

 as for Dennis Dover , now past seventy , of huge frame , with a large pallid face , his renown in the West end be due partly to his historic connection with the management of grand opera , partly from his dry and not unkind wit , and partly from his peculiar voice : which be not a voice but only about one - tenth of a voice ; it issue from a permanently damage throat through his fine lip in a hoarse thin murmur . stranger think that he be suffer from a bad cold , and that his voice would become normal in a day or two . it have not be normal for several decade . Youngish Dacker , when he first join the Palace Board and appear somewhat nervously at his first Board meeting , have happen to have a very sore throat . " Morning , Dacker . fine December fog to - day , eh ? " Dover have greet he in the hoarse thin murmur . and dandiacal Dacker have reply in a hoarse thin murmur unavoidably just like Dover 's : " good morning , Mr. Dover . yes , a fine December fog . " Mr. Dover , whose infirmity no one have ever dare to ridicule to his face , have lean forward to Dacker and murmur with a grim smile : " young man , man have be shoot at dawn for less than that . " 

 Glancing at his watch and at Evelyn , Mr. Dover benevolently and encouragingly thus address Mr. Dacker and Mr. Smiss : 

 " now , you lily - livere , have some brandy , for your hour be at hand . " 

 at half - past two , in the large banqueting - room , the Board have to confront its judge , the shareholder , at the Annual General Meeting , which meeting be to be follow on this occasion by a Special General Meeting . the youngish man smile as easily as they could ; for indeed they have betray apprehension concern the special meeting , at which be to be propose a resolution limit the vote power of shareholder everybody at the table feel apprehensive about the fate of that resolution , but Mr. Dacker and Mr. Smiss alone have fail to conceal anxiety . the fate of the resolution might well involve the fate of the Imperial Palace Hotel itself . 

 " obey your venerable chairman , gentleman , " murmur Dennis Dover , and raise his mighty bulk and fill the glass of Messrs. Dacker and Smiss with Waterloo brandy   which Mr. Lingmell say be so old as to be indistinguishable from water . " your alarm do you credit , see that you will not   have to speechify at the meeting and that you hold no share worth mention , and that if the Palace go to pot the ancient prestige of the Palace will set forty hotel fight for your service ... to the Resolution ! to the resolution ! " 

 the toast be drunk , but by Evelyn and Mr. Levinsohn in Malvern water ; and the Chairman descend cautiously back into his chair . 

 Mr. Dover have a good right to the position he hold in the Company . not merely be he the large shareholder . his father , age fifty odd when Dennis be beget in the hotel itself , have build the original Palace . he have first call it the Royal Palace , because of its proximity to Buckingham Palace ; but in 1876 , when Disraeli make Queen Victoria Empress of India , Mr. Dover have loyally change ' Royal ' to ' Imperial . ' the name Palace have be copy all over the world . Dennis always maintain that the french use of the word palace as a generic term for large luxury hotel have derive from the reputation of the original Palace for luxury , and be not due to the prevalence of imitative Palace Hotels throughout Europe . 

 in the late ' fifty the Palace luxury have make it the wonder of the earth . it be then repute to have a bathroom on every floor ; and some people stay in it in order to see what a bathroom be really like . then a Crown Prince stay in it , then a monarch , and Queen Victoria would recommend it to some of her foreign distant cousin . soon the Palace have establish two royal suite . soon , despite the fact that every hotel - expert in London have condemn it as be too impossibly big , it become too small , and the eld Dover have enlarge it . More than once it have be enlarge , alter , replanne , reconstruct ; but the Queen Anne character of its charming façade have always be preserve . the last and great and most ruthless of the enlarger be Evelyn . when Evelyn have finish - but he have never finish - all that have survive of the original Palace be the Queen Anne character of the façade ; not the façade , only the character . 

 2 . 

 as a child Dennis Dover have live under the roof of the Palace , in its most majestic day . the elder Dover have amass incalculable money under that roof . but he have make a common mistake . he have forget that the earth revolve . he have assume that luxury could go no far than his luxury have go . when he die , rich , though not as rich as in the grand day , the Imperial Palace , with all its unique prestige , be begin to be a back number . trustee under the will of the founder have do no well than trustee usually do . then Dennis Dover have take command , and the public have be invite to buy the Imperial Palace . the public , ingenuous as ever , and blind by the glitter of prestige , have buy . the Palace recover a little , lose ground a little , recover a little , pay a dividend , pass its dividend , and be on the very edge of be transmogrify into a block of superlative flat , when Dennis Dover have chance to sojourn at the Wey Hotel and to find Evelyn , then in his thirty . 

 in ten year Evelyn , start as an invalided A.S.C. officer towards the end of the war , and spend three - quarter of a million borrow in instalment with much difficulty on debenture , have , after the formation of a new company , make the Palace for the second time in its career the wonder of the wide world . twice in its career the prestige of the Palace have thus shoot up like a rocket ; but Evelyn have no intention that it should ever fall like a rocket . 

 such , perhaps too briefly state , be the history of the Imperial Palace Hotel , whose royal suite , owe to a dearth of royalty , be now occupy by cinema - king , president of republic and similar highness . 

 as the six pass in irregular formation through corridor and downstair towards the large banqueting - room   call the Imperial - the small banqueting - room be call the Royal   Dennis Dover step between Dacker and Smiss , and put a hand paternally on the near shoulder of each of they , and look down from his superior height at their upturned young face , squeakily murmur : 

 " you do not   mind I refer to the colour of your liver , boy ? Sign of affection . " 

 they smile . they know their own worth ; and they hop that the Chairman know it and know also that their interest in the Palace be fanatical , and that they be intensely proud of have be elevate to the Board at a cost to themselves of only a hundred qualifying share each . what they do not know be that father Dennis Dover love they the more for their apprehensiveness concern the Resolution . 

 the Chairman himself be apprehensive , but he be old enough to be a fatalist ; and the risk attend a resolution to be propose at a meeting of a limited liability company could arouse no emotion in one who would soon be cross the supreme frontier . Old Lingmell be equally unmoved , but not for the same reason as father Dennis . he never spend time in think about the supreme frontier . his investment be secure , and the earth and the fruit thereof be good enough for he . Mr. Levinsohn feel no emotion either ; for he the matter be strictly professional , one among a hundred such matter . as for Evelyn , he feel a certain anxiety ; but he be build on a rock , the rock of his creative , organise brain , which the foolishness of no shareholder could damage , which be more valuable than any investment , and which have a world - market wait to compete for it . 

 content 
 chapter 21 

 shareholder 

 the six man sit in a row behind a long green - top table at one side of the square - shape Royal banqueting - hall ; and age Mr. John Crump , secretary of the Imperial Palace Hotel Company and a member of Evelyn 's directorial staff , sit at one end of the table , with minute - book , balance - sheet , the register of shareholder , and - most important of all - a pile of proxy , under his hand . the Chairman and Evelyn be in the middle of the six , who have no document beyond a sheet or two of rough note or blank paper . Evelyn discourage the exhibition of document in business , and father Dennis , with whom his understanding be always sympathetically perfect , regard document as a symptom of a fussy mind . 

 in front be the shareholder , two or three hundred of they , include a few woman , range in row on the brilliant parti - colour and gild banquet chair , and each hold a copy of the white annual report and account . 

 those chair , with the rich pendant chandelier , be the sole reminder of the original purpose of the spacious chamber . at night , and sometimes at the lunch hour , table be join together in length , in the shape of an e , or a rake , or a greek letter , or a horse - shoe ; they be white , then , cover with china , plate , cutlery and glass , flower - deck , gleaming , brilliantly convivial ; and the people sit round they , ceremonially clothe , grow more and more jolly under the influence of the expensive succulence provide by Maître Planquet , until by the time the speech have begin and the cohort of waiter , marshal by Amadeo Ruffo the banqueting - manager , have vanish away through the service - door , every banqueter have become the most lovable and righteous person of his or her sex , in every breast all food and drink have be transform by a magical change into the milk of human kindness , and the world have develop into the good of all possible world : with the final result that the attendant in the cloak - room receive tip far exceed the ordinary . 

 now , the scene be dramatically different . the row of shareholder , some stylish some dowdy , some harsh some gentle , some sagacious some silly , some experience some ingenuous , some greedy some easily satisfied , some avaricious some generous , be all absorb in the great affair of get money - the money which pay for banquet . a nondescript , unpicturesque , and infestive lot , think Evelyn , who know a number of they by sight and a few by name . some face be obviously new , and Evelyn look at these with suspicion . 

 without rise , father Dennis say in his hardly audible hoarse murmur : 

 " the secretary will kindly read the notice convene the meeting . " 

 and Mr. John Crump , nervous as always on august occasion , get up and read the notice in a voice render loud and defiant by his nervousness . 

 then three unpunctual shareholder creep in on guilty tiptoe , and sit down , and chair scrap on the parquet . 

 then father Dennis cumbrously rise . 

 " lady and gentleman , " he begin in his murmurous squeak . 

 " we be off ! " think Evelyn , humorously agog . 

 yes , they be off , and there would be no surcease until the Resolution be carry or lose by the vote at the special meeting . 

 Father Dennis never waste word on shareholder , partly on account of his throat , and partly because he delight to starve they of word - at the end of a good year - and also to shock they by his casual brevity . 

 he say , while some shareholder put hand to ear : 

 " figure speak louder than loud - speaker . I be sure that you have all study our figure with that impartial conscientiousness which distinguish all good shareholder . I need not therefore weary you with information of which you be already in full possession . I will merely remark , as much for my own satisfaction as for your , that last year be a record year in the Company 's history , that our net trading profit after deduct fix dividend on preference share , debenture interest and sinking - fund charge , be equivalent to twenty and a half per cent . on our ordinary capital , and that we propose to declare a final dividend make fourteen per cent . per annum , for the year , instead of last year 's eleven per cent . , and incidentally I will point out that we be allot L75,000 to our reserve fund , instead of last year 's L60,000 . I move the adoption of the account and the payment of the dividend as recommend , and I call upon Mr. Evelyn Orcham , our manage director and orator , who will be less summary than myself , to second the motion . " with that he subside into his chair , and glance sardonically around as if to say : " you can put that in your pipe and smoke it ; and go to hell . " 

 no applause greet the statement of good tiding . the shareholder have be in possession of the tiding for day . at a banquet they would have loudly applaud a silly and insincere speech which be not worth twopence to their pocket . but to - day their stomach have not be warm . and they be shareholder - who take as a right all they can get and whose high praise be forbearance from criticism . 

 Evelyn rise . he be not an orator , and speechify make he nervous . but he always know just what he want to say and he would say it plainly , if too slowly . now and then he would employ an unusual adjective which tickle he . the sheet of note which he hold in his hand be merely something to hold . he be not positively inimical to shareholder , for they be necessary to his life - work . but he disdain they as a greedy , grasping and soulless crew whose head be swell by an utterly false notion of their own moral importance . nevertheless he use a tone different from the Chairman 's . the Chairman be a London figure , and could carry off any tone ; and there be a pacify glint in the Chairman 's old eye . Evelyn love the Chairman 's brief pronouncement , which father Dennis call his ' turn . ' but part of Evelyn 's job as a hotel - manager be to flat shareholder . bad might come again , and then shareholder who have be flatter would be easy to handle than shareholder who be treat year after year with cynical curtness . therefore Evelyn flatter , but with a hidden private cynicism which even exceed the Chairman 's . 

 2 . 

 " lady and gentleman , " he begin . " your hotel " - and his thought be " your hotel ? good God ! they be not   your hotel . you could not   have start they . you could not   run they . you do not   understand they . you have   no idea what wonderful , romantic thing they be . you know nothing about they , except a few arithmetical symbol which I choose to offer you and which be beyond your comprehension . you do not   buy share because you be interested in hotel ; only because you believe that you could squeeze a bit of money out of they . whereas ' your ' hotel be my creation . I live for they . I have a passion for they . without I they would be hotel , common hotel , not the hotel . if I leave they , as I could , your precious dividend would diminish and might disappear . ' your ' hotel be mine , and if you deny this I could prove it to you quick enough . ignoramus ! be any one of you aware , for instance , that at this moment I be wonder how the devil I can entice my customer in my restaurant and my grill - room to consume more than a dozen and a half champagne per hundred cover ? do any one of you guess that in my opinion an average of one - sixth of a bottle of champagne per person dining or lunching be a shockingly low average - especially consider the quality of my champagne ? not one of you ! barbarian ! benighted savage ! Unworthy of respect ! ' your ' hotel ! " 

 in the midst of these lightning reflection he go on aloud to the audience : 

 " your hotel , thank entirely to the willing and generous co - operation which the Board have receive from you in support we in a policy of large annual expenditure in order to keep your establishment abreast or in front of the time " -   " this sentence be get out of hand , " he think . " I would well kill it . "   - " your hotel , I say , have pass through an extremely difficult year not without credit . I will first of all refer to the difficulty . " 

 and he do refer to the difficulty : the poorness of the previous London season , the obstinately high price of commodity ; the dearth of good service ; the austerity of customer ; the rapacity of customer , who once ask only for food and drink at meal , then demand music , then demand dancing - floor , and now be demand cabaret ; the unwillingness of Americans to come to Europe in the anticipated number ; the monstrous and crush absurdity of the licensing law ; the specious attraction of continental resort ; the curse of the motor - car , which have pretty well strangle week - end business to death ; and forty other difficulty ... until you might have be excuse for wonder why the Imperial Palace Hotel have not be force into so - call ' voluntary ' liquidation . the bright side of the enterprise he gloss over . the arithmetical symbol he touch upon lightly , use the plea that they be self - explanatory to shareholder so intelligent as the shareholder of the Imperial Palace Hotel Company Limited . 

 " in conclusion , " say he , " I should like to refer to one point . your hotel , and particularly the Imperial Palace , have be call dear - in their charge . I resent the word , and I think that you will resent it . they be expensive ; but dear they be not . we try to give , and I claim that we do give , well value for money than any other hotel in this country . and the proof that the public share this opinion lie in the undoubted fact that the public be patronise your hotel more and more . the public can not be deceive for long . many hotel have attempt to deceive it , and they have fail to do so . we - I mean everybody present when I say ' we ' - have not attempt to deceive it . I be sure that you , the shareholder , would never agree to a policy of pretend to the public that your hotel be what they be not . we maintain that they be the most luxurious and efficient in the world , and that their charge be as low as be consistent with the desire for perfection which animate we all . lady and gentleman , I thank you for the patience with which you have listen to my halting remark - our ironic Chairman ought not to have dub I ' orator ' - and I have great pleasure in second the motion . " 

 one or two shareholder clap , but , find themselves unsupported , cease abruptly . 

 2 . 

 " good old platitude ! " think Evelyn , as he sit down , relieve at have safely accomplish his speech , and he surreptitiously wink at smile father Dennis . the meeting be finish , save for question and formality . " and these people in front will go home feeling that they have   do thing important ! " think Evelyn . 

 the Chairman ask drily : 

 " any question , lady and gentleman ? " 

 a mature lady rise and with a self - possession unusual and perhaps indecorous in a shareholder of her sex ask why in the Profit and Loss account all payment - wage , salary , washing , licence , advertising , band , fee , livery , insurance , stationery , electric light , repair , renewal , etc . , etc . , etc . , etc . - be lump together in one huge item . to which the Chairman respond that such be the universal custom in Profit and Loss account of limited company . 

 the lady 's question be a very justifiable one ; it jab a hole in the beautiful convention which regulate the pacific union between shareholder and Board . many shareholder would have like further illumination of the subject . some know the right answer . but as the lady wear an eyeglass , a starched white collar and a sailor' - knot tie , she get no help ; the subject be not far illuminate , and feminine curiosity , which have thus flout the sacred immemorial custom of company practice , go unsatisfied . 

 then a gentleman apologetically enquire whether Atlantic telephone have have any ' repercussion ' upon the business of the hotel . the Chairman answer that so far as he know the Atlantic telephone have have no ' repercussion ' - he mischievously give the faint emphasis to the splendid word - but that the manage director might have something to say . Evelyn say that the atlantic telephone have have no repercussion , but that the shareholder might be interested to learn that in the past year visitor at the Imperial Palace have spend L6,123 in use the Atlantic telephone ; that be appreciably more than L100 a week . 

 there be no other question from shareholder . what question indeed could shareholder ask , after a record year , a fourteen per cent . dividend , and an allocation of L75,000 to reserve ? the resolution be carry unanimously . two director who have to retire be re - elect unanimously . the auditor be reappointe unanimously . and what the official report describe next day as a ' hearty ' vote of thank to chairman , director and staff be carry unanimously . Evelyn 's heart lighten , prematurely - a mechanical repercussion . it grow heavy again as the Chairman rise and say : 

 " the proceeding of the Ordinary General Meeting be now terminate , the Secretary will kindly read the notice convene the Special General Meeting . " 

 " now we really be off ! " think Evelyn . 

 content 
 chapter 22 

 the resolution 

 in call upon Evelyn to move the resolution which be the sole reason for the Special General Meeting , father Dennis hoarsely and squeakily murmur : 

 " the meeting will I hope pardon I if I refer to a purely personal matter . I be suffer to - day from rather serious throat - trouble , and my medical adviser , in whom I have as much confidence as a sane man can have in a medical adviser insist that I should make only one speech - and that as short as possible , " he add with a roguish old smile . 

 titter of laughter , which be , however , sympathetic . every year the Chairman thus mention his throat , as though the malady have but quite recently supervene . 

 Evelyn do not wholly regret the sad state of the Chairman 's throat , because in practice it raise himself from second - fiddle to first - fiddle at the annual gathering . also the nervousness which have beset he in his speech at the Ordinary Meeting be now completely dissipate in exciting emotion . let none imagine that the moving of a Resolution at a Special General Meeting of the shareholder of a limited liability company can not be emotional . liability may be limit by Act of Parliament , but not emotion - neither drama . 

 the shareholder be fully acquaint with the term of the startling Resolution , but Evelyn begin by read it in tone which almost justify the Chairman 's description of he as an orator . the Resolution provide that instead of have one vote per share , each shareholder should have only one vote per five share . and far that no shareholder , no matter how large his holding of share , should have a total of more than ten vote . he point out that obviously the Resolution give an advantage to the small shareholder , since a holder of fifty share would wield the same voting power as a holder of fifty thousand share . and he point out that , as the Chairman of the Board happen to be the large shareholder in the Company , the Board could not be accuse of an attempt to favour its own individual interest at the expense of any other shareholder . 

 then he speak very vaguely of the possibility of foreign interference in the destiny of the Company . he make no accusation . oh no ! he speak of a mere possibility - but a possibility against which , if the shareholder in their wisdom agree , it might be advisable to protect the Company . be the shareholder prepare to allow the control of a british company to pass out of british hand ? if so , well and good . if not , the Resolution be the sure safeguard , the only real safeguard , against such a contingency - a contingency which , he venture to think , be of a most sinister nature . the shareholder , who be doubtless thoroughly acquainted with all the phenomenon of industry and finance , have of course notice in past month that foreign interest have be oust british interest in various very important british undertaking . he would not assert that any scheme be definitely afoot for get control of the Imperial Palace Hotel Company . he would be content to say that in the last couple of year , and especially in the last few month , block of share have change hand , and transfer have be register , in a manner calculate to arouse the suspicion , but no more than the suspicion , of a watchful Board . the Board have desire the attendance of their good friend Mr. Levinsohn , who have act with signal success for many year as solicitor to the Company . he , the speaker , could not pretend to Mr. Levinsohn 's unique authority in Company affair , and Mr. Levinsohn would give the shareholder his valuable view on the subject before they . confess that his own feeling as to the proper course to be follow for the welfare of the Company be both clear and deep , and then formally move the Resolution , Evelyn sit down . 

 certainly he have show some emotion , some sense of the drama of the occasion . but his clear and deep feeling , though he might not have admit the fact even to himself , be due less to a regard for the welfare of the Imperial Palace Hotel Company than to the risk of his life - work and his career be imperille by the substitution of any other Board for the Board which while nominally his master be really his tool . 

 Evelyn 's heart knock against his waistcoat , but its beat be strong and regular . he be nervous again ; his glance flit nervously about the banqueting chamber , in which the sobriety of the green - top table contrast so strangely with the glory of the chandelier , the brightness of the decorate wall and the gaiety of the chair . 

 Ruffo peep cautiously in through the double service - door and the door slowly and silently shut he out of sight 

 Father Dennis 's face have an expression of bland , negligent cynicism . Lingmell 's bloated , wise feature be calm and absorb in his everlasting dream of fleshly satisfaction . the two old man be still incapable of excitement . the two young director be employ in subdue their fever into an imitation of tranquillity . Evelyn understand they , but he doubt whether they understand he . he be too far above they in attainment and position to be fully understand by they . they might work hard ; they might display a heroical loyalty ; but never could they reach his height , for they have not his quality . he feel sorry for they ; for either their ambition be humble or their ambition would be disappoint . the future king of the world of hotel be not on the Imperial Palace Board ; perhaps he be hide somewhere in the upper staff . 

 the shareholder , stiff on their festive chair , be grim , unresponsive , waiting , flinty - soule . 

 2 . 

 then Mr. Levinsohn stand on his foot . he be impassive , absolutely at ease . noticeably , unmistakably a Jew , he reek as little of anti - Semitism as of a few drop of rain . he be above race . he have be elect to the Carlton Club . he know half the secret of the City . the demand for his counsel exceed the supply . the low fee charge by his firm for permit the appearance of its august name on a company prospectus be seven hundred and fifty guineas . the universal City opinion be that he have a subtler and profounder comprehension of the mentality of shareholder than any other man in England . he survey the body of Imperial Palace shareholder as an alienist might survey a ward of lunatic in an asylum ; his handsome , hard , semi - oriental face be as mysterious as the placid surface of a bottomless ocean . 

 Mr. Levinsohn say : 

 " lady and gentleman , I shall not detain you long . need I say that I share the sentiment express by your vice - chairman . at the same time I think that - patriot as he be , and a man of imagination , something of the artist in he , no one can be the great organiser Mr. Orcham be without have a large amount of imagination - he have perhaps not quite sufficiently stress the strictly practical business side of this proposal . " 

 Mr. Levinsohn pause , rub his blue chin . the attention of the shareholder have be seize instantly . they be wonder what would come next . what ! the Company 's solicitor criticise the vice - chairman ! but nothing matter , not even that ; for they , the shareholder , be judge and jury ; and naught but horse - sense could sway they ; and from their verdict there could be no appeal . Evelyn be slightly puzzle ; but he say to himself that Mr. Levinsohn be anyhow the first man who publicly at a company meeting have show a real understanding of he . curious , how this middle - aged Jew , speak in a gentle conversational tone , as careless about the form of his sentence as one individual to other in a lounge , could without any apparent effort or art , put a spell upon those tough shareholder ! 

 have placate his chin , Mr. Levinsohn proceed : 

 " we be all man and woman of business here , and we be all patriot , and anxious if possible and fair to ourselves to keep british commercial enterprise in british hand . but patriotism be a burden , and in common justice the burden ought to be equally share among the citizen . your share stand on the Stock Exchange round about thirty - five shilling - in my opinion decidedly below their real value . suppose a group of foreign interest - say American , purely as an illustration - come along and offer you fifty - five shilling a share , as might well happen . patriotism might urge you to refuse , but in refuse you would be throw away something like two and a half million pound , you , a comparatively small body of citizen . the loss in actual cash would not be share equally by the electorate , it would fall exclusively on you . would this be fair ? it would not , and I should be rather surprised if your vice - chairman do not say the same . the suggestion would be monstrous . no reasonable person could make such a demand on you . let we look fact in the face . you would accept the offer , and you would be right . "   murmur of assent from the gilt chair .   " and another thing . true , the magnificent Imperial Palace and Wey hotel would be lose to british control . but the wealth of Great Britain would have be increase by two and a half million pound and you would have at your absolute disposal the total purchase money , between six and seven million pound , for reinvestment in british industry and commerce under british control . it seem to I clear that if the - purely hypothetical - offer be actually make , the true patriotism and the most far - see business sagacity would accept the offer . your company might cease to exist , but it be necessary to take a broad view , and in the broad view british industry and commerce as a whole would gain a considerable advantage . bad business be never good patriotism . " 

 the first genuine applause of the meeting greet this aphorism . 

 " I have nearly finish , " Mr. Levinsohn continue . " but not quite . I have speak of an offer , purely hypothetical as I say . can an offer so handsome ever materialise ? it never could materialise if the prospective buyer of your undertaking first obtain control of the Imperial Palace Company by quietly get hold of a majority of the share , which as thing stand would mean a majority vote at a General Meeting . if by this mean any prospective buyer first obtain control they would be seller as well as buyer , and they would sell to themselves at any price they choose to name , and those of you who have keep your share would find yourself between the upper and nether millstone . you would get leave . the Resolution before the meeting will , if you pass it , prevent this quite possible ramp . for these reason , if you ask my advice - not otherwise - I should advise you to vote for the Resolution . let I say that I be entirely disinterested . I hold no share in your company , or in any of the many company which do I the honour to employ my professional service . " 

 Mr. Levinsohn , have finish in the same conversational tone as he have use at the start , quietly sit down . 

 no applause . a number of shareholder be whisper to each other in small group . 

 " talk about an artist ! " think Evelyn . " this fellow be a finished artist . I can manage a hotel . but this fellow have show I that I do not   know the first thing about handle shareholder . make a good effect first by pretend to disagree with I . then simply roll they all up . damned clever of he not to tell the Board beforehand exactly what line he be go to take ! " he would have like warmly to shake Mr. Levinsohn 's hand , which he feel sure be always quite cold . 

 Mr. Smiss timidly second the Resolution . 

 " any observation ? " ask father Dennis quietly . " the Board will be glad to have the view of shareholder , and to answer any question . " 

 3 . 

 a pause . then a little , scrubby man rise from the front row and , look round at his fellow shareholder behind he , say ina rasp voice : 

 " with great respect for the wisdom of the Board , and give full weight to the opinion which have be so ably express by the Vice - chairman and my friend the Company 's solicitor , I venture to differ from they as to the advisability of pass this most drastic and even revolutionary Resolution . I may say that I be not without experience in the management of public company , as my friend Mr. Levinsohn know . my experience have teach I that ownership ought never to be divorce from control - " 

 at this point father Dennis push a scribble note along the table to Mr. Levinsohn . " who be your friend ? how many share do he hold ? D.D. " Mr. Levinsohn write on the paper and push it along to Mr. Crump , the secretary . in a moment father Dennis have the reply : " Dickingham , a solicitor . probably one of Savott 's nominee and speak for all of they , " in Levinsohn 's handwriting ; and at the bottom , in Mr. Crump 's : " 1,500 . buy six month ago . " 

 Dickingham be continue : " this Resolution , if carry , would obviously divorce ownership from control . " he turn again to the people behind he : " if you pass the resolution , you will be entirely in the hand of the Board . large shareholder will have no power . and it be well know that the average small shareholder always support his Board . I make no reflection upon the small shareholder . I be one myself , and I make no doubt that there be many here . as a rule the small shareholder be right to support his Board . but the result will be the same , whatever his motif : an autocracy of the Board , an autocracy which will last as long as the Board choose it shall last . if a similar Resolution to this could be translate into politic - which happily for our national welfare it can not - and put before the House of Commons as a measure of electoral reform , it would be laugh out of the House by every political party . in fact no political party would dare to introduce such a measure , be such a measure conceivable . I admit that it be not . the principle which have make the empire what it be be the principle of control go hand in hand with ownership . the Resolution would abolish control by ownership . " 

 the speaker amplify his argument at length , and end : " there be a proverb : ' where your treasure be , there be your heart also . ' I beg you , lady and gentleman , to think of all that that wisdom mean . I feel that at this moment the fortune of the Imperial Palace Hotel Company be tremble in the balance . " 

 Mr. Dickingham be applaud in several part of the room . then three other man rise in succession , and , with much less suavity of phrasing than Mr. Dickingham , speak against the Resolution . then silence . 

 Father Dennis lift himself , and hoarsely squeak : 

 " I have the pleasure to put the Resolution . those in favour - " many band be raise . " the Resolution appear to be carry . but of course , if any of you would prefer a poll to be take - " 

 " Poll ! Poll ! Poll ! " cry a number of voice , fiercely , savagely . " Poll ! Poll ! " 

 Mr. Crump begin to finger the pile of proxy by which some dozen or score of absent shareholder have delegate their vote power to the Board . 

 Mr. Dickingham be on his foot : 

 " Mr. Chairman , if you will permit I to suggest it , I should like to examine the proxy - of course in collaboration with my friend the Company 's solicitor . " 

 " I have not the small objection , " squeak father Dennis magnanimously . 

 the battle be now join . 

 Evelyn draw symmetrical pattern on a piece of paper , continually enlarge they and make they more elaborate and shade they . his absurd heart be still more insistently beat . Mr. Dickingham have say truth : the fortune of the Imperial Palace Hotel Company be indeed tremble in the balance . perhaps also Evelyn 's own fortune . the autocrat of a big merger of hotel might or might not invite he to manage the whole lot . but the Palace be the Palace , unique . anyhow he would not accept a subordinate position , as manager of one hotel , not even be that hotel the Imperial Palace itself . either he would be autocrat or he would be nothing - he would start life again . he could not bear to look at the group of the two 1awyer and the secretary , examine the proxy , compare they with the share - register . he could not judge the total strength of the opposition . nor could anybody else on the Board or off it . 

 presently he hear father Dennis say : " shareholder now kindly substantiate their claim to vote . " 

 shareholder approach the table , some diffidently , some defiantly . the assembly be in disorder . noise of voice , explanatory and argumentative . Mr. Crump have rather more than he could do , but the two lawyer in their professional calm and patience help he both practically and morally . one by one the shareholder return to their seat . then Mr. Dickingham sit down , his face illegible . 

 Mr. Crump rise and ceremoniously deliver a paper to the Chairman , who show it to Evelyn and lift himself again : 

 " the Resolution be carry , by a majority of 22,111 vote , " he squeak , and then add with characteristic gratuitousnaughtiness : " ownership have exercise control . " 

 " for the last time , " shout Mr. Dickingham in his rasp tone , spring up . 

 " an improper observation , " say the Chairman , smile . 

 " I be sorry you should think so , sir , " say Mr. Dickingham , pale and furious . " and I will point out to those shareholder who do not know it that you close the Transfer book a month ago , and I understand will keep they close until after the confirmatory meeting a fortnight hence . you have thus prevent new genuine holder of share from vote at this meeting or the next . if it have not be for this piece of sharp practice , probably illegal , your Resolution would have be lose to - day , and well you know it ! " 

 some uproar . Father Dennis reply with extraordinary mildness : 

 " the Board follow a perfectly normal procedure in close the Transfer book . they act within their right . and they certainly do their duty . this gentleman " - he indicate Mr. Dickingham to the other shareholder - " be a lawyer . he be therefore aware that this be not the proper place to raise a legal question . there be the Law Courts . may I remind you , lady and gentleman , of the statutory Special General Meeting a fortnight hence for the purpose of formally confirm the resolution which you have be good enough to pass to - day . the proceeding be now terminate . " 

 4 . 

 before the room have begin to empty , Mr. Levinsohn come up to the Chairman . 

 " good afternoon , Dover , " he say briefly and evenly . " I have another meeting at four o'clock . " he shake hand with father Dennis and with Evelyn , and leave , hurry . 

 everybody leave . shareholder could be hear in lively but hush conversation beyond the open door at the end of the banqueting - room . Evelyn have glimpse of they take their hat and coat at the special vestiaire outside . Lingmell depart , with one nod which serve for both father Dennis and Evelyn , the thought in his mind be that he have do his duty by the Imperial Palace Hotel Company and be free for a time to devote himself completely to himself . Dacker and Smiss go off at speed , conscientiously to resume at once the round of their important daily work . Mr. Crump gather together his paraphernalia and , pile it all on the large Register , carry the whole away like a laden tea - tray . Ruffo enter through the service - door , anxiety on his face . he be responsible for the arrangement of the room for a banquet that evening , and want the place to himself and his waiting minion at the early possible moment . nevertheless , see Evelyn and father Dennis still together , he disappear yet again . Evelyn , however , have notice he and his impatience . Father Dennis and Evelyn have sit side by side without speech . Evelyn slowly tear up his patterned paper into small and small piece . 

 " rather a lark ! " hoarsely murmur Dennis Dover , with a grim , benevolent humorous smile at Evelyn . 

 " what ? " 

 " Savott wander about the hotel while all this have be go on . eh ? " he splutter laughter and touch Evelyn on the arm . 

 ' he know by this time , " say Evelyn . 

 " you may bet your shirt he do ! " say the old man , give another shake laugh . 

 Evelyn smile . he reflect that he have be wrong about old Dennis . Old Dennis be not old . and he be not always cynical in his cheerfulness . there be still a free , impulsive , warm youth in that body so aged , so cumbrous , so unwieldy , and so dilapidated . his bleared eye gaze into Evelyn 's eye with quick sympathy . what could it matter to old father Dennis whether or not the Imperial Palace change ownership ? nothing . Father Dennis have live beyond such trifle . but it matter tremendously to Evelyn , and father Dennis 's delight be for Evelyn . he be fondly attach to Evelyn . and Evelyn , realise this exquisite fact anew , feel tear spring to his eye . he want to be by himself - he be so happy , so overcome by the spirit of loving - kindness pour into he and permeate he from its magic source in the secret and divine place hide somewhere in father Dennis 's coarse mortal envelope . 

 they rise and leave the room together , and before they have reach the vestiaire , Ruffo and his shirt - sleeve corp have rushingly invade it , carry table . Evelyn put the old gentleman into his vast overcoat , walk down the step with he to the Queen Anne entrance , and help he into his car . 

 " we must have that Board meeting to - morrow to elect our chairman , " say Evelyn as he be close the door of the car . 

 " I remind Lingmell , " squeak father Dennis . " noon , be not   it ? but he will not   come . do not   matter . there will be a quorum without the old ruffian . " the car move . 

 Evelyn stroll to his private office . Dacker , his alter ego in the affair of the Palace , be stand at the big desk . 

 " I be just wait for you , sir . " 

 " want anything ? " 

 " no , sir . I think you might . " 

 an even increase devotion in his tone . his feature be all joyous exhilaration . 

 " no . nothing , " say Evelyn . " I be go to have my tea upstairs . I will be down at five again . " 

 " yes , sir . " Dacker 's smooth face say : " you be entitle to your retreat on this magnificent occasion . in your absence I shall watch over your interest . " 

 Evelyn go up in the lift to his home , and telephone : 

 " get hold of Oldham , will you , please , and ask he to bring I my tea here . the Darjeeling , tell he . thank . " 

 he drop into the easy chair that the Works Department of the Palace could devise and make . a masterpiece of comfort . he pick up the current number of the Economist , his favourite weekly , and begin to read it . a pretence ! he do not read it . he be too happy to read , or even to think . he yield his mind utterly to the sensation of happiness , say to himself that he have never be so happy , never at any previous moment of all his life . the vista of his life in the future stretch beautifully before he . this kind of happiness have no complication . nobody have the right to violate his retreat , man or woman . his monarchy be as absolute as that of a sultan - sultan without a purdah . 

 Oldham softly enter with the tea - tray , which he set on a table by Evelyn 's side . 

 " I have   bring you some hot ry - vita in case you should fancy it , sir . " 

 " thank , I shall . " 

 " thank you , sir . " 

 Oldham glance about the order room to see that its orderliness be perfect . it be perfect . then he glance at his master . happiness be on Oldham 's face too . proud happiness , not for himself , but for Evelyn . Oldham know . they all know . probably Oldham do not understand just what have occur . but he know that something supremely good for Evelyn have occur . and his devotion be exalt . Evelyn think : 

 " what have I do to win all this loyalty ? I do not   deserve it . " 

 content 
 chapter 23 

 SUSAN 

 the reason why Evelyn alter his rendezvous with Sir Henry Savott , Bart . , from a mere encounter in the directorial private office to a super - intimate dinner in his own living - room upstairs be simple . he have chance , on the morning after the meeting of shareholder , to sit side by side with Savott in the barber 's shop of the Imperial Palace . here , white - rob , in the most modern operating - theatre in London , ensconce in arm - chair   from Chicago   which by a turn of a handle could be transform into sofa or bed or stretcher fix at any desire angle from the perpendicular to the horizontal , cropped , lathered , shave , lave , anoint , trim , rub , combed and brush by forty instrument and decoction and oily perfume compound actuate or administer by electricity or caress human hand , the two man have simultaneously submit themselves to similar experience . 

 they have begin together ; they talk amiably from chair to chair ; they hear a fellow - patient enquiring from an operator how in an electric scalp - massage the current pass from the throb machine into the skull ; they exchange confidential smile at such naiveté ; they hear the candour of unwitte customer concern the characteristic of the Imperial Palace and the peculiarity of other visitor ; and they exchange more smile ; they overheard bit of extraordinary feminine conversation through partition which imperfectly separate the male department from the female , and out of discretion forbore to glance at one another ; they discover that neither of they have ever in his life accept the service of a manicure , and far that in nearly every detail they have the same tonsorial taste ; they chat freely about necktie , collar , handkerchief and evening waistcoat . and , finish simultaneously , they have stand up together , recreate , shin , and scented , and behold themselves in mirror and see that they be marvellously fine . the sole difference between they be that whereas Sir Henry pay cash Evelyn only scribble his initial on a check . 

 they leave the luxurious marble apartment , crony . there be nothing like a barber 's shop for produce rapid intimacy . yet they have not bar their soul . in the entrance - hall Sir Henry have praise the operator and the installation . and in return Evelyn have say : " I say , suppose we alter our date ? come and dine with I to - night in my secret castle upstairs , if you be free . we shall be more at home there , " and Sir Henry have say : " I be not free . but I will get free . eight - thirty ? would that suit you ? " 

 and Maître Planquet have receive special order ; the guardian of the wine - cellar too . and Miss Cass , learn the new arrangement , have of her own accord intimate that it would be a pleasure to instruct the florist about just a few choice flower . 

 thus the two meet again in Evelyn 's sitting - room at precisely eight - thirty . no uneasy wait about for woman . they be too intimate to feel the need for shake hand . 

 " very nice of you to have I escort up here , " say Sir Henry , who have find a white - gloved page - boy wait outside the door of his suite . 

 " well , " say Evelyn , " it be a little withdraw , my castle . have a glass of sherry ? " 

 " if I might have one of your ' soft ' cocktail , " Sir Henry suggest . 

 " Two , " Evelyn murmur to Oldham , who be in attendance 

 none but Oldham himself ever serve at a meal in that room . a waiter assist , but he be forbid by law from appear in front of the screen which hide the door . 

 " I see I be behind the time , " say Evelyn , observe that Sir Henry wear a flower in his smoking - jacket , and he take a flower from a vase and insert its stalk into his buttonhole . " that be well . " 

 Sir Henry laugh deprecatingly . Evelyn poke the fire , whose function be exclusively to cheer , not to supplement the radiator . as they stand before the fire , sip orange - juice , smoke cigarette , and talk of nothing in particular Evelyn think : 

 " after all , why should not   I have he up here ? show he who I be , and that I be not suspicious of he , do not   want to hold he off , as I hold off his strange daughter - so she say ! fact be I can handle he well up here than down in my office . he be think already I be go to fall for he . I do not   like his tooth , but he be a lot more agreeable to - day than he be yesterday . he be damned civil . be it all put on for my benefit ? no . could not   be . there be something about he that rather appeal to I . his tone . his eye . a shade too small , his eye , but - he may be quite all right . and I do not   care a curse what his reputation be . do not   I always say you ought to take people as you find they ? he may be a thoroughly decent fellow . well , then ! after all , it be not   a sin to want to buy the Imperial Palace . Anybody be entitle to try . and anybody be entitle to lay hold of all the share he can before he start to bargain . childish to bear he a grudge . and if he imagine he can get the well of I - well , we shall see . " 

 Oldham take the emptied glass , and Evelyn and his guest sit down to the small round table . 

 " I really must congratulate you on your castle , " say Sir Henry , glance round . 

 " well , " say Evelyn , " one do what one can to be comfortable . no reason , be there , why I should make any visitor more comfortable than I make myself ? " 

 " you be right . " 

 it be a man 's menu . no caviare . no oyster . no hor d'ouvre . turtle soup . Sole Palace . pré - salé with two vegetable . no sweet . a savoury . Oldham offer a 1921hock . Sir Henry accept , but Evelyn notice that he drink only a mouthful . the same thing happen to the champagne . 

 " they understand food and drink in your castle , " say Sir Henry . 

 " as to that , " say Evelyn , " I will tell you my motto : plain , and as perfect as you can get it . I hope it have not   be too plain . " 

 " could not   be , " say Sir Henry tersely . no trace in he of the gourmand whom Evelyn have observe at the dinner in the restaurant . 

 the meal be finish in less than half an hour - before they have pass beyond small - talk about such trifle as the Stock Exchange , international politic , protection ; on all of which , as it seem to Evelyn , Sir Henry speak sound , impartial , unsentimental sense . in short , they agree . Sir Henry taste port , refuse cognac , and drink coffee . Oldham hand Partaga cigar , and , the table have be clear of all but finger - bowl , ash - tray , and cigar , bow interrogatively , get a nod from Evelyn , and disappear , close the door without a sound . 

 2 . 

 " shall we sit by the fire ? " Evelyn suggest , after a pause , and say to himself : " it be get time he begin . " 

 they sit in easy - chair on opposite side of the hearth , with a smoker 's table between they . 

 " this be very pleasant , " think Evelyn ; but he feel like an infantryman five minute before zero - hour . he be of course firmly decide that Sir Henry , and not himself , should be the first to mention business . Sir Henry seem to be absorb in the delight of his cigar . he puff it vigorously , gaze at it as if in ecstasy , and puff it again . " Tranquillity , the hush before wild weather , " think Evelyn . 

 " I see from the departure list that Miss Gracie have leave we , " say Evelyn , feel the host 's duty to keep conversation alive . 

 " yes , " say Sir Henry , suddenly vivacious . " yesterday morning . go to Paris with Lady Devizes and one of the Cheddars . decide it all in a minute , as they do . " he give a short , dry laugh . " woke I up to tell I she be off . girl be a problem , " he add confidentially . " only thing to do be to leave they alone . at least that be my conclusion . Most of they be fool , if you ask I . but Gracie be not . how do she strike you , Orcham ? " 

 " well , " say Evelyn , careful to appear detached and judicial . " I hardly know she . but I should say she be about as far from be a fool as any young woman I ever meet . I certainly never meet one more intelligent . " 

 Sir Henry lean forward : " quite . but do we want a lot of intelligence in a woman ? " 

 " yes . " 

 " I suppose we do . yes , you be right , we do ... we do . " Sir Henry look at the fire . 

 " and as for beauty - " Evelyn stop . 

 " you know , " say Sir Henry eagerly . " I be her father and all that . but Gracie really be extraordinary . " 

 " I can believe it . " 

 " she be give up motor - racing . perhaps she be right . but it would have be just the same if she have not   be right . she be take to literature now . write . naturally she would not   show I anything . read nothing but Shakspere and the Bible . very strong on the Psalms . you would never guess what she think be the fine thing in the Bible . she quote it to I . ' be still , and know that I be God . ' forty - sixth Psalm . " Sir Henry laugh nervously . " I be dash if I understand just what it mean , but you know , it stick in your mind . Mystical , I reckon . " he snigger . " I have   be think about it ever since . what do it mean ? it mean something to she . I expect you think I be make a noise like a father . " 

 the biblical phrase fall into Evelyn 's mind like a light torch into a heap of resinous wood . flame burst forth . the whole heap be on fire . he know , or rather fancy he know , what the phrase mean . and whatever it mean , it be the most remarkable sign of Gracie 's extraordinariness that have yet be disclose to he . 

 " perhaps , " he say , meditative . " perhaps , we be not   still enough . never occur to I before , but perhaps we be not . " he be astonish at the effect of the phrase on he . he too , after all , do not surely know what the phrase mean , but he feel what it mean , and the spiritual emotion which it arouse in he put the whole of his mind - his ideal , his aim , his principle , his prejudice - into a strange and frightening disorder . Saul , smitten on the way to Damascus ! the talk have take an odd , a disconcert turn . and through that extraordinary girl with her visit to Smithfield before dawn and her 2 a.m. party and her flight to Paris - all equally impulsive , improvise and unforeseeable even by herself ! 

 " well , well ! " Sir Henry murmur , as if to indicate that that be that , and no use worry your head about it ! and Evelyn see that the subject could not profitably be pursue far . moreover he have a strong instinctive desire not to discuss it . he prefer to let the phrase burn undisturbed in his mind . but , he think , how could even a Sir Henry switch off from it abruptly to business ? business - after that mighty and menacing command ! 

 in a new , casual tone Sir Henry say : " I meet a friend of mine here yesterday morning . " 

 " oh ? " 

 " when I say ' friend ' I mean I know she . a girl name Violet Powler . " 

 " yes , " say Evelyn . " I notice you talk to she in the hall . she 's staff - manageress in my Laundry . " 

 " so she tell I . " 

 " I be think of take she on here . what about she ? " 

 " oh ! nothing . only she be a first - rater , Violet be . " 

 " she say she have be act for a time as your housekeeper at - I forget where . Claygate , do she say ? " 

 " yes . it be while her sister be ill . those two sister be wonderful . it be a positive fact that inside twenty - four hour Violet have pick up the entire job . I never see anything like it . never ! I try to get she back again ; but she would not   come . I give up try . " 

 " why would not   she ? I should have think it be a much well situation than anything I could offer she . " 

 " perhaps it be . but of course I do not   know how good your situation be . I know I would have give she practically any salary she care to ask . I would not   like to say whether Violet or Susan be the good of the two . Susan be the eld . " 

 " die , do not   she ? " 

 " she do , " say Sir Henry quietly . and still in a very quiet pathetic voice , and with gaze avert , he go on : " when I tell you I very nearly married Susan - " he cease . 

 " well ! " think Evelyn , with more than the notorious swiftness of thought : " if Susan actually be anything like Violet , that be the good thing I ever hear about you ! " 

 he be indeed astounded . he see Violet Powler in a new light , as the sister of an exceedingly opulent Lady Savott ; but he could not imagine Susan as stepmother to a Gracie . and yet , why not ? if she be anything like Violet , she would have be adequate for that or any other role . he be flatteringly confirm in his opinion of himself as a judge of individuality . 

 More ammunition for he in his imminent contest with Mrs. O'Riordan about the selection of Violet Powler as a Palace floor - housekeeper ! 

 " really ! " he breathe sympathetically . he truly feel sympathetic . 

 as Sir Henry be look at the hearthrug Evelyn could scrutinise his face at leisure , without rudeness . he see the savott reputation in those feature . the small eye with their perforating and yet far - away gaze , the hard jaw , the inhuman regular tooth !   Evelyn 's tooth be somewhat irregular , and he thank God for it .   but there must be , there be , another facet , unnoticed by the world of affair , to Henry Savott 's individuality . he could see it now , in the attitude humble and soft . and even , if under the influence of Savott 's confession , he only imagine he see it , it must still be there : for not merely must Savott have respond to the fineness of Violet 's sister , but she in turn must have find fineness in Savott . 

 " my private affair , " say Sir Henry , " use to fill a lot of space in the newspaper . so I daresay you know more about they than I do myself . " he glance up , with a terrible sardonic smile , then lower his eye again . " it be before I get free of Lady Savott that I want to come to an understanding with Susan . but she be so afraid she would be mix up in the divorce proceeding , and I could not   make she see she would not   be , could not   possibly be . you know if a woman do not   see a thing for herself you can not   reason she into see it . no . she would not   give even a provisional consent . do not   like the idea of it . and when I be free it be just too late . I do everything I could to save her life . everything ... she be on my side right enough against Lady Savott . she know the fact . she would see them . it be see Violet yesterday that bring it all back to I . Funny , I do not   know to this day whether Violet know how thing be between her sister and I ! I doubt whether Susan ever say a word to a soul . tremendously reserve ; and as for discretion! ... excuse I bore you . it come over I , all of a sudden . well , well ! " Sir Henry give renew attention to the Partaga . 

 Evelyn be flatter once more by the confidence . he be sadden ; but his sadness be not unpleasant ; it have a quality of beauty . strange , startling encounter , there in the handsome and comfortable room , after the perfect meal , the perfect wine , and in the middle of the perfect cigar ! and flower in their button - hole ! strange encounter with this dictatorial and ruthless speciman of the top - dog ; prince of practitioner of company - mongering , whose scheme might and do imperil the happiness of thousand of under - dog , and also many middle - dog ! all his wealth and all his power have not suffice to save he from the fate of be himself , in a different sense , an under - dog too . well might the man 's heart echo with the Psalmist 's intimidate ' be still and know that I be God ! ' genuine and affect sympathy for the survivor of the tragedy draw Evelyn towards Sir Henry . and yet in the very moment of his compassion , he be think : " I bet it have not   prevent he from amuse himself since . " 

 " now look here ! " say Sir Henry in a voice suddenly strong and perhaps more domineering than he mean it to be . " I have   not come here to make a nuisance of myself . " 

 " not at all , " Evelyn mildly interject . 

 " yes , yes . a damned nuisance ! " Sir Henry stand up and stand straight . " I have   come here to try to do a bit of business , anyhow to begin it . you know what it be of course . " 

 " what I do know , " think Evelyn , " be that whether you intend it or not , you and I will never be on a purely business footing again . " he keep silence and wait , merely wave his cigar as a sign of concurrence . 

 content 
 chapter 24 

 dog 

 " now , " say Sir Henry , still stand , with his back to the fire , and perhaps somewhat masterfully , look down upon Evelyn , who lounge in the easy - chair . " I want you to believe that I have nothing whatever to conceal from you . if I try to conceal anything from a man like you , I know I should not   succeed - for long . you know too much about your business , and you be far too clever . do not   think I be flatter you . I be not . and what be more , you must know I be not . you must know very well that in your own line you be the first man in the world . now do not   you ? honest to God ! " 

 " there be one or two pretty fine man in Germany , " say Evelyn . 

 " do you think they be equal to you ? do you ? " 

 Evelyn lean forward , and with his elbow on his knee let his forearm droop towards the floor . 

 " do you wish to make I talk like a conceited ass ? " he ask , cigar between tooth . 

 " no . I wish you to answer a question . yes , or no ? " 

 all Evelyn 's intense natural reserve rise up to prevent he from give a direct answer . 

 " how can I tell ? how do I know whether the german fellow be not   equal to I ? I be an interested party . " 

 " of course you be an interested party . but I be not ask you what you know . I be ask you what you think . you have an opinion . what be it ? " 

 " well , I do not   think they be equal to I . " 

 " confession be good for the soul , " say Sir Henry , smile , and make a brilliant display of his tooth . 

 " I be not so sure about that , " Evelyn think . " and why do he use these wear - out phrase ? ' confession be good for the soul ! ' good God ! " 

 " thank " say Sir Henry . " may I have another cigar ? " 

 Evelyn negligently point to the box on the table . Sir Henry pick one , bit the end off - his sharp tooth make a matchless cigar - cutter - and light the new cigar from the old , violently puff forth cloud of blue smoke . 

 " he do not   know a lot about cigar - smoking , " Evelyn think . " he be get that cigar too hot right at the start . and he be finish one already , and mine be only half through . " 

 " well , " resume Sir Henry , carefully drop the end of the old cigar into the fire and turn to Evelyn again , with a benevolent expression . " so far so good . well , as I say , I be go to be perfectly open with you . that be not   always my way in big negotiation . but it be my way this time , because I feel it will be the good way with you . no other reason . no question of moral principle and so on . Candour be not   necessarily the good policy . it often be not , by Jove . but in this case it be . I reckon myself a very good judge of character . you can appreciate frankness , because you be not   sentimental . " 

 " that be true , " think Evelyn , really flatter again . " he be a bit of a judge of character . and he be devilish different tonight from the man who stand I a dinner the night before last . " Evelyn be impressed , and he admit to himself that his first estimate of Sir Henry have be inadequate . he say nothing ; just wait . 

 " I will tell you something possibly you do not   know . let I mention a few hotel . for instance , the Majestic in London , your only serious rival , and the Duncannon in London . the Concorde and the Montaigne in Paris . the Minerva at Cannes . the Escurial in Madrid . the Bottecini at San Remo . the Albergo Umberto in Rome . " 

 " that be eight . " 

 " yes . what do you think of they ? " 

 " not a bad selection , " say Evelyn coldly . " fairly representative very fairly . " 

 his mind pass with extreme rapidity through the list . he be well acquainted with every one of the eight , either from personal knowledge or from reliable report ; with its good and its bad characteristic , the nature of its clientele , its efficiency and inefficiency , its past , its present and its prospect ; also with the percentage of its dividend earn , its dividend actually pay out , or in the alternative its trading loss . and in his mind , assess all the eight simultaneously and instantaneously , he consider and decide - by no mean for the first time - how each of they could be improve . an impose lot truly ; but less impose to Evelyn than to a layman ; as a first - rate virtuoso 's piano - playing be less impose to another first - rate piano virtuoso than to a layman . 

 and what he would have call ' the conceited ass ' in himself reflect upon the immense fuss which would be make of he if he walk into any one of they and present his card : " Mr. Evelyn Orcham , Managing Director , Imperial Palace Hotel , London . " of which immense fuss he have on various occasion have experience . for he be a retire man , though he would never coddle his shyness to the extent of hide his identity from fellow - manager . 

 " I now have control of all the eight , " say Sir Henry with lightness , ineffectually try to pretend that to have obtain the control of eight such hotel be to a person build on his scale a mere trifle of an achievement . " I do not   say I have   buy they . I have   actually buy one - and no doubt you can guess which one - but I have option which will give I control of the other seven at any moment I choose . " 

 " the Majestic ? " say Evelyn , name the establishment which Sir Henry have buy . 

 Sir Henry nod , smile . 

 " not a vast amount of profit - earn there , " say Evelyn . 

 " on the hotel itself , no . but think of the real estate own by the company , my friend . its value have appreciate by a good sixty per cent . in the last fifteen year . and the figure they put it at in their Balance Sheet be grotesquely below the value to - day . " 

 " quite . I agree . but you speak of it as a serious rival to the Palace . it be not . they have not   even the sense to spend fifteen thousand pound on replace their wear - out carpet and curtain . to say nothing of the furniture . " 

 " I have not   particularly notice the carpet and curtain , " Sir Henry rather haltingly admit . 

 " you will next time you go in there , " Evelyn answer drily . but less drily than he feel . for Savott 's announcement have excite in he sensation of admire wonder . though the man might show the foible of a Napoleon he have , too , a true napoleonic grandeur of conception , and , if he in fact hold the boasted option , which he probably do , he certainly have in addition a napoleonic power to realise his conception . as he stand there on the hearthrug in the comfortable modest room , insult a fine cigar by smoke it too quickly , he be toss million about . and he have have the courage and the originality to love and fight for the daughter of a small town - traveller ; and the misfortune to lose she . a few minute early he have be a wistful emblem of tragedy . he be still that emblem , for Evelyn ; but he be a great deal more now : he be an emblem of confident , imaginative might . 

 Evelyn marvel at he , and pity he . he want to say to he eagerly , " you be a big chap than I think . " and he want magically to raise Susan Powler from the dead , so that he might see a cherished woman fold the ruthless giant in her honest arm and kiss away calamity from those ferret eye , and by her homeliness reduce a colossus to the human dimension of a lover . Evelyn be thrill . 

 " you have   get eight , " say he with feigned cold indifference ; and pause . " but you want nine . " 

 2 . 

 " I want the Imperial Palace , " Sir Henry exclaim , and could not refrain from a grandiose napoleonic gesture . " if I can not   bring the Imperial Palace into my merger , I will drop it . I could sell the Majestic at a profit already . I would sell it . and I would get rid of my option too . I would clear out of hotel and try something else . I have not   the least desire to mess about with an affair if it be go to be only second - class . Second - c1ass be not   a bit my line . but I will admit I do not   want to clear out of hotel . the luxury hotel , as you have   make it , my dear Orcham , seem to I to be the most characteristic of all modem creation . it stand for the age , just as much as the pyramid do for Egypt . our age can be proud of it - I mean as an organism . it be marvellous , and there never be anything like it before . the luxury hotel - " 

 " what about the department - store ? " Evelyn interject . 

 " I agree , " say Sir Henry quickly . " the department - store be just as characteristic , and original , as the luxury hotel . but as you probably know , I have   handle the department - store - both here and in Australia . my department - store merger be a proved success - and half the City prophesy failure for it . well , that be do . and now I be in for a hotel - merger . only , it must be first - class . splendid ! gorgeous ! something to sing about and write home about ! otherwise I would not   give tuppence for it . of course there have   be hotel - merger already . I expect you know a lot more about my friend Hoster 's merger than I do . it be pretty big . I have   no dependable information as to how it be do . but however well it be do it would not   be good enough for I . to my nose it smell of the suburban street and the provincial up from the country and the conduct tour and God know what else ! no , no ! the Imperial Palace be the standard for I . and that be why I be so keen on interesting you in my proposition . Orcham , I be damnably keen . " 

 Evelyn be move by the surprising lyricism of the City man . he be begin to glimpse the quality which have lift up Sir Henry to be a figure in the world of high finance . his imagination be impressed - by the reveal fact that Sir Henry have imagination . he behold Sir Henry with a satisfaction that be aesthetic . he be even ever so little scared . but he show none of his emotion . 

 " I can not   quite understand this mania for merger . it seem to I to mean the destroying of individuality , " he say . nobody could be more misleading , more mystifying , than Evelyn when his mind be fluid and he have to play for time . 

 " destroy of individuality ! " cry Sir Henry . " oh , hang it ! I have   let the thing out . " he seize the match - box . 

 " no , Savott ! " Evelyn stop he . " you can do most thing in this room , but you be not   allow to re - light a good cigar . " he stretch his arm , pluck the extinct cigar from his guest 's finger , and throw it into the fire . " oblige I by take a fresh one . " 

 Sir Henry shrug his shoulder humorously , and oblige , and resume his talk while light the fresh cigar . 

 " destroy of individuality ! " he repeat , mutter at first with the cigar between his tooth . " you of all people to say that ! look at the present case . it would mean the extension of your individuality . it would give your individuality a scope - a scope - well , you see my idea ? I will not   say anything about your great ability . but take your efficiency . a merger mean the spread of your efficiency ; it mean the spread of the Imperial Palace standard . be that nothing ? destruction of individuality ! why ! on the contrary ! a merger always mean increase power and influence for the top - dog . and why be the top - dog the top - dog ? why be you a top - dog ? " 

 " yes . but what about the under - dog ? " Evelyn ask , think again the thought which have stir in his mind early about top - dog and under - dog and middle - dog . 

 " it be no use talk about under - dog , " say Sir Henry , with a transient impatience . " nothing can stop merger . they have   come , everywhere , in everything . they be still come , and they will keep on come more and more . they be bind to . all big enterprise will get big , and small enterprise will be swallow up or go to hell . bind to . I be not a scientist , and I could not   make a very clear story of evolution . but I have   get the hang of it . and what I say be , the merger be evolution . anyhow , part of it . there it be ! it may be a bit rough on a lot of people . but what be you go to do about it ? pull it up with a jerk ? you can not . you might as well try to tie a rope to the moon and pull that up . Evolution will go on . where to ? we do not   know . at least I do not . nor care either . all I know be I feel in my bone I have   get to go on . do you suppose I be take on this job for money ? I have   make money . I be a rich man , very rich . and I want money - want it all the time . I be interested in money , but I be much more interested in my instinct . and I be sure my instinct be right . if they lead I to money , I can not   help that . Money be a side - issue . pleasant enough , of course - but only a side - issue . I be push evolution forward . somebody have to push it forward , and I be somebody . what will happen next , after merger have have a fair show ? who can tell ? not I . it do not   concern I . something - call it God or Nature or what you please - something be put certain instinct into my bone , I tell you . I be not a religionist , but I have a conscience . yes , I be conscientious . sense of duty , somewhere down inside I ! and the duty be to use my instinct . or let they use I . I should not   like to say which it be . there might be some bad consequence . well , let there be ! my conscience will be clear . and I know jolly well there would be some good consequence . and soon ! " 

 " do he think he be a besom and go to sweep I into a corner ? " think Evelyn , sardonic . but Evelyn be bluff to himself ; for he could feel that he be be sweep up by the vigorous besom and already on his way to the corner . the power of the City Napoleon loom formidably over he . " this fellow 's situation precarious ? " he think , recall sinister rumour concern the reality of Sir Henry 's position . " rot ! his position could never be precarious . and if one situation go to smithereen he would build another and a well one in about half a minute . still , that Resolution be a pretty wise precaution . " he have to fight against the impulse to enrol himself as a partisan of Henry Savott . 

 he say aloud , in a voice that make Sir Henry 's seem coarse and rhetorical : 

 " as we seem to be talk , I may as well tell you that my sentiment about the plight of the under - dog in this evolution of yours be rather strong . in a place like this you get some very melodramatic contrast , and they make you think . and when I think for instance of you in your suite , or I here , and then of some of the fellow and girl down in the basement , I get a sort of a notion that there must be something wrong somewhere . and your merger be not   likely to do such a devil of a lot to put it right . the reverse . " 

 3 . 

 Sir Henry drop smoothly into an easy - chair opposite Evelyn and when he speak his restrained tone show that he have accept the reproof of Evelyn 's quietude . 

 " and have not   there always be something wrong ? and will not   there always be ? " he enquire , almost insinuatingly . " when there be no under - dog the world will have to come to an end , because there will not   be anything to improve . Perfection 's another name for death , be not   it ? and I must just ask you again : what be you go to do about it ? about these under - dog ? merger mean mass - production and low price . what be the matter with this country be that there be not   enough mass - production . mass - production be the only chance for the under - dog , as far as I can see . " 

 Sir Henry have speak slowly and more slowly . he pause . then begin again , very low and very deliberate . 

 " I be continually hear about the soul - destroy monotony of organise labour in these day . one man do one tiny fraction of a job all day every day . well , that be part of the penalty of cheap price . but people forget that cheap price be not   all penalty . they do have the advantage of raise the purchase power of the under - dog ; therefore raise his standard of life . do you want to go back to the old method ? even if you could , you would only raise price and lower the standard of life . but you could not   go back . because we simply do not   go back . and do you want to stand still ? everyone know you can not   stand still . then you must go forward . More mass - production ! and - more machinery ! I seem to see that machinery may at last put an end to the under - dog . it may wipe he off the earth by throw he out of work . well , somebody have to suffer . anyhow when he be dead he be not   an under - dog . see here ! on the voyage over , this last week , I think I would have a look at the innard of the ship . I think they must be rather like a hotel , and I want to pick up all I could in the hotel line . I do pick up some trifle . of course you know , but I do not   know , that there be no bottle - washer in those big ship . all the washing - up be do by machinery and the drying and everything , and well do than any bottle - washer ever do it or ever could do it . " 

 " oh yes ! " say Evelyn . " all the big hotel have that machinery . be in use for year . " 

 " wait a minute . wait a minute . " Sir Henry speak more loudly , and with some excitement . " there be no miserable bottle - washer any more in the big show . they be go . they may have die of starvation , and their family with they . but they be go . no more monotonous , dirty , greasy , soul - destroy labour for bottle - washer . now that be all to the good . that be what I call an advance . and lot of other underdog will follow the bottle - washer . frightful martyrdom no doubt for a generation or two . but it can not   be help . there be a chance that mass - production and machinery will abolish the under - dog . there be no other chance . so in the sacred cause of social progress I be determined to bear with fortitude the present and future misfortune of your under - dog . " Sir Henry laugh grimly . 

 " you may be right , " say Evelyn reluctantly . then , a little ashamed of this assumed reluctance , he add in a more sympathetic tone : " you probably be right . anyhow it be soothe to the mind to think you be ... but I be afraid I have   be lead you off the point . " 

 " no , no ! " Sir Henry amiably smile . " I lead myself . it be I who begin about dog . however , I will get back . I have   nearly finish . I tell you I would be perfectly open with you , and I will . it be a bit unusual for a buyer to be enthusiastic about what he want to buy . do not   help he in bargaining , do it ? I can not   help that . I be after the Imperial Palace , and you know why . no one know well . but the Imperial Palace would be no earthly use to I without Mr. Evelyn Orcham . without he I would not   have it at any price . he be the Imperial Palace . he bring it from ruin to the most brilliant success in the short time on record . of course there be hotel that have start from nothing and succeed terrifically from the very day they open . there be at least two in London . and even Mr. Evelyn Orcham could not   teach much to the fellow that run they . only they be cheap hotel . even under - dog - some under - dog - stay in they for a day or two without be break . they be not   luxury hotel , and it be the luxury hotel and nothing else that interest I . I want something I can look at , with woman walk around that I can look at , and money flow out of pocket like water . there be no fun in run a cheap hotel . " 

 " oh yes , there be , " Evelyn contradict . 

 " well , naturally there be . I mean not my sort of fun , and your sort of fun . I could not   bear anything that I have a hand in to be speak slightingly of . I could not   bear it ! ' must be funny kind of place , ' I have   hear people - some of your visitor - say of those cheap hotel ; and if I have be in control of the funny kind of place I should have knock the people down . simply that . because I could not   have bear it . you do not   know I if you think I should not . you understand I - what I mean ? " 

 " perfectly , " say Evelyn . " I daresay I should feel the same . but I be not a prize - fighter . " 

 " well , I be , " say Sir Henry with emphasis . " off the point again ! " he snigger ; then suddenly become serious : " now Mr. Evelyn Orcham be not   merely the king of the hotel world . he be boss of the market in hotel - manager . and there be not   any under - boss . there be nobody but he - for a buyer like I , who will not   have anything but the good . he own the fine article in the market - himself - and he can put his own price on it , without argue . he be in the strong position that any seller could be in . you see , I realise all that , and I would not   pretend I do not . I want to buy Mr. Evelyn Orcham . damn it ! of course I want to buy he . he be the foundation - stone and the keystone and everything of my blooming arch . and I be ready to pay for he . and when I have   get he safe , I want to make he the head - god of the great hotel - combine that ever be . nine big luxury hotel ! and I want he to put his stamp on all of they , so that everybody can see the brand at a glance . I want everybody in the luxury world to know that every one of those nine belong to the Orcham group - and nothing more need be say , no question ask , no doubt raise , no qualm , no fear , apprehension . ' it be an Orcham hotel . it be dear , but it be worth the money . you know where you be in his show . ' that be how the luxury crew have get to talk among themselves . and that be how they would talk , by God ! why ! in London and Madrid and Paris and San Remo and Cannes and Rome we should put every other swell hotel out of business . right out . we should divide the luxury crew into two section - those who have the sense and the money to stay in an Orcham , and those who have not ... now , Orcham , be it worth your while to take the thing on ? or be I a rant idiot ? " 

 Evelyn answer at once : 

 " if you want my candid opinion , I should say that you do not   coincide very closely with my idea of a rant idiot . but it be not   worth my while to take the thing on . you see , I be very fond of the Imperial Palace . there be a genuine attachment between we . I be happy here . I be content . I do not   want anything else . " 

 4 . 

 Sir Henry jump up from his chair , and begin to eat his cigar instead of smoke it . 

 " then you will excuse I , " he burst forth , stress nearly every syllable . " but what I say be you have   no right to be happy and content here . how old be you ? you can not   be fifty . Fancy any man under fifty be happy and content ! I be a long sight old than you ; but I be not happy and I be not content . and I do not   want to be , either . when I be happy and content I shall be so near to be dead that you would not   notice the difference . why man , if you be happy and content you might as well say you have not   get anything else to live for ! and what would you have to live for ? you have   make this place once , complete . you have   exercise your genius on it . you can not   go on make it . it be make . all you have to do be to keep it where it be . a touch here and a touch there . no more . and your genius go to waste ! waste ! you have   realise one ambition , and a jolly good ambition . you have   create the fine luxury hotel in the world . have not   you get any more ambition ? or be you at the end ? under fifty ! shall you be satisfied to sit down and fold your arm ? " he spread out his arm , and then fold they . but fold his arm do nothing to tranquilise his almost fierce excitement . 

 with a casual air Evelyn remark : 

 " there be not   much sit down and fold of arm about this place . " 

 drop his arm , Sir Henry , cigar between tooth , go back to his chair once again , sit down , and fold his arm anew , but with a comic , apologetic gesture . he star at Evelyn , faintly smile . 

 " excuse I ! " he say , as it be ruefully , and pleadingly . " I really do beg you to excuse I . when I get keen I be apt to - well , you know . so do I know - curse it ! " he show considerable charm . indeed for the moment he be irresistible . 

 " not at all ! " say Evelyn , make no effort to resist , and with a smile quite as charming as his guest 's . " not at all . you be very interesting . a talk be a talk . do go on . " as a fact he find Sir Henry more than interesting - acutely disturbing . but his reserve be a shield to he . and although upon occasion he could , like Sir Henry , put all his card on the table , he choose not to do so on this occasion . 

 " let I say just one thing more , " Sir Henry say , ingratiating , appealing , astonishingly placid after his fevere eloquence . " your talent be be waste here - in my opinion , that be . be you justify in waste they ? perhaps you be . I be merely ask the question . there be still quite a great deal to do in the world . perhaps luxury hotel be not   the be - all and end - all of life . but they be a factor . and they happen to be your field . and what we want more and more to - day be efficiency . efficiency be a speciality of your . why should not   nine luxury hotel set an example of absolutely tiptop efficiency ? any efficiency , particularly when it be spectacular , stimulate all other efficiency . " 

 Sir Henry 's voice die away . he rise slowly , and hold out his hand . 

 " you be not   go ? " 

 " yes , " say Sir Henry . " thank immensely for a perfect evening . I could not   have enjoy an evening more . " 

 " but - " 

 " seem to I I ought to give you a chance to think it over . that be all I ask . for you to think it over . no hurry . I should hate to hurry you . you will ring I up , or I will ring you up . I be not leave the Palace yet . I do not   vanish out of hotel like Gracie . Au revoir . your hospitality be the sort I can appreciate . of course be in the Imperial Palace it would be . " 

 Evelyn shake band unwillingly . at the door Sir Henry turn . 

 " and I say , " he murmur with another rueful smile , " I rely on you to forgive all the noise I have   make . " 

 he depart . the door bang . 

 Evelyn gently throw the last inch of his first evening cigar into the fire . 

 " a masterly exit , " he think . 

 content 
 chapter 25 

 early MORN 

 Evelyn have luck that night . he do not possess the napoleonic gift of sleep at will and for any willed length of time . indeed he seldom sleep uninterruptedly for more than three hour together , and he praise God when God grant he a total of five and a half hour ' sleep in three instalment . he probably do not sleep well because he be not very interested in sleep . what really interested he be wake up , get up , and satisfy himself by contemplation of the dawn that the ancient earth be revolve as usual . but on just that night it mysteriously happen to he to receive from heaven five hour ' unbroken sleep . so that he arise with full mental vigour in the morning twilight and draw the curtain and raise the blind and beheld glisten roof and cloud glide above they from the eternal south - west ; and begin to reflect upon a new problem , as eagerly curious about it as a child about a new toy . 

 it be in these early morning hour , after a fair night , that Evelyn most pleasantly savour life . he have leisure then , more time than be necessary for the due performance of what he call his ' chore . ' he possess three dressing - gown of different thickness . Oldham always lay they side by side in an unvarying order on the back of his easy - chair . he choose the one which seem to he to suit the temperature of the morning . he turn on the electric radiator . steam - heating be good enough for the visitor to the Palace , but not for its Director . he turn on all the light , for he like the full illumination , say that whatever he be do he prefer to see clearly what it be . he behold the room , and the tidiness of the room provide fresh satisfaction every morning . every morning be the beginning of the world and of his existence . no clothe and no linen be ever leave lie in the room . nothing be out of place : neither the book on the large bed - table , nor the glass and bottle and weekly paper and cigarette - box on the square table behind the bed , nor the appointment on the dressing - table , nor the pump and slipper on the floor . 

 now , he light the fine cigarette of the day , and open window wide , and , warm in his camel - hair gown , defy the tang of the air of sunrise . he glance at the clock on the mantelpiece and the encased watch on the bed - table , and note with relief and pride that they announce precisely the same minute of the same hour . he consider what suit he would wear , what shirt , what necktie , what handkerchief , what sock , what shoe . he hat anew the prospect of shaving . he drink the celestial juice of two orange carefully distil for he overnight by Oldham . he eat half a handful of seedless raisin , also prepare for he by Oldham . 

 among the book on the bed - table be an India - paper Bible . he scarcely ever read it , but he like to feel that in case he want to read it the Bible be handy . on this morning he pick up the Bible , find the Psalms , find the forty - sixth Psalm . yes . there it be , the memorable sentence : " be still and know that I be God . " the sentence awe he . it seem to contain the whole wisdom of thirty century of human experience . and he have live for nearly fifty year in ignorance of it . he repeat and repeat the sentence . but no well than on the previous night could he have define its significance , even to himself . he stroll into the bathroom , stroll back , leave the door ajar , take off his dressing - gown , and , with customary conscientiousness , perform blood - stimulate physical exercise on the floor and upright in front of an open window . then he shut the window , resume the dressing gown , and luxuriously , voluptuously , and a little breathlessly recline in the easy - chair . one chore do ! 

 as a rule at this stage of the day he read periodical . but now he have no desire to read . he wish to enjoy his mind . he be not give to self - analysis . he would think out his plan , but the originating cause of all his plan have little interest for he . he live his life by deep impulse into which he never enquire . he rather despise the individual who be always worry themselves about themselves . his attitude be God 's : I be that I be . to wonder why he be what he be hardly occur to he . and whither he be go do not trouble he more than whence he have come . he construct no chart , write out no annual balance - sheet . he merely know , feel , that he have work to do and that he be do it pretty well and be thereby keep continually busy . 

 2 . 

 but to - day , in the freshness of the morning and the cherished order of the room , he enter upon some sort of an examination of that unexplored strange creature , Evelyn Orcham . at leisure , and secure from any invasion , he begin to reflect , not without mild excitement . he be happy . Henry Savott have feverishly inform he that at his age he have no right to be happy . nevertheless he be happy . he damn Henry Savott . still , the man have impress he . in his daily life Evelyn be more used to bestow wisdom than to receive it . and to have positively explosive instruction fling in his face with violence be to say the least disconcerting . 

 the young son of the Chief Customs Inspector of an important East Coast port , Evelyn have be bring up with two extremely taciturn man - his widow father and his brother . the two man and the boy seldom talk and never argue , even at meal . the two man show no curiosity about anything , and apparently think that nothing be worth talk about . each be an individual island entirely surround by spiritual solitude ; and the boy become an island . the eld brother enter the Customs service , marry a girl who chatter incessantly , and reach in course of time the chief inspectorship of another East Coast port . his child be grow up . he ask no more from life . he never write to Evelyn , nor Evelyn to he . immediately on leave school Evelyn hear casually of a catering job at a provincial exhibition , and on the strength of a school reputation as organiser of field - excursion , casually wander off to get the job , and get it . nobody either encourage or discourage his enterprise of leave home . he just depart with an exchange of " Ta - ta , ta - ta . " and he never see his home again . his father die while away on holiday , and at the funeral Evelyn speak about forty word to his brother , and his brother about twenty word to Evelyn . " Ta - ta , ta - ta , " once more . Withal , the pair be conscious of mutual esteem . Evelyn rise by step and step to the top of his profession . when he arrive at the panjandrumship of the Imperial Palace Hotel he sit down to write the news to his brother . but he desist and cast the sheet into the waste - paper basket , because he be afraid that his grave and silent brother might reply on a post - card and despise he for break the grand family tradition of taciturnity . all he could be sure of about his brother be that he be not dead ; for tradition would assuredly have summon he to a brother 's funeral . 

 once fairly establish in the hotel world , Evelyn of course have to learn the art , and especially the craft , of conversation . he learn it as he might have learn mathematic or juggling or conjuring . he talk , but he remain reserved . he have always be , and he still be , reserve even with the person whom be least mistrusted - himself . at no period of his wonderful ascent have he make many friend . 

 the career of hotel - management be as absorbing as that of ship - captaincy . there be , in practice , no fix , regular hour of work for the chief and his immediate subordinate . during twenty hour daily , from 6.30 a.m. to 2 a.m. , the big hotel be as it be in full navigation of the high sea ; and during the poor brief remnant of the twenty - four the vessel be not in port ; she be only hove to . a critical situation be as likely to supervene by night as by day . Evelyn 's most intimate friend be old Dennis Dover , and it be he who have late one evening liken a big cosmopolitan hotel to a baby . " you never dare leave it , " father Dennis have say . " the darned thing be always liable to wake up before dawn and cry itself into convulsion if you be not   there . " the Imperial Palace Hotel tolerate no rival interest . everybody who serve it become enslave to it . the hotel take the place of wife , child , friend , hobby , sport . apparent exception occur now and then ; not , however , real exception . thus the sardonic middle - aged grill - room chef , Rocco , have begin recently to flirt with golf ; but his colleague prophesy that the affair would be flirtation and no more . 

 as for Evelyn , he have forsake sport and pastime many year ago . and why should evelyn embarrass himself with a pack of friend when he be happy without they ? 

 but on this particular morning he see his present as well as his future in the new searchlight direct upon they by Henry Savott . he be the celebrated panjandrum of the Imperial Palace Hotel . he have ' get there . ' good ! and in ten year , in twenty ? when he be approach three score and ten , would be have retire - unthinkable - or would he still be the panjandrum of the Imperial Palace Hotel ? would not the livelier of his acquaintance and colleague then be say behind his back : " yes , terrific fellow ! make the place ! perhaps he be be there a bit too long . thirty year . in a groove . you can not   teach he anything now " ? possibly he be already fairly deep in a groove of habit and self - complacency . be it not true what Savott have say , that a touch here and a touch there should suffice to keep the vast organism of the Imperial Palace in the path of prosperity ? could he , Evelyn , deny that his talent for imaginative efficiency be be to some extent waste ? he sit quiet , and wait for inspiration . without at all realise it , he be fulfil the behest of the Psalmist 's deity : " be still and know that I be God . " 

 he hear a faint whine . it be the sound of the vacuum cleaner which twice a week a chambermaid and a valet between they employ upon his sitting - room . the day have start . the humble be abroad and active . but how come it that he could hear the sound across the bathroom , in a bedroom theoretically impervious to all noise ? ah ! he have leave the bedroom door ajar . he rise and shut the door . the whine cease to be audible . 

 could he successfully inspire the manager of eight hotel in four different country with his own spirit , energy , enthusiasm , tact , tireless ingenuity in organisation ? he might be able to teach Rome and Madrid . but could he teach Paris and the Riviera ; he an Englishman , handicap , despite his renown , by the fact of be a native of the land which have the bad hotel in Europe ? well , he think he could . he know he could . already he could see how he would have to set about the mighty task : stay in each of the hotel , say nothing , watch , praise , study local condition , allow for local standard ; a touch here and a touch there at first ; cautious suggestion ; then bolder stroke ; a few abrupt dismissal ; exchange of important member of staff between one hotel and another ; promotion , degradation ; soft answer ; the iron hand ; encouragement of the large harmony through transient violent discord ; flitting from city to city ; rapid and frequent return to London to maintain the peace of the Imperial Palace , and to galvanise and electrify the Majestic and the Duncannon into a more and more active reform energy . 

 there be the language difficulty . absurd ! he be invent difficulty . the entire hotel - world be polyglot . and he could speak French admirably . he have learn French as he have learn conversation , and for the same reason . and if he feel any apprehension about Madrid , which he have see only once , he could take with he once or twice Adolphe , the chef de reception of the Palace , and the supreme linguist of all the Palace staff . 

 the project enterprise of modernising hotel make a fascinating panorama in his mind . it be an enterprise perfectly suited to his faculty . have he not already conduct two similar enterprise to triumph , in his beloved first - bear , the Wey , and then in the Imperial Palace ? in both case have he not perform the miracle of raise the dead ; and to what glorious life ? in the privacy of his self - esteem he doubt whether there exist on earth another man as fortunately qualified as himself for the realisation of Savott 's dream . by the way , it be Savott 's dream ; not his own . and Savott might well be an excellent man to work with . Savott would understand without too much argument , because he have imagination . 

 nevertheless Evelyn hat the visionary project . he shrink from the sight of it , avert his eye . why shoulder the weight of ten thousand new anxiety ? why wander homeless ? why leave the adorable habitual comfort of his everlasting home ? he fear , tremblingly hesitant . ha ! the groove ! dramatic proof , this hesitation , that he be indeed already sink in a groove , that in his shelter he shiver at the mere thought of the wind of the world . but suppose that he decline Savott 's offer - how would he feel afterwards for the rest of his life ? sham , remorseful , disappointed , stultify , lethargise ? would he not . know in his heart that he be a coward ? then he perceive a flaw in Savott 's grandiose scheme . it be not sufficiently grandiose . the fellow do not know enough . he be miss the fine , the most glaring opportunity in Europe . Deauville ! there be only two authentic luxury hotel in Deauville . Savott should have buy option on both of they . the trouble in Deauville be the shortness of the season . but the season ought to be lengthen , could be lengthen . that bright young man Immerson , author and controller of the unique indirect publicity of the Imperial Palace , have once in Evelyn 's presence sigh for the chance to do in Deauville what he have do in London and Weybridge . the Deauville people have amazingly succeed with their hotel , but they have not succeed in stretch their season . their imagination lack breadth and sweep . 

 3 . 

 a quiet knock . Evelyn get up and walk to the right - hand window . Oldham enter . 

 " Morning , Oldham , " Evelyn greet he , but without turn round . 

 " Morning , sir . " 

 these two understand each other perfectly - not almost perfectly , but perfectly . Evelyn 's attitude towards Oldham be one of affection and appreciation . Oldham 's to Evelyn one of affection and devotion . because of his aversion for physical exercise and his inexhaustible interest in eat , Oldham , who be five year young than Evelyn , look five year old , and Evelyn always think of he as old . 

 once , a long time since , they have have a skirmish which might have develop into a calamitous shindy if Evelyn have not the presence of mind to shut his own mouth . Oldham value that forbearance . it have be report to Evelyn through the floor - housekeeper , that in a quarrel with a chambermaid about their respective duty Oldham have remark : " if you think I be a bloody chambermaid - " Evelyn have be infuriate at such behaviour ; less at the language use to a girl by a respectable man of an age to be her father , than at the respectable man 's evident unfairness in presume on the immense advantage of his position as Evelyn 's private and confidential servant . Evelyn be very seldom infuriate ; one might say never . but he happen to be himself extreme punctilious in his demeanour to all his employee ; he have a special detestation of master who be rude to their servant and Oldham 's iniquity have take he by surprise . also , Evelyn 's fury have take Oldham by surprise ; and Oldham have retort too soon , before he have recover from the surprise . the next day Oldham have briefly express contrition , and the quarrel be over . they have never have another . the first and last quarrel have seem to draw they more closely together ; both have realise that a rupture would be desolate . 

 Evelyn have try for year to put sense into Oldham about eat , outdoor exercise , and personal tidiness . he have fail and have abandon the effort . he might have succeed as regard personal tidiness , if Oldham 's gourmandise have not make he too stout to get into Evelyn 's cast - off suit . instead of wear these perquisite Oldham sell they . as in all other matter Oldham be meticulously tidy , Evelyn have accept the situation . 

 " strip , " say Evelyn , still not turn round .   each of Evelyn 's suit be christen with a short epithet .   " black - and - white shirt , black tie , black french shoe . " he say nothing about sock because sock have to match the tie . 

 " yes , sir ... excuse I , sir , " say Oldham . " Mrs. O'Riordan be unwell and think she ought to stay in bed . she would very much oblige if you could go and see she after breakfast . that be the message , sir . " his shocked tone say : " yes , that be the message , and I give it you , but it be the big piece of cheek I ever hear of in this hotel , and I beg to take no responsibility for it . you go to see the housekeeper because she be ' unwell , ' as she call it ! " 

 " all right , " say Evelyn , absently . " remind I . " 

 " yes , sir . " 

 Evelyn himself perceive not the enormity of the message , but at the back of his brain , behind the circle thought concern his presence and his future , he be somewhat disturbed . he guess : " it must be about the new floor - housekeeper . she want to settle that business at once , and I may have some trouble with the old girl . " at last he turn to go into the bathroom . Oldham have switch on the light in the huge wardrobe - cubicle which give on to the bedroom and which hold the whole of Evelyn 's attire . the man be handle a pair of trouser . 

 " here ! steady ! " Evelyn enjoin he . " I tell you the strip , not the broad stripe . " when Evelyn have buy a second striped suit the new one have be dub ' broad - stripe ' to distinguish it from the old one . 

 " sorry , sir , " Oldham apologise , after a brief pause for cerebration , in the thick , obscure tone which always indicate that he be secretly worried . indeed the audacity of Mrs. O'Riordan be still abrade his sensitive nerve so loyal to Evelyn . 

 Evelyn pass into the bathroom , where Oldham have already make every minute customary preparation for the morning rite . the spectacle of the sacred traditional disposition of the bathroom appeal pleasurably every day to Evelyn 's passionate sense of order . Razor , razor - towel , chair , bath - towel , mat , mirror , soap , height and temperature of water in the bath - each item be arrange strictly in accordance with the changeless daily formula . and he enjoy the spectacle this morning , but absently . 

 he be not think of Mrs. O'Riordan . he be think : " what be I alive for ? what be my justification for be alive and working ? I can not keep on create the Palace . I have create it . the thing be do . I can not   do it again . " 

 for the first time he be address to his soul the terrible comprehensive question , which corrode the very root of content in the existence of million of less fortunate people , but which have never even present itself to Evelyn until the previous night : 

 " why ? " 

 if Henry Savott 's proposition could not furnish the answer to the question , what could ? as late as within the last twenty four hour - nay , twelve hour - he have be condemn Savott 's scheme as a dastardly and hateful conspiracy to be counter at any cost . only a minute ago he have be hat it . but now the visionary project be change its appearance : and in spite of himself he see in it the chance of salvation - he who but a little early would have deride any hypothesis that he need salvation . 

 he shave with cautious tranquillity . he lie long in the warm water ; and as he lie a lamp seem to be ignite in his brain , and it burn up slowly into a steady flame which illuminate the whole of his brain . and it be the figure and symbol of Savott 's scheme , and the one veritable answer to that dread conundrum : why be he alive , and why should he go on living ? and though he try to pretend that his brain be dark , he could not , because of the convincing brightness of the lamp . and even when , reluctantly , he withdraw himself from the warm water and with a towel violently rub his skin as if he would rub out the flame itself , it still burn unwaveringly . and Evelyn have to carry the lamp into the bedroom . in the bedroom he behold all his clothe lay out accord to formula and with the zealous accuracy of a man who know why he be alive and have find the reason completely satisfactory . 

 then , while he be seat at the mirror tie his cravat , there be a tap on the door and the door open , and Oldham enter , consternation on his pale , flabby face . 

 " Mrs. O'Riordan be in the sitting - room , sir , " say Oldham , ashame , shock by his own tiding . 

 " what ? " 

 with admirable presence of mind Evelyn neither turn his gaze from the mirror nor cease to tie the cravat . 

 " she want to see you at once , sir . " 

 " who let she into the room ? " 

 " she come in , sir . " 

 " but I think she be ill . " 

 " yes , sir . " 

 " what time be it ? " 

 " twenty minute to eight , sir . " 

 " now , look here , Oldham . " Evelyn swing round on the chair . " get she out . use your famous tact . say I be late . say I be not dress . tell she I will come along and see she in her own room as quickly as possible . " 

 " yes , sir , " Oldham agree , doubtfully , and depart . 

 Evelyn have not be able to extinguish the lamp , but this unparalleled occurrence extinguish it . scarcely could he believe what he have hear . what ! a member of the staff invade his sacred castle , and before breakfast ! such an act be unheard of in all the history of Evelyn 's panjandrumship . nobody dare to come into his castle , save upon special request and as a favour - and never on hotel business . Mrs. O'Riordan must have have one of her rare nerve - storm . but even so - ! he be all spruce and ready to leave the bedroom before Oldham return . 

 " well ? " he ask , show anxiety despite an effort to hide it . 

 " she be go , sir . " 

 " be she dress ? " 

 " well , sir , she be dress , as you might call it . " 

 " what do you mean ? " 

 " a negleejay , sir . " Oldham depart once more . 

 Evelyn pass through the now disordered and sloppy - floored bathroom into the sitting - room , which be as clean and bright as a new pin . he ring the bell , sit down to the breakfast table , and open " the Times . " first he look at the City page and note that Imperial Palace share have rise one - eighth . good ! then he turn to the obituary and to the announcement of betrothal , wedding , birth , death , dinner - party , reception ; for it be part of his work , as of Cousin 's and Adolphe 's and Cappone 's and Ruffo 's , to maintain close familiarity with the daily annal of the great self - advertising world . then on the sport page his eye catch a paragraph about Woolwich Arsenal Football Club . then Oldham bring in breakfast . 

 " I say , Oldham , " he enquire with seem vivacious interest , " what be this about the Arsenal this season ? " 

 he hop to get one up on Oldham in the matter of football news , but as usual his hope be disappoint . Oldham have see the news in another paper , his own , where it be a front - page item . the man 's sole distraction be Association Football . as a slim youth he have play centre - half . he seldom attend a match ; in fact he attend a match no oftener than he attend his wife , who live in a berkshire village . but he always know all about all team , player , match . the desire of his life be to win a L1,000 prize offer by a Sunday paper for twenty - two correct result . he have never get beyond eighteen ; and Evelyn pray that he would stick eternally at eighteen , lest l1,000 in cash might ruin he both as a man and as a valet . Evelyn have no curiosity whatever about Association Football or about Rugby either ; he keep a careless attention on Association news solely in order to be able to discuss it intelligently with Oldham , who love to display his vast knowledge . this morning they talk at some length . but the conversation be a piece of bravado , a horrible and unconvincing make - believe . both be humiliatingly aware of its false character . each know that the other be obsess , worried , appalled , overset by Mrs. O'Riordan 's shocking , incredible invasion in a negligé . both have be unmanned thereby . but each nevertheless be nobly determined to play the intrepid man in face of insu1ting behaviour and oncoming trouble . 

 Oldham leave . in five minute he come back , freight with still bad news . 

 " Mr. Plimsing be outside , sir , " say he , have carefully shut the door . " wish to see you , sir . " 

 " what next ? " cry Evelyn , push away his plate with a gesture betray serious agitation . Oldham intensify the woe in his visage . " what do you tell he ? " 

 " nothing , sir . " 

 Evelyn raise his voice slightly : " well , tell he this . tell he I can not   see he here . tell he I will see he in my office at nine o'clock . no . I will see he here at nine o'clock . and not before . I do not   care how urgent his business be . I wonder what be come over the place this morning ! " 

 Mr. Plimsing be the hotel detective ; formerly in the C.I.D. department of Scotland Yard . 

 content 
 chapter 26 

 NERVE - STORM 

 " how sweet of you to come ! " murmur Mrs. O'Riordan sweetly , as Evelyn enter her sitting - room . 

 she recline on a sofa which have be draw up near the hearth , where a small fire burn . her slim body be envelop in a rosy negligé , a magnificent garment . her head rest on a small white embroider pillow , under which be three variegate and ribboned cushion . she smile with a coquettish consciousness of grace , of the exceed neatness of her grey - white coiffure , of the rouged and powdered finish of her lip and complexion , and of the elegance of her wrist and manicure hand emerge from the lacy sleeve . but the most elegant thing on the sofa be a black cat , curl up on the eiderdown cover her foot . Mrs. O'Riordan 's attitude and demeanour combine those of a Madame Récamier and an Olympia , inviting , refusing , teasing , voluptuous , intelligent . 

 the room be over - full of furniture and knickknack and flower . portrait of man , woman and mansion throng the wall . the room be a boudoir . but in one hand Mrs. O'Riordan hold some letter , and at her side , on a pouf , sit a young , pink - faced , short - frocked secretary , notebook open on knee . the Récamier , the Olympia , the odalisque , have be dictate answer to correspondence . 

 Evelyn 's apprehension momentarily vanish at the warm spectacle of the domestic interior . he think : " I can deal with this all right . " and he think what a shame it be that such a woman , such a cunning piece of femininity , should be compel by fate to knit her brow over business when she ought to be occupy solely with her ageless charm , the attraction of her boudoir , and the responsiveness of man to her fine art . monstrous it be that she , whose function in life be obviously to scatter money , should have to earn it , and in order to earn it should be dictate letter at 8.30 a.m. the whole situation be against nature . he have always know , or at any rate guess , that Mrs. O'Riordan be somewhat ardently feminine ; but never before have he have such evidence of her temperament . the sight amount to a sudden revelation ; for he have not be in her sitting - room for year , and not once have he see she in aught but the strict shin head - housekeeper 's black . 

 he say nothing , wave his hand vaguely as though it hold his stick , wait . 

 " Shoo ! Run ! " say Mrs. O'Riordan to the little secretary , frown , rather crossly . in an instant her face have assume its smile . 

 " she be wound up ; all nerve ; a bit hysterical , " think Evelyn . 

 the little secretary jump to her foot , and , with a shy , pleasant glance at Evelyn , obediently hurry out of the room . 

 " you do not   look ill , " say Evelyn . " what be this I hear about you be ill ? " 

 " Pleurisy , " say Mrs. O'Riordan 

 " Pleurisy ? " he exclaim . 

 " oh ! if you do not   believe I , just look . " she raise her head and shoulder , and with one hand pull down the negligé at the back , expose one shoulder - blade and the edge of a white undergarment . " come near and look . " it be a command that she utter . Evelyn see the end of a series of strip of plaster . 

 " you see how he be plaster I all up . " 

 " who ? " 

 " Dr. Constam of course . " Dr. Constam be the young hotel - doctor . " so that when I move , the pleura will not   rub . I send for he before seven o'clock . I have such a sharp pain . it be only a very slight attack , but it be pleurisy . " she lower her head on to the pillow . " and that be not all . he say there be something funny about my liver . well , I always know there be . the gallbladder be not   work properly . but otherwise I feel very well . only he be tell I I must keep as quiet as I can . as if I could ! " 

 " and your idea of keep quiet be to come down to see I before I be dress ! " say Evelyn , with a gentle , sardonic smile 

 " you be not   very sympathetic . Pleurisy 's pleurisy , you know . it be nothing yet ; but it might be very serious if it be not   take in hand at once . I have   have it before . " 

 " well , you ought to be in bed , then . " 

 " I be in bed , practically . I be only lie here while my bed be be make . he say I must not   eat any fat - that be because of the gall - bladder , or drink any alcohol - or as little as I can . I shall certainly drink some . I come down to see you because I just could not   wait . I know it be very naughty of I . I know you be God . Mr. Cousin think he be God too , but he be not . do sit down . I want to talk to you . " 

 " very well . but ought not   you to leave everything till you be well ? " 

 " no , I ought not , " say Mrs. O'Riordan . Evelyn be move about the room , carelessly examine the portrait . " and please do sit down . you fidget I . please ! " 

 Evelyn sit , at some distance from the sofa , on a chair by the sideboard . yes , he think , Mrs. O'Riordan be in a strange , sensitive mood , a mood surprising to he . she have cease to be an employee . he have cease to be the Director of the Imperial Palace . he be a man , and she be a woman , and she know her power and be use it , with a grand impetuous disregard of their relative position . despite her alleged malady , she seem to be uplifted , and responsive ; Evelyn feel uplifted also . he enjoy his plight . the cat stand up on Mrs. O'Riordan 's hidden ankle , yawn , arch its back , and gaze at Evelyn with real contempt . 

 " well ? " Evelyn calmly encourage the invalid , fold his hand and cross one knee over the other . he say to himself that Mrs. O'Riordan would have to look much more like a sick woman than she do before he could behave to she as one . he have , however , quite forgive her scandalous and untimely invasion of his castle . 

 " it be about Miss Brury , " say Mrs. O'Riordan , stroke the cat , which have stroll up to her shoulder . " Darling ! "   this to the cat .   " she come to see I last night . she want to be take back . she cry and I cry , and any woman with any heart would have cry . this notion that man have that woman be hard on one another be ridiculous . it be man that be hard on woman , and do not   we know it ! Alice say she have not   get a penny - give all she have to her married sister , who have about a thousand child - what a husband ! - and she simply dare not   ask for another place because everyone will know what happen here . and why should not   she come back ? tired to death , and she have to deal with a drunken thief in the cloak - room - " 

 " Drunken ? " 

 " yes . " 

 " you never say that before . " 

 " because I do not   think of it . and Miss Brury do not   either . good - natured woman do not   think these horrid thing of one another . but it occur to I all of a sudden . and so I send down to Cappone to find out what that precious party have have to drink . hock . a bottle and a half of champagne . three port , and three armagnac . she must have be drunk - or halfdrunk . but some of they hide it so cleverly . so I go to see Cousin immediately . this be last night . he be just leave , and I keep he over three - quarter of an hour , and glad I be I do too ! what annoy I in Mr. Cousin be he be always so calm . it be unnatural - especially in a Frenchman . a Frenchman ought to know that a woman with something on her mind hardly like talk to a stone wall . well , Mr. Cousin do not   seem to know that . he just say Alice could not   be take back , and she could not   and she could not   and she could not . the pain I have get bad and bad . I tell he I be very unwell , but do you suppose he care ? no more than you do , Mr. Orcham ! " 

 " I be very sorry , " say Evelyn . 

 " yes . you look as if you be ! you would not   see I before because you be in your brace , and now you be twiddle yourthumb and you be ' ve ry sorry . ' " Mrs. O'Riordan laugh with a surprising attractiveness which her remark belie . 

 Evelyn , fear that her gaiety might at any moment turn to hysterical sobbing , smile with prudence . but he remain in a conditionsecretly uplifted . 

 2 . 

 " I be afraid we can not   have Miss Brury back at the Palace , " he say . 

 " of course you man always agree . " 

 " but I will find she another place , if you really want I to . " 

 " where ? " 

 " well , at the Laundry . " 

 " at the Laundry ! " 

 " why not ? " 

 " oh , nothing ! only it be an insult . I have not   train Alice to iron shirt and pant . " 

 " she might be staff - manageress . it be an excellent job . " 

 " glad to hear it ! " say Mrs. O'Riordan , with charming scorn . but in spite of herself she be a little bit dash by the splendour of the offer . she go on : " of course when a girl be in a hole , through no fault of her own , and have not   a penny , you can safely humiliate she , and she be oblige to thank you for humiliate she . do not   I know ! I daresay you think I be be impudent . " 

 " not at all , " Evelyn reply blandly . " I like you when you be very ill - like this . " 

 and he do . instead of resent her present lack of self - control , he admire , as never before , the extraordinary self - control which almost continuously for year and year she have manage to maintain in the past . he appreciate , now , the tremendous effort which it must have entail for she : keep the peace among a pack of woman and girl ; mollify and kowtow to a pack of hypercritical visitor ; try to prevent the unscrupulous visitor from steal coat - hanger and ashtray and even electroplate - for the Palace , like all hotel , be no well than a den of well - dress thief ; watch over the sewing - repair ; placate the Works Department , especially when trouble arise between the Works carpenter and her own private carpenter who carpenter exclusively within the hotel ; pester and be pester by the electrician , dictate her wordy letter ; pass on complaint about room meal to the grill - room chef ; clash herself against the insensate rock which be Mr. Cousin ; get up early and go to bed late ; always , always , be sweetly diplomatic with the panjandrum ; and always , always pretend that she allow nothing to worry she or ever would ! she , the Olympia - Récamier on the couch ! she be marvellous . let she break out . let she be impudent . let she be as womanish as she choose . she have earn the right to be so . the truth indeed be that brief intercourse with Gracie Savott have somehow give Evelyn a new insight into woman and quicken his sympathy for they . strange , consider the way Gracie have behave ! but it be so . 

 " oh ! so you like impudence ! " she raise her eyebrow seductively , and her clear voice be seductive . 

 " yes , when it be your , mother . " 

 " please do not   call I mother , " she snap , in quite another voice , frown suddenly . 

 " you darling ! " he nearly say as he cajolingly smile , as to a petulant young beauty . what be wrong with she ? be it merely liver and a touch of pleurisy ? everyone refer to she as mother . she frequently , with pride in her tone , refer to herself as mother . he himself , and several other in the hierarchy , often address she as mother . " Sister , " he correct aloud , while sustain the smile . 

 " I hate to be call mother , and if you be so hard on poor Alice Brury I can not   understand why you should make such a fuss about chambermaid have to open their bag and thing to that brute Maxon . yes , I get your note . I do not   answer it because I be so angry . of course it be not nice for girl to have to open their bag . do you imagine we have not   think of it ? as a matter of fact I long since start a system of they show their bag to their housekeeper . but housekeeper can not   always be on the spot to O.K. the bag with a bit of chalk . and even if they be , what be to prevent the girl from get a friend to hand they something on the stair as they go down ? it all seem easy and simple to you ; but you be a man and you do not   know . any chambermaid could get the well of you . chambermaid be awful . they would leave as soon as look at you . and you have to be after they the whole damn time . just ask Miss Maclaren . she could tell you a few thing . chambermaid , oh yes ! but when it come to Alice Brury , who be be perfect , you be absolutely flinty , you and your Mr. Cousin ! " 

 Evelyn say : 

 " but it must not   be forget that the unhappy Alice leave we at a moment 's notice . I mean without any notice at all . " 

 " yes , " cry Mrs. O'Riordan . " and that be what I be go to do ! I be too young for this place . that be what be the matter with I ! " 

 her voice have rise sharply . she have be lie on her back . now she twist her body a little , lay one cheek on the embroidered pillow , and throw she right arm over her face . the letter slip from her right hand and float down to the carpet . the cat jump after they and they rustle beneath its paw . a strange sound be hear - Mrs. O'Riordan sob . Evelyn , in accordance with his habit when he could not decide what to do , do nothing . he be startle . 

 " she will get over this , " he think . " it be the beginning of the end of the nerve - storm . she will be through in about a minute now . then she will be sorry . they be always like that . " 

 he have never conceive the Imperial Palace without its mother . probably nobody have . but to his own surprise the conception of the Imperial Palace without its mother at once attract he . she be charming , efficient , conscientious . still , she be undeniably sixty - two ; and who could go on for ever ? already several time it have occur to Evelyn that ' if anything happen ' - and who could go on for ever ? - there be always Miss Maclaren , who be scottish - well than be English , Welsh or Irish ! - have work on every floor of the hotel in turn , and have carry on quite smoothly in the stead of Mrs. O'Riordan during the mother 's last summer holiday . if mother have die , the Imperial Palace would have survive , and if mother choose to retire the Imperial Palace would survive . Emile Cousin at any rate would support the blow with fortitude . the slowly develop antipathy between those two have be cause some mild concern to Evelyn . nevertheless the retirement of mother , if indeed she really mean to retire , would be a mighty and reverberate event in the domestic life and politic of the Palace . 

 3 . 

 Mrs. O'Riordan , have cease to sob , be softly weep , but she have presence of mind enough to draw a handkerchief from a pocket inside her negligé and dab her eye . Evelyn see she gaze at he from under her arm . the eye be glint and gleam at he . 

 " you might rescue those letter from the cat , " Mrs. O'Riordan murmur . 

 Evelyn obey . 

 " you be well now , be not   you ? " he say , bend over she . " perhaps you could sleep a little . " 

 " well ! " she say , with amazing swift brightness and lightness . " I could not   be well . I be only cry because I be so happy . I be much too happy to sleep . Sleep ! I would not   sleep for anything ! I be go to be marry . that be really why I come down to see you this morning - to tell you ! I want you to be the first to hear about it . but when you walk in here I do not   know just how to begin . you frighten I . you frighten everybody . " 

 Evelyn move away , laugh . 

 " well , I do not   see anything to laugh at , " the mother protest . 

 " I be only laugh because I be so happy - in your happiness , " Evelyn retort . " may one ask who be the favourite of fortune ? " 

 Mrs. O'Riordan sit up and face her employer . 

 " Colonel Sir Brian Milligan , Bart . - age sixty - eight , if you do not   mind . " she gaze at Evelyn in splendid triumph . " look at I , " her gaze seem to say to he . " I be the future Lady Milligan . and I be too young to be the mother of this hotel . I be young enough to catch a man and hold he even if I be only a hotel - housekeeper . any man , except cold - blooded fish like you and your Frenchman ! " 

 Evelyn 's eye glisten with pleasure . he be proud of mother , enrapture with her conquest . he know something about Milligan , who be an irregular diner and luncher in the grill - room and have once spend a few night in the hotel . how clever of she to entrance and enchant this not - unknown figure of a Colonel ! and the future Lady Milligan would conscientiously and brilliantly play her part in the affair . she have preside in drawing - room before , and she would preside in drawing - room again . no more early morning for she , no business correspondence , organising , diplomacy , repression , unnatural deprivation ! she would be able to be fully her natural self . she would be pet , spoilt - she would see to that ! she would lead the fine old fellow a dance ; but so delicately , so deliciously ! do he good too ! she who be ' too young ' at sixty - two , she who would never be old , would rejuvenate he in spite of himself . have she not be young enough to invade even Evelyn 's castle in her girlish anxiety to announce the tiding ? and Evelyn be the first to know ! 

 he secretly chuckle at the thought of the liveliness of the married life of those two , and of the surprise that await Sir Brian . some of the surprise would be exquisite , some not . no ! they would all be exquisite , but some would be disturbing . her nerve - storm would test his masculine calm and authority . she would never go too far . she would always win , while often appear to lose . she be infernally clever . have she not be clever enough to hide the growth of the extraordinary idyll from all the world ? how she have manage that , Evelyn neither know nor care . she have manage it . 

 " he be rich , be not   he ? " he ask . 

 Mrs. O'Riordan 's demure reply be : 

 " we be very fond of one another . very fond . I adore he - but do not   tell he that when you meet he - and I shall try my hard to make he happy . " 

 Evelyn accept the rebuke . 

 " you will succeed , " he say . " it be a certainty . " 

 " of course , " she say . " at my age I do not   want to be silly and talk about passion . and yet - " she stop , and smile innumerable implication . " you know , his father live to be ninety - eight , and get himself into frightful trouble with a housemaid three year before he die . and Brian 's exactly like a boy . d'you know , he write poetry ! nobody see it but I and he make I tear it up . at least he think he do . naturally I keep it . I would not   destroy it for anything . I mean of course I do tear up the paper , but I learn it off first . he would be furious if he know . he be very passionate , by temperament . I have   tell you his age . but what be that ? sixty - eight - and a boy ! " 

 " and you be twenty - two , " say Evelyn . " the six be a misprint for a two . " 

 " you be nice , " she say , with sudden tenderness . 

 " I feel nice , " say Evelyn . he do . he think he have never be so happy , never behold a spectacle so ravish as the spectacle of the feminine half of this idyll . " when be you go to get marry ? " 

 " ah ! " say Mrs. O'Riordan , mother and head - housekeeper of the Imperial Palace Hotel . " that will depend on you . I will not   leave you in the lurch . " 

 Evelyn have an impulse to say : 

 " you can leave now . you can get married to - morrow . you can begin your honeymoon to - morrow night . " but he check himself . he would not wound she by imply that a personage so important could be dispense with as easily as an Alice Brury , could depart and leave no trace of difficulty behind . 

 he say : 

 " now listen to I , bride . this hotel will not be allow to interfere with your happiness . you make your plan , and this hotel will fit in with they . I know you be the impatient sort . " 

 " I be not . " 

 " yes , you be . you do all you can to hide it , but if you imagine you have   hide it from I you be wrong . " 

 " but what shall you do ? " 

 " oh ! never mind . something . " 

 " but I do mind , " she object plaintively , touchily . " I be very interested . " 

 " of course you be ... well , what about raise Miss Maclaren to the throne ? " 

 " she be rather Scotch and stolid . " 

 " she may be . but she be a rock . " 

 " yes . but she be rather young for the post . " 

 Evelyn laugh . 

 " I like that , " say he . " I like that from you , of all people . here I have   be entrust the entire place to a girl of twenty - two for year and year , and now I be tell Miss Maclaren 's too young ! " Mrs. O'Riordan give a pouting , delighted smile . " however , we will talk it over . " he decide that he would not ask her approval of Violet Powler . why should he ? new appointment be no long any concern of her . he would only formally submit the girl to she . " I must go now . remember what I say , please . the hotel shall fit into your plan . by the way , I suppose I can tell the staff ? " 

 " about I ? I wish you would . I be rather nervous about tell they myself . " 

 " I will tell they . and I will come in and see you later in the day when I be somewhat calm , and wish you every happiness . and you do as you be order and go to bed . " he go to the door ; then pause . " we shall give you a dinner . I mean the head of department . not more than thirty . quite informal . I shall ask Mr. Dover too . " 

 " my dear sir , " say Mrs. O'Riordan . " you must not . I could not   bear it . I should feel so - " 

 " we shall give you a dinner , " Evelyn repeat . " and you will bear it magnificently . of course you will cry . but they will all love to see you cry . I expect I be the only person who have see you cry - and I only this once ... I must run . " 

 Mrs. O'Riordan shake her head . 

 " not a dinner , " she weakly murmur . 

 " yes , a dinner . I suppose you expect a wedding - present . what would Sir Brian think if we let you go without give you a wedding - present ? well , there will be a dinner . no dinner , no present . " 

 he kiss his hand to she and left . the next instant he return , into the room , mischievous . 

 " I say , " he smile , " it seem you can not   keep off your irish Colonels . get quite a habit with you . " 

 she be fondle the cat , whose purring be clearly audible . she say , with dignity : 

 " not at all . Sir Brian be a friend of both my husband . " 

 " and no doubt he have a house in County Meath , " Evelyn pursue , not to be dash . 

 " and what if he have ? " she laugh self - consciously , frown as well as laugh . 

 " I know it , " say Evelyn . 

 he walk back to his room with the studied sedateness proper to a panjandrum . but he be in the high spirit . 

 content 
 chapter 27 

 CRIME 

 " good morning , sir , " say Plimsing , who be wait outside the gate of Evelyn 's castle . 

 " Morning , Plimsing , " say Evelyn , look at his watch . " one minute late . sorry to keep you . come in . what be it ? " 

 Plimsing raise his left arm . he never lose a fair chance to consult his wrist - watch , which be ornament with diamond and the Spanish royal insignia . 

 " if the train on the Southern Railway be only a minute late , sir , life would be much simple for some of we , " say Plimsing , with a courtly Foreign Office air . he live beyond the Crystal Palace . 

 Evelyn smile almost ingratiatingly . like all respectable people , he be conscious of a desire to stand well with policeman , and when he meet they would instinctively suit his demeanour to the occasion . 

 not that the hotel - detective be a policeman ; nor ever have be . tall , burly and fair , rosy - cheeked , with a large fair moustache , he have the appearance of a beef - feed british farmer , except that his black suit , include a morning coat , and his gleam tie - pin show a little more smartness of style than the agricultural . but he do also resemble a policeman , and in mackintosh overall and white armlet he would not have seem out of place conduct the orchestral traffic of Piccadilly Circus on a wet day . 

 he be still appreciably under fifty . as an officer   detective inspector   of the Criminal Investigation Department at Scotland Yard he have be allow , thank to his fluency in a language which he imagine to be french , to specialise in the protective surveillance of distinguished foreign official visitor to London . also on similar duty he have accompany british prince abroad . it be soon after the vicissitude of the war that Evelyn have put a spell upon he , to the detriment of Scotland Yard , with which , however , Plimsing 's relation have remain intimate and very cordial . outside the hotel Plimsing usually refer to the Imperial Palace as ' my hotel . ' he use in professional conversation such word and phrase as ' police - circle , ' ' we '   mean ' we police ' , ' subtle individual , ' ' one of your super - prostitutes , ' ' energetic action , ' and ' H.R.H. ' how his vigilance for potentate , politician and prince specially fit he for the preservation of order and common honesty in a large hotel neither he nor anybody else could have say : certainly not Evelyn ; but it give he a tremendous prestige with visitor , and a lot of prestige even with Evelyn , who have choose he partly on that account , but more because of his quiet , compose manner and voice , and his twinkling , rather naive expression . despite his expression he talk of the bad turpitude and immorality of hotel - thief , man and woman , with the bland casualness of a clergyman discuss the weather . apparently no infamous vagary of human nature could surprise he or in the least degree trouble his calm of a virtuous householder reside in an impeccable suburb somewhere beyond the Crystal Palace . in short , he be as entirely benign as a policeman hold up a hundred motor - car for the passage of a perambulator . 

 " what be it ? " Evelyn repeat , within the room . they both stand . - 

 " rather a busy morning , sir , " plimsing begin , finger his tie - pin , which carry the British royal insignia . " I happen to be here early on another matter when I receive information to the effect that the second - floor valet be call to roomwent in and leave his pass - key in the door . this procedure be of course quite contrary to regulation , and I have tell he so . when he come out the pass - key be go . as I say to he , I take a very serious view of this culpable negligence ; for , as I need not point out to you , sir , even if the pass - key come back a duplicate of it could have be make in the meantime . I regard it as so serious that I take the liberty of call here to tell you at once , as Mr. Cousin be not yet on duty . however , it be all right , sir . since I see Oldham I make enquiry , and on the strength of certain information receive I telephone to Scotland Yard , have two individual in my mind 's eye , and they send an officer in an express car to the Majestic , where both individual be arrest , and on be search one man be find to have the pass - key in his left - hand hip - pocket . smart work , sir , if I may say so , have take no part in the identification . " 

 " very . most satisfactory , " say Evelyn . 

 " I may add that I should have go to the Majestic myself , sir , to take observation ; but I be prevent by an Amsterdam diamond merchant , also fifth floor , who be just leave and could not find a pair of trouser , which he allege must have be steal during the night . after some search and a little cross - examination I convince he that he be wear they . he be so apologetic that I venture to ask he if he would let I drive with he to Victoria , as he be go to Paris by the 8.20 Newhaven - Dieppe . he do so , and give I valuable information about diamond , of which he have a large quantity on his person , in a receptacle stitch to the back of his necktie , sir . I be glad to know this . he invite I to feel they , which I do . " 

 2 . 

 " I congratulate you , " say Evelyn , somewhat impatiently . " I be rather pressed for time . Mrs. O'Riordan be leave we , and I have to make arrangement . " he give the enormous news with an intonation as casual as he could assume . he could no long keep it to himself . 

 " ah ! " say Plimsing , twinkle . " go to marry Sir Brian Milligan at last , I presume , sir . " 

 " yes , " say Evelyn shortly , with a casualness which do even great credit to his histrionic power than his statement of the news . for he be astounded and ashamed by this demonstration of recondite knowledge on the part of the detective . how come it that Plimsing have know so much and he , Evelyn , nothing at all ? he want to question Plimsing , but from pride he would not . also Plimsing have completely take the wind out of his sail . 

 " I will not detain you , sir , " the detective smoothly proceed with a diplomatic movement towards the door . " but you will be relieve to know that the matter of the so - call Mrs. de Rassiter be now settle . I shall submit a formal report in due course . " 

 " Mrs. de Rassiter ? " 

 " the mink - fur lady , sir . she have be identify as a female who be fin for be drunk and disorderly in Soho in the early hour of the day before yesterday morning . I call on Messrs. Murkett and Co. , formerly Murkett and Mostlethwaite , the solicitor who send you that lawyer 's letter by messenger about the alleged miss fur . they have also send in a claim to an insurance company , as I ascertain by enquiry , act on a hint from my friend at the Yard . must have get the drink at a night - club in Greek Street , but she probably have have a good deal before leave here . so I surmise from what I hear of her behaviour before she leave . a very shady firm , Murketts , sir . Mostlethwaite be already inside , and Murkett will soon be there too if he be not   careful . " 

 " ' inside ' ? " 

 " yes , sir . in prison . no one can understand why Murkett have not   be strike off the roll . I insist on see Mr. Murkett . I say to he , I say : ' perhaps you be not   aware that your client 's real name be Ebag . ' I say no more . Mrs. Ebag leave by the 8.20newhaven - Dieppe this morning , sir . that be why I be so anxious to be there . I want to be quite sure . sorry I could not   have she arrest , but there have be no time to assemble my evidence . she will come back to London . they always do . they can not   keep off , no more than rook off a cornfield . I do not   want to tell you anything until I could tell you everything . I know how busy you be . but as I be here ... good morning , sir . and I hope I have   not detain you . " 

 " not at all , plimse . you have   do excellently . " 

 " thank you , sir . " plimsing raise his left wrist again . 

 " then you think the woman be a bit ' on ' when she make the row m the cloakroom . " 

 " I should say so , sir . if she have not   be she would never have begin the thing . I soon make up my mind that the coup have not be prepare . good morning , sir . you will not   hear another word from Murketts . " 

 Plimsing depart , with thought of ask for an increase of salary . 

 content 
 chapter 28 

 COUSIN 

 after a minute Evelyn leave his castle . on the surface of his mind float light thought about the efficient and stately detective . have he a wife ? Evelyn have learn less about he than about any of the other principal member of the upper - staff , plimse be somehow in a class by himself . if he have a wife , do he address formal speech to she in the style of his speech to Evelyn ? " have write and duly deliver my report for the day to Mr. Cousin , Maria , I proceed , by motor - bus , to Victoria and catch the 6.5 . , in which I occupy a compartment with three gentleman , one of whom I know slightly and exchange with he a few word about the financial situation in the City , " etc . or be he a different kind of man at home , who fondle and tousle his fat wife , who tell he not to be a silly old fool , and upon request give he a glass of beer as a preliminary to supper ? and be his brain aware that his eye be humorous and his professional deportment enough to make a cat laugh ? 

 beneath the light thought , graver thought . mystery of an immortal soul ! Evelyn be environ by mystery . friendly with all his colleague and subordinate , he know none of they , except Dennis Dover . he be more like a man on a desert island than the vitalise centre of a vast organisation . something ought to be do about it . yes , since the encounter with Gracie Savott , and the great encounter with her father , new perception have awaken in he . and beneath these graver thought , a thought , one thought , one burn mass of a thought : the thought of Fate 's injustice to Miss Alice Brury . he picture to himself the young woman , full - bosomed , with full lip and large eye that belie she train , stiff , formal demeanour and her excellent , earnest , conscientious intention . there be two Miss Brurys , as there be two Mrs. O'Riordans . of the latter he have see both . of the former he have see only one , but now he be divine the other . 

 from sheer devotion to duty Alice Brury have take a very delicate social situation out of the hand of her inferior , the cloak - room attendant . why should she be blame for not guess that her opponent be semi - intoxicated ? to distinguish between the half - drunk and the sober be notoriously a matter of excessive difficulty ; expert continually come to quite opposite conclusion in it . Miss Brury have fail in the affair . she have lose her head under the strain , show sign of hysteria , and - bad sin of all against the steely code of the hotel - raise her voice ! then she have run away , desert her post , in desperation and despair . in other word , from an inhuman housekeeper she have descend - or be it ascend ? - to be a human woman . she be certainly somebody 's daughter ; she might be somebody 's sweetheart . five minute ' lack of self - control , and her career be in the way to be ruin ! Cousin have be adamantine against her readmission into the cosmo of inhumanity . and Cousin be right . rule be rule . he , Evelyn , could not possibly gainsay Cousin in Cousin 's own kingdom . nevertheless the thing be monstrous , utterly and absolutely monstrous . Evelyn uneasily wonder how many similar affair , less spectacular , have happen unknown to his almightiness in the secret annal of the hotel ... and yet , for personal reason , he would prefer that Miss Brury should not come back . he have discover Miss Powler . Miss Powler be his invention , his pet aspirant . he see in her unlimited potentiality . if Miss Brury come back , Miss Powler could not be admit ; and therefore the problem at the Laundry would remain unsolved . he must talk to Cousin , and , to be fair to Cousin , he must take heed not to have any air of authority in the discussion . 

 he go downstairs , nod absently here and there to employee of various grade , and open the withdraw door over which gleam in light the formidable word : " Manager 's Office . " an alert , bright , smile secretary be at her desk in the ante - room , do something with the mouth of one of the pneumatic tube through which repair - slip and other notification be despatch to subterranean den . 

 " good morning , Mr. Orcham . " the secretarial face mystically beam the tiding that ' mother ' be engage to be marry . 

 with an answer smile , but silently , Evelyn pass she and walk straight into Cousin 's private room - an apartment worthy of Cousin 's high position . a startled young man spring up from the managerial chair at the managerial desk , like a jack - in - the - box . 

 this be Monsieur Pozzi , the assistant - manager of the hotel , a Frenchman , a protégé of Cousin 's , with both continental and London experience , and a perfect command of the english language . he have be in the service of the Imperial Palace for about six month , but Evelyn have have little or nothing to do with he . it be understand that he give plenary satisfaction to his immediate chief . some notion of his importance be convey by the fact that he have receive permission to send out his own Christmas card to the clientele . at that moment he be make a rough sketch of the greeting . not more than seven or eight of the upper staff have the right to distribute their personal good wish to the clientele . Pozzi be more than French ; he be parisian , though with some admixture of italian blood . he be indeed startle by Evelyn 's abrupt and unexpected entry , but not a bit perturb . he smile ; he bow gracefully ; he be grace itself - slim , sinuous , elegant , correct , charming , easy without sauciness , self - respect without rigidity . 

 " Mr. Cousin will be here in one minute , sir . he be just have a word with Ruffo . " 

 " oh ! " say Evelyn , sit down on the sofa . " what about ? Ruffo 's here early this morning . " 

 " yes , sir . there be no big banquet last night . it be about some little difficulty over extra waiter for to - night . " 

 " I see , " say Evelyn , rather drily , as one who be aware of occasional slight friction between Ruffo and the restaurant - manager over the transfer of first - flight head - waiter from the restaurant to Ruffo 's department for very special banquet . 

 " I wonder , sir , " say Pozzi , at his most attractive , stand dutifully in front of Evelyn on the sofa , " whether I might ask you a great favour . " 

 " you can ask , my boy , " Evelyn answer , with a sardonic benignity . 

 " it be this , sir . you probably know that a few of we , Adolphe , Dr. Constam , Major Linklater , and myself , have a little lunch - mess of our own in 156 . Rocco have take to golf , and we be give he a club , or a set of club . there will be a lunch . Mr. Cousin have promise to come , and if youwould kindly come and preside , we should all be very delighted . and I need not   say how flattered Rocco would be . " 

 " but it would mean that I should have to subscribe towards the club . " 

 " oh no , sir ! we should not   dream of such a thing . Mr. Cousin be not subscribe . " 

 " no , " say Evelyn . " but I be . here ! " he pull a ten shilling note from his waistcoat pocket . 

 " really , sir ? " 

 " take it , " Evelyn command . 

 Young Pozzi obey , blush . yes , a blush clearly visible on his olive skin ! 

 " you be a sport , sir , " he exclaim , almost dance , with the effusiveness of youth - for he be a mere thirty - one , and young at that . " thank you ever so much . " 

 no formalism . no constraint . but freshness , naturalness , youthful vivacity . Evelyn suddenly realise that he live in a world of constraint . only sometimes at the daily conference , when a serious question be on the carpet , do even the foreigner drop their subdue formalism - among themselves , never to Evelyn nor to Cousin . the handling of visitor , every one of whom have to be treat as a sultan , have make hushed formalism a habit with they . Evelyn long for oath , wild word , exorbitant gesture , even impudence to himself , such as he have have that morning from the future Lady Milligan . he think : 

 " this boy be alive . I be not . he be a breath of air in all the stuffiness . " 

 " what be the date of this orgy ? " he ask . 

 " the eighteenth , sir . twelve forty - five . Rocco will make a special effort with the menu . " 

 " write it down for I , will you ? " 

 Pozzi jump to the desk , write , and hand the slip to the panjandrum , who crush it into a trouser - pocket , where he could not possibly overlook it . 

 " that be agree then , " say Evelyn . 

 " Bravo ! Bravo ! " cry Pozzi . 

 2 . 

 Mr. Cousin walk in , sedate , smile , reserve . the secretary have warn he of Evelyn 's arrival . Pozzi , bowing , walk mercurially out , but not before snatch up his Christmas card sketch from the desk . 

 " shall we have the pleasure of see you at the Conference this morning ? " Cousin ask , with his matchless but implacable courtesy . 

 " not unless there be anything urgent . " 

 " nothing urgent for the Conference , but I do want to get your instruction about Miss Brury . Mrs. O'Riordan have a long talk with I here last night . " 

 " of course , " say Evelyn , " the whole situation be alter now that she be leave . " 

 " Leaving ? who ? " 

 " Mrs. O'Riordan . have not   you hear about she ? " 

 " no , " say Cousin , sit down on the sofa by Evelyn 's side . " she be very amiable last night . " 

 inspirit by the discovery of at any rate one person who know less than himself , Evelyn communicate the news of the engagement . naively he expect sign of commotion in the manager 's demeanour , but in an instant be realise his own naiveté . 

 " Tiens ! Tiens ! " Cousin murmur calmly , and continue in French : " well , since six month I have have a little idea that something bizarre be go on in that dear lady . she have have a little air ... of another world ... I do not   know what . indescribable . certainly she have temperament ... at her age ! it be not natural . but what would you ? Englishwomen be always incomprehensible . a mixture so curious . " he half close his eye . " it be bizarre . but nothing could surprise I . for Sir Brian Milligan - there be man to whom it be necessary that they should complicate their life . the excellent baronet be perhaps offer himself in this case a complication more serious than he imagine . but what do I know ? between ourselves , my dear director , I avow frankly that I comprehend nothing , but nothing , of the affair of the heart in this city of London otherwise so sympathetic to I . that be to say , I comprehend as an observer detach , with the brain , but I feel - nothing , but nothing . all that say nothing to I . Madame O'Riordan have indubitably have some luck , and I felicitate she . " 

 Evelyn be aware of the birth of a sense of intimacy with Mr. Cousin . nevertheless he be somewhat dash , in spite of himself . 

 " as regard her successor , what do you think of Maclaren - as a provisional appointment ? " he suggest , abruptly turn the conversation . 

 " ah ! the Maclaren ! yes . that be quite another thing . she be not english . the Maclaren - one can come to an understanding with she . yes , yes . it be an idea , that . happily she be not a femme du monde . Madame O'Riordan have lately have a rage for femme du monde . true , she be one of they herself . but I do not share her view in the matter . to I it be unnatural that a femme du monde should hold a servile situation . it be against nature . it demand that she should play a role . artificial . she must think more about her role than about her work . perhaps among the numerous russian princess that one see now in Paris there be a few capable of persuade themselves to be bear again into a state of servitude . but Russians be Russians . an Englishwoman can never be bear again . it be the aristocratic race , above all . Madame O'Riordan bring to I a candidate for the position of the poor brury . very femme du monde . oh , very ! niece of a knight who blow his brain out . I do not encourage she . " 

 " I agree with you , " say Evelyn warmly , change all his view on the subject in a moment . not with his brain , but with his heart . 

 he see daylight . everything would be easy . Cousin would begin with a prejudice favourable to Violet Powler because she be not a gentlewoman . there could be no friction . he at once tell Cousin about Miss Powler , emphasise her origin , about the delicate position at the Laundry , and about his plan for make an exchange between Miss Brury and Miss Powler . Cousin nod several time . 

 " I be glad , " say Cousin , in English , " that you support I against this extraordinary proposal for take Miss Brury back again . it must happen sometimes that someone must suffer . and Miss Brury have be unfortunate . but to take she back would be impossible unless we be to ignore the interest of the hotel . and your ingenious suggestion would solve the problem . of course I accept it , without reserve . if you be satisfied - " 

 " you have well have a look at Miss Powler for yourself . " 

 " of course . if you wish it . but I be sure - " 

 " I will send for she . " 

 Cousin then seem to resume his habitual mood of taciturnity , after the astonishing exhibition of communicativeness . 

 Evelyn hurry away to his office and to Miss Cass . he be uplifted anew , but differently now . he feel that be be somehow climb out of his groove . dangerous to put an inexperienced woman into a post so important as that relinquish under stress of emotion by Miss Brury . but danger now attract he . and Violet . Powler have all the talent . she would succeed . Miss Brury would be save . Miss Maclaren be acceptable to the Frenchman . Mrs. O'Riordan could not interfere . all thing be work together for good . of course he must see Cyril Purkin and explain . everything must be do quickly , instantly . Miss Cass have a busy time telephone to the laundry - manager to come at one hour , and to Miss Powler to come at another , and telegraph to Miss Brury to come at still another hour . she report that all be in order , and that she have so report to Mr. Cousin . the new heaven and the new earth be in train . 

 content 
 chapter 29 

 VIOLET 'S ARRIVAL 

 another lamp be burn in another brain , Violet Powler 's : which with Evelyn 's lamp in Evelyn 's brain , make two . Violet , all unconscious of what she be do , have bring she bright but materially invisible lamp into the hotel one morning at five minute to ten . accord to instruction she report at Mr. Cousin 's office . but she see only the manager 's secretary , Mr. Cousin be engage at a conference . the secretary , name unknown , be an agreeable and vivacious young woman . she shake hand with Violet , seem to know all about she , and sharply order a page - boy , who have come with a cablegram , to escort Violet to her quarter on the eighth floor . Violet , she explain , be first to install herself and then to report for order to Mrs. O'Riordan , also an inhabitant of the eighth floor . 

 Violet , despite her common sense , think that the secretarial demeanour be somewhat casual , have regard to the importance   for Violet   of the occasion . surely the arrival of a new floor - housekeeper could not be a daily event in the life even of a great hotel ! 

 the secretary , on the other hand , think that Violet 's demeanour be astounding casual , though cordial enough , have regard to the importance of the occasion . surely it could not be a daily event in any girl 's life to walk out of a South London laundry straight to a fine situation in the great hotel on earth ! but the secretary could not see Violet 's lamp . 

 Violet and the tiny page - boy go up in the lift ; the lift - man be very respectful to Violet ; the page - boy find her room and have open the door make as if to leave . 

 " one moment , " say she . " which be Mrs. O'Riordan 's room ? " 

 the page - boy give the indication and point a white - gloved hand . 

 " and what be your name ? " she ask . 

 " John Croom , miss . " and he add , grin , " Jack . " 

 she smile , pat his shoulder ; he leave ; and Violet shut and bolt the door of her new home . 

 it be a smallish room , look on a courtyard . and the courtyard be a deep well   of which Violet could not see the bottom   whose side be white tile inset with tier of window . still , the room be large than the one she have that morning quit in her father 's little house in Battersea , and it be more elegantly furnish : a sort of bed - sit - room , with a sofa and a desk and a business - like nest of drawer in the sit portion of it . 

 her simple and recently fretful and pessimistic mother would have deem it a magnificent apartment . Mrs. Powler have cry at parting , and amid her tear have deplore Violet 's facial make - up and express the hope that Violet would not be allot to an attic whose only window be a skylight . her father , have a rendezvous in Vauxhall , have accompany Violet a certain distance in a tram . they have say good - bye in the tram , and shabby passenger in the huge squalid vehicle have behold with inquisitive wonder the kissing of the shabby old man by the rouged and powdered young lady whose smartness cast doubt upon her virtue . but when moisture show in Violet 's eye the judgment of the passenger be soften and Violet receive the benefit of the doubt . 

 now she drop her bag and her glove and her hat and her thin cloak on the bed . her luggage have be despatch in advance by the simple device of stick a card bear famous initial in the protrude square window of the front room in Renshaw Street . because she apprehend that the luggage might be delay , Violet have decide to leave home in what she inform a suspicious mother be to be her work dress and face . but the luggage have reach its destination . it lie in a pile at the foot of the bed . 

 first she examine critically the interior of the wardrobe , give it ninety mark out of a possible hundred . then she examine herself critically in the wardrobe mirror , and give herself ninety mark out of a hundred . yes , she would pass . brown hair , permanently wave . finger - nail curve in a crescent . black dress buy ready make at a mighty store in Clapham and alter to fit by Violet herself . quite stylish . a thin girdle   for key . new shoe ; new stocking . as for her make - up , it make she feel as if she be in the wing wait to " go on " in Gilbert and Sullivan comic opera - except that the skin under the eye have not be darken . she hop , she be convince , that her face would successfully stand the scrutiny of seven floor - housekeeper and a head - housekeeper . she be hardly at ease , yet , in her new face ; but at any rate it have so far provoke no slight sign of astonishment or dismay on the face of the member of the hotel staff . she unfasten the bag and retouch her feature here and there . then she examine the room more closely . well , it be good in her sight . wash - basin , h. and c. she turn a tap . the h. be tremendously hot . she sit on the bed , spring up and down . soft . on the desk be quite a large vase of fresh flower . 

 instantly , as she pat the flower , the Imperial Palace rise in her esteem to the full height of its reputation . somebody with imagination have think of those flower and of their effect on the arrive , intimidate stranger . vast as the organisation be , it have not be too vast to think of a trifle of flower for her comfort . she say to herself that she would be happy in the Imperial Palace . 

 she have an impulse to unpack her possession . no ! that would not be right . her duty be to report for duty at once . at the Laundry she would already have do two hour ' work . still , she dawdle hesitant about the room . she would hardly admit to herself that she be afraid , positively afraid , to go forth into the corridor . but she be . the corridor be the corridor to the new life . she go forth into the corridor , and as she do so the lamp in her head suddenly burn with a bright flame . from the end of the corridor , where her room be , she see the apparently endless vista of a kingdom . she see herself the vicereine of the kingdom . and in five second she be see herself as the head - housekeeper of the Imperial Palace Hotel . why not ? there would be no Cyril Purkin in the Imperial Palace to disquiet and harass she . 

 nevertheless she feel really frightened . it seem impossible to she that she , she , straight out of a laundry , could manage a floor of the Imperial Palace . Pooh ! why not ? the job might well be easy than that of manage a couple of hundred or more girl all in one way or another temperamental . and she firmly believe in herself : which fact do nothing to mitigate her fright - stage - fright . 

 she walk steadily down the deserted corridor , pass number after number until she reach Mrs. O'Riordan 's room   unnumbered . the door be ajar . she knock . no answer . cautiously she step in . 

 the spectacle of the sitting - room make a most sinister impression upon Violet . the wall be bare . a large number of nail , and a large number of small rectangular patch , show where picture have be . the mantelpiece be empty . there be no cushion and no knickknack anywhere . there be the carpet , the rather plentiful furniture , and nothing else , not even a book . feel like a trespasser , she pass into the bedroom , the door to which be wide open . similar phenomenon . the bed have be sleep in , but she could see no nightgown nor slipper . the interior of the large wardrobe be expose , and quite empty . three trunk of various sort and size , and a wooden packing - case and a shapeless bundle , encumber the floor . they be label : " Mrs. O'Riordan , cloak - room , Euston Station . " the melancholy of an abandon home , of a semi - spiritual death , of something that be and be not , pervade the room deprive of their individuality . 

 Mrs. O'Riordan have go , and she would not return . Violet have be tell that the head - housekeeper would remain for at least another week , during which she be personally to instruct the newcomer in her work . at the beginning of the negotiation for Violet 's entry into the Imperial Palace , she have understand that a period of six month , soon afterwards diminish to three month , would be necessary for proper tuition in her duty . then it have be intimate to she that a young woman with experience such as hers would easily learn the duty in a week of intensive training under Mrs. O'Riordan herself . she have successfully survive the ordeal of a personal catechism by Mrs. O'Riordan and another by Mr. Cousin . salary and condition of notice have be arrange , and the contract sign . everything have march smoothly accord to plan . and now - this ! she return to the sitting - room and sit down on the sofa , uneasy , desolate ! then , as there be a bell handy , she ring it . a plump chambermaid , in early middle - age , appear . 

 2 . 

 " good morning . " 

 " good morning , miss . " the chambermaid 's attitude , while reserve , be not at all unfriendly . the woman have a fat , good - natured face . her blue print morning dress show a stain , and one shoulder - strap of the apron be twist . 

 " do you look after this room - these room ? " 

 " yes , miss . " 

 " I be the new floor - housekeeper . my name 's Powler , Violet Powler . will you tell I what yours be ? " 

 " Beatrice , miss . " 

 " beatrice what ? " 

 " Mrs. Beatrice Noakes . " 

 " be here long ? " 

 " oh yes , miss . ever since I poor husband die , 1917 . " 

 " in the war ? " Beatrice nod . " I be sorry to hear that - I mean about your husband . " 

 " yes , miss , " Beatrice say casually . the fact be that her husband have long cease to have any reality in her memory . not even his shade haunt it . 

 " any child , Mrs. Noakes ? " 

 " oh no , miss . if I have I should not   be here , should I , see we sleep in . I have   work on every floor of this hotel , miss , " she go on more vivaciously . " same as Miss Maclaren . Miss Maclaren use to take I with she whenever she move . " 

 " well that show she trust you . " 

 " yes , miss . my word ! and now she be go to be head - housekeeper - " 

 " yes , yes . and you will still be on this floor . " 

 " yes , miss . " 

 " I think we shall get on . " 

 " you and Miss Maclaren , miss ? " 

 " Miss Maclaren of course . but I mean you and I . I be sure you will be able to tell I all sort of thing I have   get to know . " 

 " well , miss , I always like to help - when I be ask . I never put myself forward , if you know what I mean . but when I be ask , I be there . " Beatrice smile helpfully . 

 " do you know where Miss Maclaren be ? " 

 " no , miss . she be not   be up here this morning . " 

 " be Mrs. O'Riordan come back ? " 

 " that I could not   say , miss , " say Beatrice , caution in her voice . 

 " you have   see she this morning ? " 

 " Mrs. O'Riordan ? oh yes , miss . " 

 " she do not   say ? " 

 " no , miss . " still caution . 

 " have she ask you to her wedding ? " 

 " well , miss , no . but I do believe she would have do - just to the church . just to come in and see she go off like . but it be a great secret , I hear . nobody know anything . they want a quiet wedding . I hope it will not   be at a Registry Office . but it will not . because Mrs. O'Riordan 's a roman Catholic . every Sunday morning she go to Mass , as they call it . " 

 " I see her luggage be all pack . " 

 " yes , miss . some of it be go . and I do hear the rest be be send for to - day some time . you could have knock I down with a feather when she tell I this morning when I bring her tea she have to leave at once . how she pack they trunk between last night and to - day I do not   know . I be quite free to tell you , miss . she only say to I I be not   to say a word till she have go . well , as she have go - well , I do not   say a word . " 

 " everyone seem to trust you , Beatrice . " Beatrice smile happily . " I be very much oblige . " Violet rise from the sofa . 

 " anything I can do , miss - " 

 " thank you , Beatrice . " 

 the room be less desolate , its melancholy diminish . as soon as Beatrice have shut the door , Violet take up the telephone and , compose her voice , ask to be put on to Mr. Cousin 's secretary . she hear an answer enquiry within ten second , and say : 

 " I think I ought to report that Mrs. O'Riordan have leave before I get up here . Violet Powler speak , in Mrs. Riordan 's room . she be go away . " 

 " Gone ? " serious astonishment in her tone . " but she can not   have go . she must have just go out for something . she will be back again soon . " 

 " I do not   think so , " say Violet , and describe in detail the state of Mrs. O'Riordan 's late home . she finish : " there be nobody up here for I to refer to . Miss Maclaren be not   anywhere about . will you please tell Mr. Cousin ? " 

 " it be all frightfully queer , " say the thin secretarial voice . " I can not   disturb Mr. Cousin just now . listen . if you will wait where you be I will give you a ring in a minute or two . " a note of sympathetic intimacy in the voice . 

 " thank very much . I say . do you mind tell I your name ? I shall not   feel so strange when I have   get to know a few name . " 

 an amiable comprehend laugh in the telephone . " yes , of course . Tilton . " the voice spell the name . " christian name same as your . " 

 " what ? violet ? really ! " Violet 's tone seem to indicate a pleased surprise that there should be another Violet in the whole world . 

 " no ! " the voice laugh . " I know I should catch you , Miss Powler . Marian . " 

 and Violet laugh say : " how nice ! " Violet 's full name be Violet Marian Powler . Miss Marian Tilton have see it in the formal contract . 

 " when you have a moment , come down here and see I . any time . and I will show you the upper - staff file and go over some of the name with you . Au revoir , Miss Powler . " 

 Violet think that she might be make a friend . already she be begin to relish her social environment . but with caution . at their previous brief encounter she have suspect that the second Marian might conceivably be a little too dashing and worldly for her personal taste . still , she feel capable of be dash and worldly too , if necessary . she be absorbing , as through the pore of her skin , the atom of the Imperial Palace atmosphere . every moment she learn something , and every moment she grow more at ease . Marian Tilton . Beatrice Noakes . being that belong to two different order ; but both friendly and both ready to be helpful and to assume that she Violet , be all right . and there be no more Cyril Purkin , who could not   keep away from she and could not   bear she . intense relief in that thought ! Cyril 's one kiss have cure she of he for ever and ever ; though it have be a kiss sober and respectful enough . 

 the mysterious vanishing of Mrs. O'Riordan be shape into a first - class sensation . and she be the discoverer of the vanishing . and what of it ? Mrs. O'Riordan be leave , anyhow . well , she have leave . and Violet be glad that she have leave . why ? because there must be something rather queer about a lady who in such a high position could play such a trick in such a place as the Imperial Palace . Mrs. O'Riordan go , they could all as it be make a fresh start on a clean page . and far , Mrs. O'Riordan 's flight seem somehow to humanise the formidable , frightening , inhuman organism of the Imperial Palace . funny , human thing happen there , as they happen in laundry . one touch of nature ... etc . Trite ! but how true ! 

 she glance round the room . and the room have now almost entirely lose its melancholy of a home desert by a mistress whom it would never see again . she wonder what Miss Maclaren would make of it , and what Miss Maclaren be like ; for she have not yet meet Miss Maclaren . the tinkle of the telephone bell give she a shock . 

 " that Miss Powler ? Miss Cass speak . " a voice drier than that of Marian . voice of one high than Marian Tilton in the company of cherubim and seraphim . " Mr. Orcham say please will you come down and see he immediately . " authority in the voice . 

 so Marian have telephone to Miss Cass . and Miss Cass have impart the strange news to her master , and her master have deem it stupendous enough to justify he in send for Violet to come to he immediately ! 

 " thank you , Miss Cass . I will come at once . " 

 and now , as she quit the room , Violet be really all in a flutter . she have not see Mr. Orcham since the interview at which he have so oddly hint about rouge and powder . she remember her blush at that interview . she feel as though she would never forget it . everything have move very harmoniously , step by step , since the interview . Cyril Purkin have quietly and urbanely tell she that Mr. Orcham want she at the Palace , and that therefore he , Mr. Purkin , could of course offer no objection to she leave the Laundry . for one week she have give instruction in the management of laundry - girl to her successor , Miss Brury , who have begin with condescension and end with gratitude almost meek . and no sign from Mr. Orcham . but she surmise , feel , know , be absolutely sure , that the unseen hand of Mr. Orcham have guide event . and now she have arrive in her new situation , and within half an hour the great invisible Mr. Orcham have summon she , because of her astounding discovery ! a very different place , this , from the homely Laundry ! 

 she walk along the corridor and see the lift . ought she , now a member of the staff , to dare to use the lift ? or be there a staff - lift ? she have hear of such thing . yes , she chide herself for be all in a flutter . she ring the lift - bell and wait , and up come the lift out of immeasurable depth , as promptly as though she be the Marchioness of Renshaw and stay in the hotel . the bony - face , sallow lift - man give she a decorous smile of recognition as he slide back the grille ; he know who she be and what she be . 

 " ground - floor , please . " 

 " yes , miss , " the man compliantly answer , feel in his heart , so acutely sensitise to the vary influence of individuality , that here be a polite , self - possess , firm young lady who would certainly stand no kind of familiarity . 

 content 
 chapter 30 

 OFFICIAL INTERVIEW 

 " good morning , Miss Powler . welcome to the Imperial Palace . " 

 this be Evelyn 's greeting to Violet when she enter Evelyn 's outer office , where apparently he be just finish a conversation with the authoritative Miss Cass , who sit at her desk and behold the incomer with a firm impartial glance . he offer his hand , not to a floor - housekeeper , but merely to a new and possibly nervous member of the great Palace commonwealth of which he be president . 

 " good morning , sir . thank you , I be sure . you send for I , sir . " Violet have expect to be nervous , but she be nervous beyond her fear ; so much so that quite involuntarily she avert her face as she shake hand . " good morning , Miss Cass , " she murmur , as quite involuntarily she catch Miss Cass 's glance . 

 " good morning , Miss Powler , " Miss Cass respond , in a strong , almost peremptory voice , but nevertheless with a cheerful and not unfriendly smile , and bend at once over her desk , as one who have in train mighty matter which must not suffer delay . Violet have encounter Miss Cass only once before . 

 " come in , will you , " say Evelyn , and when they be in his room and the door shut , and he be pull a cigarette out of his case , he say curtly : " sit down , " and smile at she . 

 curious that she should feel more diffident now than at any of their previous meeting . she be ashamed of herself . Evelyn , his back turn to Violet for a moment , drop a match into an ash - tray on his desk and puff smoke , as it be meditatively . by all his movement Violet realise afresh and more clearly that he be a gentleman . so different from Cyril Purkin , whose every gesture and tone demonstrate continuously a total lack of distinction . and she think : " and I be not a lady , either , and could I ever be ? " Distinction could not be acquire . 

 " Funny about Mrs. O'Riordan , " he say , suddenly face Violet , and laugh easily . " you do not   know the explanation , but I do . and I may as well tell you . we be go to give she a staff - dinner to - morrow night . she always say she could never go through with a dinner and hear her health propose , and wed happiness - you know she be go to be marry . I do not   believe she , and I insist on the dinner . well , I be wrong . she leave a note for I this morning . here it be . " he touch a letter which lie on the desk . " she be run away from the dinner . that be all . I be sorry . but these bride - ! it do not   matter of course in the least , dinner or no dinner . still , I be sorry . Miss Maclaren get her job - Mrs. O'Riordan 's - and she will take over at once , anyhow this afternoon . I have   telephone she and I have   tell she something about you , and I think you will like she . and of course she will be on your floor . you will pick up your work in a couple of day . Miss Brury be do ground - floor when she leave we , but Mr. Cousin be start you on Eighth - easy for you to learn there . but of course we do move our housekeeper up and down . you will know how to handle customer - I think I tell you - and you know all about linen and how to deal with maid . it be all much simple than it sound . some sense be all that be require . you trust yourself to Miss Maclaren , and if she be not   about , just act on your own . you be bind to be all right . only do not   worry Mr. Cousin . ever hear of the chain of responsibility ? well , we be all link in the chain . Miss Maclaren be the next link above you , and Mr. Cousin 's above she , and I be above Mr. Cousin , and the Board 's above I . but remember , you can not   skip link . Mr. Cousin can go to the Board only through I , and you can go to Mr. Cousin only through Miss Maclaren . it be a necessary arrangement in a big place like this . be that clear ? " 

 " quite , sir . " 

 " how do you feel - on your first morning ? " 

 " well , sir , I be rather nervous . " 

 " you do not   look it a bit , and so long as you do not   look it , it do not   matter . in fact it be rather a good thing to be nervous . " 

 Violet think that there be wisdom in this last remark . but otherwise she be somewhat critical of the panjandrum . he seem to she to be take thing very lightly . how could she learn her job - the job of housekeeping for an entire floor of the immense Imperial Palace - in a couple of day ? the notion be frivolous .   and yet simultaneously , as she criticise , she have a conviction that she indeed could learn the job in a couple of day . all housekeeping be in essence alike . and of luxurious housekeeping she have have some experience at Sir Henry Savott 's , where the figure of the housekeeping - book have so startle she in the first week that she could never forget they . 

 the panjandrum seem , too , to assume that his domestic machine work and would work by itself . he probably know nothing about the detail of housekeeping . in fine , he be a man , and a man incline to be prematurely airy and gay . perhaps superficial ! her nervousness do not in the least hamper she strongly develop critical faculty , which faculty however she always hide away from view , like a possession semi - sacred , occult , too precious for any exposure to the public gaze . few of her equal or her superior have even guess the existence of that sharp , acid faculty . 

 2 . 

 " be there anything you want to ask I ? " Evelyn suggest . Violet reflect . " no , sir ... no , sir . I only hope I - er - my dress and so on - I hope it will do . " she look young , girlish , confused , quite charming in her sudden constraint . there be a hardly perceptible change of bodily pose , nothing more than the disclosure of an impulse towards a change of pose , to the end that he might see she more completely . . 

 it be naught . Evelyn glance at she anew . 

 " I will tell you more about that when you stand up , " he say . 

 she faintly smile , drop her eye , maidenly , modest ; hat herself for her attitude , her feeling . staff - manageress of a laundry , floor - housekeeper in a large fashionable hotel - and lack the wit not to be girlish and silly ! she scorn herself ferociously . where be her self - reliance , to say nothing of her self - esteem ? weak as water : that be what she be . she would have give a lot to be back at the Laundry , nicely firm with the girl there , nicely untouchable to Mr. Purkin . 

 " I hope you will succeed here , " Evelyn go on . " because I be responsible for your come here . I think you will succeed . I be sure you will . not my business to engage floor - housekeeper , you know . I never interfere . but when I be down at the Laundry that day , you remember , we be rather in a quandary , and it occur to I you might be the very person we need . yes , and I think you be . " 

 " I shall try to be , sir , " she answer conventionally , uncertainly , sear herself with invisible , inaudible criticism . 

 he must be take she for a ninny . how could he take she for the same girl who have favourably impress he at the Laundry ? he could not . 

 Evelyn say : 

 " there be a woman up on your floor who might be rather useful to you if you get on the right side of she . Bertha - Bertha something . noake , be it ? I will find out . quite a friend of mine . use to be on my floor . we shift she about whenever we be in difficulty . she be up there now because Mrs. O'Riordan be do head - housekeeper and floor - housekeeper as well ; and not in the good health either . " 

 " do you mean Beatrice Noakes , sir ? " 

 " Beatrice . Beatrice . of course . I simply can not   remember name . so you have   come across she already ? " 

 Violet relate the Beatrice episode , and in do so scrap together some self - confidence . 

 " I can see that Heaven be watch over you , " say Evelyn . " you will not   let I down . " 

 " let you down , sir ? " 

 " nothing , nothing . Mrs. O'Riordan tell I she would not   leave I in the lurch . only she do . however , all thing work together for good . " 

 " it be absolutely certain that I shall not   leave you in the lurch , sir , " say a new Violet Powler . 

 " no , you will not . I say , I should be glad if you would just see this afternoon to Miss Maclaren be fix up nice and cosy in her room . she will never do it for herself , anyhow until there be nothing else want do anywhere on the floor . and she will object to you bother about it . say it be an instruction from I . that will settle it . have some flower put in the room , in both room . " 

 " yes , sir , " say Violet eagerly , warmly . 

 a pause . Violet stand up . 

 " yes , " say Evelyn , examine her appearance as though she be a mannequin . " I should think you would do very well . but ask Miss Maclaren . I shall be surprised if , before you be much old , one of them do not   ask you what lipstick you use . " he be sardonic , teasing . 

 " thank you , sir . " Violet move to leave he . 

 " here . one moment . " he stop she . " I have to go down into the engine - room . you would well come with I . you ought to see the real part of the place . besides , it make conversation with customer . it be an idea I have only yesterday . for the floor - housekeeper . what can they know of floor who only the floor know ? there be a great deal more in this hotel than meet the eye . and it ought to meet the eye of important young woman like you . " 

 content 
 chapter 31 

 bowel of the HOTEL 

 Violet go down with Evelyn into the unknown , first through a door to a staircase of bare stone , then along a narrow corridor , then down a slope which be ridge to prevent slipping , then by turn and twist until she have quite lose the sense of direction . the two walk side by side when space permit ; sometimes Evelyn without hesitation step in front of she , sometimes he press himself against a wall courteously to let she precede he as a woman should precede a man . once or twice a graceless menial employee pass they unrecognised and unrecognise . 

 they be in the Imperial Palace , but it be another Imperial Palace : no bright paint , no gilt , no decoration , no attempt to please the eye , little or no daylight , electric lamp but no lamp - shade ; another world in which appearance have no importance and be indeed neglect . 

 she glimpse a large open space , a room lack a fourth wall , in which a number of girl in overall be bend over big wicker - basket of soiled linen , separate , transfer , sort . in semi - obscurity they have something of an air of dimly - tint phantom ; they be absorb ; they do not look up or away . the spectacle vaguely recall the Laundry ; but the Laundry have no basement ; everything be light in the Laundry . here she have the sensation of be underground , though in fact she be hardly yet underground . of course she have a feeling for the romantic ; the word itself , however , be hardly in her vocabulary - at any rate for use . 

 she be still rather awed by the strangeness of her sudden magic removal from the environment of the lowly , commonplace Laundry to the enormous and majestic environment of the Imperial Palace . here she be , walk with the supreme ruler of the bewilder hotel , almost as an equal - do he not make way for she ? - the man who be above everybody , the man who could say even to Mr. Cousin " come , " and he would come . hardly credible ! and the change have arise out of the supreme ruler happen to overhear she talk to a colourblind girl ! she be awed , yes , but she be proud . 

 " I can not   be quite ordinary , " she think , with that false humility which people assume even to themselves . for she know very well that she be far from ordinary . she have a fairly accurate idea of her unusual worth , be as free from conceit as from any form of inferiority complex . 

 " here ! " say Evelyn , stop . " we may as well look in here . " she see , paint in black on a brownish yellow wall the word , " Audit Department . Mr. Exshaw , " and a pointing arrow . they enter a very large low room divide by glass partition into various enclosure , with a long passage and door into each enclosure . number of male clerk at desk strew with prodigious account - book . all the clerk absorb , bent , like the linen - girl . 

 " Mr. Exshaw in ? " Evelyn call out loud . 

 " yes , sir , " say someone . 

 they walk to the end of the corridor . Violet think that she would have be frighten to death to venture alone into this new world . she need protection . and she have it , the mighty possible protection . she be as safe as a child in its cot . a transient , pleasant surmise : be it Mr. Orcham who have order flower for her bedroom ? absurd . and yet - have he not tell she to put flower in Miss Maclaren 's room ? he might - he just might have . 

 Evelyn strode into the final enclosure - more spacious than the other . a big , high desk , at which stand a short , spectacle , grey - haired man , a pen behind his ear , the big account - book she have ever see in front of he , minutely rule horizontally and vertically . 

 " Morning , Exshaw . " 

 the man seem to wake out of a trance   pretence , think Violet critically , and as he gaze at the visitor his eye harden 

 " ah ! good morning , Mr. Orcham . " it be as if the man have say : " on careful inspection I realise that you be a gentleman name Orcham and my chief . " 

 " got a moment ? " 

 " as many as you wish , sir . " with a dignity that throw doubt on the statement . 

 " this be Miss Powler , one of our housekeeper , " say Evelyn lightly . 

 Violet bow . Mr. Exshaw give a start , then curtly nod . " I have   come to the conclusion that it will be a good thing for the floor - housekeeper to get some kind of a notion of the more or less secret work of this place . " Evelyn go on . " Miss Powler be the first to come . you may expect a few more visit . do not   you think it be rather a scheme ? widen their horizon , eh ? " Evelyn laugh ; more correctly , he snigger . 

 " well , sir , " Mr. Exshaw answer , have judicially ponder , " we do think now and then that if the Floors know about the way we straighten thing out for they down here it might be good for their soul . which floor ? " he demand of Violet . 

 " Eighth , " say Violet , low . 

 Mr. Exshaw peer at she through his spectacle , apparently say to himself : " so this speciman be a floor - housekeeper . interesting to see . what next I wonder ! " and the Floors seem to be a very long way off - phenomena hear of , write about , check , reprimand , but invisible and materially non - existent . 

 " ah ! Eighth ! " say Mr. Exshaw at length , aloud . " Eighth be a wonderful floor for breakage . there must be somebody up there who play hockey with tumbler . breakage in the restaurant cost we a hundred pound a week , but the percentage on Eighth I should say be high . I do not   mean they cost the hotel a hundred a week , because we only pay a quarter , but the waste 's there . you get the special memo day before yesterday , Miss - er ? " 

 " this be Miss Powler 's first day here , " Evelyn put in , before Violet could speak . 

 " ah ! " say Mr. Exshaw , more benevolently , for he be a just man . he rap on the glass behind he , and a youth rush in . " bring I N here , " say Mr. Exshaw to the youth . 

 n prove to be a heavy , red - bind book of account . 

 " you might like to see , Miss - er . Restaurant . Grill . " he turn page over . " floor . first . sixth . Eighth , yes . here you be . here be the analysis of breakage on Eighth , week by week . here be last week . " 

 Violet obediently look , but she could see nothing save a dance of numeral . she have a ridiculous sense of shame on behalf of the eighth floor . her wandering gaze see that the window offer a fine view of a white - tile blank wall about six foot off , and that Mr. Exshaw 's spectacle be steel - rim . 

 " yes , " say the ninny in she . yet she be not unused to vast statistical volume at the Laundry , nor to male clerk bend over the same . but at the Imperial Palace the scale of thing be more grandiose . 

 " you would be very clever if you grasp all this in a month of Sundays , Miss - er , " say Mr. Exshaw kindly . 

 she think he be perhaps a nice man , if a trifle self - important in the presence of the panjandrum whom he ignore . the next minute he shut the book with a slam . 

 " I suppose she can see everything , sir ? " he surprisingly address the panjandrum . 

 " certainly , " say Evelyn , ' so far as I be concern . it be up to you . " 

 " she might like to see how the floor order - slip be analyse . " 

 " oh , I should ! " say the ninny . 

 thereafter , as the accountancy mechanism not only of order - slip , but bill , of estimate   estimate of L41,000 for next year 's linen renewal , wag   Mr. Exshaw skim rapidly over the wage , staff - meal , graph , and forty other category , pass before she , Violet feel herself in a daze , a maze and a nightmare . and she marvel at the brain of Mr. Exshaw , head - demon of the unparalleled cave . 

 " I think you can not   carry any more , young lady , " he say triumphantly . 

 Violet , weak , smile . " thank you very much , Mr. Exshaw , " she say , beholden . 

 " not at all , " say Mr. Exshaw brightly . 

 Violet and her protector be hardly out of the room before Mr. Exshaw resume the huge book on which be be engage when they have disturb he . Evelyn stick his head back into the enclosure . 

 " Mrs. O'Riordan have leave we , " say he , deliver a tit - bit of hotel news . 

 " so I hear , sir , " say Mr. Exshaw casually , without look up . 

 when they be safely out of the cave , Violet say : 

 " it be wonderful . I should call it exciting . " 

 " it be , be not   it ? " say Evelyn . 

 she think he like her nervous animation . he glance at she quite appreciatively , humanly . very different from Cyril Purkin ! she feel happy , if agitated . 

 " I have no idea - " she softly exclaim . 

 " no , you have not , ' he say , quite ruthlessly . " but you will soon be get an idea . that be what you be down here for . Exshaw be in this place before I come on the scene . nobody in the hotel know his job well . " 

 some hardness in his voice . one moment he be smile at she appreciatively ; the next moment his tone seem to be warn she : " we may as well look the fact in the face - you be an ignorant simpleton here . you will learn , but you do not   realise how much you have to learn , and I do not   expect you to realise it . " 

 where now be the admired shepherdess of laundry - hoyden ; and where the compose , quietly imperative daughter of Renshaw Street from whom two parent draw solace , harmony and moral strength ? still , Mr. Orcham be protect she . there be more beneath his lightness than she have imagine . and yet have she not always , since the career - turn interview , divine everything of force that there be beneath his lightness ? she say to herself that she would not mind be admonish , correct by he , because he be a just man . she could look up to he . 

 she could never have look up to Cyril Purkin , though she admit Cyril 's excellence - his conscientiousness , his devotion to duty , his industry , his clear head . if she have marry Cyril , what a secret disaster ! a narrow man . never laugh , or , if he do , always at something silly . he exhibit more self - confidence than he feel . married to she , he would have appear to rule she , whereas in reality she would have rule he , and they would both have know it , and Cyril would have resent it as though the fault be her , and she would always have have the sensation of not be support . for many year at home she have be the supporter , and she desire relief . with Cyril she would have have no relief . 

 now Mr. Orcham , on the contrary , exhibit less self - confidence than he feel . in thought she be begin to make a hero of Mr. Orcham . she need a hero , have never have one . probably she would not run across he once a month , if at all . but that would not interfere with the gradual process of hero - creation . his image would be set within her brain in the full light of the lamp of passionate ardour , assiduity and endeavour which burn there . 

 2 . 

 " might look in at the printing - shop , " Evelyn suggest as they resume the pilgrimage together . it be close by . More male , but of the artisan type , not the clerkly . all absorb . several machine , work by hand . pile of card and sheet . Evelyn take off a card as it emerge from a machine . 

 " breakfast menu for the grill to - morrow morning . for the Floors too . " 

 " oh yes , " Violet say . she could think of nothing else to say . she be tremendously anxious to seem intelligent . but how could she seem intelligent ? 

 " here be a notice to the floor - waiter , " say Evelyn , pick up a sheet from a small pile . " it will be stick on the wall of the service room to - night . be not   strike enough , perhaps . " 

 only one old man , a compositor set up a special programme for a banquet , salute Evelyn , who speak to nobody . Violet surprise one or two male glance at herself . she would have prefer that Mr. Orcham should explain she in the printing - shop as he have do in the audit - office . but Mr. Orcham do not . they leave the printing - shop . 

 " do the hotel do all its own printing ? " Violet question " rather ! " say Evelyn . " and it manufacture its own bed ; and its own silversmith repair its own silver and electroplate and so on . here ! you would well just glance at the Stocks Department . " 

 much of the Stocks Department have no daylight , but the darker chamber be illuminate , irradiate , by the energy of the enthusiasm and loquacity of the manager , Mr. Stairforth , to whom Evelyn carefully present his eighth - floor housekeeper . Mr. Stairforth , like Mr. Exshaw , be grey in the service of the Palace . withal he have remain a boy . so intense be his pride in stock that he delight to receive caller . and he delight to send subordinate to and fro to fetch thing for the practical illustration of his remark to caller . he talk incessantly , and with extreme clarity and rapidity . he could not stand still . he could not refrain from impart knowledge . he be eager with Violet , see in she a virgin subject . he draw the pair urgently from room to room , pour out statistic in a quenchless stream . he never hesitate for a figure . 

 " here be the stationery . L3,250 's worth . specially make paper . our own water mark . look ! here be a time - sheet . " he hold it up against an electric lamp . " see ? time - sheet be the most indispensable thing in the hotel . every five minute have to be account for here . now fancy good . we give away twenty thousand fan a year . that be only one item . so on and so on . now the glass . " 

 he be lead they into a huge and horrid cavern . he administer to Violet colossal figure about glass . also he explain in detail how glass be transport . cocktail glass yes . cocktail be the most profitable trade in the hotel . Mr. Orcham would agree . nineteen bar in the hotel , but of course mainly service - bar . still , bar . Mr. Stairforth know everything , everything . he have a million compartment in his head , and could open any one of they and expose its content in the tenth of a second . on ! on ! China , now . the Palace carry that day L21,150 's worth of china and glass . electroplate . countless shelf of it . innumerable repetition of one article . cruet , for instance . coffee spoon , for instance . 297 coffee spoon miss in four month . L161 's worth of silver lose in four month . 

 on ! on yes , here be the silversmith ' repair shop . you see how they bent they back into shape . very ingenious . and the re - plating . yes , yes . now the linen . 40,000 serviette , 24,000 chamber - towel . 24,000 table - cloth . 5,730 sheet . vary from week to week of course . pity she could not   see the wine stock ; but they be chiefly at Craven Street . L322,000 's worth of wine , include L50,000 's worth reserve in France . L5,000 's worth of cigar . curious that cigar mature well in a room with a south - east aspect . a big cigar take eighteen month to mature , a little one only six month . on ! on ! 

 Evelyn look at his watch . 

 " you must go . you must go . I quite understand , Mr. Orcham . quite . you have not   begin to see thing , Miss Powler . but any time you can come down , I shall be at your disposal . I think that all housekeeper , and other , ought to visit the Stocks Department . valuable knowledge . yes . valuable . good - bye . so glad you come . not at all . not at all . delighted . I love people to be interested as you have   be . " 

 " that man , " say Evelyn in the corridor , " that man have seventeen child and seventeen grandchild . at least seventeen be the last I hear . it may be eighteen by this time . he must be get on . " 

 3 . 

 he conduct she through more corridor and then down a very steep , narrow , steel staircase . increase warmth . an odour of warm oil . rumbling of machinery in motion . Violet see from above an interior that recall a glimpse which she have once have of the engine - room of a Margate steamer ; but this interior be very much large . a broad man come to meet the visitor at the foot of the steel staircase . 

 " good morning , sir . I be begin to think something have turn up to stop you from come . " 

 " no ! " say Evelyn . " I should have telephone you in that case . this be Miss Powler . " he explain Violet and her presence there . " Mr. Ickeringway , " he say to Violet . " our chief engineer . we rob the Navy of he . " 

 Mr. Ickeringway cordially press Violet 's hand in a hand broad to match his body . a man of fifty , neat in navy blue , with grey hair , a loud voice , a calm pale face , and an expression on it of authoritative and slightly humorous fortitude . 

 " if you could see the new well now , sir . it be just the moment . " he turn to Violet : " yes , miss , I be a naval man . we have   a staff down here of sixty - eight , and all but three of them be naval man too . " 

 he lead they across the great engine - hall to an enclosure where be three frightening steel - rim and brick - line hole , with thin shaft run down they into Australia . 

 " five hundred foot deep , miss , " say Mr. Ickeringway , and then suddenly begin a discussion with the panjandrum , who bent his head towards the chief engineer 's . Violet gaze around , and see clump of machinery here and there , some moveless , some whizzing , clicking , sizzling ; also a few of the sixty - eight visibly wander around on inspection , or stationary at some job . 

 by this time the ex - staff - manageress of the Laundry   whose small engine - room Cyril Purkin have never encourage she to see   be incapable of receive any but vague impression of semi - stupefied amazement . she have cease to try to follow intelligently the procession of wonder , or even to try to seem intelligent . she do not listen to the conversation between the two man . she hear Mr. Orcham finish it with the word : 

 " that be understand then . you can go right ahead . " 

 " well look at this , miss , " Mr. Ickeringway wake she . " it be the new artesian well . electric pump . it blow the water from the bottom straight up on to the roof . you would not   think we use 22,000 gallon of water an hour in the Palace . but that be it . 22,000 . and soft water . this be about the only hotel in London that have soft water . because we do not   depend on public supply . " 

 " of course , " say Evelyn . " we could not   have have all this - " he wave an imaginary cane in the direction of the open hall - " if we have not   build our new wing . all this be under the new last wing . would not   have be room for it under the old part of the building . " . 

 " now you would well begin with the boiler , miss , " say the chief engineer , and draw the party out towards the mammoth row of boiler , from which run a series of thick serpentine hosepipes . " if anything happen to these , miss - well ! nine fire . oil - fed . twenty - five ton of oil a day . equal to fifty of coal . yes . and here be the turbine . 4,500 revs . , miss , and you can hardly hear it . it be bed in spring so it will not   vibrate the hotel down . " 

 suddenly there be a terrific roar . Violet start violently . she think that the entire hall be about to blow up and blow the hotel into the air . Evelyn 's hand be strongly on her arm . 

 " it be all right . it be all right ! " he protectively soothe 

 and she be in fact tranquillise instantly . so that she feel safe amid mysterious peril and call herself a baby and an idiot . 

 " they be only test the new semi - diesel , " say the chief engineer casually , and point to where two pigmy man in beige overall be perch on a huge dark active mass of a machine . the roar die away . Violet be lead on from machine to machine , comprehend the purpose of none . 

 she hear the chief engineer say : 

 " there be not   much of a load on now . there will be more at one o'clock , and a lot more in the evening . we get through a lot of current . well , there be twenty - nine electric lift . and a thousand horse - power of electric motor . and about six thousand light - unit a day we get through . come and see where we wash all the air for the public room and corridor , and ozonise it , and warm it in winter and cool it in summer . " 

 on , on ! the brine - bath , twenty - eight ton of brine . the icemake apparatus   reach by a slope upwards . seven ton of ice a day . Violet gaze . 

 " you would well not stay in here , " Evelyn caution she . he be benevolently protect she again . " so liable to catch cold in these sudden change of temperature . I should not   like you to be lay up the first day . " he smile . she smile weakly , unintelligently . 

 back into the engine - hall . 

 " and you do all your own repair here , do not   you , Ickeringway ? " say Evelyn , as if prompt the chief engineer in the recital of the catalogue of marvel . 

 " we do , miss . all . I think we may say that this be a se1f - contain unit , same as a ship , but a bit more . " Violet address another glance of flabbergast admiration to Mr. Orcham and Mr. Ickeringway . she see that Mr. Orcham be passionately proud of his establishment , and she think it be nice of he , and so man - like and so child - like , to be so innocent in his glorious pride . 

 4 . 

 a few minute later Evelyn look at his watch . the chief engineer , in common with all the other head of department , know the proper response to that gesture . 

 " a wonderful fellow , that , " say Evelyn , at the top of the steel staircase . " I have   never see he excited . never . and his man would do anything for he . they simply worship he . I do not   quite know why . " 

 " yes , " think Violet . " and you simply worship all your head of department . you be so proud of they you can not   keep it to yourself . and of course they would not   do anything for you ! oh no ! naturally they would not ! " 

 Silence in the long , narrow , squalid corridor . no rumour or vibration of any machinery . a workman pass , halt close against the wall to leave room for the two visitor from the luxury world . then another . in the silence Violet soon regain her poise . she be touch as much by Mr. Orcham 's simple pride in his head of department as by his calm protectiveness over she . there be tear of emotional sympathy in the eye of her soul , if not a trace of feeling in the eye of her serene face . 

 " it make you think , " she murmur . 

 " what ? all that ? you have not   see half . not half ... yes . you could understand anyone want to buy this place , " he say . 

 " oh yes ! " she agree eagerly . " I suppose you get lot of offer . " 

 " I do not   get lot , but I get one now and then . " he speak carelessly , as if such matter have no importance . 

 " I remember somebody think of try to buy it a long time ago . " 

 " oh ! " Evelyn 's tone sharpen into astonishment and curiosity . " who be that ? " 

 " Sir Henry Savott . he tell my sister once , and she tell I . she say to I : ' he have not   finish with his department - store business , but he be think about something else - hotel . Imperial Palace and so on . ' I remember the very word . " instantly Violet have an idea that she might be break a confidence . but she do not care . she exult in her wrongdoing , if wrongdoe it be . she want to interest he , and he would certainly be interested . the information might even in some unguessable way be useful to he . and her sister be dead . 

 " oh ! " say Evelyn very lightly . " indeed ! " as if he consider that Sir Henry have a nerve to think of buy the Imperial Palace . 

 " but I expect he give up the idea , " Violet add . 

 " and when be this ? " Evelyn ask . 

 " I could not   say , sir , now . year since . " Evelyn say no more . 

 when by the swing - door mark " private " they have re - enter the decorate and gaudy world of mirror and gilt and luxury and uniformed attendant , Violet stop resolutely at the lift , which she recognise as her lift by the feature of the attendant . 

 " thank you very much , sir . about those flower for Miss Maclaren 's room , sir , that you say I be to see to . can you tell I how I get they ? where ? I ought not   to ask Miss Maclaren , ought I ? " she half smile . 

 " no , " Evelyn reply , with an almost snubbing frigidity . " you would well not ask I thing like that . you go upstairs and find out . you will have far more important thing than that to find out . I count on you to fall on your foot . the Floors be in a bit of a mess , I mean as regard supervise . so I count on you . " 

 " sorry , sir , " say Violet , meekly accept the rebuke . 

 she press the rebuke to her bosom , like a saint an arrow . he be right . she have be wrong . imagine a floor - housekeeper worry the Director with a silly question about flower ! obviously it be her business to fall on her foot - part of her duty . she have be presume upon his benevolence towards she . he wave a hand negligently . 

 " good - morning , sir . thank you again . " 

 as the lift ascend she reflect : " I would well keep as quiet as possible about all this sightseeing this morning . I do not   want to start with a lot of jealousy . I would well pretend it be nothing , but he just tell I to come and I go , and they will all have to go . it be a pity I be the first to go . that will make they jealous - without anything else . " 

 still , at the bottom of her soul she be not displeased that she yet unknown colleague should be jealous of her relation with Mr. Orcham . relation ! the thought recur : would she ever see he again ? what about the chain of authority ? now she have to learn her job in a couple of day or so . she decide that she could . she resolve that she would . the lamp blaze up in her brain with fresh ardour . and she feel joyously inspire to terrific deed . 

 content 
 chapter 32 

 initiation 

 on the eighth floor , her own , Violet see a fairly young woman in black talk to Beatrice Noakes in the doorway of the head - housekeeper 's room . the fairly young woman in black , catch sight of Violet , immediately step out into the corridor , at the same time dismiss Beatrice . 

 " you be Miss Powler ? " she call , while Violet be still twenty foot away . 

 " yes . " 

 " my name 's Maclaren , and I suppose I be head - housekeeper now . I have   be ask for you everywhere . " the accent be scottish , the voice bright , but obviously that of a woman both fatigue and harass . 

 " sorry , " say Violet . " Mr. Orcham send for I . " 

 " just come in here a moment , will you ? I have   only get five minute . I must go back to Fourth . " Miss Maclaren shut the door , and the two stand close together in the half - dismantled room . 

 " what do Mr. Orcham want ? " 

 Violet explain that she be the discoverer of Mrs. O'Riordan 's flight , and relate the circumstance precede the telephonic summon to the Director 's office . she finish : " he say as I be down there he would show I some thing in the basement , so I should know . " 

 " oh ! " murmur Miss Maclaren negligently . 

 look at she closely , Violet at once put eight or ten year on to her first estimate of Miss Maclaren 's age ; the new head - housekeeper have wrinkle and a rather worn expression . her powder be not very well distribute . 

 she seem inclined to be decent , " think Violet . " but she be disturb . as she be my boss I would well be a bit careful . ' and aloud , with pleasant animation : " I should be so glad if you would just tell I what I have to do . " 

 " you have to inspect all the room that be unoccupied or empty for the time be . first of all you turn on all the light , whether it be daylight or not , to see they be in order . try the curtain . see all the tap be right and do not   drip . and the lock right everywhere , and everything clean . bed - linen have to be change every two day . but some visitor want it change every day . and you have to watch the chambermaid and - " 

 " I have   talk to one , as I say . " 

 " Beatrice , I expect . she be good . but she think she be Mr. Cousin . " Miss Maclaren 's tone harden . " she will want to run you , instead of you run she . " 

 " I think I can see to that , " Violet put in with a smile . 

 " never give they an inch - I mean the maid . not an inch . and do not   give they half a minute in the morning . they have to sign on at half - past six . and every second morning you have to be on duty at half - past six to see they sign on , on both Eighth and Seventh . Miss Prentiss - she be Seventh - do it on the other morning . in turn , you see . I may as well tell you the hour now . you have half a day a week off , and every second week - end - from Saturday at three , about , till Monday morning . you have four hour off every day - if you be lucky . when you have early morning duty , 6.30 , you finish at nine at night . on the other day you begin at nine in the morning and finish at midnight . of course they be long hour . " 

 " oh ! that be all right , " Violet respond , with an enthusiasm which she do not quite feel . 

 she have not know the hour . Mr. Cousin have say nothing about they . nor have Mrs. O'Riordan . Miss Brury might have give her information during the week they have spend together at the Laundry ; but Miss Brury have plainly indicate an unwillingness to talk about the Imperial Palace . she even affect not to know that Violet have be engage for the hotel . Violet now calculate that her hour would be between sixty and seventy a week , whereas at the Laundry they have be fifty - five a week . also at the hotel she would have only three clear evening off in a fortnight . no more evening rehearsal of the Dramatic Society , and other fun ! she fear for the future of the Dramatic Society , whose member she have leave in a state of forlorn depression . in spite of this , the lamp still burn brightly in her brain . 

 " and then , " Miss Maclaren proceed , " you have to be ready to go into any room instantly , if any visitor ask for the housekeeper , to settle any trouble . " 

 " yes , " say Violet . " I remember Mr. Orcham tell I about that when he first send for I . I daresay I can manage it . I have   have to do it before . " she relate her sojourn as temporary housekeeper at a large place in the country . " do I have any key ? " she enquire . 

 " you have a pass - key to the room and duplicate key of the linen - closet . that be all . now you would well begin now with - let I see - my head 's all in a whirl . " Miss Maclaren put her hand over her eye . " Mrs. O'Riordan leave like this . I have no idea of it , Miss Powler . not a notion . " 

 " it must be frightfully try . Mr. Orcham tell I that I must first of all see to your room here . " 

 " oh ! that do not   matter , " snap Miss Maclaren . " there be lot of thing more important than that . " 

 " but if he find out I have not   do it , " Violet smile . " I might be in trouble - right at the start . he seem very anxious for it to be do . but of course I know I take my order from you . " 

 " oh ! very well ! " Miss Maclaren impatiently yield . " but I do wish Mr. Orcham would not   try to run everything himself . he always do . " she smile with a sort of dismal comic resignation . " let he have his own way . I be on Fourth now . I will give instruction for all my thing to be send up immediately . and you do what you like with they . I have   no time . there be be an oak and wicker bedstead simply break to bit on Fifth . some actress . she must have do it herself in one of her tantrum . but of course nobody be do it ! Mr. Cousin 's secretary just tell I in her casual way Mrs. O'Riordan 's gone , and Mr. Orcham telephone I himself and say I be to take charge as quick as I can , and the first thing I have be this bedstead affair . it be worth l40at least . if I be Mr. Cousin I should ask her royal highness to leave to - day , but he will not , I know he will not , because she be suppose to be a great actress and good publicity . you would hardly believe it , but she be make a fuss because a new bedstead have not   be bring in at once ! that will just show you the kind of thing a housekeeper have to face . have your luggage come ? " 

 " yes . it be here . " 

 " have you unpacked ? " 

 " not yet . " 

 " well , while you be wait for my thing you go and get straight yourself . " 

 Violet give three little nod of obedient assent . the two have not even shake hand , but Violet be already feel sympathetic towards her superior . she think : " I will let she see she can depend on I . " she have the sensation of have be in the hotel for day . 

 Miss Maclaren hurry off . not a word about her return . not a word about meal . not a word as to whether that night Violet would be on duty till nine o'clock or till midnight . as soon as she be go Violet go to her own room and rang the bell , and then , have pull open all the drawer and cupboard - door , instantly begin to unpack ; she have find in the top middle drawer of the desk a lot of empty form for hotel linen and for laundry . 

 2 . 

 " oh ! can I help you to unpack , miss ? " say an eager voice , Beatrice 's . 

 Violet be bend over a trunk on the bed . Beatrice seem fat than before . Plump be a slightly inadequate description of she . and she be certainly more eager . the tiding of the definite departure of the head - housekeeper have spread through the entire hotel , excite its life , and give to everybody a quite unaccustomed zest . 

 " no thank you , Beatrice . but I will tell you what you can do . " 

 " yes , miss . " 

 " and at once . go and do out Miss Maclaren 's room , as quick as you can . " 

 " Miss Maclaren be on Fourth , miss . " 

 " she be come up here . I mean Mrs. O'Riordan 's room . what be the number of they ? " 

 " oh , I see , miss . they have   no number . " 

 " well , go and do they out now . and put Mrs. O'Riordan 's trunk and thing out into the corridor . " 

 " I misdoubt if I can move the big one by myself , miss . and chambermaid be not   suppose - " 

 " well , then , get someone to help you . get a waiter . " 

 " oh , miss , not a waiter . I dare not . we and the valet be about equal as you may say . but a waiter . if I get give order - message to the waiter I should have old Mr. Perosi down on I like half - a - ton of coal . " 

 " who be Mr. Perosi ? " 

 " he be the head - waiter for all the Floors , miss . and he be terrible particular . Mrs. O'Riordan and he once have some word , an ' it be just like the hotel be on fire . Mr. Orcham have to settle that , he have . of course 

 " then get a valet to help you . " 

 " well , miss - " 

 " how many valet be there on this floor ? " 

 " Two , miss . what I be go to say , miss , one be press a suit urgent at this very moment , and the other be off . " 

 " and the other maid ? how many be there of you up here ? " 

 " Four , miss . and forty room . besides all the bit of sewing we have to do for visitor . of course there be more room on the other floor . but here you see there be more store - room and the carpenter 's shop , besides the head - housekeeper 's room , and the lampshade room . there be more maid on the low floor , but forty bedroom among three of us! .. and thing be a bit mess up to - day . Miss Prentiss do not   see we sign on this morning , and you know what young girl be , miss . I have   be tell them . they be fearful late this morning . but of course , miss , if you - " 

 " come along , Beatrice . come along , " say Violet , stop the spate once more , and precede she down the corridor to Mrs. O'Riordan 's late home , and into the bedroom thereof . 

 she think , reflect on what Miss Maclaren have say : 

 ' this Beatrice just be not   go to run I , anyway . " and aloud , gaily : " now take that outside , and take that outside . and I will take this . " three of the light article of baggage be thus deposit in the corridor . " now come back . take that end of this trunk . I will take the other . " 

 " yes , miss . " 

 when all the baggage be in the corridor Violet say , a little breathless , but very happy : 

 " now you get your brush and thing and do these room out , and come and tell I as soon as they be finish . " 

 " yes , miss . " 

 " you will easily do they before your dinner . when be your dinner - time ? " 

 " twelve o'clock , miss . and if we be late - " 

 " but you will not   be late . " 

 " no , miss . I be only say if we be late we be likely to lose on it . there be two relay . I be in the first this week . when I first come here the food - well , you could not   eat it . but it be well now . though they do say it only cost the management one - and - six a day a head of we . you see our dining - room 's down in the upper basement . same as your , miss . the floor - housekeeper have a table in the room next to ours . the page - boy eat in there too . it be just be redecorate . it be not   very easy to find , miss . but they will tell you at the lift . " 

 " I daresay they will , " Violet agree , depart , and Beatrice waddle away in search of utensil . 

 to Violet , the woman be now rather a different creature from the relatively cautious , reconnoitre Beatrice whom she have talk to at their previous interview . Decent still , and incline to be oblige , and assuredly cheerful ; but too desirous of impose herself . Violet know the type well . no mean of silence that type . it would chatter even if it be drown at sea in a gale of wind . Violet lean now to Miss Maclaren 's general estimate of chambermaid . give they an inch ... still , there be an expression on the florid face of Beatrice that please she . she divine that the key to the handling of Beatrice be a resolute and unfluctuating cheerfulness . in regard to Miss Maclaren , she hesitate as to method . she suspect that Miss Maclaren be a worrier , whose bright voice be intend to indicate that she be for ever bear up in great and unfair ordeal ; a fix believer in the injustice of destiny towards herself . here Miss Maclaren have be promote to the sublime situation of head - housekeeper at the Imperial Palace Hotel , and yet she be find sorrow and grievance in good fortune ! Violet surmise that the plant of Miss Maclaren 's existence would well flourish in an atmosphere of brave gloom , water occasionally with tear . but Violet could seldom weep . Arid she despise tearfulness in other . her instinct be nearly always to be bland and smile . Withal she decide that Miss Maclaren be able , conscientious , industrious , and to be rely upon , which be something , if not everything . 

 " I have   get to be damn careful , " say Violet to herself in warning . nobody have ever hear she use an improper word , except the late Susan .   the sister would now and then luxuriate in frightful swearing match , for fun , to give colour to grey life .   now Violet have no one to swear with ; so , infrequently , she indulge in solitary , silent swearing , to the same end . 

 as , with rapid judgment of the suitability of particular drawer and cupboard for particular article , she make continual dash from the bedside to the wardrobe , dressing - table or desk , distribute her attire and possession , none could have guess that her mind be dwell upon the imagine figure of Mr. Orcham . it be . sometimes she could see his face quite plainly . she like his funny tooth , and his warm eye , and the way he hold his head up and walk more on his toe than on his heel .   a bit stealthy , somehow .   but his chin puzzle she , and his nose stick out too much . he be always change . now stiff and curt , now flexible and acquiescent . there be moment when you would think he be go to be positively intimate ; and then no , he be as straight as a poker again . Fearfully well dress , but quietly . she be sure that he prefer girl to look smart . he must be mildly interested in woman . she know nothing about he , in that department , save that he be a widower . he be one of your mysterious bland person .   she like blandness , and practise it naturally , without effort .   something of the child in he . and something of the woman in he . not what you would call so frightfully masculine . yet he be . 

 and you could not   guess from the way he behave that he be a terrific swell . yet you could . of course she do not   know very much about terrific swell . perhaps they be all like that . no , it could not   be so . because Sir Henry Savott be not   like that , and he be a terrific swell , and some of his friend who come to Claygate be swell too , and they be not   like Mr. Orcham , either . well , perhaps one or two of they might have be . but not like Mr. Orcham after all . she would never meet anyone like Mr. Orcham . yes , she judge for the second time that day , he be a gentleman . here be the thought that brighten her lamp . she would never see he , because you could not   miss link in the chain of responsibility . but a large part of her inspiration to work be the desire to be worthy of his choice . he have choose she - he say so . he have choose she ; he , the head of the whole hotel . difficult not to forget that he be as high up as he certainly be - there be something equal about he . he might be stiff , but he never look down on you . the way he would stand aside for you , and open door for you - not always , but sometimes - it make you almost think you be a lady . of course she be a lady , but she know what she mean . 

 3 . 

 she have purposely leave her door open . she hear a trundling , squeak sound in the corridor , and peep out . a valet in sleeve of shiny black push a luggage - carrier . 

 " these Miss Maclaren 's thing ? " 

 " yes , miss . " 

 " all right . you know the room ? " 

 " yes , miss . " 

 " you be from Fourth ? " she enjoy say ' fourth . ' 

 " yes , miss . " 

 little more than three - quarter of an hour have pass . evidently Miss Maclaren have the gift of get thing do with speed . Violet continue she unpack until she hear the trundling sound again . then she hurry to the head - housekeeper 's room . they be finish . praise be due , think Violet . 

 " you have   be pretty quick , Beatrice . " 

 " thank you , miss . I think you will find everything be clean . of course when we - " 

 " what be these key ? " 

 four key , one large and three small , lie prominent on an arm of the sofa . 

 " Miss Maclaren 's send they up , miss . they be your pass - key and the key of the linen - closet . " 

 " good . " Violet at once attach they to the key - chain on her girdle . 

 " I suppose I would well undo some of these thing , miss . it do not   matter about my dinner . " Beatrice point to a couple of trunk and some small bag and an umbrella and a lot of cloak and oddment repose right in the middle of the doorway lead towards the bedroom . 

 Violet look at the clock near the ceiling over the fireplace . " it do matter about your dinner , Beatrice . I shall not   be late for mine and I will not   have you be late for your . off you go ! you will just be in time . " 

 " oh ! if it be like that , miss ! " Beatrice smile richly . " I be only go to tell you - " 

 " tell I afterwards , when you come up . " 

 " but you will not   be up , miss . " 

 " well , when I do come up then . " 

 Beatrice go out , smile still against rebuff . and the moment Beatrice be go Violet seize on the cloak . poor garment . no style . a shabby pinkish transparent mackintosh . a shabby umbrella . a good , warm , heavy rug , which Violet immediately lay on the sofa . two large photograph of two serrie band of young man - one band in football kit - with wide white margin in black frame . two small photograph , an old man and an old woman , similarly frame . and another photograph of a tiny country cottage with low hill behind , frame in straw with bow . Miss Maclaren 's relative ? Miss Maclaren 's birthplace ? one cushion . two vas . ten book . Violet hang the two large photograph on either side of the hearth , and the portrait on either side of the door ; and she put the vas and the cottage with hill on the mantelpiece , and the cushion on the easy - chair . the room become inhabit , take on some faint similitude of a home . 

 then she drag the trunk and the bag into the bedroom . she open the small of the bag . toilet . brush , toothbrush , sponge in a bag , pin - cushion , etc . she dispose the article on the dressing - table and the lavatory basin . one of the trunk be not completely shut . she open it - and close it . no ! sacrilege ! she would have be glad to empty the trunk and the other bag ; but she dare not . pry ! she must be damn careful . however , she hang up the cloak and the mackintosh in the enormous wardrobe , and prop up the umbrella in a corner . well , Miss Maclaren probably would not   mind her thing be unpacked for she . she be not   that sort . but Miss Maclaren just might mind . you never know ! 

 " my God ! the flower ! " 

 she have forget they . she have mean to enquire from Beatrice about the machinery for get flower . " it slip my memory , miss " : a phrase familiar to she in the Laundry . she hat it . how do you get flower ? she might telephone down to the other Marian . no . that would be a sign of weakness . stock Department ? she might telephone down to Mr. Stairforth , the breathless talker . no . she dare not . besides , though there must be a stock of flower somewhere , she have notice no stock of flower in Mr. Stairforth 's dark realm . she feel helpless . she feel alone on the floor . she look around . there be two glass vas of flower , one on the window - sill : but the blossom be obviously fade and forlorn beyond revival . she run into her own room and return thence with the large vase of flower . quite enough in it for two vas . she throw the dead flower into the waste - paper basket , empty the vas at the lavatory - basin , refill they , and divide the flower and arrange they in the vas , one in each room . they make a most respectable display . she run back towards her own room with the empty vas , her key swing and rattle very cheerfully , and be accost by a pale waiter emerge from one of the room . 

 " you be ask for here , miss , " say the waiter briefly , in a foreign accent , without enquire who or what she be . 

 " I ? I be the new floor - housekeeper . " 

 " yes . " 

 " who be it ? " 

 " I do not know quite . I have be three day away ill . " 

 " be it a lady ? " 

 " no . a gentleman . " 

 " very well . I be come . " 

 she go on to her bedroom with the vase . she be rather frightened . her major duty be commence . she finger her pass - key . suppose she could not   fit it into the door ... an angry or a dissatisfied customer ? Tact , tact ! 

 content 
 chapter 33 

 a FRIEND 

 the door , she see as soon as she stand close to it , bear three number , and she assume therefore that it open into a suite of three room and that the single occupant be a person of wealth . one of her unformulated definition of a person of wealth be a traveller who could afford a private sitting - room in a hotel - any hotel , not merely an expensive hotel such as the Imperial Palace . a hotel private sitting - room seem to she to be the very symbol and illustration of fabulous luxury . as for three room , what could a visitor want with three room . " how silly of I ! " she think suddenly . " of course ! the bathroom be one of the room ! " 

 happily the key fit itself without any fuss into the lock . she be extremely nervous as she turn the key , push open the door , and withdraw the key . never in her life have she see a visitor 's bedroom in any hotel . her summit of luxury have be a bedroom in a rather good boarding - house at Ramsgate . she have witness various wonder of the Imperial Palace , but its guest - room be absolutely unknown to she . and yet she be floor - housekeeper on Eighth . uncanny situation ! ' Uncanny ' be the only word for it . the visitor might expose her ignorance by his first question , his first demand . and the customer might be a very strange type of man , might even be a foreigner . she guess that these big cosmopolitan luxury hotel be inhabit by all sort of strange , haughty individual . for a moment again she almost wish herself back in the homely vaporous security of the Laundry , order girl about and keep an invisible wall between herself and Mr. Cyril Purkin . 

 in front of she be a tiny lobby or hall . hat and coat cluster on a hatstand - sufficient of they for several man . a half -opene door ahead show a bathroom . there be door on either side , both shut . she tap on one . no answer . she open it . bedroom . then she tap on the other one . 

 " come in ! " an authoritative male voice , muffle by the thickness of the door . 

 her heart announce an increase activity . yes , she be frightened . as she open the door she might have be a soldier go over the top in the Great War . a gentleman be stand expectant in the middle of the room , hand in pocket . for one second , in her perturbation , Violet do not recognise he . then the figure and the rather wizened face with its small eye resolve themselves for she into those of Sir Henry Savott . she have a feeling of thankfulness . at any rate this be no overbearing stranger . she know Sir Henry and a lot about he and his idiosyncrasy . have she not serve he for a month and see he both bland and stern ? also he have be remarkably polite to she in the entrance - hall of the Imperial Palace not long since . she be indeed relieve . 

 Sir Henry 's feature relax into a smile astonish and welcoming . he have cease to be the consciously great man which he have always be in the big house at Claygate during her stay there . he move towards she with hand outstretche ; the hand clasp her with warmth ; and at the same time he exclaim : 

 " now what - what in the name of coincidence be the meaning of this ? how be you ? I be delighted to see a familiar face . " all in one breath . 

 Violet explain what she be . 

 " this be my first day here , " she say . somewhat excited by the encounter , she have an impulse to add : " and this be the first room I have   see , and you be the first visitor who have send for I , and I hardly know where I be yet . " but a natural prudence silence she . instead , she add : " what can I do for you , Sir Henry ? " in a rather formal tone . an instinctive sense of propriety always prompt she to keep herplace and to encourage other people to keep theirs . Sir Henry , however , in his cordiality , apparently desire not to be formal . he sit down . 

 " do sit down , " he say . 

 " I be all right , thank you , Sir Henry , " Violet answer firmly , but very nicely . she be not go to be catch by any waiter or other chance entrant sit down in the room of a male visitor , and especially on her first day . no ! moreover , if such a freedom be not forbid by the hotel code , well , it ought to be ! 

 she have never be aware of much sympathy with Sir Henry . he have characteristic which she dislike . his quick , sharp gesture and movement , design - she often think - to deceive people as to his age . his bristly moustache , which in her opinion ought either to be allow to grow a little more or to be completely suppress . his chin , which be ugly and sinister . his tooth , which seem always hungry . and his glance , inquisitive and suspicious . if she trust he , it be not without reluctance . 

 still , her sister Susan , while reserve about he - even to Violet - have certainly both trust and like he . he have mean a deal to Susan ; and he have invariably treat Susan well . as indeed he have treat Violet herself . Violet have nothing definable against he ; and , far , she have follow Susan in sympathise with he in his conjugal difficulty . and now , as she stand primly before he , she feel sorry for he . and neither he nor anybody else could have guess why . 

 it be because the sitting - room be so small .   the bedroom too be small .   after the immense spacious interior of the house at Claygate , it seem a perfect shame to Violet that the great opulent man should have to content himself , or should content himself , with room relatively so tiny . as a fact , neither of his room here be much large than her own . she be disappoint in the size of the room at the amazing Imperial Palace . 

 " well , Miss Powler , " say Sir Henry . " I be genuinely glad to see you here . I seem to remember Mr. Orcham mention to I that there be some idea of your come here . I be glad because I be quite sure you be throw away at that Laundry . this be just the place for you . " 

  ' Miss Powler . ' at Claygate he have always call Susan ' Susan ' and Violet ' Violet , ' except in the presence of the servant . 

 " you be very kind , Sir Henry , " Violet respond . " but I have   a great deal to learn . " 

 " not you . you be first - rate at my house . you know all about maid and valet and so on . and you know exactly how to treat guest . you have   get nothing to learn , really , except - what shall I say ? - the geography of the hotel . and a few tuppenny - halfpenny rule . " 

 " it be understand it take six month or more to train a housekeeper here , Sir Henry , " say Violet . but she be impress by his instant grasp of essential , and , flattered , she feel inclined to agree with his estimate of the situation . 

 " not for a woman like you , " say he , positive and slightly impatient . " a fool could not   be train in six month or six year . but you have intelligence , and you know it . you be bind to have a successful career . of course " - he raise a finger - " accident do happen . I do not   think for a moment they will , but you can not   be sure . I be convinced you will rise high in this place . but if anything should happen , I want you to know that in some other hotel , anyhow one - and there may be more - what I say go . and if ever you want a change , you just send I one line , one line , and I will fix it . oh yes ! I will do it for my own sake , and glad to ! " 

 " it be very kind of you , Sir Henry . very kind . but I hope I shall not   - I do not   think - " 

 " neither do I. I be only say ' if . ' and there be something else - you do not   mind I give you a tip , do you ? " 

 Violet shake her head and smile . Assuredly Sir Henry be strengthen her belief in herself . and he be indeed kind . assuredly she feel uplifted once more . 

 " I suppose you do not   know any French ? " Sir Henry resume . " no . I know you do not , because I remember once when I have Monsieur Messein down at Claygate and there be some mix - up in his bedroom , Miss Gracie have to interpret . " 

 " no , Sir Henry . I do begin to learn French at the South - West London Polytechnic , but I forget it all as soon as I leave there . " 

 " well , take my tip and learn French . in this new business of yours here it will be of the great use to you . would not   be much good in an ordinary english hotel , of course . but this be a cosmopolitan show where you get all sort of client . it would give you a sort of a standing , you see . in France and so on housekeeper and cashier and reception - clerk - they be often woman - can speak English , have to ; but in England , even in London , how often do you see a housekeeper who can talk anything but English ? scarcely ever . I undertake to say there be not   one housekeeper in the I.P. can speak French . of course you always hear that English be the international language . it may be . it be . but not in the luxury world , and the luxury world 's your world , you know . think it over , will you ? " 

 " oh , I will , Sir Henry , " Violet reply , enthusiastic , but - as it be - dreamily enthusiastic . 

 she be dreamy in the suddenly induce marvellous vision of herself as a young woman able to gabble away in French to foreigner who could not speak English . " give she a sort of stand ! " it would . in her vision she could hear Miss Maclaren say on other floor in her lowland - scottish accent : " well send for Miss Powler . where be Miss Powler ? Miss Powler can talk French . Miss Powler will see the lady - or the gentleman . " it would be wonderful . too wonderful to be true ! she want to begin to learn French the next minute . the lamp burn still brighter in her brain . Mr. Orcham could talk French , she be sure . he would be impressed if he know that she could talk French too . Mr. Cousin be french . what fun it would be if , one day when she have to go down and , see Mr. Cousin , she start the interview right off in French ! what a difference between the old Violet in the Laundry , and the new French - chatter Violet in Sir Henry 's luxury world ! 

 but she be a practical girl , and she emerge from her dream into realisation . 

 " it might be rather hard for I to do it here , Sir Henry,'she say . " the hour be pretty long , and perhaps I could not   get out . " 

 " hard ? here ? could not   get out ? what do you want to get out for ? why , there must be score of people in this place who talk French well than they talk English ! and some of they would be glad to teach you . you could easily come to an arrangement . simple thing in the world . a little enterprise need ; that be all . " 

 " I shall , " say Violet positively , her brown eye light up . " I be very much oblige , Sir Henry . " 

 2 . 

 he have speak benevolently , persuasively , even coaxingly . she feel more sympathetic towards he than she have ever feel . why be he so good - natured ? possibly because she happen to be Susan 's sister . surely he would not have show the same interest in any other housekeeper ! he could not . of course she have serve in his house , run his house . but age ago , and not for long . the reason for his interest must be Susan . anyhow he be full of common sense . and he certainly do grasp a situation . Violet admire common sense and grasp more than anything else . he have open her eye , that he have ! 

 in her admiration she grow nearly at ease with he . her association with he in the past help she to forget now that he be a millionaire , a big public figure , whose name and whose photograph be constantly in the newspaper . she see in front of she not a legend but a human being , who want a floor - housekeeper to look after some ordinary matter for he in his room . it might be the starching of his shirt .   though it be the effect of life in the Laundry that turn her thought first to shirt , she do recall that he use to be a bit particular about his shirt .   and in advise she he have not try to come the bigwig over she . not a trace of ' side . ' no indication whatever of the difference in class which separate they . he be just friendly and decent , in a nice kind of fatherly style . and yet not quite fatherly . no . just as a friendly decent man to a decent self - respect woman much young than himself . 

 in her heart she apologise to he for her reservation concern he . the small , intimate sitting - room have a very agreeable , reassure atmosphere . her simple father and mother would have be proud to overhear that interview . and Mr. Orcham would have admit that she be fall on her foot . 

 " I would like something do about this desk , " say Sir Henry , suddenly rise and go to the window , beneath which be a small knee - hole desk , paint green to match the general tint of the room . 

 " yes , Sir Henry . " Violet brace herself to receive order . even her voice be brace . 

 " it be too small for I . " 

 " yes , Sir Henry . " 

 " I want a large one . " 

 " yes , Sir Henry . " 

 " and I want it change as quick as you can . " 

 " yes , Sir Henry . " 

 the benevolent paternal human being be transform into the millionaire autocrat ; but there be still some benevolence in his tone , abrupt and commanding as it have become . 

 he continue : 

 " I be down on the third floor . I have a large desk there . I have   be out of London for a bit since I meet you in the hall that day . I get back yesterday , and I move up here yesterday evening ... pretty view from here , be not   there ? " he star out of the window across St. James 's Park and the Green Park towards Piccadilly , all lie under a mist - veil autumn sun . " it be really because of the view I decide to come up to this floor . you see , on the third floor you be just level with the top of the tree , and you can not   see a thing . I like a view . space . I can not   do with be shut in . see the new Devonshire House there ? then there be another thing . say what you like about sound - proof room , it be always quietest on the top floor . now about this desk . you see , my secretary , or one of them , have to be able to work at it sometimes . there be two desk in my room downstairs . " 

 " I expect it be a large room , Sir Henry . " 

 " it certainly be . these room be too narrow for their length . still , I prefer this room of the two . only I want a large desk . understand ? " 

 " yes , Sir Henry . I will get it as quickly as I can . but the head - housekeeper 's have some trouble downstairs , and as I tell you , I do not   know a thing here yet . this be a question of geography . " she faintly smile . 

 " quite , quite , " Sir Henry amiably concur . " but I want a large desk and the soon the well . " his voice harden . it be as if he take away with one hand what he have give with the other ; as if he have say : " I do not   care about your head - housekeeper and her trouble , and it be no affair of mine that you do not   know a thing . I want my desk . " 

 " I will go right now . " 

 " that be a good girl . " 

 this appellation startle Violet ever so little . she move towards the door . 

 " just a minute . you remember Jim ? " 

 " Jim , Sir Henry ? I be afraid I do not . " 

 " yes , you do . he be second footman at Claygate . " 

 " oh yes ! " but she do not remember Jim . even in her one month at Claygate she have witness several change of footman . 

 " well , I make he my valet . he be here with I now . he be take ill in the night on the journey , and I have   send he to bed . I wish you would go and see for yourself what be the matter with he . and then report to I . if he be go to be really ill I must get a temporary . I only want to know how I stand . " 

 " yes , Sir Henry . " she be somewhat cooled , critical . at first she have think that the great man be anxious for his valet . then she think that the great man be concern only for himself . 

 " I will stay here and wait , " say the great man , warningly . 

 " yes , Sir Henry . " 

 Violet hurry out . how to procure the large desk ? have procure it , how to get the change effect ? how to discover where this Jim be lodge ? she would not ask . Sir Henry would not know . he would probably retort : " oh ! do not   ask I . " yet on the whole , for a first encounter with a visitor in her capacity of floor - housekeeper , the meeting have pass off very well . and Violet be happy , and still uplifted , and still hold a high opinion than before of Sir Henry Savott . what a world be this Imperial Palace world of rich , bewilder novelty and romantic surprise ! and she be on her mettle . 

 content 
 chapter 34 

 VIOLET and MAC 

 " what be this ? " Miss Maclaren demand , with chill civility , of the waiter who bring into her newly acquire sitting - room a small tray contain a pot of tea , a jug of hot water , milk , sugar , and two cup and saucer . 

 " two tea , " answer the waiter . it be the same man who have give to Violet the message from Sir Henry Savott . 

 " I do not   say two ' dry ' tea , " say Miss Maclaren in a hard , uncompromise tone , dry than the dry tea could be . " please take this away , and let I have it all on a large tray , the one Mrs. O'Riordan always have , and her tea - pot , and plenty of bread - and - butter , and cake , and some black - currant jam . and I be in a hurry , please . " 

 in silence the waiter withdraw with the tray . 

 " that be just like they , " Miss Maclaren explain her grievance to Violet , whom she have invite to take tea with she . " however , I believe in beginning as you mean to go on . he know perfectly well . the floor - housekeeper have their tea downstair where they have their other meal . only if they want tea upstairs they can have it in their bedroom . but it be what we call a ' dry ' tea . nothing to eat with it , you know . but the head - housekeeper be at liberty to have whatever she want , and she be serve by a floor - waiter , same as a visitor . Mrs. O'Riordan always have that , and I shall . he be only try it on . he have not   be here very long , and he be ill half the time , or pretend to be . still , he ought surely to have see enough of I to know I be not the sort of person to try thing on with . he soon will know - I will attend to that ! do not   you think I be right ? " 

 " rather ! " Violet agree . 

 she see in Miss Maclaren a person who love authority , who be very jealous of her authority , newly acquire with the room , but who feel the need at first of a little moral support in the exercise of the same . as one who have until the previous day exercise a great deal of authority over more than two hundred woman and girl , Violet regard herself as nearly the moral equal of Miss Maclaren , and she feel that Miss Maclaren so regard she . but she be privately critical of Miss Maclaren 's method . Stony be the word to apply to it . no allowance make . Violet usually manage to put herself in the place of a wrong - doer ; which enable she often to read the wrong - doer 's thought and thus give she a considerable advantage in hand the wrong - doer . it be because she be read Miss Maclaren 's thought that she have reply with such sympathy , " rather ! " 

 " you must have have some lively time down at the Laundry now and then , " say Miss Maclaren . 

 " you may depend I have ! " say Violet , with a troubled expression feign dark memory of the lively time . she add : 

 " but of course it must be much more difficult here - especially for you , with eight floor to keep an eye on and so many different sort of people too . we have no foreigner at the Laundry anyhow . " the benevolent , deceitful little piece have here say exactly the right thing to the brave martyr of the Floors . Miss Maclaren despise and mistrust all the foreigner on the staff , except perhaps Mr. Cousin , whose impregnable blandness appeal much more to she than to the somewhat temperamental Mrs. O'Riordan . 

 the sun be low in the sky . not a ray of it come through the window . the flame of the small autumn fire show brighter in the first onset of the dusk . the sofa be draw close at an angle across the hearth . Miss Maclaren sit in a corner of it , without lean back . Violet sit on the pouf . the two black - rob creature , prim with office , soon lose some of their primness in a chiefly physical sensation of nascent intimacy . Violet open her bag and boldly employ her lipstick . 

 " what lipstick do you fancy , dear ? " ask Miss Maclaren . 

  Mr. Orcham be uncanny . 

 " Michel , " say Violet , pause in her work . " it be a kind of an imitation of Tanger , you know . but I think it be well . not what you would call cheap , but it last for age . if you ask I , I think the most expensive be the cheap . " 

 " yes ? " say Miss Maclaren doubtfully . " I do not   know what mine be , really . but I know it be about finished . Mrs. O'Riordan always have Chanel . " 

 " yes . that be one that last for age , too . " 

 then the waiter arrive with another and a superior tray , laden apparently with the whole content of a Bond Street tea - shop and a superior tea - service and superior china . he hesitate . 

 " shall he put it on here ? " Violet suggest , rise from the pouf . 

 " yes . " 

 Violet sit down by Miss Maclaren 's side . Intimacy be increase . 

 " thank you , " say Miss Maclaren , less harshly , to the waiter , who stand expectant with a pad of order - slip in his hand . 

 " will you sign , please , miss ? " the waiter speak with marked deference . 

 " oh ! " Miss Maclaren exclaim , catch . she have forget that only ' dry ' tea require no signature . she sign the check , have first scrutinise it . glance over the tray , she add to the waiter in the most friendly manner , " yes , this will be all I want . thank you very much . " 

 " thank you , miss . " the waiter leave . 

 " he be learn his lesson , " say Miss Maclaren , but with no bitterness ; rather with a smile . the magnificent spectacle of the tray have mollify she . she pick up a petit four and eat it at once . then another . her mouth half - full , she mumble to Violet : " Milk ? Sugar ? " 

 Violet have one lump , Miss Maclaren three . Miss Maclaren be of those who enjoy their tea . far , she have a sweet tooth - when sweet be gratis . this immense and crush weight of the Imperial Palace seem to slip from her responsible shoulder the look on her worn , well - shape face gradually change ; the wrinkle be smooth out ; even Violet 's demeanour change in sympathy with Miss Maclaren 's . 

 " it must be rather fun , be head - housekeeper , " she venture . 

 " well , I suppose it be , dear , " say Miss Maclaren , who at that moment be define a head - housekeeper as a personage who could have what she choose for tea . " I mean - it be and it be not . now Mr. Cousin ask I down for lunch to - day , and Mr. Orcham be there too . naturally , I could not   refuse , though really I have not   a minute and they must have know it . be not   as if they have much to tell I that be useful . no . just talk . it be extraordinary the amount of time man waste . I could have have my lunch in five minute . do you know , I be there over an hour . it be in Mr. Cousin 's room . I suppose they just want to be friendly . " 

 " and so they ought ! " Violet put in . " but it be nice of they . " she wonder if she would ever be invite to lunch with the swell . never . 

 " oh , it be , " say Miss Maclaren , who scarcely try to conceal a justifiable pride in the event . " and my word they do have meal , those two . " the greedy woman be speak . " Mr. Cousin do not   say a lot , but Mr. Orcham do , and they be both full of Mrs. O'Riordan . Mr. Orcham 's make up his mind she shall not   have her wedding - present . he say he tell she if she do not   come to the dinner she would not   get any present . and she do say she would come . so he be send the plate back to the silversmith 's , and he say he be go to return all the subscription . that mean ten shilling I never expect to see again . oh ! he be very light and jolly about it . but he mean it . you could see that . and when he mean a thing he do mean it , Mr. Orcham do . she ought not   to have run off like that . no ! I must say I be very surprised . I should never I have think it of she . " 

 " I should think not indeed ! " say Violet . " but I think just before wedding woman do get into a state . I have   notice it . " 

 " really ? " Miss Maclaren casually murmur . " still , she should not   have do it . " she lift her shoulder censoriously , pour out more tea , eat bread - and - butter , eat jam , eat more cake . 

 2 . 

 there be a tap on the door . Mrs. O'Riordan 's fluffy little school - gir1ish secretary enter , notebook in hand . 

 " in half an hour , Agatha , " say Miss Maclaren , turn her head , grandly . the secretary nod and vanish . 

 " have another of these little cake - petty four as they call they , " Miss Maclaren hospitably suggest . 

 " no , thank . I can not   eat any more . " 

 " you have not   have any jam . do have some . " 

 Violet smile and move her head slowly from side to side . 

 " another cup of tea ? " 

 Violet nod her head . 

 have pour out two more cup , Miss Maclaren take for herself more bread - and - butter , more jam , and more little cake . she eat very quickly . 

 " no use leave anything for they , " say she , seize as it be sadly the last bit of food on the tray . " the cake that be no more ! " her glance at the empty plate seem to say . but her demeanour have become quite animate , even gay . she be a completely change woman : happy in the satiating of her passion . she like eat ; she have authority to order what she want ; she have get it ; and she have consume it . she lean back . 

 " very nice of you to arrange these room for I , Violet , " she say ; and add : " they christen I ' Mac ' in this place . but I be not go to have any ' mac ' now - except of course when I be alone with someone , like this . " 

 " no , " say Violet . " it would not   do , would it ? I should have unpack your trunk too ; but I think perhaps I would well not . People prefer to do that themselves . " 

 " I have   do it , " say Miss Maclaren . 

 ' you be quick , " say Violet , who be really impress by this despatch . 

 " oh ! that do not   take I long ! " say Miss Maclaren . " I have   do it too often . but hang picture and so on . no . I never seem to have a moment for that . Downstairs my picture never be hung . and if you have not   hang they here , I do not   know when they would have be do . " her gaze be apparently set on one of the vas of flower . but she say no word about Violet 's flower . evidently she be a woman , rare , who could look at flower without see they . 

 " and what have you be do on your first day ? I have   have to leave you to yourself . " Miss Maclaren laugh . 

 Violet answer : 

 " I would well make my report , have not   I ? " 

 she tell about Sir Henry Savott 's urgent demand for a new desk . 

 " Savott ? what number ? " Violet give the number of the suite . " but that be occupy by a Mr. - I forget his name , only it be not   Savott ; a Canadian . " 

 " Sir Henry come in last night , he tell I . " 

 " I be sure he be not   on the floor - list , " say Miss Maclaren . 

 " that must be her ladyship again . she must have have the slip from the Reception Office - and forget it . other thing tooccupy her mind ! " Miss Maclaren both sardonically enjoy and severely disapprove Mrs. O'Riordan 's negligence . " you see , she be do floor - housekeeper up here as well as head - housekeeper . you would have think she could manage it , would not   you ? well , what about the desk ? " Violet relate that a valet have advise she to go to the carpenter 's shop . 

 " and do you go ? " 

 " no , I send for the head - carpenter . the valet say there be some spare furniture in his shop . " 

 " now that be right , " say Miss Maclaren . " send for they . never go to they unless you can not   possibly help it . " 

 " well , there be not   a desk - at least not one large enough . and Sir Henry want it green . I go to the shop myself to see . " 

 " so you do not   get one ? " 

 " yes , I do . I do not   know whether I do right or not , but I look in all the empty room and I find a large desk in 847 . so I exchange that one for the one in Sir Henry 's room . be that right ? " 

 " yes , it be , " say Miss Maclaren . " but the desk in 847 be not   green . " 

 " it have some green line pick out on it . " 

 " so it have , " Miss Maclaren agree , after reflection . " how do you get the desk shift ? " 

 " I just ask the valet if he would get it do for I , and he do . " 

 " which valet be it ? " 

 " do not   know his name . red hair . " 

 " oh ! he do ? " 

 " yes . I think the carpenter help . I leave they to do it and go away . when I come up from lunch it be do . I be very late for lunch . it take I about ten minute to find where the place be . the housekeeper ' table be empty . but there be two page - boy eat in the same room . " 

 " well , dear , that be not   so bad for a first day . I do not   believe in page - boy have their meal in the same room as the floor - housekeeper . I have   often think of it . it be not nice . and I mean to get that altered if I can . what else ? anything ? " 

 the conversation , vivacious enough , and deeply interesting to both woman , burrow down into recondite detail of administration . Violet absorb new knowledge through her pore . she mention the illness of Sir Henry 's servant , Jim . 

 " I go to see he . he say he know he would got bronchitis , and I think he have too . so I send for Dr. Constam . " 

 " who tell you about Dr. Constam ? " 

 " Marian Tilton . that be her name , be not   it ? Mr. Cousin 's secretary . I telephone down to she . she be very obliging . " 

 " yes . I suppose she be , " Miss Maclaren concur . " but do not   you go and say too much to she . she be the bad gossip in the hotel . I be always very careful with she . what do the doctor say ? " 

 " oh ! it be bronchitis . but only a touch . " 

 " he would not   have say it be only a touch if it have be a visitor on any of the floor , " observe Miss Maclaren . 

 " would not   he ? but I really think it be only a touch this time . I have   be to see the man since . I know he , you see , before . I know Sir Henry Savott too . " 

 Violet hesitate for a moment , but the hesitation end by her tell pretty fully the story of her brief connection with the Savott household at Claygate . Miss Maclaren listen with both ear , and do not cease to question until she have learn more of Susan Powler 's illness and death than anybody outside the Powler family . Intimacy be still far increase . the very room be warm with intimacy . tone of voice sink lower . inflection and glance and gesture acquire a new freedom and variety . 

 " then you must know a lot about our business , " say Miss Maclaren , at the close of the talk . " I wish I have know this morning . I should not   have be so nervous for you . Mr. Cousin or Mr. Orcham might have tell I , I think . " the head - housekeeper 's respect for her subordinate have increase as much as the intimacy . after all there be a glamour about manage a large country mansion for a celebrity that even the Imperial Palace could not offer . silence fall for a moment . 

 Violet be think : 

 " I be glad I tell she . she might have hear one day and it would not   have do for she to think I have not   be open with she . she be a nice old sort . no trouble about keep in with she if you go about it right . she be fussy , but she be a great worker , and she know her job and she will see that I do mine . " 

 then the telephone - bell tinkle in the room . Miss Maclaren jump with a nervous start to answer it . 

 " oh , dear ! " she murmur , with resignation . " can not   people leave I alone while I be have my tea ? " 

 3 . 

 in the telephone dialogue , Miss Maclaren say little , listen much more than she talk . Violet hear only such phrase as : 

 " oh ! quite satisfactory , sir . She's ... very well , sir ... to - night ? yes , to - morrow morning would be well . certainly , sir . I will arrange it ... oh yes , sir . I can manage . " Miss Maclaren hang up the receiver , sigh , and return to the sofa . 

 " I be sorry , Violet , but the order be that you be to go down to Third to - morrow morning , and take over there . it be Mr. Cousin speak . I do think it would have be well for you to stay up here with I for a bit , while you be get into it . but that be the order . he do not   give any reason . but I should like to know whether I be head - housekeeper or not . it ought to be my business to decide what housekeeper be to be on what door . Miss Venables be do Third and Fourth at present , and she might just as well go on do they both , until you be settle down . I think we would settle it all at that lunch of theirs . I tell they there be no need to have eight housekeeper . Waste of money , I tell they . I can easily do Eighth myself , same as Mrs. O'Riordan have to do for a week and more . but I do wish you could have stay with I . I be so sorry , dear . " 

 " so be i - Mac , " Violet reply , use the diminutive with a certain constraint for the first time . 

 and she be rather more than sorry . she be upset . these mysterious power downstairs ! they say go , and you go . no reason give . they order , and you obey , blindly . you be not   a human being . you be a robot . you have to exercise judgment , tact , take responsibility , be smart , powder your face . but you be a robot . suppose she have be do wrong over the desk , as she might have be do ! what trouble ! take on herself to change furniture without authority ! but she be a robot nevertheless . nothing like this could have happen at the Laundry . Cyril Purkin have be above she , technically , but he be always a bit timid , apologetic , and full of explanation whenever he encroach on her territory . third floor ! it be a foreign land to she . it be like Canada . Fancy have to emigrate to Canada at less than a day 's notice . and she be unpacked and fix on Eighth ! and she feel at home there . to she , Eighth be the nice and the cosy floor in the hotel . no other floor could be half as nice . 

 she feel helplessly involve in a terrific and ruthless machine . and why be she be move ? why ? Miss Maclaren think there be no sense in it , and so there could not   be any sense in it . with Miss Maclaren the interest of the hotel would have come first . she would have sacrifice herself and Violet and anybody to the interest of the hotel . that be certain . you could feel in Miss Maclaren a tremendous loyalty and devotion to the hotel . well , if Miss Maclaren could not   see the point of the move there just be not   a point . surely Mr. Orcham have have nothing to do with the order . no , it be just a whim of that strange Frenchman . already Violet be begin to catch the head - housekeeper 's prejudice against foreigner . 

 " Agatha will be here in a minute , " say Miss Maclaren , glance at the clock . " I must dictate some letter . I be not very good at it . do you have to do any dictating at the Laundry , dear ? " 

 " oh no ! Mr. Purkin do all that . " 

 " he be a bit curt in his letter to Mrs. O'Riordan , " say Miss Maclaren . 

 " yes , I daresay , " say Violet . " but I do not   think he mean to be , " she smile . 

 and Mac smile quite suddenly . 

 " no . I be sure he do not , " say she , as if suddenly persuade to revise her opinion of Mr. Purkin as a business correspondent . " and talk of the Laundry , " she go on , " the linen will be come in about seven - you know when it leave the Laundry - I wish you would see that it be check carefully , and I want you to look right through the linen - closet , and see if everything be arrange for the good and report to I , will you ? " 

 " I will , " say Violet , with enthusiastic , consciously comfort willingness , convey the idea that her special delight would be to do what be ask of she . 

 " let I see now , " say Miss Maclaren . " this will be your late night . Midnight , you go off . have you have any time off to - day ? " 

 " I have   have plenty of time when there be not   anything to do . " 

 " you ought to have go out , " say Miss Maclaren , who seldom take the trouble to go out herself . " I would like we to have another quiet chat to - night . come along here about half - past eleven . I will expect you . but be sure to tell the night - waiter and the valet and the maid where you be to be find . in case . you never know . " 

 Agatha tap and enter . Miss Maclaren frown instinctively , prepare herself to shoulder again the full burden of the Imperial Palace . 

 " you have   bring that correspondence I ask you for with the Works Department ? " 

 " yes , Miss Maclaren . " 

 Violet din in the society of Miss Prentiss and Miss Venables . there be no page - boy . later she go through the linen - closet . she be humorously surprised to discover herself highly critical of the laundry work . she admit defect which , if they have be bring to her notice by the hotel staff , she would never have admit in the Laundry . by eleven - thirty she be almost reconcile to the emigration order . Mac and she gossip till nearly one o'clock in the morning , hedonistically heedless of the clock . at part they kiss : a prim kiss . Mac say that Violet must come up for tea again the next day - not for mere pleasure , certainly not , but to receive any advice or information which she might need for the proper conduct of Third . 

 " have you pack at all , you poor dear ? " Mac enquire . 

 " no . I shall not   think of it till morning . " 

 " that be right . and do not   you go down a minute before nine o'clock . that be your time on Third . " 

 Violet walk slowly through the long narrow corridor , in which all the light save three have be extinguish . no sound . no sign of human existence , except a pair of shoe on doormat here and there . ghostly . weird . light show through the half - open door of the waiter ' service - room . a man in a dressing - gown emerge from a room nearly opposite Violet 's , drop a letter into the letter - shoot , and disappear back into his room . and in the strange solitude of her home - for - one - night , Violet undress slowly and meditatively . she smile to herself . on the whole she be very well pleased with her debut . 

 " what a hell of an exciting day ! " she remark aloud . 

 content 
 chapter 35 

 return to EIGHTH 

 the next morning Violet , already instal and at work on Third , go into one of the principal suite there . it be empty , and her business be to inspect . Third be a territory very different from Eighth . its main corridor be broad , more deeply carpet , more richly decorate , its ceiling loftier . the corridor alone suffice to establish in every heart the conviction that wealth abound and that no price could be too high for tranquillity and the perfection of silent and luxurious service . even a vacuum - cleaner , at work on the crimson carpet , seem to purr like a tiger tame and domesticate to the us of the lord of the earth . and the menial of the staff move upon humble task seem to apologise to the invisible lord for their own miserable existence . 

 the suite be plan similarly to that of Sir Henry Savott on Eighth , but on a vaster scale : a large entrance - hall , a large bathroom full of gadget unknown on Eighth , a huge bedroom on one side and a huge sitting - room on the other . brocade upholstery everywhere , multiplicity of lamp , multiplicity of cushion , multiplicity of occasional table ; everywhere a yield , acquiescent softness . 

 everything that the caprice of infinite power might demand , and yet emptiness , a total absence of individuality , of humanity . a feeling in the room of expectancy , await with everlasting patience the arrival of life - give , imperious , exact lord of the earth . in the bedroom , twin - bed cover with silk till the lord should come , destine to receive upon their resilient spring and their pillow the delicate sensitive body of lord and lady fresh perfume from the bath . Thereon they would deign to recline , repose , slumber , perhaps snore . strange thought ! 

 the blind be up , the heavy double curtain draw apart . Violet look out of the window , open they , see the tree which obstruct Sir Henry Savott 's view , test every lamp - there be thirty - seven - test every tap , every gadget , pull down the blind , pull the curtain together , open every drawer and every cupboard , try every key and knob and bolt , pass a hand along ledge to discover dust , bend down in order to descry dust on glass - top of table . and make note . 

 a tap in the bathroom which obstinately drip . in the sitting - room a lamp whose filament have ' go . ' a curtain - hook which have escape from its ring . flower require . small stain on a white linen cover of one of the pedestal in the bedroom . and a large dark stain on the bedroom carpet , very noticeable and ugly . also a drawer unline with paper in the chief wardrobe , and only eight coat - hanger in the wardrobe - not enough . quite a list ! she know the machinery for remedy every defect except the stain on the immense carpet in the bedroom . neither lord nor lady could hope to be able to sleep peacefully in a bedroom with a stained carpet . the physical side of the complex enterprise of living which these lord and lady have invent be indeed extremely difficult for themselves and extremely arduous for their attendant . from the bedroom Violet hear voice in the entrance - hall . an arrive visitor . she see through the open door a dapper and diplomatic reception clerk , and Sir Henry Savott . 

 " yes , " Sir Henry be say . " I will come back at once to my old room . I have   nothing to complain of upstairs , and the outlook be much fine there ; but it be all too small . I find I can not   manage . so if you do not   mind I will come back here this afternoon . about five . not before . " 

 " certainly , Sir Henry . certainly . " 

 " I shall have to leave all the moving to your people , without superintendence . my man 's ill . " the two go into the sitting - room , and Violet hear far the voice of Sir Henry : " now as regard this desk . there be a desk in my sitting - room upstairs that I should prefer to this one . can it be bring down ? " 

 " certainly , Sir Henry . certainly . " 

 then the two come to the bedroom . Violet be a little nervous . she prepare a discreet smile for Sir Henry . but Sir Henry do not smile . he merely nod perfunctorily . 

 " I want one of these bed take out . it be only in the way . I have it remove before , but of course it be be bring back again " 

 " certainly , Sir Henry . naturally . " 

 " thank you . " 

 the two retreat . 

 " that will do , thank . I will just look round , " Violet hear Sir Henry say to the clerk . after which the entrance - door close and Sir Henry reappear in the bedroom , smile and friendly . 

 " so you be down here now , Violet , " he say , offer no explanation of his previous stiff formality . 

 " yes , Sir Henry . " 

 " well , I be glad I have   see you . I do not   come across you again yesterday , and I do want to thank you for look after Jim so well . he be well . and he be very pleased to see you , very pleased . I go along to have a look at he this morning . " 

 " oh yes ! " Violet murmur . 

 " and there be another thing . you succeed brilliantly in the affair of the desk , and I be much oblige . have you get charge here to - day ? " 

 " yes , Sir Henry . " 

 " well , that relieve my mind . I know I shall be safe . goodbye for the present . " and off he hurry . 

 to Violet it be all very odd . and the stained carpet trouble she . she go to the corridor service - telephone and be lucky to get Miss Maclaren in her own room . she want counsel from Mac , who at once reassure she as to the carpet . 

 " it be a really bad stain ? " ask Mac . 

 " frightful . " 

 " People be careless . how big be it ? " 

 " about a foot square at least . " 

 " all right . do not   bother . I will see to it . " 

 " but can it be do before five ? " 

 " of course . look under one of the corner of the carpet . do not   matter which . you will see a tab with a number on it . give I the number . " 

 Whereupon the neophyte of the Imperial Palace learn that every carpet in the Palace have its exact duplicate , in size and shape , at the Works Department in Craven Street , and that an exchange could be effect in a couple of hour at most . Violet be impress by the reckless grandeur of the domestic machine . 

 " and I say , Violet , " continue Mac . " there be just come up another order . you be to come back to Eighth this afternoon . I do not   know why . but I expect it be strike they at last that what I say to they about your be up here with I for a bit be only common sense . I be so glad . " 

 " so be I , " Violet reply , too astonished and disturb to respond adequately to Mac 's gladness . those mysterious power down below be more mysterious than ever . to they you be no well than chessman on a chessboard . and you have no well right to question they than the chessman the chess - player . 

 2 . 

 the tone of sincerity which Miss Maclaren have use in the phrase " I be so glad " remain warmly in Violet 's mind . it be clear that the head - housekeeper really do want to make a friend of she . apparently Mac have few friend or none on the staff . Miss Venables and Miss Prentiss have show reserve in their reference to she at lunch on the previous day . Violet guess that while they neither like nor dislike their new superior they be perhaps prepare themselves to be restive under what they fear might prove to be a too strict and exact régime . why have she take to I ? " Violet think . " there be no contrast between we . we be much the same . " yet she well know that they differ in at least one important aspect . both of they conscientious and industrious , Mac be victimise by a tendency to harass gloom , but Violet be animate by a tendency to cheerfulness . Violet have a desire always to lift Mac out of a pit of depression , and she be aware that the satisfaction of the desire would demand a slightly wearisome continuous moral effort on her part . she feel sorry for Mac , more sorry for she than fond of she . and in some strange way she feel sorry also for Sir Henry Savott ; feel as though she ought to remain on Third until he be entirely comfortable there , until she have assure herself that all his requirement , whatever they might be , have be fulfil . she have a personal relation to Sir Henry , and nobody on the staff could understand his temperament as she understand it . at bottom , beneath all his imperious demeanour , he be a bit helpless , be Sir Henry . 

 come out of Sir Henry 's suite , she meet Mr. Perosi , the head of all the floor - waiter , the jealous commander of twenty - five or thirty man . a tall , broad , heavy , grey - haired fellow   French despite his name , whose weight press too hard on his foot , which be generally tired and sore . 

 " excuse I , Mr. Perosi - you be Mr. Perosi , be not   you ? " the middle - aged functionary , stop , slowly nod his head and give Violet the faintest fatigue sardonic smile . " I do not   know a thing yet about flower here . and I want some for this suite . what do I do ? " 

 " you telephone down to the flower - shop . you know the flower - shop ? " 

 " never hear of it . " 

 " it be on the right in the corridor between the hall and the grill - room . they always have carnation and rose . and if you want any special flower for a visitor at any time , you can always get they . a visitor order a bouquet of orchid at midnight - well any time after eight o'clock you telephone to the manager 's office . they have a key of the shop there when it be closed , and whoever be on duty open the shop and send you up orchid - or anything else . of course in the ordinary way all flower be take out of the sitting - room at seven in the morning every morning , and the vas put into the corridor and they go down to the flower - shop to be examine . they be back again before nine , change or freshen , you see . bedroom flower be change when the visitor have leave their room . it be very simple , Miss Powler . " 

 " oh ! " Violet exclaim eagerly . " you be kind . I be wonder how it be all arrange . thank very much . sorry to trouble you . " she think , please : " he know my name . " Mr. Perosi 's glance become benevolent , paternal . 

 " if you want to know anything else , come and ask I . Fourth be the floor to find I . end of the corridor . " he point . 

 " there be something else , but I ought not   - " 

 " what ? " Perosi be suddenly harsh . 

 " I hardly like to ask you . but I have   decide to try to learn French . I suppose there be plenty of Frenchmen on your staff , Mr. Perosi . I only think - " 

 " I be french , " say Perosi in his perfect colloquial English . " my father be bear in Milan , but I be french . so you wish to learn French ? that be good . I will see . come to I to - night . I will see . " 

 " you be kind . but I be return to Eighth this afternoon . " 

 " and then ? what do that matter ? telephone to I . " he pass on his way . 

 " why do not   they like he ? " Violet thought , mean the other housekeeper . " he be a dear . " 

 a sensation of happiness flow into she , but it do not quite destroy the vague unease which have be set up by the incomprehensible order to go back to Eighth . 

 content 
 chapter 36 

 MESS LUNCH 

 a very small room , so small that the telephone have to be precariously perch on the window - sill . photograph of seductive , acquiescent , provocative and lightly clothe girl on the wall ; also two photograph in a different style , on either side of the long , low window - portrait respectively of Maître Planquet , chef of the restaurant kitchen , and of Commendatore Rocco , chef of the grill kitchen . the latter be a new addition to the wall . an oval table , relatively large , occupy most of the room . indeed there be no other furniture except chair and a small sideboard well stock with bottle . 

 seat at the table be Adolphe , the rosy - cheeked Reception - manager ; Major Linklater , a tall , thin , retired army - officer whose business it be to fly about in aeroplane and meet customer on liner at Southampton , Cherbourg and Plymouth , and know they and all concern they ; Immerson , the young , slim publicity - manager , whose dandyism of attire rival even that of Mr. Dacker and Mr. Smiss   the youthful member of the Board ; Pozzi , the assistant - manager ; and Commendatore Rocco . 

 the Commendatore , sole member of the staff with an honorific title , dominate the table . a big man and a grim man , he be dress professionally in gleam stainless white , and have a white cap on his mighty head . the Commendatore , chief guest of the mess on this great occasion , speak little or not at all . when he do speak he use Italian to Adolphe   who could chatter colloquially in most civilised language   and French to the other . his voice be deep , nearly a growl ; and his soul be deep . perhaps even he himself have never plumb his soul quite to the bottom . he have a sardonic , observant eye . he notice his portrait hang on an equality with Maître Planquet 's , and make no remark thereon . but he think : " and not too soon ! " not that the Commendatore be jealous of the wide reputation of Maître Planquet ! no . he merely desire due recognition of the fact that Maître Planquet be not the only chef in the Imperial Palace . the Commendatore be much old than the Maître . he be a relative of the once - famous Rocco of the Grand Babylon Hotel , but never mention the fact . his career have include several of the supreme restaurant , and the kitchen of a deceased Rothschild . he have refuse a startlingly munificent offer from New York , with a memorable aside to a friend : " Ce sont des barbares , le New - Yorkais . " he have be a know chef when Maître Planquet be an infant , and in the privacy of his mind he regard the Maître as a promising youngster to whom he could teach a thing or two if he choose and if the youngster would learn . he have never do anything save cook or superintend cook and play " manila , " call by the Commendatore " maniglia , " a card - game which he prefer because it could be play by any number of gambler from two to five ; his principal subordinate take care to learn it . but now he have yield to golf while the world wonder . a new and very special club in a pliant case be prop against the wall in a corner of the room , ready for presentation to the Commendatore . 

 such be the mess   a mess without a name   and its guest . two other guest have yet to arrive . Mr. Orcham and Mr. Cousin , and two empty chair seem to be grow impatient for their arrival . a couple of waiter circle restlessly around the table , show their expertise by not get in each other 's way . from time to time the Commendatore growl to they an imperious enquiry , which they respectfully answer . the Commendatore , beneath his sardonic calm , be somewhat nervous for the plenary success of the repast which he have compose and supervise with the nice captious attention down below . cocktail be be sip . 

 at half - past twelve Evelyn enter , smile . everybody stand . 

 " I be not late , " say he . " but I be not use to these early hour . " 

 the mess lunch be always at twelve - thirty , partly because that be the continental hour for lunch , and partly because it fit in with the duty of the staff well than the english hour . Evelyn take his seat at the head of the table , and the other resume their chair . 

 " where be my friend Cousin ? " he ask . 

 " come , sir - we hope , " say Major Linklater . 

 " damn that hammer , " say Evelyn . " I must stop it . " he rise . 

 " that be what we all say , " say the Major . 

 the Imperial Palace be in a continuous state of structural improvement , and a band of workman be busy on a roof just below the level of the window . but before Evelyn could reach the window , the noise cease as by magic . Workmen 's dinner hour . 

 " you have only to rise , sir , " laugh Adolphe . 

 " I be sure Mr. Cousin will not   mind if we start - will he , Pozzi ? " 

 " certainly not , sir . " 

 the meal begin at once . 

 " ah ! " say Evelyn . " hot hor d'ouvre ! so you be go on with that idea of your , Commendatore . I have   not have this one before . " 

 the Commendatore reply : 

 " my director , no one have have this before . I invent six new one every day . another two day , and it will be a month since I begin . that will make one hundred and eighty - six new combination . that be work , if I may dare to say so . I have be reserve this one expressly for to - day . " he eat reflectively , critically , appreciatively , as though listen with attention to a new poem or piece of concert music . " yes , truly it be not bad . the mushroom , prepare like this ... it be necessary to drink sherry with it . as for I , I never touch sherry ; but sherry should go with it . " 

 all the luncher eagerly laud the novel dish . Sherry be serve . Evelyn forbid the wine - waiter with a gesture . 

 " vittel , " he murmur . and aloud to the Commendatore : 

 ' we do not   get these in the restaurant . " 

 the glance of the Commendatore signify : " of course you do not . the restaurant be only the restaurant , but the grill be the grill . " his growl tongue say : " my director , if once you would come to the grill - " 

 " I will . demain , san faute , " Evelyn answer . 

 " I shall be too honour , my director . lunch ? " 

 " Lunch . " 

 " I shall give myself the pleasure of occupy myself with it specially . " 

 on the rare occasion when he do not lunch privately , Evelyn lunch in a corner of the restaurant . he realise that he would be well advise to divide his patronage less unequally . 

 2 . 

 the Commendatore have the same thought , and his tone , though formally submissive , do not hide the thought and be not mean to hide it . he glance as it be stealthily about he . publicity man , managerial man , reception man , even the Director himself : what be they ? naught ! he , Rocco , be the sole artist and creator in the room . he alone really understand . the other , kindly , and clever enough in their way , be savage . La haute cuisine . he dream . golf - not serious , a game , a diversion . La haute cuisine . not fifty people in the world be equip by education and natural taste to comprehend it . Planquet might comprehend that hor d'ouvre . yes , possibly the youngster would comprehend it . yes , he must admit that the youngster would . the Director comprehend wine , cigar . that he know , though it be almost incredible that an Englishman should comprehend any wine but champagne . and even champagne ... with their mania for extra sec ! it be time the Director patronise the grill . not to do so amount to an insult . but he , Rocco , be truly too benevolent . he might retire , for in Italy he would be a rich man . or he could choose between a dozen high situation . but after all , the Imperial Palace - there be not two of they ! and Rocco be extremely flattered that day . the artist despise , but the man admire , the chic of his host ; he in white , they in black . and golf ! very smart , golf . the entry into society , into the beau monde . he , son of a small rice - grower ! 

 the telephone - bell rang . Pozzi jump to it and listen ; then sit down . 

 " Mr. Cousin be detain , " say he , and after a moment add : " Sir Henry Savott . " 

 " what about Savott ? " Evelyn question . 

 " it be he who be detain Mr. Cousin . " 

 Evelyn rise and step across to the telephone himself . 

 " Manager 's office , please ... that you , Cousin ? Orcham speak . you have Sir Henry Savott with you . I only want to tell you this . there be no accommodation on Eighth . you understand? ... yes . right . " 

 nobody understand what the instruction imply . it make they all think , uneasily , but agreeably too ; the suggestion of a skirmish between the Director and an important visitor be always exciting . even Adolphe , who know everything about visitor , be at a loss to understand the instruction . Evelyn sit down again , and in a gay tone immediately address Adolphe : 

 " well , Adolphe , how be you get on with that novel I lend you ? " Evelyn read a large number of book - nobody know when - and he talk of what he read . the novel be the late example of the fashionable , brilliant , daring variety , which have be recommend for suppression by the godly and which not to have read amount to a social solecism . 

 " I finish it last night , sir , " say Adolphe . " I should call it mild . the chapter in the underground bakehouse between the girl and the baker nude down to the waist be not bad , but I be afraid they would not   think much of its realism in Czecho - Slovakia . " everybody laugh , for Czecho - Slovakia be one of Adolphe 's weakness . 

 " now do not   boast , Adolphe , " say Major Linklater . " you be not   a Czecho - Slovakian . you wish to heaven you be . " 

 " I very nearly be , " Adolphe innocently retort . 

 " yes , we have   hear that story about a million time , " say Major Linklater . " so spare we , my beamish boy . " 

 " I wish somebody would tell I the meaning of that word ' beamish ' , " Adolphe retort . " it be not   in the dictionary . " 

 " and it never will be , " say the Major . " it would set any dictionary on fire , and there would be a smell of sulphur . you have to be English and you have to have your name put down for it when you be eight year old , and then perhaps the high - priest will vouchsafe to you its meaning when you be eighteen . otherwise you have not   an earthly . tell we about the bakehouse scene . " 

 after Adolphe have picturesquely and boldly describe the bakehouse scene , which have be discuss at hundred of dinner - table , in and out of the Imperial Palace , Major Linklater go on , to Evelyn : 

 " may I have that book , sir , after Adolphe ? I should love to know what Adolphe think would be think mild in Czecho - Slovakia . " 

 " I will make a present of it to the mess , " say Evelyn . " then you can talk bawdy and everyone can join in . " 

 " Dr. Johnson , " murmur young Dr. Constam . 

 " noble sir ! " exclaim Major Linklater . " gentleman ! the health of the noble Director . " 

 there be some applause , actual clapping of hand , amid which the next dish be introduce into the room - a John Dory fish , cook and sauce from an absolutely original recipe of the only creative artist present . 

 " serve I first , " the Commendatore gruffly tell the waiter . 

 " I be not very sure of this dish . " he taste . 

 " that go , " he growl with relief , and glance at the Director , who taste . 

 " this be quite new to I , " say the Director . 

 " yes , my director , " say the Commendatore , grimly triumphant . " and to the world . " 

 " first time on any stage ! " say Major Linklater . " gentleman , we drink to the success of the Commendatore 's novelty . " 

 suddenly , after a lot more benevolent badinage , young Dr. Constam say in his quiet , cheerful , modest voice : 

 " I have a piece of really stupendous news . " 

 " do not   hesitate , " Evelyn encourage he . 

 " Perosi have at last fall . " 

 " down the lift - well ? " Adolphe surmise . 

 " for a woman . " Dr. Constam look round as if to say : 

 " beat that if you can ! " 

 " what ! old flatfoot ? " 

 " the same . I think his relation with our glitter bevy of housekeeper have always be very correct . but distant . oh yes , distant . well , I happen to meet he this morning , and it be a positive fact that he begin all on his own talk about the new housekeeper - I forget her name . " 

 " do not   know there be a new housekeeper , " Major Linklater say . 

 " no . you be always a month or so behind the time , " say Adolphe . " if the Palace be burn down you would not   hear of it till it have be rebuild . well , who be she ? " 

 " her name be Powler , " say Evelyn . 

 " well , " Dr. Constam continue . " as I say , he begin talk about she . say she be very agreeable and serious . and she want to learn French , and he be go to give her lesson himself . " 

 " no bakehouse scene , I hope . " Adolphe laugh . 

 Young Immerson , sit next to he , press his foot hard on Adolphe 's toe . 

 " he use to be a schoolmaster , " say Evelyn calmly . " Commendatore , tell I something about this most distinguished sauce , will you ? " 

 all be subtly aware of a certain constraint . and the conversation falter and lose its gaiety until after the fish have be remove . not a word more as to Perosi , or as to Violet Powler . then young Pozzi look at his watch . 

 " your chief do not   seem to be come , " say Evelyn . 

 " do not   look like it ... will you make the presentation , sir ? " 

 " most assuredly not , " say Evelyn . " this be a hotel - staff affair . if Mr. Cousin be not   here , you be his second - in - command , and you must perform the ceremony . " 

 at which Pozzi , with a graceful timidity which delight Evelyn , go to the corner , seize the golf - club and hand it in its case to the Commendatore with ten halting word in Italian . the Commendatore have to pretend to be surprised , and the company have to pretend that the great golfer of the immediate future would be Commendatore Rocco and that the sequel would play hell with the grill - kitchen and ruin the whole hotel . 

 " I think I may add one thing , " say Evelyn . " Rocco have the ideal temperament for a good golfer . it be like a rock . gentleman , fill your glass . " they all stand . even Rocco , disprove Evelyn 's statement as to the rockiness of his temperament , stand , from sheer nervousness . 

 the ceremony be finish , and the meal finish very quietly afterwards . Mr. Cousin have fail to appear . man look at their watch . staff - lunch have to be rapid at the Imperial Palace . soon all , except Evelyn and Immerson , have go - Rocco first , with his magnificent club , his pride as a creative artist , and his dream of triumph over eighteen hole . 

 the two laggard be stand , while Immerson hold a gold light to Evelyn 's cigarette . 

 " can you spare I a minute , sir ? " Immerson suggest with his customary deference . 

 3 . 

 Evelyn nod . the senior of the waiter have already depart ; the other be in the tiny service - room which adjoin the mess - room . Immerson happen to be one of Evelyn 's young pet , perhaps the chief among they . he be a quiet fellow who speak , when he do speak , in a low , restrained voice . at the luncheon he have say hardly a word . he have be at the Imperial Palace only three year , and be still a few month under thirty . he have come out of the blue to see Evelyn . when Evelyn have enquire what have decide he to leave general advertising in order to specialise in hotel advertising , he have answer : " my christian name , sir . an omen . a signpost . " his christian name by chance be " Frederick Gordon " - name of one of the pioneer of the modern british hotel world . when Evelyn have ask he what be his lead idea about the hotel business from his point of view he have answer : " it be no use wait for business to come in you have to go out and get it . and you will not   get it by display - ad of the kind you be put now in London daily . londoner do not   use London hotel , except their restaurant , and even if your restaurant be full your hotel will not   pay if your bedroom be empty . " 

 Immerson be engage , on salary plus commission . he stop all the Palace 's newspaper advertising in London , and be run campaign in the province and abroad for the inculcation of a theory that London , the world 's centre , be a jolly and bright city , and for depreciate the attraction of the Riviera and other resort . he run also column of gossip in many provincial paper , and in these column the word " Imperial Palace " constantly appear , as though by accident . he never pay for space in a newspaper . 

 he have seize with enthusiasm upon Evelyn 's scheme for establish an " Imperial Palace " bureau in New York , and have improve on it by persuade non - competing luxury hotel throughout Europe and in Egypt to co - operate in share the advantage and the expense thereof . his recent visit to the United States have be a very brilliant success . incidentally , one of its result be to multiply the function of Major Linklater , the hotel 's official welcomer to England 's shore . Evelyn 's final verdict on Immerson be that the young man have more , and more original and more audacious , imagination than any other person on the staff . " this boy , " Evelyn have say to himself , " must be co - opt to the Board as soon as Lingmell have the grace to retire - if not soon . " 

 " forgive I , " Immerson begin , lean against the mess - table . " no doubt you have notice the drop in North Atlantic share these last few day . " 

 North Atlantic be the illustrious company which own the fleet of liner all of whose name end in " we . " 

 " I have not , " Evelyn answer . " why should I ? because transatlantic liner be call ' float hotel ' ? " 

 " they fall several shilling yesterday , and they be fall still more to - day . and to - morrow they will probably go down with a bump . " 

 " why ? " 

 " the ' Daily Mercury ' be come out to - morrow with a terrific stunt about that splitting of one of the deck on the ' Caractacus ' . they have   be collect all the detail , and they have   find a woman who have her thigh break in a lurch of the ship during the voyage . the Company have pay she handsomely to hold her tongue , but some woman can not   rely on themselves to do that . " Immerson give a faint smile . " the ' Daily Mercury ' be bind to lose some steam advertising , but it do not   carry much , and it reckon that what it lose on the swing it will make on the roundabout . anyhow the story'll be a great story . it be quite possible that traffic will be affect . " 

 " not for long . " 

 " no . but even a month be too long for we . if traffic 's affect we shall be affect . you see - forgive I for remind you , sir - the ' Caractacus ' be German build , and there be several other German - build ship on the New York service . they will all be affect , especially as the ' Caractacus ' be lay up for what be call reconditioning . the ' Mercury ' will go on the anti - german lay . I have   be to the North Atlantic people this morning and offer they a few hint on how to react . and I be go again this afternoon , if you approve , sir . I think I can get something in one of to - morrow 's paper , the ' Echo ' - it have a big circulation than even the ' Mercury ' . " 

 " you go right on , " say Evelyn . " I leave it to you . " 

 " thank you , sir . but I have not   come to the point yet . " 

 " oh ? " 

 " no , sir . from what I hear , our friend Sir Henry Savott be at the bottom of all this . he be a very large shareholder in North Atlantic , and my private information be that one reason for the fall in the share be that he be be unload heavily . he will buy in again when the fall have reach its limit , and he might make a couple of hundred thousand over the thing in the end ... no , not that much ; but quite a lot . " 

 " be he a director of North Atlantic ? " 

 " oh no , sir . if he have be he dare not   have do it . no ! he be far too clever to be a director . but I daresay he have a director or two in his pocket . " 

 " well , " say Evelyn , mask an excusable agitation . " it be all very interesting - very interesting indeed . when you say that Savott be at the bottom of it , do you mean he be at the bottom of the ' Mercury ' stunt as well ? " 

 " nothing would surprise I less , sir , " Immerson reply with characteristic caution . 

 " I must go now , " say Evelyn , not because he be due for another appointment , but because he want to be alone . 

 " pardon I for detain you , sir , " Immerson deferentially apologise . 

 the other waiter return , and the next moment the two waiter , busy clear the table in the room now desert by their better , be freely discuss in French the alluring detail of the bakehouse chapter . 

 content 
 chapter 37 

 the new MILLIONAIRE 

 the next night Evelyn , with time to spare after a busy forenoon and afternoon of varied diplomatic and administrative toil , be put on a dinner - jacket at leisure in his bedroom . he have in his mind a surfeit of matter for meditation . 

 have return to the Imperial Palace from an excursion as to which Evelyn know nothing except that it have include Paris , Sir Henry Savott have suggest a second interview and have invite he to dinner . Evelyn have find an excuse for insist that the meeting should occur in the same place as the first one , his own dunghill or castle . he would not give up the advantage of the ground which he have choose . 

 Sir Henry 's proposal have occupy his thought for day . he have pretend to himself that he have come to no decision , even a tentative decision , about it . but the pretence be a failure . he have try , in vain , to discover good reason for decline the proposal without any further discussion . he have talk it over with Dennis Dover , and the throaty old man have obviously feel the attraction of the offer . it be an offer which appeal to his imagination , as to Evelyn 's . it be a grandiose , glittering offer . it might have drawback , pitfall , snare ; acceptance of it would necessarily be precede by a terrific battle of term and condition ; but father Dennis have make plain his view that it ought not to be turn down out of hand . Evelyn agree ; impossible for he to disagree . the temptation of the offer , to Evelyn , be tremendous , and the more he reflect upon they , the more tremendous they seem and be . Evelyn be like a man who hesitate and fear to admit that he be in love with a beautiful , dangerous woman ; yet well know that he be in her power . 

 also father Dennis have say : " I can not   live for ever . what will happen to my share if I die ? my grand - nephew will happen to they , because nobody else can happen to they . " 

 of course , by the Resolution pass at the Special Meeting and very soon to be formally ratify , the Board of Directors would still have control of the Imperial Palace Hotel Company , and could in theory ride over any shareholder , however large . but in practice it might be difficult to do so . the moral factor in the situation would count . at well , that notorious grand - nephew , old Dennis be dead , could not be refuse a seat on the Board ; and a director who be the large shareholder in a concern can hardly be ignore . anything might occur ; trouble would assuredly occur . whereas if the Imperial Palace become merely the lead item in a vast merger , the incalculable grand - nephew would be deprive of his paramount importance . there be other pointer to an acceptance of Sir Henry 's proposal , and not the least of they be Evelyn 's secret instinct and inclination grow daily within he . 

 and then have come young Immerson 's tiding , follow by the highly sensational stunt article in the " Daily Mercury , " which have reverberate throughout London , and be a chief topic of conversation ; and North Atlantic share have have a fall as sensational as the article , though later in the day they have rise again somewhat . could Evelyn bring himself to have dealing with the man who , he be convince , be primarily responsible for the stunt and the fall ? the notion revolt he . accustomed to rapid and definitive judgment , he be for once embarrass by genuine irresolution . in twenty minute he would be face to face with Sir Henry , and he have not decide what attitude to adopt . his mental discomfort be extreme . 

 and there be something else , more strange . the affair of Violet Powler . he have hear - and not by chance - that Savott have move from the Third to the eighth floor . Cousin have tell he of the change as a phenomenon quite extraordinary , inexplicable . why should a millionaire leave the rich spaciousness of Third for the small room of Eighth ? Savott 's specify reason - the well view and the great tranquility - have appear to Cousin remarkably insufficient . Evelyn have feign to regard they as sufficient and have dismiss the caprice as trifling . but in fact he have be perturb by it . Savott have speak with appreciation of Violet . Violet have the excellence of her sister . Savott have nearly marry the sister , on his own admission . he know that Violet be enter the service of the Imperial Palace . Evelyn have the absurd suspicion that Savott , have somehow learn on his arrival that Violet be to be station on Eighth , have go up there with the intention of renew relation with she , of reconsider she . yes , an absurd suspicion . but , entertain it , Evelyn have deviously arrange that Violet should descend to Third . then Savott have return to Third . the suspicion cease to be absurd , and grow into a positive certainty ... and why should not savott seek to renew relation with Violet ? Violet be well able to take care of herself . beyond any doubt she be not at all the sort of young woman to be deceive by even the cleverest speciousness . as old Perosi have say , she be ' serious . ' but Evelyn do not like the look of the thing . Violet be safe . Savott might be perfectly honest . he , Evelyn , have no interest in Violet except as , in a sense , a protégée . he simply do not like the look of the thing . it annoy he . it outrage he . he would not allow Savott to play any game in his hotel . never ! he have control of the situation , and he would exercise his control . 

 so he have restore Violet to Eighth , and have instruct Cousin to inform Savott that there be now no accommodation on Eighth . not that he know that Savott have be suggest to cousin a return to Eighth . Cousin have volunteer nothing about the nature of the interview with Savott . and Evelyn have not question Cousin . either he be too proud to question his manager , or he fear to receive an answer which might entirely demolish his theory of the inwardness of Savott 's odd peregrination . he would not have Violet on the same floor as her former employer , and he have no wish to argue the point . the point be decide . funny ! it be all extremely funny , a lark , a regular game . Evelyn laugh aloud : a harsh , sinister laugh . he have have an impulse to ask Oldham whether Oldham be acquaint with Savott 's valet . but , again , pride have stop he . 

 2 . 

 at this very moment Oldham enter the bedroom . the flabby face of the stoutish , unkempt man be transfigure by some mighty emotion . Evelyn notice this , but he ignore it in a sudden determination to let pride go and question Oldham . 

 " do you know Sir Henry Savott 's valet ? " he demand at once . 

 Oldham be dash , as by an unexpected obstacle . 

 " well , sir , I know he . he be be ill . " 

 " yes , so I hear . " 

 " I do not   really know he . as you may see , sir , when I tell you he be never tell I his surname . but we have   have one or two chat . he be a valet , and I too . " 

 " ever talk to he about our housekeeper ? " 

 " well , sir , we may have mention it . " 

 " he ask you ? " 

 " now I come to think of it , I believe he do speak about the new one - Miss Powler . just in the way of talk . " 

 " do you tell he anything ? " 

 " no , sir . I could not . I do not   know anything , except she would come from the Laundry . seem she use to be with Sir Henry , sir . he tell I that . else I doubt if I should have remember it . yes , and he ask I what floor she be on , and I tell he . then when I see he day before yesterday - be it ? - and he be up and about , and Miss Powler have be move to Third , he happen to ask I what floor she have be move to . " 

 " and you tell he ? " 

 " yes , sir . " 

 " well , " say Evelyn stiffly , in a tone somewhat censorious . " I wish you would not   gossip about hotel affair to visitor ' servant . " he know that the reproach be unfair , but he would not admit to himself that it be unfair . 

 " sorry , sir , " Oldham apologise , but with a strange , surprising , defiant stiffness far surpass Evelyn 's stiffness . 

 " that be all . what do you want ? I do not   ring . " 

 " no , sir . the fact be I have   just hear something , and I think you might like to know . sorry if it be inconvenient . " Oldham be wound . he make a move to retire . 

 " what be it ? " 

 " well , sir . it be like this . I have   win that thousand pound . I have   have a letter this minute . " 

 " what thousand pound ? " 

 " football result Competition , sir . it will be in next Sunday 's paper . I have to call and see they myself to get the cheque . and they want I to be photograph . " 

 " I congratulate you , " say Evelyn with a charming sympathetic smile . " it be the good piece of news I have   hear for a long time . " 

 " thank you , sir , " say Oldham , quickly mollify , but still sturdily - man to man , not as valet to master . 

 Evelyn have lie . it be not the good piece of news he have hear for a long time ; it be the bad . he divine instantly that he would lose Oldham . he be overset by a feeling that Oldham be necessary to he , that existence without Oldham would be impossible . a marvellous , an incredible thing have happen in the life of Oldham . the man be vibrate with heavenly joy . Evelyn , as his friend , ought to have share the joy . he do not . he hardly make an attempt to enter into Oldham 's unique sensation . he even resent Oldham 's astounding luck , simply because one consequence of the luck mean that he , Evelyn , would be for a period incommode . 

 " so I expect you will be leave ? " he say , and wait for the reply as for the death - sentence from a judge . 

 " I will not   leave you till it suit you , sir , " Oldham reply . " certainly not . you have   always be very kind to I , sir , and I would like to be - " he stop , realise that for a valet , even a wealthy valet , to offer to be very kind to his employer would be a too daring sin against establish convention . 

 yes , the fellow would leave . he have evidently decide to leave . it would be nothing to he to break the lien that have bind he and his master together in daily , intimate habit and intercourse . servant be all alike , incapable of gratitude . and they be all child . now you would have take Oldham for a sensible man . but be he ? how could he be , if a thousand pound be enough to induce he to abandon a secure livelihood ? the truth be that when a sum of money pass a certain figure servant cease to be able to estimate its value . as central african native could not count beyond ten , so ' they ' could not count beyond , say , a hundred or a couple of hundred . to Oldham a thousand pound be as good as a million , as good as ten million ; it be infinity - and therefore inexhaustible . and Oldham be drunk with bliss . 

 " that be very good of you , Oldham , " say Evelyn . " but of course you must tell I when . get any plan ? " 

 " well , sir , I be think I might do bad than buy a little tobacconist 's business . you see they advertise . I see one the other day on sale for two hundred pound cash . Camberwell . Camberwell 's a very nice part , do not   you think so , sir ? " 

 " yes , I think it be . " 

 the usual thing . Tobacconist 's business ! why a tobacconist 's business ? do Oldham know anything about tobacco , and buy and selling , and deal with customer , and so on and so on ? he do not . he just picture himself stand behind a counter and smoke a cigarette or a pipe or even a cigar , and hand out packet of cigarette and match and pipe and an occasional cigar , and rake in money all the time and chat in a worldly , benevolent , easy fashion with customer . the ideal life for the Oldhams of the earth ! simpleton ! fool ! blasted fool ! within a year the man 's capital would be halve . within two year he would not   have a cent . he would be on the street , seek a situation in the cushiony sort of job that he be now so idiotically prepare to quit ! could you believe it of a man such as Oldham ? well , you could . it be exactly what you ought to expect . 

 " Excellent ! " say Evelyn , amiably and without conviction . " but be careful how you buy . you would well consult I before you do anything . or well still , talk to someone down in the audit office . you would need an expert to go into the figure . I have   hear some funny tale about this business - buying business . there be swindler who make a regular trade of it . " 

 " oh ! " say Oldham , magnificently self - confident in his opulence . " I shall be careful . I think I may say you know I , sir . but I be much oblige to you , sir , and when the time come I shall ask your advice . " 

 Nincompoop ! Noodle ! Folie des grandeur ! 

 then Evelyn soften , little by little . the man be entitle to his own life . he be entitle to leave if it suit he to leave . and as for the gratitude which master be continually expect , and not receive , from their servant - what about Evelyn 's gratitude due to Oldham for efficient and faithful service during year and year ? do Evelyn feel it ? he do not . he feel resentment . he strove to conquer his resentment , and to some small extent he succeed . after all , Oldham be not a thief , nor a slacker , nor incompetent . he be a fortunate man , thank to his encyclopadic knowledge of form in Association Football . Evelyn dismiss he with a gentle pat on the shoulder , which delight Oldham and confirm he in his new creed that all man be equal . Evelyn smile , but far down beneath the smile he be extremely perturb and pessimistic . he curse these newspaper which would increase their already vast circulation by appeal to the gambling instinct of the populace . 

 content 
 chapter 38 

 false reprieve 

 " you teach I something that honestly I do not   know about cigar , " say Sir Henry at a quarter to ten that evening , as he light one of Evelyn 's cigar after the second dinner in Evelyn 's fortress . he add , look meditatively at the bright end of the cigar : " but I be certain to forget . I always light a cigar about five time . it be a habit , and I shall never get over it . " he laugh carelessly . 

 " you do not   forget last time , once I have make my protest , " say Evelyn . 

 " do not   I ? " Sir Henry 's tone indicate that really he could not   recall what he have do or not do , and that anyhow the matter , to he , have no importance . 

 Gracie have remark to Evelyn that while her father be a great man , he have the weakness of act the great man . but during the dinner the great man have indulge in no histrionic . he have talk simply , unaffectedly , about the light side of his short stay in Paris , speak of Gracie , and of the two Cheddar brother , one of whom be also in Paris , of the big spectacular revue there specialise in naked woman , and of his own inability to ' follow ' a french play . 

 but now Evelyn 's critical faculty pounce upon Sir Henry 's demeanour in the cigar incident as probably a proof that Gracie have be right . he decide that what Sir Henry have really say be : " I be a great man , a unique man , and if I choose to relight a cigar , it be correct because I do it . I can afford to treat a cigar as I please , and I shall not   risk any prestige by my oddness . I be Sir Henry Savott , I be . " and Evelyn in his heart rather condescend towards the conscious performer in Sir Henry . 

 still , the millionaire have again prove himself an agreeable and divert companion , sometimes charmingly ingenuous , and rarely coarse . he have say not a single word as to the propose hotel - merger : to Evelyn 's relief . for until the end of the meal the coveted panjandrum of the coveted Imperial Palace have not fully regain his self - possession . but now the would - be retail tobacconist have quit the sitting - room for the last time , and with such a perfect affectionate deference in his final murmur to the master that Evelyn have reinstate he in esteem and liking , and the wake nightmare be dissolve , its obsession vanish away , and Evelyn 's sense of proportion restore . he be in a proper condition to face the great man with assurance , and use wile against wile . as before , the great man would have to begin . 

 the great man do begin , on a topic which both he and his host have so far avoid . the first phenomenon be a smile , follow by a hardly audible laugh . Evelyn glance at he interrogatively . 

 " I be just think about the ' Caractacus ' firework in the ' Mercury ' this morning . I suppose you see it ? " 

 " yes , " say Evelyn drily . " it be what they call ' bring to my notice . ' I also see the North Atlantic reply this afternoon in the ' Echo . ' what they say about the split be cause by structural alteration of their own to make room for extra lift be rather effective , I think . it give their architect away , but it sound true , and if it be true it do save the reputation of the ship as originally build . " 

 " the reply be very clever , " say Sir Henry . 

 " yes , " think Evelyn , " and if I tell you it have be put together by one of the fellow on my staff here you might be a bit startled . " 

 " only , " Sir Henry go on , " it come out about two hour too late . the North Atlantic market have go to piece before noon . the share recover a trifle this afternoon , but not much . they have   have a tousling . " 

 he rise , and walk slowly to and fro in the warm , curtain room ; then stand with his back against the damask drapery of the window , and at that distance from Evelyn grow confidential : 

 " the ' Mercury ' people come to see I about the thing last week . they want my evidence . I refuse to tell they anything , naturally . but of course I have to be careful . if I would shut my mouth absolutely they would have use that to support their story , I be a very large holder of North Atlantics . so I pretend to be very open - and do not   give away anything that be not   know to at least five hundred people . you know , the comfort of those crack hell - for - leather liner be one of the most ridiculous legend ever invent by our reptile press . when I say ' reptile ' I be say it in a parliamentary sense . the paper be not   bribe . they do not   keep the legend alive for money . the big steamer advertisement be nothing to a big daily . no . they keep it alive because it sound so nice . good copy . symbol of luxury , and everybody want to read about luxury . but even in good weather those rusher positively shake half the time . it be not   a mere vibration . it be like have electric massage all day , include at meal . and in bad weather they be no well than 12,000 tonner . not as good . some of them roll till sometimes the only way to keep yourself upright be to lie flat on the deck . they be liable to throw pile of plate across the dining - saloon , and chuck you all over your cabin . they drop from under you until you think your stomach 's above your head . I mean in bad weather . the food be not   too awful , consider they have to serve five or six hundred people at once . but nobody can feed five or six hundred at once on really good food . it can not   be do . and the price be insane . I pay L1,000 for my suite last time I come over . and there be a big ass than I on board . he pay thirteen hundred . and the tip ! all for 27knot ! well , I prefer 18 or 19 knot . I will never do it again . " 

 a pause . Evelyn say : 

 " on New Year 's Eve here I shall serve a thousand people at once , and the food will not be too awful . it will be the good there be . " 

 " ah ! " murmur Sir Henry . " but you be you . " 

 " you try it - on New Year 's Eve . " 

 " I will , " say Sir Henry . " I will make a pointof try it . " 

 he return to his chair , smoke his cigar with conscious restraint . 

 " I do not   mind tell you , " he continue in a low tone , dreamy , " as soon as the ' Mercury ' people have be to see I I begin to sell my North Atlantics . I sell a big packet , and I keep on sell them . " 

 " and now you will buy back , " say Evelyn sardonically . 

 " and now I shall buy back , " Sir Henry agree . " I buy a lot this morning at rock bottom , and a lot more this afternoon a bit higher , and I be ready for more to - morrow . I shall clear quite a lump of money on the ' Mercury ' stunt . well , one must live ... and why not ? " 

 Evelyn repeat in his mind : " and why not ? " 

 the fact be that Savott have ' drop from under ' Evelyn 's foot . the great man have be perfectly open . he have frankly confess . no ! ' Confess ' be the wrong word . there have be nothing to confess . confession imply sin . the great man have not sin . he have behave as any speculative investor would behave . he have not break the code . the code be intact . it might be , as Immerson have suggest , that he be at the bottom of the ' Mercury ' stunt . but that be a supposition and could never be prove . and even if he have be at the bottom of it , what then ? he have not depart from the truth . the detail be indisputable . the deck have split . indeed , by smash the age - long Fleet Street sentimental conspiracy of hush - hush about atlantic liner , the great man , assume what might be term his guilt , have do good . Evelyn hat any policy of hush - hush in anything . and yet he be of pure English blood : that be to say , he have in he , so far as he know , no tincture of Scottish , Irish , Welsh , French , german , italian , american nor jewish . 

 2 . 

 " by the way , " say Sir Henry . " I have a long talk with your man Cousin yesterday . in the end I ask he to lunch . " 

 " what be he go to say now ? " Evelyn think . have be twice down to Weybridge and once to the Laundry and attend a long Board meeting , he have not see Cousin for more than a couple of minute in the two day , and he know nothing of the nature of the interview which have prevent Cousin from attend the luncheon give to the Commendatore . 

 Sir Henry proceed : 

 " I hear by accident that Cousin have be connect with the Concorde in Paris and the Minerva at Cannes - " 

 " yes , he be manager of the Minerva for a time , " Evelyn interject . 

 " so he say . well , as both the Concorde and the Minerva be include in my propose team , it strike I it might be useful to get some independent view about they . so I do . " 

 " I hope you be satisfied , " say Evelyn , and think : 

 " here I go again ! wrong again ! I imagine he be manouvre with Cousin to get back to Eighth . and he be not   at all . this suspiciousness be grow on I . if I let it , I shall soon be as suspicious as a millionaire . " 

 " on the whole , " Sir Henry reply , " I be very well satisfied with the look of thing . you do not   mind I talk to he , do you ? " 

 " certainly not , " say Evelyn . " why should not   you ? " 

 " I need not   tell you I do not   ask he anything about this place . no . " 

 Evelyn think : " it would have be just the same if you have . " he say nothing . 

 Sir Henry be restless . he sit back ; then demand suddenly : 

 " well , what be your decision about my proposal , Orcham ? " there it be at last ! the question , unexpected at that moment , hit he like a stone . 

 " decision ? " he repeat the word hesitatingly . " why ! I do not   even know what the proposal be yet . you do not   expect I to say yes or no to a mere idea , do you ? " he gaze fairly at the father of Gracie class he as a wild , impulsive creature , for all his astuteness . be that the way the prince of finance allow their mind to skip from hilltop to hilltop across the landscape ? something the matter with he ! he peer more boldly into Sir Henry 's little , shrewd eye , strive as it be to pierce through they into the crafty brain behind ; but strive vainly . he could not even define the general expression on the man 's face . it seem a candid expression . but be it ? the ruthless tooth be hide as Sir Henry purse his lip . 

 " you misunderstand I , " say the financier with a smile quite gentle . " all I mean be : have you decide to examine my proposition ? or not . if not , I will not   trouble you any far . if yes , I will put the entire scheme before you within the next day or two . all the figure and calculation . and a definite offer as to price for Imperial Palace share , and also of course as to the term of the contract with you personally . " 

 have say this , he faintly hum a fragment of Auld Lang Syne , evidently inspire by Evelyn 's reference to the New Year 's Eve banquet , and inspect the burn stump of his cigar . 

 Evelyn have the sensation of have be reprieve ; from a sentence pass not by the financier but by himself . but he know that the sensation be false . there be no real reprieve . he know that a decision to examine the proposition be the equivalent of a decision to sell the Imperial Palace to Savott 's merger . once the two party begin to bargain , an agreement would be ultimately certain . nothing could stop it . Savott have a powerful supporter ; that supporter be Evelyn himself . Evelyn could not seriously resist the glitter temptation which Savott dangle in front of he . one Evelyn do indeed resist , but another Evelyn be entrance by the resplendency of the promise of the future , and the first Evelyn could not for long resist unaided . it seem to the composite Evelyn that he shut his eye and jump from a great height . 

 " of course , " he say , in an even tone . " of course we shall be charm to examine the proposal . let we know when you be ready . " he feel relieve now : a man who know the bad . 

 " good ! I will , " say Sir Henry cheerfully , show his perfect tooth . 

 and Evelyn be whisper to himself : " my God ! my God ! if anyone have foretell this to I a month ago I should have - my God ! my God ! " a fuse have be light before dinner and it have go on slowly and silently burn during dinner and after dinner , and now - the sudden explosion ! 

 " I say , " say Sir Henry . " there be one thing I want to mention to you . nothing to do with this . about that girl Violet Powler . " 

 " yes ? " Evelyn mutter , alert and hostile . 

 " you have   only get to say no , and you can forget I have   speak . I will forget too . I be buy a new house . I shall want a housekeeper . do not   shoot I , I know she be in your employ , and to lose she might be rather inconvenient for you . I admit she be one in a thousand . but I know she first . and she know I . now would you mind if I make she an offer of the job of housekeeper at my new house ? I will not   breathe it if you object . and in any case I would not   try to over - persuade she . no ! I would say : ' there it be , miss . take it or leave it . ' you see I be be quite open . perhaps I be ask too much . perhaps it be not   fair . I just mention it - that be all . " Savott 's face be the very mirror of candour and goodwill . this Savott could surely not be the cunning coarse Savott with whom and his daughter Evelyn have din one night in the restaurant . 

 " my dear fellow , " Evelyn exclaim . " naturally you must ask she . I would not   dream of stand in the girl 's way . " 

 a little later the two man part , all smile and handclasps and cordial friendliness . they might have be swear brother . 

 " delightful castle ! " say Sir Henry , quietly enthusiastic , glance round the room . " I love it . and once more - you be really very kind . I appreciate it . good night . " 

 3 . 

 Evelyn put out the lamp in the castle ; and in the light of the low fire and of the corridor lamp through the wide - open door two glass on the table glint mysteriously . he shut the inner door on the hot interior wherein as it seem to he a decisive and intimidating event have occur . this event fill his mind , but the ether of the thought of it be suffuse with the ether of the thought of Savott 's intention towards Violet Powler . Evelyn have to descend to his office , and in do so he make one of his periodical peregrination of the hotel , walk slowly along corridor and down flight of stair , eschew lift . 

 he see his hotel now with a different vision , as though he have leave it and come back and find it a strange land and himself a stranger in it . if he have not laugh at his own feeling he might have fall from sentiment into sentimentality . 

 he have cover about a quarter of a mile of carpet , and glance at score of baffle numbered door , and see no sign of life in the nocturnal coma of the place except the swift ascent of an illuminated lift behind a steel grille , and have reach the fourth floor , when a trifling event happen such as can happen only in the multiple existence of a large hotel . he hear a door open behind he and a low shriek . he turn and see a young , dark woman , a white bath - towel wrap round her body , which be dripping with water . 

 " Fire ! " she breathe , scarcely audible , hoarse in her terror . he step very quickly in front of she through the doorway . instantly he have pass from out of the vast , vague anonymity of the hotel into an inhabit , circumscribe home . garment fling and hang on a hat - stand ; a short umbrella on the floor . before he , the open door of a bathroom full of steam , and bright in the steam a great blaze arise from the glass - top table which stand in the same spot in every bathroom . the flame , a couple of foot high , wave in a draught set up between the open window of the bathroom and the open door of the suite . the origin of the conflagration be a spirit - lamp , and its fuel a newspaper or several newspaper . 

 he seize the spirit - lamp , very hot to the touch , and fling itwith a single movement into the bath , which be half full of steam soapy water . it sizzle for a fraction of a second and sink into the depth . then he snatch at a face - towel and crush the burn newspaper to extinction . a moment , and the danger be over . there never have be any danger , for the paper would have burn itself out harmlessly on the glass of the table . 

 " all right now , " he say with the calm of a consciously superior being , to the young woman who be cower in the lobby as if to hide her bodily shame . 

 but Evelyn have no mercy on her bodily shame . young woman careless enough to let spirit - lamp ignite newspaper must accept all the consequence of their silly act . this one be a beautiful thing , scarcely emerge from girlhood .   he must find out about she .   the ample bath - towel hang precariously on she , remind he of the tantalise cover - design of certain french , german and american illustrate weekly in which the pose of a woman in an entirely inadequate garment have be catch at the very instant when the flimsy attire be give way under strain to reveal that which ought not to be reveal . an instant later , and the last poor remnant of decency would be go . 

 in a few second this very young woman have somewhat accustom herself to the immodesty of her predicament . 

 " I be have a hot bath , " she weakly murmur . 

 " so I see . " 

 " and I get out to open the window because I be afraid I might faint - " 

 " you be not   all alone in here ? " Evelyn question . 

 " no . my husband be there . but he be asleep and nothing would ever waken he . " 

 her husband ! what be she do with a husband at her age ? something shocking about it . some fat man old enough to be her father , no doubt . always in the Imperial Palace there be such couple , respectable and disgusting . 

 " well , do not   take cold , " Evelyn advise the wife curtly , and quit the excessive intimacy of the lobby for the somnolent desert of the corridor , shut the door behind he she have offer no thank . he have give she no chance to express gratitude . 

 Perosi be pad as fast as he could towards he . 

 " I think I hear a scream , sir , " say the age big man , alarmed and rather breathless . 

 " you do . but you have   get very good ear . it be all over . Spirit - lamp in the bathroom in 415 . I have   put it right . hysterical woman . the usual thing . who be they ? " 

 " I can not   remember the name exactly . it be a queer name . the lady seem to be English . but the gentleman be a Roumanian . " 

 " he would be , " think Evelyn , and say aloud : " well , you need not   trouble any more . I have   see to it . " 

 " thank you , sir . " Perosi , tranquillised , face about to return to his cubicle - office at the end of the corridor . then Evelyn see Violet Powler stand hesitant at the door of Perosi 's cubicle . she see Evelyn , but do not move . Perosi face about again . 

 " I wish to tell you , sir , " say he to Evelyn . " I be give lesson in French to Miss Powler . she be very anxious to learn . I tell Dr. Constam yesterday morning and Mr. Pozzi this afternoon . there be no secret about it . I hope you approve , sir . " 

 " of course , Perosi . by the way , I want a word with Miss Powler . Miss Powler!" ... he call aloud . and to Perosi : 

 " thank you , Perosi . " 

 the old stickler for propriety , the upholder of the full strictness of the hotel code , the watcher of reputation and prerogative , especially his own , have put himself right with the panjandrum , bow and shuffle away towards his little room , while Violet Powler obediently come forward , and Evelyn wait for she in the deep silence of the long corridor border on both side by withdraw home of a night . 

 in the light fall on she from above Evelyn notice for the first time that her cheek - bone be set just a trifle high than the average . her head be certainly broad than the average . her eye , far apart , almost exactly match her hair in colour . true , her lip be rather thin , but then her mouth be wide - a sign of benevolence . she walk well ; no trace of anxiety , diffidence , self - consciousness in her gait . be she distinguish , or do he imagine it ? he have once by chance see her mother , an ordinary , somewhat plaintive woman of the low middle - class . could the daughter of such a woman have distinction ? improbable . she be a puzzle to he ... she show no curiosity as to the cause of Perosi 's alarm . for she evidently , that affair be finish and therefore have no further interest . confident , yet modest . reserve , yet curiously candid . anyhow , though she be a newcomer in the world of the Imperial Palace , two important man be already compete for she , fight for she : Savott and himself . he realise that , and in one part of his mind be amuse at the thought . 

 " yes , sir ? " 

 an expression on her face of impartial but benevolent consideration - ready to deal with whatever question he might confront she with . 

 " I hear you be learn French , " he say . " it be a very good idea . and you have not   lose time over begin . " 

 if she be take her lesson , this must be her evening off - from nine o'clock . therefore she must have be on duty at 6.30a.m . the hour be now get late , but she seem quite fresh , and her make - up could not have be more than an hour old . he observe the nice finish of her finger - nail , for she have clasp her hand in front of she at the level of her waist . 

 she smile faintly , and say nothing , only lift her head half an inch or so . 

 " this will save I the trouble of send for you . I have something I want to tell you . " the benevolence of his tone equal the benevolence of her look . 

 " yes , sir ? " 

 " I have   be see Sir Henry Savott to - night . Sir Henry have buy or be just buy a new house , and he ask I whether I should object if he offer you the post of housekeeper . he say of course you have work for he already - before you work for we . I say I should not   dream of stand in your way . you be absolutely free . under your contract we can give you notice and you can give we notice . a month , be not   it ? " 

 " yes , sir . " 

 " yes . a month . well , that be how it stand . I think I would let you know - in fact ought to let you know - what you may expect , and that you be under no sort of obligation to I , to we , beyond the term of your contract . if we think we ought to dismiss you , naturally we should dismiss you . not that we have   the least notion of do that . far from it . but we should feel ourselves at liberty to do it . and just the same you be at liberty to dismiss we . " he smile broadly at the last word , and Violet smile too . 

 she answer : 

 " thank you , sir . it be a thing that will need a lot of thinking over . 

 " yes . good night . " Evelyn turn briskly to go back along the corridor the way he have come . 

 " good night , sir . " 

 " and no doubt now she will proceed with her french lesson , as if nothing have happen ! " he think . 

 4 . 

 he be shocked . he be hurt . have he not be behave to she in a style marvelously magnanimous ? have he not be exhibit the very ideal and perfection of human justice ? have he not be plume himself on a superfine and needless generosity ? Most employer , if not all other employer , though some of they might have accord the formal permission to Savott to approach the employee , would have sing a different tune to the employee herself . they would have say : " we do not   expect you to leave we like this . you have   just come . we have   take you into the first hotel in the world . you ought to regard yourself as extremely fortunate . we can not   have our staff play fast and loose . Sir Henry Savott ought never to have make such an extraordinary suggestion . now he have make it we look to you to realise that you have a moral duty to we , and we hope - " etc . , etc . but he , Evelyn , have be incredibly benign . and what do the girl say in reply to his benignity ? " it be a thing that will need a lot of thinking over . " and walk off . yes , he be hurt . he be very disappointed in his pet housekeeper , his discovery , his protégée . 

 but there be the other man in Evelyn , the man who glory in the godlike judicial quality of his mind . this man say : " I must be fair . she have something to hire out , and I hire it . in hire she I do not   confer a favour on she . I hire she , not for her advantage , but for the advantage of the Palace . if I have not   think she would be a splendid asset to the Palace I should have leave she where she be at the Laundry . the change may be a grand thing for she , but that be not   why I engage she . the notion of a moral duty on her part be simply preposterous . it make I think of the sickening attitude people take up to their servant in private house . the girl be absolutely entitled to give the question ' a lot of thinking over , ' and to decide solely in her own interest , and to ignore my interest . Savott could certainly pay she a much well salary than we could , and in his house she would not   have anybody over she - except he . and he would not   worry she . no chain of responsibility there . the truth be she would be an idiot not to jump at Savott 's offer . " 

 nevertheless , he be hurt . and would the affair end with housekeepership ? might it not ... she be Susan 's sister . 

 well , and why should it end with housekeepership ? 

 Evelyn descend to his office depress . he light a cigar and try to find his whereabouts in the confusing darkness of circumstance . if the hotel - merger come to fruition , he would be in the plight of a man with one darling child who marry into a numerous family of very miscellaneous child . he be about to lose his domestic prop , Oldham . and probably he be about to lose the pearl of housekeeper . of course it do not   matter , really . yet it matter , somehow . still , there be one gleam : she have refuse Savott once when she be at the Laundry . 

 content 
 chapter 39 

 housekeeper 

 when Violet return to her room on Eighth she find an unstamped letter conspicuously place on the desk . the envelope bear at the back the word " Imperial Palace . " hence the missive must be from somebody within the hotel . the handwriting of the address seem not unfamiliar . thus she reflect before open the letter . it be quite a long letter : both side of a large single sheet of notepaper . of course she look first at the signature : " Hy . Savott . " the letter begin : 

 " Dear Miss Powler , " and contain an offer of a situation as housekeeper of a shortly - to - be - acquire house in Mayfair . the salary suggest be large . the writer say that he have obtain the permission of Mr. Evelyn Orcham to approach she about the matter . the tone of the letter be urbane , friendly , faultless : tone of an equal , not of a superior . 

 she feel flattered . Mr. Orcham 's original statement have extremely surprised she , and the letter intensify her surprise . yet within she be a sensation of calm self - confidence which diminish her surprise . after all be she not , with she prove and admit efficiency   which no false modesty incline she to doubt , a fine proposition for any wealthy householder ? she have do the job satisfactorily year ago , and she know herself capable of do it again satisfactorily . 

 as for leave the Imperial Palace so soon after enter it , Mr. Orcham 's own fair word have reassure she on that point . the hotel have the right to safeguard its interest , and similarly she have the right to safeguard her . moreover , she be hardly satisfied with the post of floor - housekeeper . though the hour be very long , and Violet miss the old freedom of her evening , there be not enough work to do , and the work lack responsibility , make insufficient demand on her power . and she have be somewhat offend by the apparently causeless shift from floor to floor . she could not take exception to it ; nevertheless it have offend she . on the whole Sir Henry 's offer tempt she . and how quiet he have be in make it ! just like he ! deliberately she withhold herself from come to a decision , even to a provisional decision . she glance at her watch , slip the letter into a drawer and lock the drawer , and leave the room . she have a rendezvous with Mac . 

 the moment she put her head into Mac 's room she become aware of some disturbance in the social atmosphere - unseen lightning which play under the ceiling , unheard thunder in the distance of the corner . three prim , tense , constrain black - frocked figure be there : Miss Maclaren sit on the sofa ; Miss Venables and Miss Prentiss standing , one on the hearthrug , the other near the desk . 

 " oh , sorry ! I do not   - " Violet murmur , and be withdraw when Miss Maclaren stop she . 

 " come in , dear . come in , please ! " Mac implore she , and Mac 's Scotch accent be much more marked than usual . 

 Violet obey that and shut the door . now there be four black - frocked figure in the room , figure of woman who seem to be up and about at all hour of the late night and of the early morning , who exist in and solely for the Imperial Palace , breathe the Palace , eat and drank the Palace , and who have learn the art of dispense with sleep . Violet think she be different from the other three , but already she be less different from they than she think . 

 " Venables think she be overwork here , " say Mac . 

 " yes , I do , " say Miss Venables . 

 she be a woman of thirty - six or seven , dark , plump , of average height ; neat enough , but a bit careless about her complexion . she have a thin gold chain round her thick neck . her hair be plaster down , rather like a young man 's . her body , while not actually tremble , appear to be mysteriously move beneath her dress . her large hand be clasp in front of she , her head be slightly raise , throw back , and turn to one side : a characteristic attitude with she when in a state of emotion . Violet have a habit of clasp her hand . they be clasp now ; but as soon as she notice Miss Venables ' hand she unclasp her own , say to herself that she must lose that housekeeper 's trick . 

 " what do you think , Violet ? " ask Mac . " what be your opinion ? " 

 but before Violet could reply Miss Venables go on in her carefully cultivate voice : 

 " at least I do not   say I be overwork - so long as I be leave alone to do my work as I have   always do it . I do not   even mind do both Third and Fourth for a time , to oblige the management . I always give satisfaction to Mrs. O'Riordan , and she be not   easy to please either . " 

 Violet keep quiet . she have come to a conclusion about Miss Venables in the first three day . Miss Venables hide a fundamental commonness beneath that tone of fine manner which she have deliberately acquire and which ruffle Violet by its pretence . she be a worker ; she be conscientious ; but she happen to be afflict by a sense of her perfection so strong that any criticism , even an imply criticism , offend she . and she be continuously on the watch for the slight implication of the slight criticism . 

 " well , " say Miss Prentiss . " I think we be overwork , and I do not   care who know it . " 

 old than her companion in revolt , Miss Prentiss , tall , erect , gaunt as a telegraph - pole , and with as much human juice in she as a telegraph - pole , be capable of be very sweet in response to sweetness , but she be never more than aridly sweet . Violet have come to a conclusion about Miss Prentiss also . Miss Prentiss , not a bad worker if in the vein , be a secretive woman with a taste for scandal arise from suppress sex - instinct . an accomplished mistress of the dark hint , she could talk fast than any woman in Violet 's experience   which be considerable . on the other hand she have a sustained power of taciturnity when silence suit she . Violet think that both she and Miss Venables be quite decent creature . of the two Miss Prentiss have the well style , a style well also than Mac 's . 

 " well , what do you say , Violet ? " 

 " I think our hour be long , " Violet at last answer . " but I should not   say we be overwork . " 

 " oh ! would not   you ! " Miss Venables exclaim . " well , wait till you have   be here a bit long . you forget that we have   all be try to help you , Miss Powler - Mac particularly . you be such great friend . but you wait till you have   be here a bit long . " 

 " yes . " Miss Prentiss turn on Violet . " you have   get friend here . Mr. Orcham bring you . do not   think we do not   know all about it . " 

 " Mr. Orcham be not   a friend of mine , " say Violet warmly . " I scarcely know he . he ask I to come here and I come . " 

 " yes , " say Miss Prentiss . " and I suppose he do not   take you down to the basement and show you everything there himself . " 

 " but I tell you that , " say Violet . 

 " it do not   matter who tell we . " 

 " but he be go to take all of you down to the basement . " 

 " well , he have not   begin yet , anyhow . and I suppose you be not   hobnob with he in the corridor down on Fourth ten minute ago either . " 

 Violet be certainly shock by this revelation of the speed at which interesting news could travel from floor to floor in the vastness of the Palace . and she be very much more severely shocked as Miss Prentiss proceed : 

 " and then Sir Henry Savott . who be it who be carry on with he up here on Eighth ? they send you down to Third to stop it . and he follow you down to Third ! and they have to send you back to Eighth , to stop it again . " 

 Violet be angry , as well as astound . at first she could not speak . then she begin to speak , but control herself , cease on the first syllable . 

 " Miss Prentiss , " say Mac with protest dignity , " you ought to be ashamed ! " 

 " well , I be not then , " say Miss Prentiss , face Mac . " it be the talk of the hotel ... and I wish to say again that I shall give in my notice to - morrow morning . " she speak with a soft , fierce , mince disdain . 

 " and so shall I , " add Miss Venables , in her loftiest Mayfair accent . " that be what we come to tell you . we tell you when we come in . and we tell you again . there be plenty of place wait for girl like we . so you need not   think , Miss Maclaren ! good night . " 

 " good night , " say Miss Prentiss . 

 the farewell be direct solely to Miss Maclaren . Miss Prentiss close the door in the same manner as - Violet have notice - she deposit her knife and fork on her plate in the restaurant , soundlessly . 

 2 . 

 Violet be be very brave , when she see that Mac have begin to cry , whereupon she begin to cry herself , at first against her will and sparingly , then plenteously and with abandonment . it be that phrase ' carry on with he ' that have perturb Violet . monstrous , utterly unfounded slur ! and then the odious insinuation that she have be send down to Third by a watchful all - know management in order to separate she from Sir Henry , and send back to Eighth with the same intent ! she be revolt . she feel as though a pail of slop have be throw at she , as though she could never be clean again . Mac 's sob sympathy for she in the frightful slander be very touching , and it alone would have suffice to undo her self - control . 

 she sit down on the sofa close by Mac . there be two sleepless black - frock creature in the room now , and they be unite in a close embrace , Mac 's arm fling passionately round Violet 's neck . no long be they key - rattle housekeeper , sternly devoted to duty , but weak girl martyrise by hard destiny and the injustice of fate . 

 " what be I to do ? tell I what I be to do ? " Mac sniff uncertainly . " here I be appoint head - housekeeper , and the first thing be two of my staff give notice ! what will Mr. Cousin say ? " 

 Violet stop cry , almost with a jerk , as she realise that Mac 's grief be not for she , Violet , but for herself . she gently free her neck from the encircle arm , and stand up . 

 " where be the tea - thing ? " she ask . " in the bedroom ? " 

 Mac nod , be unable now to articulate . 

 " I will make some . " 

 Violet go straight into the bedroom , switch on the electricity , and light the spirit - lamp which be on the glass shelf above the lavatory - basin . after a moment Mac appear all wet in the doorway . 

 " I have   get that indigestion again , " say she . 

 " nerve , " say Violet soothingly . " some tea will put it right . you do not   have to do anything , my dear . " she fill the flat saucepan and ledge it over the blue flame . " where be the tea - canister ? they be only jealous of you . Mr. Cousin will understand . and I be quite sure Mr. Orcham will . " 

 " I only tell those woman about some thing they have not   do , this afternoon . I be very careful with they , but I have to tell they off a bit , have not   I ? they have   be against I ever since I be appoint . dead against I . I have   feel it all the time . " 

 " well of course ! they be jealous ! " 

 " have they say anything to you about their be jealous , either of they ? " 

 " not they ! " Violet exclaim . " they know what they would get if they do . " 

 " D'ye mean they think one of they ought to have be give the post , instead of I ? " 

 " I should not   be surprised , " say Violet . " and if one of them have get the job , would not   the other one have be jealous all the same ! would not   she just ! I think Prentiss be the bad . do you remember what you say to I the other day ? " Violet have now cover the saucepan and put the teapot on the lid to get warm . 

 " what ? " 

 " you say there be too many housekeeper in this hotel . so there be . if you tell Mr. Cousin you think one housekeeper ought to be enough for every two floor , and that anyhow you would like to try it , and you do not   want any fresh one to take the place of that pair - if you tell he that he will see the point quick enough . and so will Mr. Orcham . you take it from I , Mac . " 

 " d'ye really think so ? " 

 " of course I do . they know how jealous girl be ! blast the canister ! why the hell will not   it open ? " 

 never before have Mac hear bad language from the lip of her Violet . but she do not flinch . 

 " and how nasty they be to you ! " say Mac , at last perceiving , in her relief at the suggest policy , that Violet too have something of a grievance against Miss Venables and Miss Prentiss . " such nonsense ! disgusting , that be what it be ! make you feel perfectly sick ! at least it do I - I do not   know how you feel . " 

 " oh ! that be nothing , all that , " say Violet with a stiff smile . " but I should like to know what put the idea into their head . " 

 " they just make it up . I mean Prentiss do . " 

 Violet , however , surmise that Prentiss have indeed hear some murmur descend from on high , and that she have give the true , humiliating explanation of the tactic of the management in jump she from floor to floor . and she be stagger . the real explanation she do not suspect for one moment . she acquit Mr. Orcham of any share in the shifting , and attribute it entirely to the foreignness of Mr. Cousin . but on what conceivable ground could even Mr. Cousin have accuse she in his french mind of ' carry on ' ? 

 " of course I shall leave , " she say calmly . " what else be there to do ? " 

 and then Mac , lose the last fragment of her Lowland phlegm , drop on her knee at the foot of Violet and convulsively clasp her leg . 

 " do not   leave I ! " she implore , press her face against Violet 's skirt " that would be three . and where should I be then ? I never like anyone as much as I like you . you simply can not   leave I . I will see you through all right . Violet ! Violet ! " 

 the appeal be irresistible . strange that , as Violet yield emotionally to its power , in the same instant she see clearly that for her own sake she must not leave , could not leave . if she leave and go to Sir Henry Savott as his housekeeper - sinister word - the Imperial Palace would hum from top to bottom with the scandal of her shame . everybody would say that the correctness of the suspicion against she of ' carry on ' have be only too horribly prove . she would not herself hear those mischievous tongue , but she would know that they be at work . and she could not tolerate the knowledge . whereas if she stay , the scandal would die away . she resolve to write a refusal to Sir Henry . 

 " very well , dear , " she say quietly to Mac , and lift Mac up . 

 the water boil . the tea be bear into the sitting - room . they drink side by side , and be tranquillise . 

 " that be a clever idea of your about what I ought to say to Mr. Cousin , dear , " say Mac . " you be awfully clever . you be a dear . " her Scotch accent have somewhat subside . 

 the clock show past midnight . 

 content 
 chapter 40 

 negotiation 

 the scene of the supreme encounter concern the merger have be lay by Evelyn in his private office . old Dennis Dover and Evelyn himself sit side by side at the large desk , their back to the window . Sir Henry Savott , also at the desk , face they . there be nobody else in the room . these three alone be fight over the term upon which the Imperial Palace   with the satellite Wey Hotel   should add its indispensable prestige and power to Sir Henry 's project group . the desk be litter with paper - statistic , balance - sheet , valuation , estimate , report , and mere jotting , scribble by one or other of the three as the discussion proceed . Ashtrays be laden with cigarette and cigar end ; the air be full of smoke . 

 the conference have begin at eleven - thirty , and now the small clock on the mantelpiece apologetically show three minute to two . in the two hour and a half nobody have enter , no telephone bell have ring ; Evelyn have take his precaution for absolute tranquillity . at interval each of the three man have glance covertly at the relentless clock . it never stop , and sometimes it have seem to move its hand with a most unnatural speed . the three , especially Dennis Dover , have hop that agreement on the main point at issue would surely be reach by half - past one ; then surely at twenty to two ; then surely at ten to two . disappointment follow disappointment . but every instant of the grand altercation appear to be crucial . no one , therefore , dare to suggest a break for lunch . all three fear that to adjourn might be to lose valuable ground win at such expenditure of finesse , cunning diplomacy , and sheer brainwork . 

 Savott be tirelessly energetic , vivacious , good - humour . Evelyn be tirelessly wary , watchful and bland . but in the old man fatigue have engender both taciturnity and obstinacy . Father Dennis , exhausted , would die rather than be the first to propose a dangerous armistice . not much more than a decade between he and Savott , and yet they seem to belong to different generation , not only physically , but in outlook and in mental method . 

 " listen ! " say Savott brightly , in a new tone , as though he be start the third and last movement , the allegro , of a sonata . he light a new cigarette . " listen ! I quite admit you be try to meet I on minor but not unimportant point . I will make it l2 10 a share , to be pay in either cash , Orcham share , or Orcham debenture convertible into Orcham share . " 

 the altercation be as to the price at which the Merger be to buy or otherwise take over the ordinary share of the Imperial Palace Hotel Company . Savott have already christen the Merger the " Orcham Company , " and he insistently repeat the magical word so flattering to Evelyn . one of his subtle device in negotiation . 

 Father Dennis shake his grim head . 

 " no ! not quite good enough ! " Father Dennis murmur hoarsely in his invalid throat . 

 " I be afraid not , " say Evelyn blandly in support of his Chairman . 

 Savott raise his arm , not in surrender , but as a sign that futile stalemate have be achieve in the great game . then the door slowly open , with no warning knock . two waiter enter , one after the other , each push a wheeled table load with food and drink and the apparatus of a meal . 

 " Aha ! " Savott exclaim , jump up . 

 the aged eye of Dennis Dover gleam hungrily and thirstily . Evelyn smile the smile of a master of tactic . foresee the possibility of a protract sitting , he have ordain that , if the secret conference be still in session at two o'clock , at two o'clock precisely refreshment should be bring in without any preliminary of permission ask and grant . he have choose in detail the food and the drink , include Dennis Dover 's favourite cocktail , caviare , Derby Round , and russian salad . there the refreshment be , alluring , irresistible ; a magnificent fact to be face , and face immediately . 

 " fall to ! " say Evelyn . 

 " fall to ! " say father Dennis . 

 " you be unique , Orcham ! " say Savott , candidly admire . 

 " he be unique ! " growl and squeak father Dennis . 

 " open one of those window - wide , " say Evelyn to a waiter . and when the window be wide open he say to the waiter : " you can both go . we will help ourselves . " 

 the trio be alone again together . 

 " Aha ! " Savott repeat himself , drink a cocktail after he have pass one deferentially to father Dennis , who , grumble as often before at the discomfort of the Palace chair , rise to take the glass . 

 all three man be now stand up , stretch their arm and leg , walk to and fro in the freshness of the new air from the window , glance at Miss Cass 's horticultural window - box , peck here and peck there with fork , offer plate to one another , drinking , munch not without noise . document be hide under plate and glass . in three minute father Dennis be begin to be rejuvenate and also mellow . with his immense , unwieldy and yet noble bulk , his age , his experience of the world , he unconsciously assume dominion over his companion . Evelyn see Savott transform swiftly from the canny , astute negotiator into the avid gourmand of the dinner - table in the restaurant week early . as for Evelyn himself , he could not hide his satisfaction , and he make no effort to do so . 

 " if you think I can stand that hurricane in the small of my back , you have   be misinform , " croaked father Dennis , his mouth full , after a few minute . 

 Evelyn close the window . 

 " now let us see how far we have   get ? " say Savott , drop into an easy - chair , cross his leg , and light a cigar before he have quite finish with a peach . 

 " yes , " Evelyn agree . " let us see how far we have   get . " 

 " yes , " say father Dennis , " let us look on the bright side for a change . " 

 the will to reach agreement by compromise be stir . 

 " your salary as Managing Director be settle , " Savott address Evelyn . 

 " my salary be settle , " say Evelyn . 

 " I think you have reason to be satisfied with it , " say Savott , smile . 

 " quite , " say Evelyn . 

 the salary be indeed very high . Evelyn 's earning would be nearly double . 

 " and the term ? you still insist on a twelve year ' contract ? ten be more usual , you know . I should prefer ten , as a matter of form . of course I expect your contract to run for twenty year , thirty . but as a - " 

 Evelyn interrupt the sentence with a shake of the bead and a lifting of the broad shoulder . 

 " Twelve , " say he , smile very amiably . 

 " all right . all right ! " Savott laugh . 

 Evelyn 's private reason for demand a twelve - year contract be that it would carry he in security past the age of sixty . he have an idea of retire at sixty ; or , if his vitality forbid such a step , then of buy a smallish hotel in an English seaside resort and prove to the world that the existence of a truly first - class hotel in an English seaside resort be not an impossibility . 

 " and the constitution of the first Orcham Board of Directors be agree ? " Savott proceed . 

 " it be , " say father Dennis . " but it be understand that after serve as Chairman of this fabulous Merger for one year I shall step down and leave the throne to be fight for by rival pretender . " 

 " that be a detail , Mr. Dover , " say Savott . 

 " it be not   a detail at all , " say father Dennis . " for I it be the most important point in the whole damned conspiracy to bleed innocent traveller . even now , instead of preside over merger , I ought to be in bed surround by my devoted grandchild . " he add with a squeak : " only I have not   any grandchild . " 

 the other two laugh . 

 " next , " Savott go on , " I agree that my valuation of the Majestic and the Duncannon and the continental hotel be to be approve by your valuer . Orcham agree to make a tour at once of all the hotel , and the entire arrangement be to be subject to his be satisfied . I have   show you my scheme for raise capital and underwrite it , and I agree to produce to you as soon as possible my contract for this purpose with the three City house I have   tell you of . " 

 Savott continue from item to item . Father Dennis and Evelyn listen and nod when necessary . there be no discord . 

 " I fancy that be all , " Savott finish , content with the orderly clearness of his résumé of the plan , with his strong grasp of all the statistic , and with his accomplishment as a negotiator and deviser . 

 mind alone be creative . Sir Henry Savott have now all but think his Merger into existence . one more touch , and the vast design would magically appear , visible , concrete , complete , the wonder of the world . 

 2 . 

 " it be not   all , " growl father Dennis . 

 " no . it be not   all , " say Savott . " naturally . let us come back to the price of Imperial Palace share . I have   quote you l2 10 . now seriously , what about it ? " 

 Father Dennis shake his ancient head , and glance at Evelyn , who also give a negative sign . 

 " you really must not   make it too difficult for the Orcham Company to pay a dividend , " smile Henry Savott . 

 " we have to think of our shareholder , " say father Dennis . " and we have not   get to think of anything else . if you consider our price too high - " 

 " I do , " say Savott . 

 " then it be for you to say so plainly and definitely , and the scheme be on the scrap - heap . " 

 " but your own valuation of your own property do not   justify - " 

 " valuation ! valuation ! and our reserve , in cash and gilt - edge ? " 

 " I be not forget they . " 

 " but you be forget that we be sell you something that can not   be value , " father Dennis squeakily continue . " if you be not   forget that you surely would not   talk about valuation . we be sell you the very sine qua non of your scheme . what be the scheme without the Imperial Palace and Orcham ? you would never have think of it without they . what the Merger must have be our prestige . take that away and it be worth exactly elevenpence three farthing . " 

 " I quite agree , " say Savott lightly , even submissively . " and be not   I the first to say so ? but I should like you to remember this . if I would get hold of a majority or anywhere near a majority of Palace share , as I mean to do , only you scotch I by alter the voting power of your share while my head be turn the other way - what would have happen ? I should have be able to name my own price for your share , and what I have lose on the share I should have make on the Merger , and more . " 

 " certainly , " father Dennis hoarsely whisper . " there be no argument about that . but we do alter the voting power , thereby put you gently into the soup , my friend . if this and if that , you would have be able to name your own price . but as there do not   happen to be any if , we can name our price . and it be a price the Merger can well afford to pay . it be not   as if we have not   come down a bit . our price be l2 15s . " 

 " that be your low ? " 

 " our low . " 

 " well , I be sorry . my last word be l2 10s . " say Sir Henry genially , and as he speak he begin to collect his paper together on the desk . a decide gesture . 

 Evelyn gaze at he , meet his hard , steely eye . there be no compromise in they ; nor in his tooth . the gourmand have quit the body of Sir Henry Savott . his tiny eye be two brass tack , and the Imperial Palace have at last come down to those brass tack . the battle be finish . the oppose army would both have to retire . 

 " I be sorry , " Sir Henry repeat meditatively . " yes , I be very sorry . I be more disappointed than I can say . I must apologise to you for put you to so much trouble for nothing . I do not   complain , mind you . not in the least . you know your own business well . only I have   get a sort of a notion of my business too . we differ , and there be no more to be say . but you will find yourself wrong about one thing . I shall go on with my Merger . nothing be indispensable , not even the Imperial Palace . I have   set my heart on a merger . I have   never set my heart on anything and fail to get it . I will carry the Merger through , and I will give you the fight of your life , whatever it cost I . there must be another Orcham lie about somewhere in the world . I will find he . " 

 " Bravo ! " Evelyn exclaim , touch to admiration for the man 's passionate , exalt demeanour . Savott be once more the poet who have divulge himself at the opening dinner in Evelyn 's castle . 

 but Evelyn be very deeply depressed , realise now fully for the first time how powerfully the great scheme of the Merger have appeal to his instinct . and in his disappointment he feel that he have nothing to live for . and he be desolate by the thought that all their work , all Savott 's creative faculty , all father Dennis 's broadminde caution , all his own watchful mastery of detail , have come to naught . naught ! he sympathise with Savott as much as with father Dennis and himself . and he question the wisdom of father Dennis 's rather abrupt handling of the climax of the fray . still , he be rigidly loyal to father Dennis . they be intimate friend . they understand one another . they trust one another absolutely . and after all the Merger would have be at good a dangerous and chancy enterprise ! 

 Sir Henry Savott at this depress juncture behave with an infinite discreet propriety . many man would have dawdle , would have exasperate affliction by futile remark . Sir Henry , have pull his paper from beneath plate , stow they all into a despatch - case , say " good afternoon " very simply and amicably , and move briskly to the door . he be indeed a man , think Evelyn . and the rumour of his precarious position as a high financier be indeed silly . somehow Evelyn feel ashamed , for all three of they . 

 have open the door , Sir Henry startlingly halt and face the enemy . 

 " split the difference , " he snap harshly . 

 Evelyn 's heart jump . Father Dennis look at Evelyn , and Evelyn at father Dennis . Evelyn see a look of persistent obstinacy in the old man 's furrowed face . he withstand the look and smile . a mighty demon have rushingly enter into he and assume control of all his faculty . 

 " it be a deal , " say the demon , with quiet assurance . 

 " oh , very well ! " father Dennis whisper pleasantly , have yield to Evelyn 's astonishing sudden domination . 

 the Imperial Palace be sell . 

 Evelyn and father Dennis be the master of the Imperial Palace Board , and the Board be the autocrat of the Company ; and all minor outstanding difficulty between the Company and the Merger be easily capable of settlement . in six word the Imperial Palace have be sell . 

 3 . 

 drop his despatch - case conveniently near the door , Sir Henry Savott return to the desk . the three shake hand , not unsentimentally . conscious of the sentimentality , and determine to correct it , father Dennis stand up and growl , " damn it all ! " and go to one of the wheeled table and pour out three liqueur brandy with his infirm hand , spill some priceless liquid . and Evelyn , who never in any circumstance take either spirit or liqueur , say , " damn it all ! " and gaze at the brandy and slowly drank . they all three drink together . have commit this sublime folly , Evelyn smack his lip . Old Dover and he be more occupy with one another than with Sir Henry Savott . have they be attentive they would have notice moisture in his little eye . Sir Henry have not stake million , but million somehow have be stake . he have stake the value of year of mole - tunnelling , and of a week of the delicatest diplomacy and bargaining . he have stag a rupture , and act it with convincing realism . he have act to the last second . he know that if he have not go to the door and give his opponent time for regret , he would not have manage to squeeze out of they the concession of half the difference ; and he have decide that beyond half the difference he would not and could not yield . far , he have stake his belief in himself . still far , he have secure the five hundred thousand pound which be the least personal profit that he expect to make out of the whole transaction . Sir Henry have live through intolerable year in a quarter of an hour . Old Dover be indifferent to the scheme 's success or failure . Evelyn would very quickly have reconcile himself to its failure . but to Sir Henry the fruition of the scheme be necessary , both morally and financially . none save himself know , and few genuinely suspect , that his career have arrive at a point when a failure might ruin it - at any rate temporarily . well , he have succeed . multitudinous risk and peril yet lie before he . but he have triumph so far , and for the future he have an equal confidence in himself and in Evelyn Orcham . he have win , and he would win . hence the emotional moisture in his tiny eye : phenomenon which his late opponent , now his ally , have be too self - absorb to observe . the moisture quickly vanish . 

 " my car be be wait two hour , and even chauffeur have to eat , " squeak father Dennis . " good - bye . seem to I I look like be the big shareholder even in your new Company , Savott . " he give a sardonic , masterful grin as he stride cumbrously from the scene of battle . 

 " by the way , " say Sir Henry to Evelyn , with an affectation of nonchalance concern the upshot of the mighty encounter . " that Powler girl decline my offer . " 

 " oh yes ! " Evelyn answer . " so I hear . " 

 " do she tell you then ? " 

 " no . but she tell my head - housekeeper she should stay here , and the thing get about . thing do , you know . this place be a regular whispering - gallery . " he laugh easily . but he be uneasily think of a phrase use by Savott at the height of the battle : " I have   never set my heart on anything and fail to get it . " 

 a little later Sir Henry quietly depart , and Evelyn be alone in his office amid a disorder of dirty crockery , electroplate and glass . after a crisis he always like solitude . he walk slowly about the room , smoke one of the non - nicotine cigarette which he keep specially for use when he have indulge unduly in cigar . he smile to himself . the deed be do . nothing but some incredible mischance of destiny could prevent he from become in a few month the absolute autocrat of the most grandiose chain of luxury hotel in the world . the Imperial Palace Company would be wound up . hence the Board of Directors of the Imperial Palace would cease to be . either the youthful Dacker or the youthful Smiss would be elect to the Board of the new big Company . 

 there would not be room for both of they : continental interest must be consider . but which of they : Dacker or Smiss ? he be inclined to nominate Dacker , with whom he be in close personal relation . Smiss , however , would be invaluable on the Board when it have to deal with the work ' department of its hotel : and he speak more foreign language than Dacker . what do it matter ? these young man must take the rough with the smooth ; and anyhow the one who lose a directorship could be compensate in forty way . he , Evelyn , would henceforth have the distribution of an enormous patronage ! 

 suddenly he think , with a qualm : 

 " be I equal to the job ? I wonder . everybody believe in I . but do I believe in myself ? " yes , a qualm ; a momentary sensation of all - go - ness beneath the heart ! 

 suddenly he think : 

 " that fellow Savott 's be a bit obscure about his underwriting after all . I suppose it will be all right . I bet anything Harry Matcham Lord Watlington 's really at the back of it . those City house do not   often stand by themselves . " 

 suddenly he think : 

 " why do the fellow choose that moment to tell I he have miss fire with the Powler woman ? I expect it be just a subconscious nervous reaction from the strain . he be be work hard , the fellow have , these day . so have I. " 

 as a fact Evelyn , absorb in the complex skirmishing preliminary to the great battle over the price to be pay for Imperial Palace share , have almost forget the existence of his protégée from the Laundry . he have hear that she be not go to desert the hotel , but he have hear as in a dream . and for he Violet be a shade . what difference could it make to the huge " Orcham " company whether a mere floor - housekeeper of one of its hotel , be she never so admirable , stay or depart ? a detail ! a trifling detail ! the entire perspective of life be alter now . Evelyn drop the cigarette - end , and impulsively leave the room , pass through Miss Cass 's secretarial office . 

 4 . 

 " anything urgent for I ? " he demand . 

 " no , sir . there be only the - " 

 " be it urgent ? " 

 " no , sir . " 

 " then we will let it simmer . " 

 do she look at he in a strange way , or be he imagine the strangeness ? in either case she know . she be necessarily aware of the negotiation , and she would have guess the result from Savott 's demeanour as be go out , if not from father Dennis 's , if not from his own . astonishing , the faculty of that brisk , self - possess woman for divination ! often her knowledge of secret have surprise he . in display her knowledge she always skilfully assume that he must know that she know . but he trust she . she be a tomb for secret . but be she a tomb ? be he justify in trust she ? 

 why have he grow suspicious ? beyond the outer door a waiter be wait . 

 " may I take away the thing , sir ? " 

 " you may . " 

 he would stroll round his hotel - one of his hotel ! he always enjoy these stroll , and sometimes they be rather useful . but a few yard down the side - corridor he meet Ceria , the Grill - room - manager , emerge from Cousin 's managerial office . 

 " well , Ceria , " he greet the young man . " what be you do here at this hour ? I always understand you spend the afternoon in the bosom of your family at Hampstead . " 

 Ceria smile . he be a little young than Cappone , the restaurant - manager , and his smile , wistful , innocent , appealing , be judge to be more enchanting than even that of Cappone . Ceria count among Evelyn 's fine selection . he have make the grill - room the regular resort of the newspaper - magnate , the film - king and the theatrical star of London . at lunch the place be now crowd . at dinner it be fairly full . at supper it be very full . no self - respect actress could dispense with two or three appearance a week for supper in the Palace Grill . to be see frequently there , to be on term of intimacy with Ceria , be the final proof of success . the one trouble about Ceria be the pronunciation of his name . the film - king unanimously pronounce it " Seeria . " the more learned and cosmopolitan pronounce it " Cheeria , " save a few daring wag among they who call he " Cheerio . " only the high highbrow pronounce it in the italian way . Ceria have the same wonder - work smile for all of they : the smile of perfect health and almost perfect happiness . ignore Evelyn 's question , Ceria say , excited : 

 " my Feras have arrive , sir . " 

 " your what ? " 

 " the fish from the Lake of Geneva . by aeroplane . catch this morning . on my dinner menu to - night . " 

 Evelyn remember hearing of the Fera enterprise . 

 " have you tell Immerson ? " 

 " oh yes , sir . " 

 Immerson would make something of the Feras in his weekly gossip paragraph . 

 " I congratulate you , " say Evelyn . " it be a great stunt . " 

 " Mr. Immerson call they my ' fly fish , ' sir . " 

 Ceria laugh with joy . he would have talk at length on the piquant subject of the day ; but Evelyn leave he with a nod . what the devil do fish matter ? one dish , one night , in one restaurant , in one of his hotel . still , he have his eye on Ceria . the grill - room be very firmly establish in renown , and under Ceria be an old man , a Frenchman , who could well carry on the great work . whereas Ceria , shift to the Majestic , might marvellously vitalise the semi - comatose Majestic restaurant . 

 Evelyn stroll on into the great entrance - hall . there be the mirror column , the ceiling light , the coloured print of old steamship and the photograph of modern steamship underneath they , the sofas , the easy - chair , the little table , an underling at the Reception counter , another at the Enquiries counter , with their eternally illuminate sign , pageboy enter in a book the time of the tell - tale signal board which tell the story of every ring of every visitor 's bell on the Floors above , the newspaper - stand deserted , large old Mowlem , the hall - porter , splendid and dignified in his cubicle between the revolve door ! Odd : the Palace exist exactly as usual , not witte that it have be sell , that the old order have change into the new ! 

 he turn to the right , down into the foyer , which be empty . the last of the dilatory luncher have go . the band - man be carry away from the restaurant their light instrument and their music . waiter be set the table for the afternoon thé dansant . the gentleman 's cloak - room be empty and have only one attendant . the glass - wall reading - room be quite empty . the hotel be at its dead . Evelyn stay a few moment , hum to himself the extraordinary fact that nobody guess at the tremendous revolution . he stroll back to the entrance - hall . and there be Sir Henry Savott converse earnestly with the portly Mowlem ! Evelyn watch the interview . what chicane now ? it be curious that on the very slight evidence he would instantly begin to suspect Savott of chicane , plot , manouvre . yet he like and sincerely admire the man . he have learn to like he , and have be compel to admire he . never have Evelyn be present with so clear a statement of involved fact and figure as Savott have lay before he and old Dover concern the propose merger . and Savott have prepare the array of statistic himself . Savott say that he have do it with his own brain and hand , and Evelyn believe he . 

 Evelyn think : 

 " suppose in a year or two 's time the fellow start hankypankye with the ' Orcham ' share , in the vein of his performance with North Atlantic ! " 

 and then he think with affection and pleasure of Dennis Dover , who have so " decently " follow his perhaps too arbitrary lead in close the share bargain . moreover , father Dennis might have get cash or debenture for his huge holding of share in the Imperial Palace Company . but , because he love Evelyn , he have decide from the first to stand by Evelyn , and to exchange his Palace share for share in the new Merger Company , the Orcham Company . loyalty ! Evelyn be touch . Evelyn would make the new Company a success , if only for the sake of father Dennis . 

 he see Sir Henry nod to old Mowlem and then push his way , with the aid of a janissary outside , through the revolve door . Evelyn stroll to the hall - porter 's cubicle . 

 " Sir Henry in any difficulty , Mowlem ? " he enquire . 

 " no , sir . Mr. Adolphe do not   happen to be at the Reception , so Sir Henry come to I . he be leave we later in the afternoon . " 

 Evelyn see Sir Henry 's automobile curve away into Birdcage Walk . 

 " oh ! where be he go to ? " Evelyn ask . and say to himself : " what be the meaning of this ? he do not   tell I anything about leave . " 

 " Sir Henry do not   say , sir . only tell I to have his luggage down at five . ' 

 " well , Mowlem , I shall be leave myself for a while in a day or two . " 

 " for long , sir ? " 

 " no , not for long . it depend . " 

 " Continent , sir ? " 

 " yes . " 

 " when you come back , sir , I should like a chat with you , if you can spare I a moment . " 

 " oh ? " 

 " yes , sir . of course you know I always say I should retire at sixty . and I be sixty next month . " 

 " now , Mowlem , Mowlem ! " Evelyn protest , with a sadness which he really feel . " you may have say you be go to retire . but I never say you be . what do Mr. Cousin say ? " 

 " to tell you the truth , sir , I have not   mention the matter to Mr. Cousin . " Evelyn hear in the important functionary 's patriarchal , stately tone a reminder that he , Mowlem , have be in the service of the Palace year and year before Mr. Cousin have ever be hear of , that compare to himself Mr. Cousin be a mushroom , and that Mowlem judge himself entitle to deal direct with Mr. Cousin 's superior . 

 " Mr. Cousin will not   let you go . he think too highly of you , " say Evelyn benevolently . 

 " well , sir , " Mowlem reply with dignity , " we shall see . sixty be sixty . Times change . " he gaze at Evelyn steadily . 

 then Jim Savott 's valet , pale after his illness , appear in the hall , quest for the hall - porter . Evelyn walk away . 

 " Mowlem know , " think Evelyn . 

 somehow he feel guilty . and he still feel guilty , self - conscious , when , half a minute afterwards , he enter Cousin 's office and say , with a painful effort to be casual : 

 " well , Cousin . C'est fait " 

 content 
 chapter 41 

 an ATTACK 

 one night , a week or two later , Violet be take she french lesson from old Perosi , but in the waiter ' service - room on Eighth . Miss Maclaren have go downstairs to talk direct with Ceria , the Grill - room - manager , about certain question which have arise concern the Floors night - menus . Violet be on late duty that evening . Miss Maclaren seem to dislike give permission even to her dear friend and prop , Vi , to leave Eighth during her own absence ; and Miss Maclaren be again dyspeptically indisposed , be hardly in a condition to be argue with . Hence Perosi , who now treat Violet very paternally and benevolently indeed , have with unique and august condescension offer to desert Fourth , his proper home , and come up to Eighth for the purpose of the lesson . he know that the lesson might at any moment be interrupt by some trifling emergency on Sixth , Seventh or Eighth ; but he be majestically ready to accept the risk ; the fact be that the ponderous man enjoy his role of tutor . 

 in the still warmth of the little service - room , from which the floor - waiter have be eject before his evening spell of duty be over , both Perosi and Violet - but Violet first - hear an unusual stir at the steel gate of the neighbouring lift . the door of the service - room be keep always ajar . they both go into the corridor . an excited page - boy have step out of the lift . within the lift be Ted , the liftman , who have just ' come on , ' and Ceria himself . also Miss Maclaren . Pale , perspiring , agonised , Miss Maclaren sit on the cushioned bench of the lift , and Ceria be support she in his arm . 

 " Qu'est - ce qu'elle a ? Qu'est - ce qu'elle a ? " Perosi demand . 

 " Elle a eu une attaque , " Ceria reply , in his italian accent . 

 despite her tuition , Violet understand only the last word . 

 " she must be carry to her bedroom , " say Violet quickly . it be obvious that Miss Maclaren suffer acute pain . 

 the bell in the lift ring several time impatiently , and a tiny light glow yellow on the signal - box : ' ground - floor . ' the bell continue to ring . at a gesture from Ceria , Ted take the moan woman round her knee , and Ceria take she under the arm , and between they they move she out of the lift . Ceria be already somewhat breathless , for alone without aid he have carry she from his little office to the lift . 

 " keep her head lower , Mr. Ceria , " Violet suggest . 

 " take the lift down , kid , " say Ted to the page - boy , glance back . thrill by his responsibility , the white - gloved dwarf obey . 

 the procession of Mac 's body pass along the corridor , Violet in front , Perosi mutter behind . Violet run into Mac 's room , leave the entrance - door open , leave the bedroom - door open , turn down the bed - clothe with two rapid movement . in half a minute Mac lie pant and writhe in pain on the bed ; the liftman have reluctantly depart . 

 " I will telephone for Dr. Constam , " say Violet . " where do he live ? I suppose he do not   happen to be in the hotel ? " 

 " the doctor be come , " Ceria answer with a sad , sympathetic and yet proud smile . " I say to they to telephone for he before I come up . he be in the hotel . Santa Maria ! " his wistful eye say : " I have forget nothing . this be Imperial Palace staffwork . " he add aloud : " I think it be the doctor who be ring for the lift . " 

 it be . go to the door , Violet meet Dr. Constam enter . the young man nod . 

 " in here ? " he ask quietly , and stride into the bedroom . he nod to Ceria . 

 " right , Ceria . " 

 Ceria leave , also reluctantly . Violet and Dr. Constam be alone together in the bedroom . the doctor be now the expert in charge . he bend over the bed to examine . 

 " shall I sponge her face for she ? " Violet ask . 

 " no . wait a minute . " 

 Violet discreetly move away from the bedside , and thought scurry through her mind . Miss Maclaren be very ill . Climax of her dyspepsia . why be dyspeptic always greedy ? the hotel have cease to exist . hotel duty have lose all their importance . the martyr to hotel duty be very ill . how startlingly rapid be change ! Mrs. O'Riordan be marry - Lady Milligan . she have forfeit her wedding - present . she be go , without trace , and for ever . Alice Brury be at the Laundry . Violet have leave the Laundry . Venables and Prentiss be soon to leave the Palace . Violet feel as though she have live in the hotel for many month , instead of merely a few week . she be learn French . the interrupted french lesson have pass clean out of her head . Mr. Orcham be away on the continent . the hotel be function as smoothly as usual . nevertheless his absence be mysteriously feel . Mac herself have remark that very morning on the strange effect produce upon the mind by Mr. Orcham 's absence . Violet have feel it , though she have not be accustom to see he . Mac be very ill . Violet want to do something for the sufferer , but she be helpless . where be Perosi ? he have vanish . 

 " get I some water , only a sip , will you ? " say Dr. Constam . 

 Violet be quick . he pour the sip down Mac 's throat . 

 " where be the telephone ? " 

 " in the sitting - room . can I ' phone for you , doctor ? " 

 " no . " the doctor be brusque but quite courteous . 

 Violet , gently caress Mac 's brow , hear he telephone . she gather that he be call up a hospital . his tone at the telephone be authoritative . he seem to hold the hospital , all the hospital in London , under his sway . 

 " it be extremely urgent , " she hear he say . " you would well send an ambulance . no . the motor - ambulance . yes , at once . I will be ready . " he come back into the bedroom , and say to Violet : " there be a nurse in 538 . she can not   be very busy . go and fetch she - yourself . tell she I send you . and bring she along . " 

 " yes , doctor . be this something serious ? " she whisper from the door . 

 " it be serious . but exactly what it be I be not sure yet . colon anyhow . run . and then get a stretcher . " he speak in a scarcely audible murmur . 

 Violet run . Perosi be stand outside . 

 2 . 

 " Mr. Perosi , " she throw at he . " the doctor want a stretcher . " no more than that . she leave he to procure the stretcher . 

 when she return with the nurse , who be much too deliberate and detach for Violet 's taste , Perosi be manouvre a stretcher through the door into the sitting - room . 

 " come on , nurse , " say Dr. Constam , in the doorway between the room . " we have   get to get this young woman here downstairs . an ambulance be come . you , " he address Violet , " go and ring for the lift . and keep it . do not   bring the stretcher in , " he address Perosi . " we should never get it out again with the patient in it . " 

 Violet hurry to the lift - well , and rang , rang . she wait , wait . at last she hear the lift crawl upward . then a new procession . the laden stretcher , its burden well cover , Dr. Constam at the foot , Perosi at the head , the nurse by the side . at the lift , Ted take a hand . the lift have just space for the stretcher . Ted close the steel gate . doctor and nurse be within . the lift sink away . with it , Mac sink away out of the life of the hotel . the swiftness of the transformation of the service life of Eighth be positively frightening . Mac have disappear . it be almost as if she have be erase , delete . Violet and old Perosi exchange a long , solemn look . 

 More than once , Violet , who have return to Miss Maclaren 's room - for no purpose that she could define , be ring up by various department of the hotel for definite , authentic information as to the sick woman . clearly Mac have anxious friend in the organism of the Palace . clearly news of the disaster have spread through the vast building with the usual extreme rapidity of evil tiding . Violet answer every enquiry with a quiet reassurance . she never do and never could luxuriate in a calamity . her instinct be invariably to minimise trouble . nevertheless she be very troubled . the telephone call in themselves have the effect of make she think that she have under - estimate the gravity of the event . 

 she be not aware that the spectacular passage of the stretcher through the great hall have create a tremendous impression . in the Imperial Palace , as in all hotel , case of serious illness or death be whenever possible smother up . visitor in hotel object strongly to any reminder that disease exist and that death happen . therefore sick body and dead body be remove surreptitiously , by secret exit . but the urgency of that night 's case have permit no compliance with the customary etiquette . at the revolve door the stretcher with its bearer , compel to wait for the dilatory ambulance , have even get itself entangle with depart and arrive reveller from and to the restaurant and grill - room . nothing to wonder at , then , in the enormity of the sensation . 

 Violet be deeply disturb in two way : in her grief for Mac 's perilous misfortune , and in her anxiety about the housekeeping of the hotel . Mac would at well be absent for week ; she might never return ; at any moment during the night or next day or the day after the telephone might announce the decease of poor old Mac . in the meantime , who would temporarily be charge with the control of the housekeeping ? Assuredly Venables or Prentiss ; for the other floor - housekeeper have neither the experience nor the moral weight necessary to sustain they in the arduous job . and Violet be alarmed at the prospect of be subject to the rule of either of these lady who be now her foe and whom no ideal of magnanimity would prevent from be tyrannical and absurd . she long for the soft , masterful presence of Mr. Orcham , who be equal to every occasion . 

 quite apart from Mac 's tragic disappearance , the vanishing of Mr. Orcham have disquiet Violet ; it have disquiet all the staff except the low menial . official information as to its cause have not be vouchsafe , or at any rate have not percolate down to the stratum of floor - housekeeper . but the newspaper have give immense front - page prominence to rumour of a great hotel - merger ; so much so that the foundation of the Palace seem to tremble under the foot of the staff , and even floor - housekeeper have take to scan the financial column of their favourite daily . Mr. Orcham 's name have suddenly become familiar to citizen , astonish by the abrupt revelation of the importance of someone whom they have never hear of . but not his photograph , for despite press demand from journalist nobody in the hotel could furnish a portrait of the panjandrum - the reason be that no portrait exist . then one morning the staff have be thrill by the appearance of a lifelike photograph in a picture - paper . it have be obtain in Cannes , by a long - distance len , unknown to the victim , and it have be transmit by telegraph : proof enough of the news - value of the panjandrum 's face . and surely the rumour that the august and unique Imperial Palace might deign to merge into anything whatever be sufficient to give an inestimable news - value to the likeness of its Director . 

 3 . 

 Violet have a desire to talk to somebody . she be argue with herself whether she might seek out old Perosi , when there be a tap at Mac 's door . instantaneously the door open , and Mr. Cousin imperturbably enter . Violet jump up from her chair . and well she might , for not once hitherto have she see Mr. Cousin on Eighth , or hear of he be there ! the truth be that , unlike Evelyn , Cousin be not fond of perambulate the Floors . he prefer to exercise the function of management from his office , to be the Mahomet to whom mountain come . even when he do visit the floor he would not ascend high than Seventh . the former Mrs. O'Riordan have be subtly antipathetic to he , and because of this he have lose the habit of Eighth , habit which he have not yet resume . 

 Mr. Cousin smile blandly . 

 " I be glad you be here , Miss Powler , " he say . " I want to see you . " 

 " yes , sir . " 

 he sit down . the hour be close on midnight , but Mr. Cousin 's perfect dress - suit , shirt , collar and cravat be as fresh as though he have just put they on . in the daytime he have sartorial equal , perhaps superior ; but at night he be unrivalle . 

 " please sit down , " say he . Violet obey . " it be very sad , this . I hear that you be present . " 

 " when Miss Maclaren be bring up ? yes , sir . " 

 " tell I about it . " 

 Violet tell . she think that he listen with negligence . 

 " everything be in order on the Floors ? " 

 " so far as I know , sir , " Violet reply . " but of course I do not   know about all the Floors . " 

 " for the future , at least until Miss Maclaren have recover , it will be your business to know everything about all the Floors . I must have someone in control , someone who be responsible . and you will be good enough to take Miss Maclaren 's place for the present . Provisional , of course . " Violet be extremely surprised , and yet the realistic core of her mind be not surprised . she know her capacity , but would admit it with reluctance , and only in a crisis . 

 " but surely , " she say , excited . " Miss Venables or Miss Prentiss . they ... I ... all of they have be here long than I have , much long . " 

 " that be possible , " say Mr. Cousin with tranquillity . " but Miss Venables and Miss Prentiss be leave . and have regard to their conduct , I do not wish to add to their responsibility . as for the other ... no . " he wave a hand and benevolently smile . " it be you alone who be indicate . " 

 he do not say that from several visitor he have hear praise of Miss Powler 's cheerfulness , obligingness , tactfulness , helpfulness , efficiency . 

 " very well . thank you , sir , " say Violet quietly . what else be there to say ? if you refuse the responsibility you say " no " at once . if you accept it you say " very well " and " thank you , " and the matter be end . certainly you do not indulge in any silly , insincere self - depreciation . 

 " in case you need help or advice , come to I . naturally you will have difficulty , but - " he wave his hand again . 

 " but about allot the Floors , sir ? I expect that Miss Maclaren have speak to you about her new plan - " 

 " that will be as you decide , " Mr. Cousin interrupt she . 

 he rise . she rise . then he amaze she by hold out his hand . she take it . they both smile . 

 " what hospital be Miss Maclaren in , sir ? " 

 " St. James 's , " say Mr. Cousin . " you see , we have endow more than one bed there with the surplus from our Breakages Fund . they be very crowded , but of course they wish to oblige we . good night , Miss Powler . " 

 he bow , just perceptibly . gallic chivalry ! then he say , leave : " it may interest you to know that Mr. Orcham have just be telephone to I from Cannes . so I tell he about Miss Maclaren , and that I have decide to put you in temporary charge . he approve . good night again . " 

 Violet wonder what might be the tremendously important business which could draw these two great personage together on the telephone wire so late in the evening . she be not aware that every evening Evelyn enquire by telephone after the health of the Palace , as a man enquire nightly after the health of a mistress from whom he have be compel to absent himself . 

 for some minute the fact that Miss Maclaren be very ill be entirely submerge in her mind by the fact of her incredible , frightening , almost stupefy appointment as temporary head - housekeeper in the fine luxury hotel in the world . the post have be Lady Milligan 's . it be now her . her parent would be amazed and delighted . no ! they would be delighted , but not amazed . they would say : " of course ! quite natural . just what be to be expect ! " because their belief in her gift and her character be a religion with they . it be utterly complete , so complete that it seem silly , touch . poor thing ! 

 then the light wastefully burn in Mac 's bedroom catch her attention . she pass into the bedroom . the bed lie in disorder the eiderdown have slide to the floor . she tidy the bed , shake the pillow into shape , and cover everything , include the eiderdown , with the counterpane . and have arrange the bed , she arrange the room . Mac , though a fanatic for tidiness in the room of visitor , be strangely negligent of her own room . she would even leave her flower to wither up in their vas . 

 Melancholy martyr , the victim of fate . she have occupy the high post of its kind over the whole earth , and probably the well pay in Europe . she have climb till she could climb no far . and have her happiness be thereby increase ? it have be diminish , considerably . the change have destroy her peace of mind , her sleep , her self - confidence ; and intensify she already exaggerated conscientiousness . nature have not mean she for supreme authority . and now in a moment she have be sweep away . and doubtless in the hospital ward her last thought before submit to the anasthetic , and her first thought on awake from it , would take the form of foolish worrying anxiety as to the housekeeping of the Palace . Violet feel heavy with sympathetic woe . 

 she hear movement in the sitting - room . Venables appear in the doorway between the room , and Venables too be charge with woe . 

 4 . 

 " I do knock , " say Venables , as usual defend herself before she have be attack , " but nobody answer . Mac 's go ? " 

 Violet reflect : " as if she do not   know perfectly well Mac 's go ! " she say : " oh ! an hour ago at least . " 

 " I think I would well come up and see . I do not   really know what have happen . I suppose it be appendicitis ? " 

 " can not   say . " 

 " but it must be . " 

 " perhaps it be . only Dr. Constam tell I he do not   know . he be go with she to the hospital . " 

 " you be here all the time ? " 

 " yes . " 

 the colloquy show constraint on both side ; for these word be the first to be exchange between the two floor - housekeeper since the fearsome scene in Mac 's sit - room day and day early . 

 " Gwen and I have be wonder how this place be to be carry on . " 

 Violet reflect : " yes ; and that be what you have   come up to find out . " she say : " I think you have well take over Sixth and Fifth . I will see to this floor and Seventh . I will speak to Prentiss tomorrow . " 

 " oh , indeed ! " Venables sniff , and her dark head begin to tremble . 

 " yes . " 

 " but who will be in charge ? " 

 " Mr. Cousin say I be to be . " 

 " so you have   be down to see he already ? " fierce but restrained resentment in Venables ' tone . 

 " no , I have not . he come up here to see I about it . " 

 a long pause . 

 Venables say , with a ferocious sarcasm , but carefully ladylike : 

 " may I use the telephone , please ? " 

 " of course . why do you ask such a question ? " Violet manage to smile . 

 Venables step back into the sitting - room . Violet hear she say : 

 " I want you to get up then , dear . slip something on . I want you to come here at once , as quick as you can , dear . " her voice tremble , as her head have be tremble , with terrible emotion . 

 Violet sit down at the foot of the bed ; and the wave of Venables ' excitement seem to rush in a continuous torrential , invisible stream through the door and break against Violet 's resist temper . an awful silence . Violet feel as if she be await the explosive thunder of the crack of doom . 

 then , after an immeasurable period , Prentiss appear . 

 " I think you be never come , dear ! " Violet hear Venables say . the exalted , trustful , vibrate emphasis that Venables lay on that word " dear " ! the two housekeeper come just within the bedroom and stand together , ally defensive and offensive . Prentiss wear a purple dressing - gown pin at the neck , and bedroom slipper on her bare foot . her grey thin hair be in disarray . by contrast with the other two in their primly correct housekeeper frock she have an abandon , indecent air . 

 " do sit down , " suggest the alert , watchful Violet . 

 they do not sit down . 

 " now , Powler , " say Venables , " will you please tell Prentiss what you have   tell I . " then turn to Prentiss : " I want you to hear from she what she tell I , dear . " 

 " about Mr. Cousin ? " 

 " if you do not   mind . " 

 Violet comply . 

 " well ! " the tall , telegraph - pole woman murmur horrify , outraged , under her breath . 

 " I can not   help it , " Violet mildly protest . " Mr. Cousin come up himself and give I my order . I do not   give order . I take they . " 

 " you soon start give order to I ! " Venables exclaim . she clasp her hand and , lift her head , turn it to one side , shake . 

 " but I do not   give you any order , " Violet plead , as pleasantly and persuasively as she could . " I only say I think you would well take over Fifth and Sixth . if you have   anything against that , let I hear it for goodness ' sake ! " 

 " be it an order or be not   it ? " Venables persist , apparently determined to drink the bitterness of her cup to the last drop . 

 " have you get any other suggestion ? " 

 " be it an order or be not   it ? " Venables demand a second time . 

 " I do not   call it an order , " say Violet . " but of course if you prefer to call it an order I can not   stop you , can I ? " 

 " well ! " Prentiss mutter . " Venables have be here six year and I have   be here seven , and have you be here seven week ? " her voice rise a little , but only a little . 

 in all the annal of the Imperial Palace , and of the Royal Palace before it , there have never be a conflict so acute as this one . the conflict between Sir Henry Savott on one side and father Dennis and Evelyn on the other , conflict involve immense sum of money , be social trifle to it . the mortally injure pair have lose the freshness of their youth in the service of the Palace ; and Miss Prentiss have see the oncoming of middle - age declare itself in that service . the Imperial Palace be their home , their landscape , their climate , their atmosphere , their habit . they know the Palace through and through , though they have never see its deep foundation as Violet have disgracefully be privileged to see they . on Mrs. O'Riordan 's desertion each of they have expect to be raise to her throne . why not ? have they not the seniority of year , if not of service ? be they not efficient ? have a black mark ever be notch against they , until their defence of dignity under the monstrous assault of Maclaren ? Maclaren be not a lady , could not   be if she try . whereas Prentiss be admittedly a lady , and Venables , by the mere power of thought , have create herself a lady . 

 and who be Powler ? a laundry - woman ! introduce into the hotel by Mr. Orcham , and soon catch try to captivate Sir Henry Savott ! and the laundry - woman , an inexperienced neophyte , ignorant of the A b c of hotel , be raise over their head by the foreigner Mr. Cousin ! and there on the bed sit the laundry - woman triumphant , with her energetic youth , with her unwrinkled complexion , with her damnable complacency ! the situation be intolerably unfair . it be more than human nature could stand . Justice have cease from the earth . God be no more in heaven . if holy hatred could have kill , Violet would have die on the spot . 

 as for Violet , she do bad than hate ; she disdain . she could have inform the rebel why they have be pass over . it be because , with all their experience and their efficiency , they lack charm in the handling of visitor and in their relation with the staff . Mrs. O'Riordan could assume charm like a new frock . and because they lack tact . and because they be for ever convey to other their sense of their own importance and breeding and sinless perfection . and because , in the end , in the encounter with Mac , they have try to break the chain of authority , than which , to Mr. Orcham , nothing be more sacred . they have commit the supreme crime . Violet have an obscure feeling that she ought to sympathise with they , to be sorry for they . but she could not be sorry for they . no ! she disdain they . and she do not   care . she be in no way to blame . in her inexperience she have imagine that in the sublime and august Imperial Palace , synonym of Paradise , the horror of warfare be impossible , inconceivable . innocent ! she now comprehend that there be as much human nature in the Imperial Palace as anywhere else , even more than in the Laundry . she see in the flesh before she the great fact that human nature will out . she be intimidate , but no one should guess that she be intimidate . " I will not   speak . I will not   give they a chance , " she say to herself . 

 " I should like to know what Mr. Orcham would say to this , " Prentiss remark coldly . 

 Violet explain that Mr. Orcham have approve by telephone . 

 suddenly Prentiss flare : 

 " then it be not   Mr. Cousin ! it be not   Mr. Cousin after all . Mr. Orcham bring you here and you be his pet . yes , he bring you here and he push you up all the time . and why ? why , I should like to know . " Prentiss nearly forget that she be a lady and have have a governess all to herself once . 

 " I shall not   speak , " Violet repeat privately , feel as if she be hold back a tiger by a bit of thin string . 

 Prentiss have start , and Prentiss continue , and in five minute of destructive , eloquent diatribe , she have tear Violet 's character to piece and throw the piece on the floor by the bedside . 

 " I shall not   speak , " Violet still say to herself . she pity Prentiss and Venables ; but her pity be contemptuous . 

 " I do not   know what you mean to do , my dear , " say Prentiss lovingly to Venables . " but tomorrow morning I shall walk out of this place . " 

 " so shall I , dear , " Venables respond in her society tone ; and take the thin , veined hand of her companion . 

 " well , " say Violet with detachment . " you can settle that with Mr. Cousin . " 

 the outraged pair , exemplar of dignity both of they , draw away . the entrance - door close on they . they deserve what Violet be incapable of bestowing - compassion . in an ideal world Violet would have cast herself down at their foot , kiss Prentiss 's bedroom slipper . but she only smile . she only say to herself , please with her self - control : " I do not   speak . I do not   give they a chance . " but a moment later she begin to use the most dreadful language , and in the sitting - room she light one of Mac 's cigarette . 

 content 
 chapter 42 

 CERIA and SIR HENRY 

 " who be he , that one ? " murmur the boyish - face Ceria , in French , to his second - in - command . he have be chat with two regular guest who always sit at a table in a far corner of the Imperial Palace grill - room ; and when he return towards the middle of his kingdom he see that table No . 33 be occupy by three man , only two of whom he recognise . one of the two be chairman of a british film company , the other an owner of eight or ten minor but large cinema theatre in the suburb . Ceria be aware that 33 have be book for the film chairman . the second - in - command be aware that Ceria , though the scarcely perceptible indicative jerk of his head have be very vague , could be direct attention to nobody but the stranger who sit between the pair of habitué at 33 . the second - in - command , shrug his shoulder to signify that he could not answer the question , beckon to a headwaiter and repeat to he Ceria 's enquiry . 

 " that one ? he ought to be Sir Henry Savott , " say the head - waiter , proud of his knowledge , and pretend to be astonish at such ignorance on the part of his superior . 

 Ceria lift his eyebrow . he know everything about Sir Henry Savott except the gentleman 's physical appearance . everybody on the upper staff have learn the surpass importance of Sir Henry in the recent secret history of the Imperial Palace . 

 in the restaurant of course he be a fairly familiar if infrequent figure , and receive sedulous personal service from Cappone himself . but herein be no reason why he should be famous in the grill - room . the grill - room and the restaurant be two different world . just as there be patron of the restaurant to whom it never occur to enter the grill - room , so there be patron of the grill - room who would not dream of enter the restaurant - partly because of the band , which in artistically perform high - class music interfere with conversation , partly because the general atmosphere of the grill - room be less prim than that of the restaurant , and partly because they meet their friend in the grill - room and would not be likely to meet they in the restaurant . 

 the restaurant cater for a few truly smart people and a crowd of well - dress and well - behave nonentity to whom smartness be an ideal . the grill - room cater for active leader of commercial , industrial , theatrical , cinematographic and journalistic society . in the clientele of the grill - room there be a much large proportion of name and face know to newspaper - reader than in the clientele of the restaurant . and quite probably the wealth in the grill - room , per man , exceed the wealth in the restaurant .   one regular luncher in the former be repute to have make twenty million in thirty year of order the labour of other individual .   the restaurant be the haunt of person who exist as beautifully as they know how . the grill - room be the haunt of person accustom to command , who do thing or get they do , who specialise in neither manner nor attire   except a star - actress and a fashionable chorus - girl or so , who dare the Atlantic six or seven time a year , who greet one another with broad gesture across half - a - dozen table , and who begin to look at their watch about a quarter - past two . 

 Ceria move towards 33 in the execution of his social duty , but on the way thither he be stop twice by visitor , and once by a head - waiter who need guidance in a delicate situation . 

 the hour be 1.30 and the grill - room , which Ceria conduct as well as an orchestra consist mainly of soloist can be conduct , have scarcely one empty table . the company have arrive from various part of London , in many case at some cost of time and convenience , for the site of the Imperial Palace be well suit to butterfly than to bee ; but fashion and Ceria have make it popular with bee , who have their own snobbishness , who will pay for it , and who have persuade themselves that they could not afford to lunch elsewhere than under Ceria . the noise of chatter be at least as loud as might have be the sound of music ; but happily it be chatter and not music , it be evenly distribute , and as it proceed from the luncher it do not dominate they . a strange and exciting spectacle , the grill - room . the restaurant be a mile off , the Floors ten mile off . 

 2 . 

 at length Ceria reach 33 . youthful , with a modest smile and a most misleading air of diffidence   like other on the staff he have form his deportment on that of Mr. Orcham , he give the greeting of welcome to his two acquaintance , and bow deferentially to Sir Henry Savott . 

 " if you do not   know Sir Henry Savott , Ceria , you soon will do , " say the chairman of the film company , with a Scotch accent . he laugh significantly , as one who have nothing to learn about the intimate connection between Sir Henry and the Imperial Palace . 

 " glad to know you , Ceria , " say Sir Henry , and benevolently offer his hand . 

 " I have   never have the pleasure of see you here before , Sir Henry . but I know you well by sight . " thus speak the charming and diplomatic liar . " I hope you like your new house . one hear that it be very wonderful . " 

 while he feel flattered , Sir Henry reflect : " this fellow know his job . " he say aloud that his new house might be bad . then , in the ensue pause , he add : " how be the New Year 's Eve arrangement get on ? we shall be in next year before we know where we be . " 

 Ceria reply , with a show of proud enthusiasm : 

 " I believe that nearly every table in the restaurant have be book already . Mr. Cousin tell I yesterday that before Christmas come he will be refuse very many application . Mr. Cappone say several hundred . it will be a record New Year 's Eve for the Imperial Palace . last year be a record too . " 

 " that be fine . I have not   reserve a table yet , but I shall do . you might tell Cappone , if you do not   mind , " say Sir Henry , who have not forget Evelyn 's boast . 

 " certainly , sir , " agree Ceria , with a new kind of a smile which say to Sir Henry : " this will help you to understand that there be only one Imperial Palace . " 

 " but surely you be not   go to turn people away , " Sir Henry go on with bright , friendly astonishment and deprecation . 

 " what be we to do , sir ? there be some suggestion of use the ball - room as another restaurant , and clear the table at half - past twelve ; but of course it could not be do . People will want to eat and drink till two o'clock at least , and people will want to begin to dance at midnight . " 

 " but there be this room , " say Sir Henry . " table here for three hundred and more . but perhaps this room be to be use . " 

 " good idea ! " the scottish chairman interject . " have a separate function here , and I will give you the first showing of my new forty - minute film . " the notion excite he . first film ever exhibit in the Imperial Palace ! unique publicity ! etc . 

 Ceria shake his head sorrowfully , for he envy Cappone on New Year 's Eve and on no other night . " we must keep this room for those who do not like New Year 's Eve dinner and supper . and then , our visitor who be stay in the hotel ! impossible ! quite impossible ! " 

 " yes , yes , " Sir Henry concur . 

 the chairman be dash , and begin to fidget his very solid body . 

 " my maxim , " say the owner of cinemas , " be the great pleasure for the great number . you could fill this room with a special festivity . could you fill it with your old fogey , and if you could , would they spend as much money ? " 

 " no , sir , I hardly expect to fill it , and they would not spend half as much . you , " he glance at Sir Henry , with forlorn hopefulness , " you would perhaps speak to Mr. Cousin , sir . " 

 Sir Henry say nothing in reply . 

 a moment later Ceria leave the table , somewhat meditative . always he feel himself an exile from the renowned Palace New Year 's Eve celebration , during which the grill - room live desolate hour enliven by merely sedate ' souvenir . " he would have give a very great deal to be the autocrat of a New Year festivity of his own , complete with orchestra , cinema , balloon , streamer , missile , cap , toy - instrument , incandescent pudding and all . 

 content 
 chapter 43 

 SABBATH 

 Violet be occupy Miss Maclaren 's sitting - room , partly as a sign of authority , but much more because in her position of act head - housekeeper , she have frequent need of a room for interview . that she do not use the bedroom also be a tactful admission of the temporary nature of her seat on the high throne of the former Mrs. O'Riordan . her rule have so far be mark by no untoward incident . Miss Prentiss and Miss Venables , while work out their notice under Violet 's general instruction , keep themselves to themselves and as invisible as might be . their desperate resolve to depart instantly and leave the Palace in a fix have be abandon without a word say on the morning after Miss Maclaren 's seizure and Violet 's outrageous rise to power . 

 Violet have refrain from any direct criticism of their performance , prefer tranquillity to an ideal perfection . Agatha , the head - housekeeper 's pink - face , fluffy little secretary , have act as go - between ; Agatha have a very convenient faculty of be passionately loyal to the occupant of the throne , no matter who the occupant be . Miss Cass , Evelyn 's grand secretary , have be fairly sympathetic to Violet , though the absence of her master have give she too much freedom and a somewhat extravagant sense of her own importance in the world of the hotel . Miss Tilton , Mr. Cousin 's secretary , have be very helpful , in her dashing way ; the friendship between she and Violet , base on identity of one christian name , be progress . Beatrice Noakes , the fat chambermaid on Eighth , have be extremely helpful , if extremely loquacious . peace have be achieve and maintain . 

 it be Sunday . Sunday be more acutely sabbatical in fashionable hotel than anywhere else in London , save a few home which still keep their islet - head bravely raise above a flow tide of irreligion . visitor to the Imperial Palace consider it incorrect to be see in London on Sunday - at any rate until the evening . many leave on Saturday for the weekend , but keep their room , with a noble disregard of expense . many slip inconspicuously away early on Sunday morning for a day 's golf or perilous motoring . some stay in bed . Ceria 's grill - room be a melancholy desert at the lunch hour . the restaurant be scarcely a third full - of apologetic person or person who have no shame . the entrance - hall and the foyer have a thick moral atmosphere which seem to deaden footfall and reduce pace . the mere aspect of the reading - room render it inviolate . the staff be more than decimate . apparently none of the visitor , and none of the staff except a few Latins who attend early Mass , have any preoccupation concern the infinite , the mystery of the grave , the dread consequence of sin , the menace of a flouted deity . self - righteousness be notably diminish , almost swallow up in tedium . the afternoon be terrible . but in the evening , in the vast restaurant , with jazz , hungarian rhapsody , juggler , dancer , and caviare , bisque , and multi - coloured alcohol , the Palace do appreciably recover its weekday animation and geniality . Monday indeed begin on Sunday night . 

 in the head - housekeeper 's sitting - room sit Violet , wear not her raven duty - frock , but a frock of bright hue and a hat that suit . she be less a head - housekeeper than a prosperous daughter about to go forth and dazzle her simple parent ' home . she might have go early ; but the imponderable weight of housekeeping responsibility have hug she down . and she be also a student of conversational French . the lesson be just finish ; the benevolent and fatherly Perosi have stand up to leave . he be leave with regret . his pupil 's progress flatter he , and he enjoy her calm , sensible , matter - of - fact and smile society . the two be genuinely attach to one another . Perosi have two satisfaction in his heart . though in such condition of health as might have excuse he from the office , he have be to Mass at 8 a.m. and this lesson have be the first lesson to be conduct entirely in French . the time of the next lesson be be arrange when a knock at the door disturb the seclusion . 

 " come in , " Violet call instantly in a loud , clear voice . for , though Perosi be old and Violet young and both of they be reputable beyond slur , it be well that the appearance of respectability should fully corroborate the fact thereof , and a moment 's delay might have damage the appearance . 

 2 . 

 Ceria come in , boyish , diffident , gentle . he begin : 

 " Bon jour , mademoiselle , comment allez - vous ? "   for he have hear of the french lesson , and his brain work very swiftly . 

 and Violet , despite her amazement at see he , answer in a sort of dream , very nervously , but correctly : 

 " Trés bien , monsieur , je vous remercie . et vous - meme ? " 

 Perosi be enchant . it be nothing to he that the lesson have happen to contain those very phrase . the girl have understand French from an unexpected visitor   what a dreadful italian accent the young man have ! , and , keep her presence of mind admirably , have reply in French ! 

 but Perosi conceal his enchantment , and easily . he have a grievance against the innocent Ceria . his greeting of the grill - room manager be stiff , reserved and plainly inimical . the grievance have arise thus . two visitor on Eighth have complain to Miss Maclaren about breakfast - dish theoretically hot being in practice cold . Miss Maclaren have pass on the complaint to Perosi , perhaps rather clumsily . Perosi know the cause of the trouble : a defect in the electric hot - plate in the service - lift , which defect an electrician have not contrive at once to cure . Ceria be know to be ultimately responsible for the floor - meal , and one of the visitor have speak to Ceria . Perosi be convince that , on the evening of her seizure , Ceria have send for Miss Maclaren in order to discuss the matter with she . Perosi could not tolerate such a proceeding , which be a blow to his cherished prestige and a sin against the cardinal principle of the chain of authority . the service of meal on the Floors be his affair , and no other person 's affair . his notorious passive antipathy to all the housekeeper   with the sole exception of Violet   spring from , and be feed by , real or fancied interference by housekeeper in his exclusive domain . he hold that Ceria 's go behind his back to criticise he in private confabulation with Miss Maclaren be a monstrous act . therefore be his demeanour towards Ceria hostile . one result be that the gloomy air of Sunday seem to have penetrate into the room with the entrance of Ceria . 

 but no soon have Perosi 's face declare hostility to Ceria than he see a disturbed expression on Violet 's face . he think , alarm : " I have represent myself to this most sympathetic young woman as a man full of general kindliness . I must on no account destroy the character which I have create for myself in her eye . More than anything I wish to stand well with she . " and he begin with much latin subtlety to change his attitude . and as he change it , so do his hide feeling change towards Ceria , and so be Violet reassure . the air of Sunday be gradually dissipate . 

 " I come to enquire the late news about Miss Maclaren , " Ceria be say . 

 " do sit down , " say Violet . " I call yesterday at the hospital to leave some flower , but I be not allow to see she . but Dr. Constam telephone I this morning that if they could do without a second operation she would very likely pull through . if they must have another operation he would not   prophesy . anyhow , the poor thing be hold she own for the present . " 

 " do he tell you exactly what it be ? " Ceria ask . 

 " he do not . they hardly ever do , you know . " Violet smile sadly . " I think she will pull through . People generally pull through , do not   they ? do sit down , Mr. Ceria . will not   you sit down again , Mr. Perosi ? " she feel as if she be preside at a reception . 

 " but you be go out , " say Ceria , sit down . 

 " not the slight hurry . " 

 Perosi look at his watch . 

 " I must go down to Fourth , " say he . " thank you . " on his way to the door he stop and address Ceria very blandly . " you be the first to see Miss Maclaren . comment ça est - il arrivé ? Personne n'en satl rien - a ce qu'il parait . " 

 Ceria out of politeness to Violet answer in English , shake his head : 

 " she telephone that she want to see I . I ask she to come down to my office . she have the attack as she come in . very severe pain , I should say . I help she to sit on a chair . she would have fall off if I have not hold she . then I carry she to the lift . that be all . I know no more than anybody else . " 

 " she do not   speak ? " 

 " she could not . " 

 " she do not say why she come to see you ? " Perosi daringly probe . 

 Ceria shake his head again : " nothing . I can not guess what she want . " 

 impossible for even Perosi not to credit the young man 's sincerity . the old man be perfectly satisfied , and once more in the full bloom of his benevolence . he say , in a new tone suddenly and quite dramatically warm : 

 " Ceria , my friend , I hear you be think of organise a New Year 's Eve celebration in the grill - room to accommodate visitor who have not succeed in obtain table in the restaurant . it be a fine idea , that ! at New Year 's Eve there be little to do on the Floors . if I can help you in the service , dispose of I . " 

 Violet be thrill by this startling announcement , which after the rather laboured and melancholy exchange on the subject of Miss Maclaren 's illness sound a sort of trumpet - note of inspire enthusiasm . not often do the old man show enthusiasm concern anything . Violet have hear the widespread news of the unprecedented demand for table in the restaurant on the great night ; but not a word have reach she of the scheme for bring the grill - room into the geography of the mighty feast . she know nothing of the grill - room , have never see it . 

 as for Ceria , he be still more startled than his hostess . he have not mention Sir Henry Savott 's casual suggestion to any member of the staff , nor at a daily conference , for the reason that he have regard it as too impossible to be worth discussion . Sir Henry Savott have apparently not be ready to stand sponsor for it . and assuredly , Mr. Cousin would not for a moment consider it . and now Ceria amazingly learn that somehow the scheme have get abroad in the hotel . and the scheme blossom magnificently afresh from the shrivelled seed in his mind . he picture in a flash the entire splendid fete in his grill - room , and himself in charge of it , and his very friendly rival Cappone outshone , not in size , but by sheer force of chic and inventive novelty ; and paragraph about it in Mr. Immerson 's weekly gossip column . his eye shine ; his cheek flame . 

 " have you hear of it then ? " he hesitatingly ask . 

 " I hear , " say Perosi . 

 " how ? " 

 Perosi give a shrug . " I seem to have hear , " he say vaguely . 

 he enjoy be mysterious . the truth be that the cinema - owner , present at the lunch two day early , have mention it , with ornamental addition and exaggeration , to Perosi on the previous night during the service of an intimate dinner in the suite which he be occupy in the Palace for a week of some secret negotiation . Perosi have mistakenly understand that the thing be as good as settle ; whereas the fact be that Mr. Cousin himself be in complete ignorance of Sir Henry Savott 's fanciful notion . Sir Henry , when in the creative mood , be capable of throw off half - a - dozen such coruscating spark in half a day . 

 now Ceria , the centre of the scheme , could not possibly appear to be less well informed about it than Perosi , who have only ' hear ' of it . 

 " it will be discuss at the conference to - morrow morning , " he say , as one who be at the heart of the matter , decide on the instant to introduce it at the conference himself . he take Perosi 's offer as a significant oman . Perosi , though a minor deity in the pantheon of the Palace , have a prestige beyond his rank . he be accept by his superior as a serious and sagacious person . both Mr. Orcham and Mr. Cousin listen with respect to his opinion , whether they have seek it or not . he have have great experience of hotel work ; and before Ceria have dawn on the Palace , Perosi have be a value head - waiter in the grill - room . but for lack of ambition , lack of personal style , and a certain superficial surliness of manner , he might have rise very high in the Palace . 

 what puzzle Ceria be that Mr. Cousin , the scheme have as it seem be on the carpet for two day , have not summon he into the managerial office . he guess that it must be Sir Henry who have mention the wonderful idea , his own , to Mr. Cousin . and an idea of Sir Henry 's be not one to be lightly cast aside . 

 Perosi depart , in full lustre . 

 3 . 

 Violet wonder why Ceria outstay Perosi . he have receive the information about Mac which he have come for . and Mr. and Mrs. Powler , at home in Renshaw Street on the south side of the Thames , would grow impatient for the arrival of their marvellous daughter . still , Violet , if she have have a magic power to choose between send Ceria away and keep he , would have keep he yet awhile . she like he . she like his presence , the innocent , diffident , unworldly look on his face . she be attract to he , not as a male , but as a human being . so sensible , so ingenuous , so agreeable to behold ! similarly she like old Perosi . so grim , so benign . she like people . she like to know about they and to understand they . this be only her second meeting with Ceria . at the first , she have immediately appreciate his concern for the stricken Mac   though there be something nonchalant in it , and the discretion of his disappearance from Mac 's room when he could no long be useful . she like to hear he talk his very correct and fluent English , in which every sound be subtly foreign : so that he could not have say even ' knife ' without betray his foreign birth . 

 of course his foreignness be a vague barrier divide they . foreign , full of mystery , he would always be . but she do not object to the barrier , because she have no wish for intimacy with he . to enjoy his acquaintance be sufficient for she . what do not present itself to her mind be the fact that , just as Ceria be foreign to she , so be she foreign to he . exotic , elusive . they chat about nothing , Sundayishly . their talk be simple , and it be cheerful . but for Violet , beneath the flow of the conversation , there be an undercurrent of sadness for the tragic plight of Mac . she fancy that she could detect the same sadness beneath the social tone of Ceria 's sentence . 

 she be wrong . Ceria be certainly preoccupy , but not with the fate of Miss Maclaren . his mind be busy upon the dream of the possibility of a New Year 's Eve fete in his grill - room . Violet have a very imperfect conception of the importance of New Year 's Eve in the corporate life of the Imperial Palace . she have never see a fashionable , luxurious New Year 's Eve fete , and never imagine one . she be perhaps aware , from rumour and glimpse , that tremendous preparation be afoot , and that the entire hotel be slowly gather its energy together for a grand climacteric of display design orgiastically to receive the New Year into the infinite succession of year . but as regard the esoteric spirit of the effort , she belong to an ignorant and uninitiated laity . 

 " you be go out , " say Ceria suddenly , without rise , and as though he have not make this surprising discovery before . 

 " not yet , " she reply . " be you generally here on Sunday afternoon ? I think that - " 

 " I be never here on Sunday afternoon , and not often on Sunday evening . but my mother and my sister go away this morning to the Riviera . they would have go to Italy , our home , but there might have be complication for the return . they be not naturalise british subject like I be . my eld sister have be unwell . " 

 " I be sorry to hear that . " 

 " not ill . unwell . it be the damp climate . they have go for a month . my house be empty . you understand - the sadness of an empty home . I could not tolerate it alone . after lunch I stay here . Laisser aller ! " he smile plaintively , as it be appeal for sympathetic comprehension . 

 " what a pity you do not call early then ! " Violet smile . " I might have give you some tea . " 

 he thank she deprecatingly . Mac 's illness be the pretext for his call ; no more . he have call because he have lose three woman endear to he by habit of life ; he be accustom to the companionship of woman , this deferential functionary of whom his patron think that the grill - room be his sole and everlasting world ; and in the arid desert of the hotel on Sunday afternoon he have seek an oasis - a woman 's room . he have like Violet for the calm efficiency of her reception of Miss Maclaren 's torture body . he have like her soothe presence . her expression and her gesture have remain in his memory . and now he like a new expression on her face , an expression - which he do not know be characteristic - of kindly alacrity to observe and consider sympathetically any phenomenon that might offer itself to her cognisance . he be offer himself to her cognisance . and her smile be responsive . 

 " do you live near here ? " she ask . " I suppose you do , because of get home at night . " 

 he tell she exactly where his home lay : a little beyond Hampstead . with an increase naive eagerness he describe his home , his mother , his eld sister and his young sister , his garden , the tennis - court - with not enough space at the end for truly scientific back - line play . he be so graphic in his mild fervour that Violet see his home and the old lady and the two girl . do the lady feel exiled in North London ? do they not long for Italy ? not a bit . they be devoted to London . they love the English and the english character and way . there be no tedium in London . both Emilia and Daria speak English well than himself , Ceria . the old lady speak a little English . but at home they speak nothing but italian . they have an italian maid - cook , and the cuisine be strictly italian . the English be wonderful . the english domestic cuisine , however ... well , they have experience it in a boarding house at Brixton for a few week . the stream of home - detail slacken , trickle . Ceria rise . 

 " I must go . may I telephone you for news of Miss Maclaren to - morrow ? " 

 Violet nod . 

 " I do hope your New Year 's Eve dinner will be arrange , " she say politely , not quite realise how much the fete mean to he . 

 " ah yes ! " he sigh , with latin pessimism . then brightly : 

 " I be so glad that Perosi favour it . Perosi be listen to here in the Palace . he be a historical monument . if when he see Mr. Cousin he should chance to say a word - it would have influence . " 

 " really ? " 

 " yes , yes . I have notice before . " 

 " I shall tell he he must . I shall tell he . " Violet 's tone be confident , almost imperious , the tone of a woman who know her feminine power . she rise . she seem to be suddenly inspire with enthusiasm for Ceria 's scheme . " I shall tell he to - night when I come back . " 

 " how nice of you ! " Ceria 's eye shine . so do Violet 's . 

 a quarter of a minute after his departure she be follow he down the lighted corridor . she run into her bedroom at the end , switch on the electricity , put on her coat , snatch her bag , examine her face , switch off the electricity . she be out of the hotel . she walk quickly , past the dim grove and water of St. James 's Park , past Queen Anne house , the Abbey , hospital , grandiose Government office , to the corner of the Embankment and Westminster Bridge , and spring on to a tram with the right illuminated sign on its forehead . building be small , road wide and straight , motorcar few , costume and suit less smart . the tram slide roar by the Laundry , and the Laundry touchingly recall to she what seem like her distant youth . Cyril Purkin be no doubt in his little house there . South London be another world , the world , again , of her far - distant youth . condescend to it , she yet love it , because she know every yard of it and it be her home . 

 the tram stop . she jump down . tiny house on the broad thoroughfare . she walk a little under the recurrent glare of the street - lamp ; then turn to the left , then to the right . tiniest house , some light , some dark , some with name , some without . she halt at a low wooden gate opening into a front - garden as big as a counterpane . one project window ; slit of light at the edge of the three blind . a light over the door . the moon be not far from the earth than Violet be then from the Imperial Palace . she ring the tinkle old bell briskly . she tap on the door . her father would as usual say something faintly sardonic about her artificial complexion . her mother would remark on her new glove . how slow be these parent ! the door open . her mother ! her mother kiss she as she stand on the doorstep , look with strange enquiry at this new daughter . how narrow and stuffy and old be the lobby ! her father in his old creased housejacket appear at the door of the sitting - room . 

 " I must positively be back at the old Pally by ten o'clock , child , " she exclaim . 

 it be her father who have somewhat derisively attach the diminutive " Pally " to the great luxury hotel in the world . South London have to maintain its self - respect . 

 content 
 chapter 44 

 the vamp 

 Violet find a mild and soothe satisfaction in the short Sunday evening visit to her home ; but as she wave a good night to her parent stand side by side in the front doorway , her father puff at his pipe , the thought in her dutiful daughterly mind be : 

 " well , that be do ! " 

 her father and mother be not really interested in the Palace , and her father 's comment on the thing she tell he show no comprehension of either their importance or their significance . her mother be inquisitive about the detail of Miss Maclaren 's seizure , but to Violet her curiosity seem morbid and her prejudice against hospital almost childish . both parent have be much more interested in the life of the Laundry , probably because they see it from the street several time a week . what really do interest they be the daily functioning of the little home : the enormity of the charwoman who ' come in ' for half a day on alternate day , the caprice of the kitchen range , the inexplicable peel of paint on the back - door , the new wireless in the next house , the kittening of the cat . they assume that Violet would be eager for every tiny morsel of house - gossip . 

 her father have of course never be inside the Palace , have never dream of go inside , could not conceive of any circumstance which might lead to his go inside . her mother have never even see the hotel , or , if she have long ago see it , have not notice it . she speak of make a trip to look at it , as she might have speak of a trip to New York . the hotel be far beyond their range . Violet be miraculously rise in the hotel . the hotel , for they , be a place exist solely in order that Violet might rise in it . 

 as for Violet , this excursion into South London - she have make several before - be the first to awaken she fully to the quick growth of her affection for the Palace . as she journey eastward in the tram she be positively impatient to be back on the Floors with all their endless small surprise and anxiety ; quite ready to be immerse again in a sea of trouble - what some people would call trouble but she would not . and in particular she be impatient to talk to Mr. Perosi . she have convince herself that by talk to Perosi she might help to help the Palace towards a great glory on New Year 's Eve . her sole reason for return to the hotel not later than ten o'clock be information receive from Perosi himself that he would be leave the hotel at that hour on a visit to a friend at the Majestic . strictly , she have be entitle to a week - end off , but a truly earnest temporary head - housekeeper could not think of absent herself for so long a period from the supervision of the huge organism - especially as she have have word from Mr. Cousin that her salary would be raise during the term of her high office . but for the desire to have an interview with Perosi , however , she would not have return till midnight . 

 Mr. Maxon , the staff - manager 's second - in - command , be fuss about restlessly in the dark staff - entrance , though nobody be clock - in and nobody be clock - out . naturally Mr. Maxon do not expect a head - housekeeper to clock - in . on the contrary he very amiably open the wicket for she and express his view that the night be fine , with which Violet very amiably agree . it occur to she that her father would have make an excellent assistant staff - manager . she enquire of Mr. Maxon whether Mr. Perosi have leave the hotel . he have not . but she meet Perosi , strangely clothe in a fawn - colour lounge - suit and a brown overcoat and softhat to match , in the main basement - corridor , he have descend in a service - lift . she stop he . they be alone in the stony corridor . 

 " I be so glad I have   catch you , " she say , with a calm , gentle smile . she have intend that smile to be captivate , but at the moment of compose the smile she be too proud , or too honest , to use the wile which she have contemplate . she be disappoint with herself . she think : " why can not   I do it ? why be I so stiff ? " 

 for she have set her mind on ' vamping ' - there be no other word - the benevolent grim old gentleman , on demonstrate the influence over he which she believe she possess . accord to Ceria , Perosi 's opinion about hotel - policy have weight . Ceria desire that the weight of Perosi 's opinion should turn the scale in favour of a special New Year 's Eve fete in the grill - room , and have she not say to Ceria , of Perosi : 

 " I shall tell he he must " ? her instinct be to help Ceria . Ceria be a child , and she want to give he a toy . Ceria be so charming , so innocent , so diffident , so pathetic , so bereft of his womenkind . Ceria would have to sleep through Christmas and the New Year in his desolate home . he deserve compensation , and Violet be determined that if she could bring it about he should have the dazzle compensation of a fete in his grill - room . 

 " Qu'est - ce que c'est ? Vous I le direz en français , " say the french master , quizzically , rather alarmingly . his experience of housekeeper have endow he with a sort of second - sight ; and by nature he be suspicious . 

 Violet shake her head to the command to say she say in French . Perosi know that he be order the impossible of his pupil . 

 " you remember what you say to Mr. Ceria this afternoon in my room about that scheme for a New Year 's Eve dinner in the grill - room ? " Perosi nod cautiously . " well , after you leave he talk about it . he seem frightfully keen on it , but he be afraid they will turn it down . now I be just think - everybody in this place know what influence you have here , and I be just think that if you do get a chance to put in a word to Mr. Cousin , perhaps you might ... you see what I mean . it be only an idea that cross my mind . and everybody do know your influence . I have   often hear of it . " 

 not a very clever speech , she think . Lame ! and the last sentence be a gross and deliberate exaggeration . but she smile again , look up at the man with an appeal in her eye . 

 2 . 

 Perosi 's gaunt face soften . she think : " after all I be do this fairly well . " 

 Perosi have fear some request for a favour the granting of which might upset the strictness of the ritual of his branch of the Floors - service . you never know with these woman , even the most sensible of they ! instead , Violet have flatter he . it be true that he have influence . he be nobody . he be only the head - floor - waiter . but he have influence with the mighty - and incidentally his post of head - floor - waiter be an exceedingly important one , if you look at it properly ! perhaps none more important under Mr. Cousin ! 

 " no ! " he say gently , harden his face again . " I shall not speak to Mr. Cousin . " 

 " oh ! " Violet exclaim timidly . she really do feel like a sweet young girl at the mercy of a stern and powerful male . 

 " but , " Perosi go on , relent with grim roguishness . " I shall speak to Mr. Orcham . " 

 " Mr. Orcham ! but - " 

 " Mr. Orcham have telegraph from Boulogne that he will be here to - night . Victoria 10.47 . I have   only hear this minute . if they would let I know early , I should not have change my clothe . now I must change back again , because when Mr. Orcham return after an absence I take his order myself . so I shall not go to the Majestic . I take just a little walk to the river and back , to breathe . that be why I go out early than I say . I shall see Mr. Orcham in his room , and if I can I shall say a word . he like I to take his order myself - I mean for a meal , if he be hungry . I shall certainly see he . " 

 " that be splendid ! " say Violet . " and it be very nice of you . " she smile gratefully , admiringly : final gesture of the vamp successful . 

 Perosi go off , button his overcoat and turn up the collar . 

 but Violet be vaguely disturb by the news of Mr. Orcham 's imminent arrival . Mr. Orcham be great and terrible . he have be terrible about Venables and Prentiss . still , he have confirm her astonishing appointment as temporary head - housekeeper . he be a man about whom nothing could be prophesy . Violet have a notion that the mouse might have play more harmoniously if the cat have not return so soon . 

 content 
 chapter 45 

 the PANJANDRUM 's RETURN 

 Evelyn , at a quarter before midnight , have be in his castle for thirty - five minute . his mood be that of a return traveller for whom work and anxiety have be accumulate during his absence . he be relieve and even glad to be back , but he shrink from the consequence of be back ; he shirk the burden await his broad shoulder . also he be self - conscious as a supreme ruler re - enter a kingdom which have be leave in charge of inferior being . he have desire to meet nobody of importance until Monday morning . the prospect of effusive , deferential greeting from this person and from that as he come through the revolve door into the great hall , answer enquiry about his health and his journey , respond suitably to expression of pleasure at the sight of he , listen to hint of urgent matter which would immediately demand his notice , make polite enquiry about the health and the doing and the happiness of other people - the prospect of all this be more than he feel himself able to bear . 

 call it weakness , cowardice , what you please , the panjandrum have choose to re - enter his kingdom by the staff - entrance , to the intense astonishment of Mr. Maxon , who of course have attribute the caprice to every motive except the right foolish one . he have drive to the hotel quite alone , impatiently abandon Oldham and baggage at Victoria . he have ascend to Seventh partly by a service - lift and partly by walk . 

 but even so , sneak into his own house like a thief , he have not be able to avoid be somehow envelop in the intangible blanket - fold of the hotel atmosphere . on the way up he have catch two or three bar of the orchestra far distant in the restaurant . same old routine , hackneyed , desolate : so it seem to he . People would be dance and guzzle in the restaurant on the night of judgment and doom . but that must be the new Paris - american band which Jones - Wyatt , the Bands - and - cabaret - manager , have engage . well , he do not very much like it . he could not possibly judge it with fairness , but his inclination be not to approve it , not to approve anything . he be in a hypercritical state of mind . certain phenomenon at the staff - entrance and in the basement - corridor have ruffle he , though he have say nothing about they to Maxon . he have pass unseen along the main corridor of Seventh , open his door , slip inside his castle , shut the door . he be safe . none would dare to disturb he . yes , Perosi would dare to disturb . he know the ritual on these rare occasion . Perosi regard himself as a privileged person . and Perosi have dare to disturb he . he have to be pleasant and chatty with Perosi . he would not eat . no , not even the least snack . he have din on the train from Folkestone . to placate Perosi , to save Perosi 's gnarl face , he have ask for a liqueur brandy and hot water . 

 serve the beverage with marvellous quickness , Perosi have show an exasperating tendency to fall into hotel - gossip . Evelyn have bravely and nobly smile , while attempt to check the tendency . Perosi have remark that he have be very interested to hear of the project of a separate New Year 's Eve festivity in the grill - room . then it be that Evelyn have perform a miracle of self - control and deceitfulness . one of his fib without word . neither by telephone nor by letter on his journeying have he be vouchsafe one single syllable about this astounding project of a separate New Year 's Eve festivity in the grill - room . nevertheless he have reply mildly and casually to Perosi : 

 " yes , yes , " as if he have be familiar with the project for week , as if he himself have invent the project . and Perosi , hoodwink , and perceive that the moment be inopportune for a friendly discussion , have leave the room . " I be a bit tired , Perosi , " Evelyn have say . " good night . thank you . " 

 then Evelyn have hear baggage be thud into his bedroom through the bedroom door . by now every member of the staff would be apprise of his advent . there be Maxon . before he have reach Seventh everybody would have learn that the panjandrum have come - and by what strange entrance ! he have sit awhile lounge in his soft travel - suit , think of all his hotel - inspection , on the whole satisfactory , in various city , and of the suddenly decide tiresome journey and the rough Channel voyage . he have mean to sleep one night in Boulogne , a sympathetic port , just for change and rest . but when the train stop at the harbour station he have feel that after all he could not tolerate a night in Boulogne , and his consequent counter - order and order have considerably overset the exhausted Oldham . and it be not true that he have din in the Pullman crowd with peevish passenger . he have only pretend to dine . the Channel , follow many day of fatigue , have somewhat seriously derange he , and indeed be partly responsible for his captious , sensitive temper . 

 have finish the soothe brandy and water , he bend down and unlace his brown boot , which for hour have be slightly incommode he . then , restless , he go into the bathroom . the bedroom door be open . he star at Oldham stoop , straighten himself , sort clothe , handle they gently , almost lovingly . Oldham know well that there would be no respite for a valet until every garment and belong be in its proper place and the trunk and the two suit - case hide away . a valet be not entitle to be fatigue by journey , derange by the Channel . a valet have to be superhuman . and Oldham really do seem to be superhuman in those moment . the truth be that on the journey he have make a tranquillising decision , a decision not uninfluence by the loss of sixty pound odd , all unknown to Evelyn , in a Paris tripot . 

 " I suppose , sir , " he say , as it be dreamily , with his back to Evelyn . " I suppose you would not   care for I to withdraw my notice ? " 

 suggestion startling to Evelyn , among whose chief worry be the horrid thought of have to replace Oldham and train his successor ... Silence ... Oldham secretly tremble at his own boldness . Evelyn ought to have feel comfort . but he do not . instead , he reflect bitterly : " Inconstant ass ! coward ! he be afraid . and he do not   know his own mind . why the devil should I let he withdraw his notice ? fancy himself as a retail tobacconist , and then funk it ! but I might have guess he would give in when it come to the point ! " 

 when the silence have continue for a few minute , he say very drily : 

 " we will talk about that to - morrow . I shall have to think it over . " he add , commandingly : " be as quick as you can . I want to go to bed . " 

 " yes , sir . " 

 2 . 

 Evelyn return to the sitting - room , wear pump , and murmur inaudibly to himself . a breath - take sight confront he : two letter lie on the centre - table . he be outrage by the sight , which strain to the snapping point his already exacerbate nerve . it be a rigid rule of the Palace that no correspondence should in any circumstance be deliver in his private room , which be hold by he to be sacred . his office be the only proper place for correspondence , and for any document relate to business . also , he have determine not to touch business until the next day . he desire , and would positively have , nothing but peace . he impulsively open the door and call out : 

 " Oldham ! " 

 " yes , sir . " in response the man come as far as the bathroom . 

 " who have put these letter here ? " Evelyn 's tone be very curt and imperious . yet he admit to himself that obviously Oldham be not in a position to answer the question . 

 " I really could not   say , sir , " say Oldham , placatory because he now want more and more to keep his situation . 

 " they have be put here since I go into the bedroom to speak to you . someone must have bring they here . " Evelyn know even as he make it that this be a silly remark . 

 " yes , sir . " 

 " you do not   know who do it ? " 

 " no , sir . " 

 " well go , and find out - at once . " 

 " very good , sir , " say Oldham , think to himself : " he be just tell I to hurry up with the unpacking and here he push I off to do something else ! what a life ! " but he still want to keep his situation . 

 Evelyn firmly decide that he would not read the letter . no ! he would send they downstairs to his office unopened and deal with they in the ordinary course the next morning . then , glance at one of the envelope , he recognise the handwriting of Sir Henry Savott , and have a qualm . what could be wrong ? he rather violently tear at the envelope . " my dear Orcham . this be to tell you that my friend Mr. Oliver Oxford , manage director of the Carlyle Oxford British Films Company , have an idea to suggest to you for the propose New Year 's Eve affair in your grill - room . please listen to he . I think it be I who first think of a special affair in the grill - room for New Year 's Eve . Oxford be a friend of mine . your . " 

 curse the fellow ! try to interfere with the management of the Palace ! and all because , the hotel - merger be practically arrange , he be now turn to film - merger . evidently for reason of his own the fellow be anxious to oblige this Oxford person . of all the impudence ! he , Evelyn , would show Savott what be what ! the other envelope be large and of an ornamental nature . it bear on its face the word : 

 " Carlyle Oxford British . " Extraordinary , despicable , how these english film company would imitate american company , even in their title ! but Carlyle , Evelyn know , be an American . he read the second letter . what a signature of self - conscious flourish ! the letter afford to evelyn the virginity of an absolutely new kind of silent film , of which Carlyle Oxford British have the high hope , and in which they have an unparalleled confidence , for use in the Palace Grillroom on New Year 's Eve , if Evelyn care to avail himself of it . and would Evelyn come and see the film in the private theatre of Carlyle Oxford British in Lisle Street , at any time convenient to himself ? 

 what be this grill - room scheme ? it appear to be very much in the air . first old Perosi . then Savott . then this Oxford - no doubt a Hebrew . Evelyn be clearly the only person in the world who know nothing about it . he light a cigarette . why do not Oldham come back ? what be the nincompoop up to ? surely it be a simple enough thing to find out who have introduce correspondence into the sitting - room ! Evelyn go to the telephone , and demand Mr. Cousin . he have no wish to speak to Mr. Cousin . he want to know whether Mr. Cousin be on duty . Mr. Cousin be not suppose to be on duty on Sunday night ; but Evelyn think that the Manager , aware that his Director be return , might have have the grace to be available . the telephone answer be that Mr. Cousin be away till Monday . naturally ! there be always something subtly independent about Cousin . Evelyn have be in search of a grievance . he find it . then he telephone to his secretary , Miss Cass . he know that Miss Cass be on holiday for the week - end , but still he think that the girl might by some magic have contrive to be present to welcome he . the reply from the hotel - exchange be that the Director 's office be close . another grievance . 

 at last Oldham come back , flurry . he have fail in his mission . Perosi , a waiter , a valet , the liftman , several page , a chambermaid : he have carry out a thorough investigation , and all these people deny any complicity in the mysterious delivery of letter into the castle . Evelyn have a gleam of light . 

 " find out if a Mr. Oliver Oxford be stay here . " 

 " very good , sir . " in a quarter of a minute Oldham convey the answer . Mr. Oliver Oxford be stay in the Palace . Suite 743 . quite near to Evelyn 's castle . he guess the solution of the enigma . Mr. O.O. , have hear of Evelyn 's arrival , have write the letter and deliver both letter himself . no doubt he have knock , receive no answer , and step impudently into the room . Evelyn notice that Savott 's letter be date several day early , and have probably be wait to be use in the presumptuous Hebrew 's own good time . 

 the image of Violet Powler swam into his mind , possibly draw there by a subconscious yearning to be tranquillise . he be accustom to think of Miss Powler as a tranquillising creature ; he have never forget , and he never recall without pleasure , the scene at the Laundry when she have handle so gently the colour - blind woman . all the floor be now in charge of the inexperienced Miss Powler , with his approval . an audacious experiment . but during his absence have he receive from Cousin any criticism , any complaint , of her performance ? not one . have Cousin show the least misgive as to her capacity ? no . Cousin 's letter and his nightly telephoning have be salt with hint of the inadequacy of other member of the upper staff ; but Miss Powler 's efficiency have not once be arraign . he look at the clock . three minute to twelve . he pick up the telephone , then hesitate . if this be an early night for she she would be go to bed , but if not there be still three minute before , accord to rule , she be entitle to leave duty . he ask the Exchange for she . in a moment he hear her voice . 

 " Mr. Orcham ? " 

 " speak . I have   just return , Miss Powler . I do not   want to trouble you at this time of the night , but I be rather anxious to have the late news about Miss Maclaren . how be she to - day ? " 

 " not out of danger yet , sir . " 

 " oh ! sorry to hear that ! I be hop - " he stop . 

 " it be rather a long story , sir . " 

 " I say , " say Evelyn in a tone more colloquial , " I wonder if you would mind very much come down now and tell I . I be in my room - not my office . " 

 " certainly , sir . " 

 why have he invite she to come down to he , especially as he really have little to learn about Miss Maclaren 's illness ? well , her voice have soothe he . it be like a balm to his sore nerve . it be the most soothing   yet firm   voice within his memory of woman 's voice . his wife ; Mrs. O'Riordan , a wonderful old girl , extremely capable , but no consoler for a weary man ; Miss Maclaren , always consciously bear a weight of responsibility ; Miss Cass , devote enough and pleasant enough , but steely ; Venables , Prentiss and other , nobody who invariably by their prim voice raise a barrier between themselves and he . ah ! Cousin might stick to his lawful right ; Miss Cass might gad away for the week - end ; but his favourite , Miss Powler , his discovery , his candidate - she be at her post ! he might have know it . Miss Powler be not an employee to be fussy and exact about hour . not she ! a tap at the door . 

 3 . 

 she come into the room , quietly smile . her appearance startle he ; for instead of the regulation housekeeper 's black , she be wear a bright - coloured frock . the psychological effect on Evelyn of this simple frock be considerable . it pull he from his chair , impel he a few step across the room and thrust forward his right arm . 

 " excuse my dress , please . I have   just be home to see mother and father , " she say as they shake hand . 

 " it be a very nice dress , " he say , and point to a chair . " do sit down . it be you who must excuse I , send for you like this . now tell I the whole story . " 

 she sit . he say to himself that she be surprisingly change - for the well . her expression have the same placid benevolence , but she have gain tremendously in ease of manner , in worldliness . she must have be continuously learn from visitor . he have think before that she might be anybody 's daughter . he think now that she might be anybody 's daughter - except a small town - traveller 's ; she might be a peer 's daughter , or an artist 's , or a stockbroker 's . of course she have not quite Lady Milligan 's style ; but a quality be her which the Yorkshire gentlewoman lack : poise . at a heavy expense of nervous energy , Lady Milligan gallantly keep a semblance of poise - not the real thing ; and at interval she lose even the semblance . whereas Miss Powler could be genuinely calm for ever and ever at no expense of spirit . 

 Violet relate briefly the tragic tale of Mac from begin to end . 

 " um ! " be Evelyn 's only comment , but he put a lot of sympathy into it . he take a cigarette . then it strike he that he ought to offer Miss Powler a cigarette . but he offer the cigarette to the bright frock . at any rate , if Violet have be in official black he would not have dream of such an approach . he make it solely for the sake of his own good opinion of himself as a polite man . he be sure that she would refuse the cigarette , and that she do not smoke . she be not the sort of girl who smoke ; nor the sort of girl who , if she smoke , would care to smoke in the presence of her employer . 

 " will not   you have a cigarette ? " 

 " thank you , " say Violet . 

 he be startle , for the second time . he have to hold a match for she . the interview modulate into a new key . 

 " what be your idea about this scheme for a special New Year 's Eve dinner in the grill - room ? " he ask , rather impulsively : partly because the scheme be like a bluebottle in his mind , and partly to cover a slight self - consciousness , concern the cigarette . he think , and he be bind to think : 

 " suppose anyone come in and see she and I smoke together , and she in that frock , and the time after midnight , especially as I sneak into the hotel . of course no one will come in , but supposing - " 

 Violet make no reply . 

 " you have   hear of it ? " he say . 

 " yes , I have hear of it . " she look at he through the smoke and give a smile . 

 " who tell you ? " he be on the point of say ; but he do not utter the word . no decent employer ought to put such an ambiguous question to an employee ; it would have have the air of an invitation to tell tale . 

 " I do not   know anything about those thing , " Violet go on cautiously . to she there seem to be a faint note of hostility to the scheme in Mr. Orcham 's voice . " this scheme ! " have his tone be different she might have hint at Mr. Ceria 's passionate eagerness for the scheme , might have show some sympathy for Mr. Ceria 's cause . " I be quite a beginner here . I do not   know half enough about the Floors yet , and as for anything else - " she smile again , lightly , as one who be confident of be fully understand . then she say : " I expect they be wait for you to settle it . I be sure everybody be glad you have   come back . we have   all be rather lose without you . Mr. Cousin be say only the day before yesterday he hop you would be back soon . " 

 " you have   be see Mr. Cousin pretty often ? " 

 " not see he . on the telephone . I have   have to ask he about dozen of thing . he be be very kind to I . no one could have be nice . " 

 " well , " say Evelyn . " Mr. Cousin 's the man you have to deal with , not I , you know . " 

 " yes , I do know . " 

 Evelyn reflect that never before have any housekeeper speak as Miss Powler speak of Cousin . all the other house - keeper have be wrong . Cousin be a good fellow , and he have be quite justify in not upset his own arrangement for the sake of be available on the chance of Evelyn want to see he . Evelyn be a fine judge of tact . his opinion that Miss Powler have an unusual measure of tact be confirm . so they have all of they miss the presence of the panjandrum ! the panjandrum be soothe - either by the cigarette or by the tact . 

 he throw the cigarette into the fire , two - third smoke . Violet be smoke her very slowly . he be impatient for she to finish . he have a desire to make some enquiry about her experience as head - housekeeper . but he think that to talk professional shop with she when he have invite she down to get news of Miss Maclaren would be take an improper advantage of the occasion . still , conversation have to be maintain , and his social duty be to maintain it . 

 " heard anything about your old home ? " he ask . 

 " my old home ? oh ! you mean the Laundry ? " she laugh outright . " no . except that Miss Brury be get on splendidly . Mr. Purkin come up to see Mr. Cousin , and I happen to meet he . he tell I so himself . " 

 " excellent ! excellent ! I have an idea she would . that change we make be work out very well . " a pleasant appreciative innuendo in his voice that she , Violet , be give satisfaction . 

 " I be so glad you think so , sir . " 

 the first time she have say ' sir ' in the interview . 

 there be another lull in the talk ; he begin to feel agreeably sleepy ; but he could not dismiss she until her cigarette be consume . fortunately he happen to hit on a new topic . 

 " how be the french get on ? " 

 " very slowly , " she reply . " but Mr. Perosi be a very good teacher . " 

 " and do the very good teacher think that progress be slow , or be that only your own idea ? " 

 " he say it be pretty quick , consider . but to I it do seem terribly slow . really ! " 

 " I know the trouble I have , " Evelyn muse aloud . " and even now , when I be say to be mighty fluent , I often think I have   do no more than scratch the surface of the infernal language . if you ask I , French be the most difficult language in the world - except English . " 

 they go on talk . Evelyn reflect . beneath the current of conversation he have be think that whatever might occur on the floor he would keep this girl in her present post , for she be a bear lubricator , the enemy of all friction . he have a mazy dream , if the dangerously sick woman ever come back , of allot a pension to Miss Maclaren so that she should not stand in the way of Miss Powler . but the mention of French start another dream . he have find a lot of friction at the Minerva Hotel at Cannes , even in the slack , wet pre - christmas season . why not transfer Miss Powler to Cannes as soon as her French grow to be practically serviceable ? she would go , if ask . she be not one to jib at a new experience . another hazardous experiment ; but wherein lie the advantage of be supreme autocrat of a luxury hotel merger if you could not try hazardous experiment ? he would be tell that nobody have ever hear of an English house - keeper in a french hotel , that she could not possibly ' shake down " with a french staff , etc . nonsense ! and anyhow , she would shake down with the clientele , which be ninety - five per cent . british and American . to the clientele she would be balm , a rock of refuge , an oasis , an all - comprehend angel , everything that be sympathetic . 

 and yet - no ! the Imperial Palace have first call , and it could not spare she . 

 she rise , and carefully drop the cigarette - end into the fire . as she give he an interrogative glance he rise too . 

 " well , " be say . " it be late . I must not   keep you . " 

 " well , " she say , with urbanity but also with sturdy affirmation of a hard fact . " our hour be very long . " 

 her eye meet his . " Stomach that , my boy ! " he say to himself . he nod , as it be casually , but he be somewhat dash by the direct blow . he say to himself : " I admire she for that . " 

 " thank you so much , " she say . 

 he take her hand nonchalantly , but with a fake nonchalance . 

 " you be very kind and I do appreciate it , " she add . 

 there be such an undeferential sincerity of goodwill and gratitude in her voice and smile that he be secretly overcome . no housekeeper , no member of the female staff , have ever use that tone to he . none , except Mrs. O'Riordan , have throw down the barrier of status , of official rank , as Violet do then . and though there have be no barrier between he and Mrs. O'Riordan , though Mrs. O'Riordan could charm and blandish with the good , there have always be something formidable , daunt , in her social demeanour towards he , even at its sweetest and most alluring . he privately glow with pleasure at Violet 's unstudied humanity . he feel that he could look happily and confidently at the future . the manipulation of a chain of vast hotel seem easy than before . he be enheartene . 

 Oldham step into the sitting - room through the bathroom door . 

 " I beg pardon , sir , " say Oldham clumsily , though he have do nothing which need to be pardon . 

 " just in time , " Evelyn reflect , think of the cigarette . a near shave ! his attitude to Oldham in the bedroom have be unreasonable , if not unjust . hence he feel a grudge against Oldham , and have an impulse to continue in unreason and injustice . but the simple goodwill of Violet have arouse and enliven his own goodwill . also he would not for world have display himself to Violet as less than the perfect employer and man . the truth be that he be affect precisely as old Perosi have be affect in the afternoon . 

 " what be it , Oldham ? come in , " he say benevolently . 

 " I have   finish all the unpacking , sir . be there anything else , sir ? " 

 " no , thank , " say Evelyn . " thank very much . sorry to have keep you up . " 

 " thank you , sir . good night , sir . good night , miss . " 

 Oldham depart . Violet depart . Evelyn go to bed joyous . Miss Powler must certainly have approve his demeanour to Oldham . 

 content 
 chapter 46 

 another conference 

 the next morning Evelyn reign afresh in the directorial office ; and Reggie Dacker , his dandiacal fellow - director   usually refer to as the ' alter ego ' of the panjandrum , and Miss Cass , his authoritative secretary , be with he and under his law . despite untimely wintry weather , he be cheerful , brisk , and quite in the mood for reign . before go to bed he have tell the night floor - waiter not to call he . he have have a very good night , and within two minute of wake up he feel equal to run a hundred luxury hotel . 

 towards Oldham he have be benevolent , tell he that of course he could withdraw his notice if he choose , and that indeed in the panjandrum 's opinion he would be wise to choose . the relation between the two be at once restore to its former perfection , and both of they be relieve and delighted , and both of they try , without complete success , to hide their feeling . he have breakfast with deliberate sloth , dawdling , chat to Oldham , waste time . 

 he have telephone an amiable greeting to Cousin , say that he , Evelyn , must see to his own business first , but would put in an appearance at the daily conference if possible . in his heart he have no expectation of attend . why should he attend ? if he have not hasten his arrival by three day the Conference would have proceed that Monday morning satisfactorily without he . Cousin have mention in his characteristically aloof tone that the project for a special New Year 's Eve fete in the grill - room would be bring forward , as Ceria have ask for its discussion . to which Evelyn have reply with detachment that he know nothing about it . to which Cousin have brightly retort that he know nothing about it either , but that it seem to be somehow in the air . whereupon receiver be hang up . 

 there be two pile of document and letter for the panjandrum 's august notice : Reggie Dacker 's and Miss Cass 's . Dacker 's of course have precedence . but Miss Cass have a robust notion of the importance of her pile . in a pause due to Dacker 's failure to find a paper , she push a letter under Evelyn 's eye . 

 " this be urgent , sir , " say she firmly , in a low voice . 

 Evelyn do not read the letter . he glance up at she as she stand over he . 

 " it depend what you call urgent , " say he . " see that I be not   expect back till Wednesday night , nothing can be urgent tillthursday morning . suppose I have not   be here to - day ? " one of his theory about woman be that they lack the sense of proportion and be incapable of distinguish between one urgency and another . one of Miss Cass 's theory about man be that they lack the sense of actuality and be incapable of see thing as they be . what be the point   think Miss Cass   of suppose that he be not   there ? he wasthere . he might as usefully have suppose that the hotel have be burn down . she take back the paper , but she have no resentment , because the panjandrum be in a heavenly temper after all   not that his temper be ever bad - she admit , and most man , even panjandrum , be child and queer in the head . 

 Dacker discover his document and pass it across the desk . Evelyn study it very attentively . it concern a matter which in Evelyn 's opinion far transcend all other matter in urgency and intrinsic importance . compare to that matter , project for fete , disturb graph show the curve of individual consumption by visitor , estimate for alteration and decoration , even the merging of luxury hotel into one grand homogeneous enterprise , be trifle . Evelyn have begin a very elaborate fighting campaign for the reform of the licensing law of his country . for month he have be engage on the preliminary organisation of the campaign . he be just return , now , from a continental tour of town whose citizen buy and drink in the way of alcohol what they please , when they please , where they please . the contrast between the Continent and Britain be utterly exasperate to a british publican . and Evelyn , if not a publican , but the manager of the great luxury hotel on earth , be treat by the licensing law exactly as if he be the landlord of the low drinking den in Limehouse . he could not allow to be serve , in the public room , the most ordinary and respectable beverage before a certain hour or after a certain hour , and both hour be preposterous . not five time in a year be there a case of offensive inebriation at the Imperial Palace . and yet his head - waiter be force to walk round his restaurant and his grill - room at a give moment and submit themselves and he to the indignity of tell visitor of irreproachable manner and social standing that they must order their alcohol then or never . the situation be monstrous , and would have be incredible do it not exist . the wonder be that any high - class hotel could keep its door open . the wonder be that a revolution , with glass - breaking , arson , and the overthrow of government , have not occur . : 

 why have Britain fight and win the war if the sequel be to be the abolition of natural liberty which obtain in Britain before the say war , and which still obtain throughout the continent ? etc . , etc . it be laughable . but it be also ruinous , humiliating and intolerable . admittedly the head of the hotel world , he hold it to be his duty - and many other hotel - keeper hold it to be his duty - to lead the movement for reform . and he be lead it , with all the subterranean , subtle ingenuity of which he be capable . 

 member of Parliament , journalist , publicist , power in the City be be regiment for the campaign . and he talk to they ! by God ! he talk to they ! perhaps too vehemently , with an excessive exaggeration . he love to set side by side those two phrase , ' low drinking den ' and ' great luxury hotel . ' he enjoy the melodrama of their contrast . his excuse be that he feel very deeply on the subject . nobody have convincingly answer his argument , the argument of the hotel world , and nobody could . on all other subject Evelyn could be as detach , as judicial , as Cousin himself . but on the subject of the licensing law - well , his business acquaintance and his principal subordinate would say to one another that if you want to have fun and witness a real firework display you have only to start Mr. Orcham on the licensing law . the movement which he be lead have have a lot to do with the appointment of a Governmental Licensing Commission . the Commission mark a forward step . Evelyn , however , be extremely dissatisfied with the choice of its member . 

 on this Monday morning he be busy with Reggie Dacker on some detail of the campaign , and the document which Dacker have ultimately produce related to it . and yet suddenly , worry by a teasing thought , and possibly amazed by tiny prick of his directorial conscience , he break off the discussion with Dacker and say : 

 " excuse I for three minute , will you , my boy ? I must just - " and , demand a leaf of foolscap from the assiduous Miss Cass , he write out in his clear hand a short memorandum . 

 " put this in an envelope and take it to Mr. Cousin yourself - at once , please , " he say , as he fold the leaf in four . 

 " but the Conference will not   be finish , " Miss Cass demur . 

 " I hope it will not , " say Evelyn with a genuinely cheerful laugh . 

 2 . 

 and so Miss Cass , bear the foolscap envelope , pass down the corridor , and open the door   in a rather dark corner   over which burn night and day the electric sign " Manager 's Office , " and go in . Miss Tilton , Mr. Cousin 's secretary , be not at her desk , at which sit idly a page - boy ready to answer the telephone . he smile timidly at Miss Cass , who give he a nod . 

 even before she open the inner door into Mr. Cousin 's private room she hear the sound of vivacious , argumentative conversation the room be full of man and smoke . Mr. Cousin preside at his desk , a desk large but not as large as Evelyn 's ; and by his side sit young Pozzi , his second - in - command . at the end of the table be Marian Tilton , with notebook , just as Miss Cass sit with notebook at the end of her principal 's desk . indeed , in various way the disposition of Mr. Cousin 's room show the influence of Evelyn . a dozen or fifteen man , and Violet Powler   serene and receptive , all head of department , constitute the Conference : an attendance somewhat full than usual . evidently the chief protagonist be Ceria , Immerson , the publicity head , Ruffo , the banqueting - manager , and Jones - Wyatt , the Bands - and - cabaret - manager . and evidently the topic be the propose special New Year 's Eve fete in the grill - room . 

 Amadeo Ruffo have be argue against it , and one of his reason be that Jones - Wyatt could probably not provide a first - rate band for only one night . Jones - Wyatt , a fullbodie , youngish man well verse in the musical , music - hall , theatrical and operatic world , have be half - heartedly oppose the scheme . but Ruffo 's sinister suggestion have in a moment change his attitude . of course he could provide a band , and a first - rate band . they might leave the band to he ; he would answer for it . he do , however , object to the cinema proposition , because the broad , square column which support the ceiling of the grill - room would prevent a good twenty - five per cent . of the reveller from see the screen in its entirety .   nobody else have think of this snag .   his idea be that the entertainment should be exclusively musical , and of the high character , with a quartet of seasonable caroller and perhaps a soprano : which artist would be fully audible if not visible . 

 Immerson , in his soft , earnest tone , have espouse this idea . Immerson be strongly in favour of the general scheme , partly for its exciting novelty , but more because it would spread out before he fresh vista of piquant publicity . Cappone , the restaurant - manager , in the secrecy of his mind , do not approve the grill - room scheme , which , he fear , might impair the glory of his own fete in the restaurant , but loyalty to his colleague deter he from express himself . 

 those two marvellous smiler , Cappone and Ceria , smile upon one another at interval in touching amity . several man be talk at once as Miss Cass appear . even the disinterested burst out now and then in loud , impulsive monosyllable . keenness and animation be the note of the polemic . all genuinely and fervently desire to increase the prestige of the Imperial Palace , but some in one way and some in another . the scene have heat without hostility . Sir Henry Savott would have be flatter and delighted could he have witness the various liveliness of which a casual sentence from his mouth so richly furnish with tooth be the origin . 

 on the whole , feel support the scheme . again and again the master - argument for it have be state : namely , first , that about two hundred would - be roysterer have receive print form express regret that every table in the restaurant have be book ; and , secondly , that it would be a pity to waste these lady and gentleman if they could be utilise . 

 Mr. Cousin be calm and impartial . he certainly be not averse to the scheme ; nor be Pozzi . and Mr. Cousin consider that , as the panjandrum on the telephone have vouchsafe no opinion , still less a command , he be free to come to a decision on his own responsibility . during Evelyn 's absence , he have grow accustomed to make decision without reference , and at least twice when Mr. Dacker , whose telephone to Evelyn sometimes clash with his - when Mr. Dacker have disagree with he , the ' alter ego ' have yield . 

 as for Miss Cass , she invade the Conference with perfect assurance . she and her notebook have attend many conference . she come now as a sort of papal envoy - slightly irritated because she do not know what message on what subject she be carry . she be on familiar term with everyone in the room , but as she walk briskly round the edge of the Conference to the back of Mr. Cousin 's desk , she ignore everyone except Marian Tilton , to whom she give the nod and feminine smile of superiority . she offer the foolscap envelope to Mr. Cousin : 

 " Mr. Orcham ask I to give you this . " 

 Mr. Cousin open the envelope , and before read its content murmur to Miss Cass , who be turn away : 

 " well wait a moment . " 

 then he carefully peruse the message . 

 " I think I will read this to you just as it be - it be from Mr. Orcham , " Mr. Cousin address the suddenly still Conference . 

 and he read : 

 " I can think of a number of reason both for and against the very interesting proposal for arrange for a New Year 's Eve festivity in the grill - room . but there be one reason which in my opinion outweigh all other and which ought to settle the point . the grill - room have always be a place free from every rule except that of good manner . at any time of day or evening anyone can enter it in any dress , and order any meal , which will be charge either a la carteor at a prix fixe accord to the judgment of the manager . no formality be observe . the grill - room have a very large clientele which be aware of this state of thing and count on it . it be universally know as a restaurant of relaxation , where food of the fine sort can be eat at ease and in quietness . thousand of customer look on it as a retreat upon which they can rely . it be open every night of the year . no holiday or fete have even be allow to disturb its normal course . what would its habitué think if one night its character be to be alter , and a definite menu and hour impose upon they , with various unavoidable rule affect dress , etc . , and the introduction of music and a formal entertainment ? any such alteration would be a blow to the particular reputation of the grill - room . it would cause disappointment and possibly some resentment . confidence in the stability of the policy of the grill - room would unquestionably be undermine . which would be , I think , a rather serious matter . - evelyn ORCHAM . " 

 Silence follow . the Director have speak . he have issue no ukase . he have not employ his authority like a hammer . but he have utter that formidable word : policy . and he have advance an argument which not one of his subordinate have think of - or at any rate speak of . nobody in the conference surmise in that dramatic moment that the panjandrum be as human as any of themselves . none know that the incursion of Sir Henry Savott into the politic of the Palace have abrade Evelyn 's most delicate susceptibility , and that he have be shock to get the first word of a propose terrific innovation from a quite minor , if value , person - old Perosi ; and that these two thing together have affect the whole trend of his thinking . the Conference could judge only of the final expression of the directorial reflection , and the final expression be so phrased as to permit of no answer . 

 " thank you , " say Mr. Cousin , turn for an instant to Miss Cass behind he . in the redoubtable hush Miss Cass , diminish and yet very proud of her master 's moral force , and take some share of it to herself , leave the Conference chamber . 

 " well , my friend - " say Mr. Cousin , reserve , detach , apparently indifferent . but he offer nothing else to the Conference save a faint bland and undecipherable smile . 

 the Conference see Ceria rise from his seat and slowly and silently walk out . the young man give one glance at Miss Powler . 

 " if you will excuse I , " say Miss Powler to Mr. Cousin . and she too walk out . no other person in the room move or speak . the hush produce by the panjandrum 's communication be protract by the solemn , startling exit of Ceria ; for all realise , with a sentiment akin to awe , that tragedy have be near than they think . all be intimidate - and especially the emotional Italians - by the lamentable ravage figure of the manager of the grill - room . tear come into the eye of the bright and worldly Marian Tilton . Miss Cass have escape in the nick of time . 

 3 . 

 Violet follow Ceria at a distance of twenty foot or so , into the great entrance - hall , across it , down the broad corridor lead to the empty grill - room , past the door of the grill - room , into a narrow transverse corridor beyond , at the end of which be Ceria 's office . 

 Ceria vanish into the office , leave the door ajar . she knock softly at the door . no answer . she go cautiously in . the room be less than small ; it be tiny ; but it be an office , a piece of private territory , and Ceria would now and then mention it with a certain complacency of importance : " my office . " Violet , however , have never hear of it , do not know what the room be till she see it . Ceria be seat at a tiny table - desk , elbow on the blotting - pad , chin support by the palm of the hand , star at a milanese sheet - calendar hang on the wall . he hear a slight cough , and spring up , collect himself in order to be manly , and summon a fairly deceptive counterfeit of his famous smile . he be pale . 

 " I beg your pardon . please , " he murmur weakly . 

 Violet do not know how to begin . her wish be to soothe he and uplift he out of the despair which have be so alarmingly apparent on his wistful face as he walk out of Mr. Cousin 's room . she have fear lest he might faint or do something silly - and no woman near to tend he ! you never know with these delicate , impressible foreigner .   as a fact she have form an entirely wrong idea of the Latin temperament .   she could not bluntly say : " you should not   take it too hard . " or something like that . she say , in a tone as commonplace as she could produce : 

 " about the special Floors - menu for to - morrow , Mr. Ceria . could I have a copy of it to - day ? it be useful to I to know beforehand what it be ... if I be not disturb you too much . " 

 Ceria , with the approval of Mr. Cousin , have recently introduce a special short menu for meal in the private room . upon request a special fix price be make for it . the object of the device be to tempt visitor away from the full menus which contain dish not easy to serve satisfactorily on the floor . both menu be offer to the hungry , but visitor be quickly learn to choose from the special one because it simplify the plaguy task of choose . 

 " yes , certainly , " Ceria answer with forced animation " please sit down . have this chair . I will find it . I will find it . " he ferret in a drawer in the table . 

 Violet do not sit down . Ceria fail to find the menu . obviously he be not search with any method in the untidiness of the drawer . after a moment he stop , as if try to reflect . his eye meet Violet 's . 

 " you ought to go home as early as you can this afternoon and do a bit of hard work in your beautiful garden , " say Violet impulsively . 

 in her expression and in her voice Ceria see and hear the benevolent purpose of her intrusion . he hesitate , fumble for the right course to take . his eye moisten . Violet think " how could I suggest his go back to that empty house , with nobody but a servant there ? " 

 at length he say : 

 " at this season ... one can not work in the garden . what can one do in the garden ? " 

 " how stupid of I ! " Violet exclaim . she really feel stupid . she know nothing of garden . 

 " and it be nearly dark at four o'clock , " Ceria add . 

 another detail that Violet have most stupidly forget . 

 " but , " say Ceria , " I will go for a drive in my little car . I adore drive in the dark . I will go a long distance . " his smile become genuine , though it be forlorn , touching . 

 " how many day be it since you first think of the fete in your grill - room ? " Violet ask gently . " not many . " 

 Ceria raise his eyebrow in assent . 

 " no . not many . " 

 " well , you be no bad off now than you be then , " say Violet . 

 " you be a very kind philosopher , " Ceria murmur . " yes , you be very kind . I understand you . it be a lesson . " 

 " no , no ! " Violet protest . " please excuse I . I only think of it . " 

 Ceria timidly extend his hand . Violet 's hand advanced of its own accord . Ceria take it , and kiss it . to he the action be quite natural . but it thrill Violet . nobody have ever kiss her hand before , except in the make - believe of the amateur comic - opera stage . 

 Ceria relinquish her hand . and not a second too soon . for the face of Miss Venables appear , as it be furtively , in the doorway . instantly Ceria resume control of himself . 

 " come in , Miss Venables . " 

 the old woman nod indifferently to Violet , then ignore she for Ceria . 

 " I be leave this afternoon , Mr. Ceria , " say she . " and I could not go without say good - bye . " her heavy , prim voice be as usual charge with a martyr 's melancholy ; but the intense glance of her dark eye show that Ceria 's wistful smile could make its victim anywhere and everywhere . 

 " well , thank you , Mr. Ceria , " Violet break prosaically in . " perhaps you could send that menu up to I . or I will send down for it . " 

 " you shall have it at once , " say Ceria , in a style as prosaic as Violet 's . he have nothing to learn from she or anyone about the use of vocal tone and facial muscle . none could have guess , now , that five minute early he have feel as if he be Violet 's weak , clinging , passionately grateful child . 

 4 . 

 Violet leave quickly , without further notice of Miss Venables . Ceria take two step to the door , and , behind Miss Venables ' back , re - established intimate communication with Violet by one transient look . Violet cross once more the entrance - hall with its ceaseless foot - traffic and quiet stir of visitor and official and murmur colloquy and down - sitting and uprising . and she ascend away out of all that wordliness in the lift , happy , jingle some key and talk to the lift - man about weather , which he seldom or never have the opportunity to see in autumn and winter . and while talk she think of Ceria as her grateful child , talented , brilliant , all - conquer - and pathetic . 

 then she step from the lift into the withdraw world of Eighth , where thick carpet dull every sound of the corridor and shaded lamp give a discreet mystery to hush life . afar off she see the figure of two chambermaid - Beatrice Noakes and another - and a valet and a waiter gather in a group . Eighth be their universe , of which each small phenomenon be familiar . for they the entrance - hall and the public room have no existence . the valet hold in his hand a leaden weight attach to a long cord : apparatus by which he have just be clear an obstruction in the letter - shoot cause by some too bulky envelope - a delicate operation more exciting to the personnel of the floor than any event in managerial office . 

 at sight of the temporary head - housekeeper the group dissolve . the valet disappear silently into his brushing - and - cleaning room , the waiter into his kitchen - and - pantry , a chambermaid , use a pass - key , into a bedroom . only Beatrice Noakes be leave . she move towards the door of the head - housekeeper 's sitting - room and confidently await Violet . 

 " there be a lamp - stand break in 06 , miss , " she say earnestly . 

 " but you have   tell I about that once , Beaty , " Violet answer , laugh . 

 " oh ! have I ? so I have , miss . well twice than not at all , they do say . yes , miss . I hear Miss Prentiss have go , miss . and I know her trunk be go . they be label for Gleneagles , miss . " 

 " I wonder how you hear of all these thing , Beaty , " say Violet . " it be very clever of you . " she smile ; but she feel disappointed and a little grieve . 

 Prentiss have go without a good - bye , even a good - bye of mere ceremony . since the scene on the night of Mac 's seizure , the well - breed Prentiss have speak with she only in the way of work . good breeding might have prompt she to some formal alleviation of the feud . but no ! she have depart for the new northern post which , thank to Palace prestige , she have obtain without any difficulty . she would never again be see in the Palace . and how she would try to impose her unquestioned gentility upon Gleneagles , and how , after a few day , she would tear the good name of the Palace management into fragment ! 

 " and what be the news to - day about Miss Maclaren , miss ? I suppose you will have be hear ? " 

 " a bit well . she be eat part of an omelette . " 

 " well , that be wonderful news , miss . an omelette ! do you think I might go and see she ? I and Daisy be say last night as perhaps I might . just to show like , if you know what I mean . " 

 " she would be very pleased . but you ought not   to stay more than ten minute . " 

 " oh no , miss ! such an idea would not   enter my head . I have   get a wrist - watch and I should wear it , and I should look at it when I go in and ... Miss Venables have not   go yet , miss 

 " I know , " Violet interrupt the flow . she realise now that Mrs. Noakes have mention the break lamp - stand only in order to start one of her grand miscellaneous gossiping , for which she live . " I have   see Miss Venables , downstairs . " 

 " oh ! I be so glad she be see you , miss , " say Beatrice , with exaggerated relief in her voice , thereby inform Violet that the female floor - staff have be keep careful watch on the great housekeeper ' feud , and lusciously speculate as to whether any of the party concern would relent at the last moment either from human kindliness or from a sense of social decency . 

 " let I come past , " say Violet quickly . " I have   get plenty to do , if you have not . " 

 Beatrice stand aside from the doorway and Violet enter her sitting - room and shut the door and sit down , but not to any task . she be pleased that Beatrice , misinterpret her word , have assume a reconciliation between Venables and herself . but she feel disturbed . would Venables come and say goodbye , or would she not ? the question fill her mind , so that she could not settle to desk - work , nor even to a round of room inspection , nor even to telephone . she be entirely innocent , and yet she have a sensation of guilt . 

 little secretary Agatha burst schoolgirlishly into the room , a question on her lip : " anything urgent you want I to do ? " Violet shake her head . 

 " well go and get your lunch , if it be not   too early , " say Violet . 

 Agatha glance at the clock . 

 " five minute , " say she , and go away again . 

 Violet rise and move to the window , and star at the lofty roof of the ugly building in London . why could not   people be friend ? why be the lovable Ceria lonely and sad ? why do Prentiss harden her heart ? would Venables harden her heart ? why be the world what it be , when it might so easily be different? ... Violet look at the clock . nearly one hour have amazingly slip by since she have come into her room ; and a score of job remain undone . she must go down to lunch . she hop that by this time Venables would have lunch and leave the housekeeper ' refectory . she could not have bear to meet Venables in the presence of other . she have be through that experience too often . 

 5 . 

 there be a knock at the door . Venables primly enter . Violet be both relieve and affright . her heart assert its beat . she wait , cautious . 

 Venables say : 

 " I think I would tell you . they have   just telephone up that Mrs. Oulsnam have come . " 

 " oh , thank you very much for let I know , Venables . I suppose she will come to see I . I be just go down to lunch . " 

 Mrs. Oulsnam have leave the Majestic in order to come to the Palace , and Venables be replace she at the Majestic . this be another of Evelyn 's ingenious change . through the intermediation of Mr. Dacker the transaction have be carry out with the nice regard for the pride of Miss Venables , who have receive a letter from the Majestic management to the effect that it have hear that she be leave the Imperial Palace , and that if she care to call , etc . Evelyn now of course in fact if not in theory control the Majestic . but no one refer to the reality of the situation exist between the two hotel . everyone pretend - and Venables more convincingly than anyone - that the Majestic have seek for Venables on her notorious housekeeping merit . as for the interest of the Palace , Mrs. Oulsnam produce an excellent reference . Miss Prentiss 's post be not to be refill ; for Violet have work out Miss Maclaren 's plan for the reduction of the Palace Floors staff . 

 " not at all , " say Venables . 

 " I do hope you will be happy at the Majestic , " Violet exclaim , with a sudden outpouring of goodwill which surprise even herself . her feature relax and her mood be lighten by the mysterious lifting of an obscure oppression . 

 " oh , thank you , Powler . I feel sure I shall . you know the Majestic be go to be very much liven up . I hear yesterday they be to make a new carpet for the restaurant there at our work . but I expect you know all about that already . " 

 " no , I do not , " say Violet , fib in order to flatter Venables ' superior knowledge . 

 " and here be my key , " say Venables . Violet accept the bunch . 

 a pause . 

 " well , " say Venables , " I suppose I must be say goodbye . " 

 she hold out her hand . Violet give it one little squeeze . in do so she squeeze some tear out of Venables ' eye . 

 " I know it be not   your fault . you could not   help it , " say Venables in a broken voice . 

 Violet might have reply : " could not   help what ? " but instead she reply : " I know you know . it be all right . " 

 Venables say : 

 " but I have   never be treat like that before . never . and you must admit it be very humiliating , dear . " 

 " I be sure it be , " Violet agree . " but it be for such a short time . it be not   worth while appoint you head - housekeeper for such a short time as that . and you have not   be humiliate for long , have you ? " 

 not a word about Prentiss . 

 Venables bring her head forward and kiss Violet , and Violet return the kiss and see Venables ' face very close . what a ruin , that complexion ! without doubt the old thing be feel deeply her severance from the Palace , where she have serve for so many year . and the poor old thing have now to face a new career in strange surrounding ! " and , " think Violet , ' she will go on be a hotel - housekeeper until she be old . and what then ? and so shall I go on be a hotel - housekeeper till I be old . one of these day I shall be as old as she be ; and what then , for I too ? " she could hardly prevent herself from cry , though she do not really believe that she would ever be as old and withered and desiccate as Venables . she be mournful . but she be happy . Venables go off with the subdue self - contemplate smile of one who have righteously perform his duty to society , recognise virtue in a junior colleague , increase the sum of kindness , and with resign courage front a hard world . 

 content 
 chapter 47 

 NEW YEAR 's EVE 

 a quarter to nine on New Year 's Eve . although the festive dinner in the restaurant of the Palace be schedule to begin at 8.30 , a continuous procession of automobile and taxi - cab be enter the courtyard of the hotel , hoot to stimulate the dilatory in front , curve under the vast marquise , set down bright woman and sombre man , and curve away again back into Birdcage Walk , whose breadth be narrow by double line of parked car . and high above the building , unseen from the region of the marquise , rise the flood - light tower of the Palace , inform the West end by an admixture of red ray in its customary white that the occasion be special . Mowlem , the head - day - hall - porter , be himself active on the step outside the portal with a corps of janissary large than usual , direct and speed traffic , bow to his numerous acquaintance among the visitor , and disseminate goodwill and good wish in the keen air . the crowded scene in the entrance - hall , view from without , be brilliantly appetising , and an unanswerable proof that Britain be not yet quite the impecunious back - number which newspaper of all political party have get into the habit of proclaim she to be . 

 a car stop , and Mowlem give to the chauffeur a special word of dignified intimacy . and when the occupant descend from the car Mowlem salute he with a special bow of courtly benevolence . 

 " a Happy New Year , sir , if not too early . " 

 " thank . same to you . " 

 the arrival be Evelyn . he have choose the main entrance , preferably to the Queen Anne entrance , because on grand occasion such as the present he enjoy see his organization in the full press of work . he be still young enough in hotel management to be thrill by the long line of automobile and by the whizzing of the door and by the restless glitter of the throng hall , down which he quickly pass , unrecognised , towards his private office . he behold the display and see that it be good . 

 now the Imperial Palace dinner be not the only New Year 's Eve hotel - banquet on that night . there be of course dozen , hundred , of other up and down the land . but for Evelyn there be only one other : that of the Wey Hotel , Evelyn 's first love and charge . every year he see the soup serve at the Wey banquet . the Wey be a residential hotel , and almost in the province , its meal take place much early than those at the Palace . Evelyn have duly see the soup serve , and even the fish ; and he have give to Mr. Plott , the Wey manager , the impression that really he would have like well to usher in the New Year at the Wey , but that the more complex organism of the Palace be in urgent need of his watchful supervision , and so he must regretfully leave the Wey celebration to Mr. Plott 's very adequate sole control . and the exigent Mr. Plott have be quite satisfied . Evelyn would say to old Dennis Dover that it would have be more than his place be worth not to make an appearance at the Wey on New Year 's Eve . 

 have titivate himself anew in his office , he travel by devious service - corridor to the service - door of the grill - room ; for he have a quarter of an hour in hand . he have receive full report of the Conference at which his communication to Cousin have have the effect of cause a stricken Ceria so dramatically to leave the room , and he feel therefore that he owe a state visit to Ceria , 

 as for Ceria , his kingdom be a grand sight to he that evening ; for , surprisingly , every table be occupy or have be book . the clothe of the diner exhibit all variety of taste , from pull - over and plus - four to silken low - cut , pearl , orchid and white tie . no sign of the seasonal fete except cracker and bit of holly   no mistletoe . plenty of gaiety , plenty of champagne , and no music at all . a large number of celebrity and notoriety who demonstrate by their presence that they prefer a decent , simple Bohemianism to the elaborate formality of the great affair in Cappone 's restaurant . Ceria feel very flattered , and happiness radiate from his wistful , smile face as he walk from table to table bow and greeting . indeed Ceria would not have exchange place with the more important Cappone . he would have like Cappone to see his array of the famous ; for he be sure that for every ' somebody ' that Cappone could show , he could show half a dozen . 

 at a table lay for three person , half - hide by a column , sit a young woman alone , in morning frock . she be read a newspaper as she drink soup . Ceria stop in front of she . 

 " be everything as you wish , Miss Savott ? " he earnestly enquire . the girl glance up from the paper and nod , smile ; and Ceria bow and withdraw . the next moment he descry the panjandrum and go deferentially to meet he . 

 " well , Ceria , " Evelyn murmur with much content and approval in his voice , " I congratulate you . you could not   have do well than this if you have have a dozen band and the whole New Year rigmarole . you could not   have do as well , because a band take up a deuce of a lot of valuable room . now could you ? " 

 " no , sir . you be quite right . " 

 " you will beat your record to - night . " 

 " I shall , sir , " agree the delighted Ceria . 

 Evelyn think : 

 " he be just like a child . " 

 the pair make a leisurely tour of the room , talk together and ignore guest . they pass close by the table where the young woman sit so strangely alone . her eye do not leave the paper , and Evelyn do not glance aside , and Ceria be too obsess by the general glorious aspect of his grill - room to give a thought to the interest which his chief might be expect to feel in any individual customer , however eminent the name . a minute later Evelyn leave , by the service - door . Ceria then notice a page - boy in converse with the solitary girl . as he arrive again at the table the girl be rise to go . 

 " you can have this table now , " she say to Ceria . " my friend evidently be not   come . " he do not know that she have not be expect friend , have naughtily secure a table for three in order to get ample space for herself . she drop a form on the table for the waiter . 

 2 . 

 in the foyer , which be now steadily lose more people to the restaurant than it be receive from the entrance - hall , Evelyn could see nothing of Sir Henry Savott , who   as it have be finally arrange   be to be his guest for the evening . but the man could not yet be accuse of unpunctuality ; it still want one minute to nine o'clock , the hour of their rendezvous . what Evelyn do see be Cappone , the restaurant - manager , talk with a rather troubled expression to Lord Watlington , and Mrs. Penkethman stand a foot or two away and carefully not listen . Evelyn divine at once from Mrs. Penkethman 's dissociation of herself from the masculine colloquy that some difficulty have arise , and he accordingly move away , prefer to leave the conduct of Cappone 's business entirely to Cappone . but Lord Watlington , still more familiarly know to his friend and the world as Harry Matcham - though two year have pass since his ' public service ' have lift he into the peerage - have catch sight of Evelyn , and totally ignore both his lovely partner and Cappone , walk up to he , follow at a little distance by Mrs. Penkethman , while the astute Cappone descend abruptly into the restaurant . 

 his lordship be a man of forty - eight , of average height , but somewhat more than average girth , exceedingly dark , with coal - black hair and eye . he bear some resemblance to his friend Sir Henry Savott . indeed the imperfectly inform now and then confuse the one with the other . Savott be dark , but Lord Watlington be dark . Savott 's face be very broad between the ear , but Lord Watlington 's be broad . Savott 's gaze be pierce , but Lord Watlington 's be more pierce . and far , Savott be a triumphant financier , but Lord Watlington be a man of wealth , wealth absolute , wealth realisable , not potential wealth dependent upon the turn of market or the success of flotation . 

 Lord Watlington never touch enterprise which gamble upon the capricious taste of the public . thus he have a few day early reject a wonderful offer from Savott to go into the cinema business . he have refuse many temptation to acquire control interest in newspaper because   he argue   they be at the mercy of the big advertiser and the big advertiser be at the mercy of the uncertainty of trade and international politic . instead of own newspaper he own mill which sell paper to newspaper . instead of buy or build architectural structure , he buy ground - rent , that is , freehold , and give the risk of building to other . he be the large shareholder in a large insurance company ; ditto in a british subsidiary of a foreign bank ; he be chairman of a very important Investment Trust Company . he be nothing if not gilt - edge . he have make his fortune and his position by the exercise of judgment , by his necromantic vision of the future , which after all be not vision but only an accurate weighing of probability , by his instinctive regard for essential and his instinctive contempt for inessential ; and by nothing else . 

 among various gift Lord Watlington have the gift of creation . when a transatlantic liner be fully book up he could create a suite in it for himself . when a fashionable first - night be sell out , he could create a box in it for himself within two hour of the rise of the curtain . from pride and on principle he never ask for accommodation in advance anywhere . similarly he never carry money . often he would borrow money for munificent tip - it be always repay by cheque with a secretarial letter of thank the next day . 

 in the previous week a slight coolness have supervene between he and Savott , who have playfully say to he : " now , Harry , do not   behave like a spoiled beauty . " he do not like the remark , which have enlighten he as to the secret attitude of his friend towards his idiosyncrasy . 

 on the afternoon of this New Year 's Eve , Mrs. Penkethman have express a desire to attend the fete at the Palace . Harry have show unwillingness , but when Mrs. Penkethman have add darkly and with resignation that no table could be have , Harry have immediately promise to take she . he have telephone on the instant to Cappone , who have reply hopefully that , while no table be presently available , some table be almost sure to be cancel , and he would have the great pleasure in reserve it for his lordship . his lordship have arrive with the beautiful Nancy , and lo ! not a table have be cancel . he , Harry Matcham Lord Watlington , could not be accommodate ! he have not quite contrive to mask his sentiment . incredulity be succeed by indignation , and indignation by anger . he see himself publicly humiliate in the eye of Nancy . he be furious . to save his repute he would willingly have burn down the Imperial Palace   which be amply insure in his own company , which have reinsure a large part of the huge risk in New York . nevertheless in his frightful and unique quandary Lord Watlington accost Evelyn with the airy seductive nonchalance ; for he be an actor of genius . 

 " let I make you acquaint with the most beautiful woman in London , " he say , introduce Mrs. Penkethman . and then he explain his trouble , and say that he and Mrs. Penkethman must go elsewhere , and look at Evelyn as though he confidently expect he to work a miracle . Evelyn enjoy the spectacle for a few moment ; it be as exquisitely agreeable to he as the flavour of a fine cigar . he know by hearsay the fable of Lord Watlington . he care naught for the presume financial relation between Lord Watlington and Savott , author of the great hotel - merger . to inflict a horrible suspense upon Lord Watlington delight the unchristian , too human panjandrum . then he say : 

 " nothing be simple . I have a table , and if Mrs. Penkethman and you will dine with I I shall be charm . " 

 Lord Watlington protest , and accept . he have win . he be still Lord Watlington . he could still support the glance of Mrs. Penkethman . 

 then Sir Henry Savott appear on the stair lead down from the entrance - hall , and hand his hat and coat with studied negligence to a powdered , silk - calve footman . 

 " do not   tell I , " Savott exclaim . " I know I be late . three minute . it be your traffic outside that do it " 

 " you be not   late , my dear fellow , " say Evelyn . " every clock in the hotel be wrong . Lord Watlington and Mrs. Penkethman be join we . shall we go in ? " 

 both Harry Matcham and Henry Savott , behave with nobility , utterly forget the coolness which have be somewhat mar their business alliance . 

 vast curtain have be draw between the foyer and the restaurant , leave room for only two person at a time to pass down the six step to the restaurant floor . an attendant be take ticket from the entrant , but of course no ticket be demand from Evelyn and his guest , who descend with sovereign freedom into the noisy , crowded , multi - coloured arena of the banquet . few notice the appearance of the three celebrity and of the panjandrum of the tremendous scene ; for in the main the reveller be merely the well - to - do , who could afford three guineas a head for dinner   exclusive of wine . the exclusive smart be hardly represent on that night at the Imperial Palace , and the merely well - to - do be not familiar with the face of celebrity ; it need the smart to recognise the smart . 

 3 . 

 Lord Watlington comprehend , as in the wake of Evelyn the party wound its way to a table in a corner , why Cappone 's attitude to he have be so immovably non possumus . the table be pack so close together that not another could have be insert among they . the waiter perform marvel of self - insinuation , though with all their skill they be continually kick against chair - leg and thus annoying score of diner , who look round offend at the falsely - unconscious disturber . the whole of the space usually reserve for dancing be fill with serrie table , and an annex of the restaurant , usually separate by a glaze partition which have be remove for this night only , be fill with serrie table . 

 on the site of part of the partition a gorgeous bandstand have be upraise . the band be play fortissimo , but its majestic strain have to fight a battle against the din of shout small - talk from one thousand pair of lip ; neither the music nor the small - talk could be hear sufficiently well to enable umpire to have reach a clear decision as to the result of the contest . moreover the sense of hearing be impair by the appeal to the eye of flower , silken decoration , chinese lantern , variegate frock , glint jewel , coiffure , vermilion mouth , shin eye , suspend bunch of tinted balloon , and a huge clock with illuminated hand and roman figure . 

 Disorder seem to rule ; but beneath disorder be order , and the secret sign of it be the intent , absorb face of the industrious waiter who grimly toil on in the one sure hope that the moment of surcease would come when the last course have be serve , and the last bottle open , and the last tip collect . some of they already see in a prophetic vision the restaurant dark and empty , the table turn from white top to green and the chair pile in a series of scraggy heap . 

 and round and round , bow , smile , placate , flattering , move the young Cappone , apparently unaware of the heavy load of supreme responsibility which lie on his shoulder . 

 at the directorial table , for which Evelyn have order two extra cover before leave the foyer , Mrs. Penkethman be put into the good seat , with she back to the corner and a full view of the panorama of the restaurant ; Evelyn be on she left , Henry Savott on her right , while Lord Watlington have to be content with a view of Nancy and the two converging wall which frame she . the beautiful creature wear a very simple dark frock , to show that she do not take the fete very seriously , be indeed condescend to it .   on the popular night of New Year 's Eve the world of the Imperial Palace be not her world ; the majority of her friend be away either in country - house or on the continent .   but she carry a few trinket , a bag , and a cigarette case whose richness would have suit the smart entertainment that any expert   such as herself   in smartness could devise . she alone in the group be completely at ease and happy , her appetite for pleasure be unappeasable . she live for pleasure ; the pursuit of pleasure be her vocation , and the diversion which she call pleasure never cloy on that robust palate . also she have three man , and every important man , to herself . 

 Evelyn feel a little nervous ; for the origin of the dinner be his desire to justify his boast to Savott that the Palace could and would serve a thousand absolutely first - rate meal simultaneously ; his ridiculous conscience have prevent he from give special order in regard to his own table ; and in spite of his palatial confidence he be visit by qualm of fear lest something , some detail , might fail in perfection . Withal , he would accept the risk . Savott be slightly displeased because he have be anticipate the thoroughly intimate tete - a - tete to which Evelyn have invite he . Lord Watlington be disappoint partly because he have win a table only by favour and not by force , and partly because he have be anticipate a thoroughly intimate tete - a - tete with Nancy , who have remain in town to solace Harry 's compulsory loneliness . all these three male have to be soothe , smooth , enliven , sweeten , guide into a mood of self - complacency , free from care and corrode worm - preoccupation . 

 Nancy be the queen , and the queen know her business . Harry Matcham , who be not facile in sincere praise , though he would fling insincere praise about in trowelful , always say that she be the soothing woman in London - he do not really believe that she be the most beautiful woman in London . Nancy know that a bad first quarter of an hour might easily discompose a party for a whole evening ; she know that great and successful man be apt to be conscienceless in the matter of social amenity , and that in particular they chat or keep glumly silent accord to their caprice of the moment : she know that any conversation be well than muteness or reluctant , sparse monosyllable ; and she know that in the game of small - talk personality be always trump . therefore , no soon be the four chair occupy than she softly burst out in her soothe voice , to Sir Henry : 

 " and where be my darling Gracie to - night ? do you know , she be very naughty . I have not   hear from she for week , and she write such amusing letter - when she do write . " 

 " do you think I have   hear from she , any more than you ? " say Sir Henry , with an ironic smi1e . " I suppose she be in Paris . on the other hand she may be somewhere all by herself in the country near Paris . last news I have she be write a book . " 

 " a novel of course , " say Lord Watlington , also with irony . 

 " no , " say Evelyn , " I do not   think it be a novel . she do say 5ornethe to I about it , but I forget what . sort of journal of impression , I fancy . " 

 " yes , you be right , " Savott agree , startle by this inside knowledge of Evelyn 's . 

 " well , anyway it will not   be like anything else , " say Lord Watlington . " she have more brain than any other woman I ever meet - yes , my dear "   to Nancy   - " and you may rely on she to write down absolutely anything that come into her head . you would well see the proof , Henry . " 

 " I should have to bribe the printer then , Harry . Gracie would die before she would show they . " 

 " I always see Nancy 's , " say Lord Watlington . " I have   keep she out of trouble more than once . I can not   imagine why she keep on writing . " 

 " who ? I ? " ask Mrs. Penkethman plaintively . 

 " yes , you ! " Lord Watlington repeat with emphasis . 

 " yes , you ! " repeat Savott with emphasis . 

 Nancy divine that the two man be a little jealous of one another in regard to she . alone with she , each of they be gentle enough as a rule . but both together , each seem anxious to demonstrate to the other that his status with she entitle he to be rough . 

 " but I must write . I have to , " she say still more plaintively , envelop both of they in the same tender , appealing , wistfully smile glance . " you be my friend , be not   you , Mr. Orcham ? " 

 " count on I , Mrs. Penkethman . " 

 Nancy contribute , and sometimes she actually write , a weekly column of society gossip to the " Sunday Mercury . " the newspaper pay not for the column but for the signature , than which none could be smart . Nancy get nearly all her meal free and half her frock and hat ; she have the run of at least a dozen country - house ; she have far an allowance of five thousand a year   not from her divorced husband . so that , be thus in a chronic condition of penury , she ' simply have ' as she say , to write . moreover , it be the correct smart thing to write a column of society gossip in a Sunday paper . if a smart young woman do not write such a column , the sole reason must be that she lack the wit to write it . and Nancy , for all her sweet tenderness of demeanour , have wit . 

 4 . 

 Sir Henry Savott change the subject with the abruptness of a waiter change one plate for another . the soup interest he , be a novelty and a very delicate novelty . at the first spoonful he stop , impressed , thoughtful , curious , as to its ingredient . he praise the soup . it be entitle on the menu - card ' Potage Gracieux . ' nobody at the table , not even Evelyn , be aware that the name be Maître Planquet 's subtle tribute to the charm exercise by Miss Savott during her visit to the kitchen many week early . Maître Planquet have make enquiry about the identity and station of Gracie . 

 " Gracie ought by right to try this , " say Sir Henry , all unknowing , after his brief laudation address to Evelyn . already he be begin to be confident that Evelyn 's boast as to the quality of the dinner which the Palace could serve to a thousand people at once would be justify . already the gourmand in he be gain ground ; and , the soup finish , he anticipate the fish with eager hope . 

 Evelyn be think of Gracie , who have not be in his mind for a long time , think of she with appreciation . she have say that she would write a book , and she be write , have write it . she be not of those who dream of authorship , start a book , drop it and relapse into futility . she have character . yes , he be as much impressed by the news of Gracie as her father have be impress by the ' Potage Gracieux . ' 

 " that , I venture to think , be a unique hock , " Evelyn remark as the wine - waiter fill the glass . " anyone who prefer champagne will kindly say the word . but that - isa hock . " 

 Sir Henry taste . 

 " it be , " say he , after a moment 's cerebration . 

 Evelyn feel sympathetic towards Sir Henry 's gourmandise . there be satisfaction in feed a man who , though he somewhat deteriorate into grossness at a fine meal , could passionately distinguish between a first - rate dish and a second - rate . Evelyn have long since quite forgive Savott for attempt to interfere in the policy of the grill - room . 

 Lord Watlington have leave half his soup . also he have ask for a whisky - and - soda . Mrs. Penkethman have refuse soup . instead of soup she have take a cigarette . " barbarian , " think Evelyn , of the peer and the lady . he be glad that he have not offer to the barbarian the barbarism of cocktail . and he be glad to think that Nancy have probably be   what she would have call   die for a cocktail , while too well - breed and modest to demand one . 

 at the end of the fish the sight and taste of food and the quaffing of wine have accomplish their effect of stimulate the goodwill proper to the grandiose occasion . not only Evelyn 's table , but all the table as far as the eye could reach across the vista of white circle and square , have loose themselves into loquacity and open joyousness . the noise of the band be yield ground to the human din . tongue have be reinforce against the band by gift from the management of whistle , rattle , and other instrument of music , cracker , and toy - balloon susceptible to explosion by puncture . coloured ball be be throw about between table . coloured streamer be be cast like long fishing - line , coil round the body of dignified man and elegant woman , who in their gaiety find no offence in such entanglement . perfect stranger merrily salute and tease and slang one another . adult and the mind of adult diminish into child and child - mind . Dignity give way to impudence . 

 and Sir Henry Savott continue steadily to eat and drink , and Nancy to smoke , while Lord Watlington be so far affect by his surrounding as to accept a second whisky - and - soda . Evelyn eat and drink little . his be the ultimate responsibility for the success of the fete ; he be above Cappone , who perambulate watchfully to and fro , and above Cousin , who appear first in one corner and then in another , also watchful . Maitre Planquet himself , in white cap and suit , peep forth slily from the end of the corridor which lead to the kitchen , to observe the sweet influence of his rich viand . 

 the hand of the great illuminated clock move lazily on towards the minute which would mark the solemn inception of the New Year with its good resolution and its bill . and despite the unseen labour of engineer deep down below in the subterranean hall tend the machinery which change and wash and warm and cool the air of the glitter restaurant , the restaurant grow hotter and hotter . and no one care . and as the cracker crack , produce jewellery , wise motto , prophecy of destiny , and paper cap , the last supplement by splendid cap , genuine cap , distribute by girl from basket , there supervene the crisis which always arise at such a juncture . elegant woman don the splendid cap without the least hesitation or self - consciousness . would the man , even after have part with their dignity ? the man could not . the terrible fear of look asinine prevent they from put on cap . then a V.C. of a man put on a cap , and feel himself an ass for no more than a moment . another man put on a cap , and he be cheer by his shout companion . male cranium surmount by cap soon dot the room . Evelyn 's table be encumber with cap , as the floor be litter with knot streamer and little ball and the wreckage of toy - balloon and cracker . Nancy Penkethman , cap , motion to Evelyn to assume a cap . smile , he shake his head . Sir Henry Savott be invite similarly and refuse . 

 " Harry ! " say Nancy . Lord Watlington shake his head . 

 " Harry ! " Nancy repeat . she be the queen , and the time have arrive for she to prove the reality of her power , which hitherto out of the instinct to acquiesce she have forbear to use . 

 Lord Watlington sheepishly put on a cap , and immediately he have do so his sheepishness leave he . it be a magnificent cap , solidly construct in the shape of a helmet , with an authentic blue feather in it . and Sir Henry Savott don a cap . the fete be a success . 

 Nancy Penkethman relinquish her queenliness and her momentarily shrewish tone , and resume the role of trustful acquiescence and subtle flattery . 

 " you look like win - over this meal , " say Sir Henry to Evelyn , in reference to Evelyn 's old claim . 

 " I hope you will think so after the savoury , " Evelyn reply . 

 he alone at the table be capless . with he , Nancy have not insist . she guess that he be dream , preoccupy , absorb by his dream . he feel sure , now , that the festivity could not fail . Nay , he feel sure that somehow in his gossip column Immerson would make it the most marvellous New Year 's Eve in all the history of London luxury hotel . but he be dream of more than the triumph of the festivity . he be dream of the future triumph of the gigantic merger of luxury hotel , of which he be the autocrat and the godfather . both Sir Henry and Lord Watlington be indulge in the sweetness of the same dream . 

 Sir Henry be think , as he survey the riotous scene and digest the sumptuous food , and as he glance furtively at the quiet , unassuming , laconic man who in his fancy ride the whirlwind and direct the storm : 

 " this fellow be the good . he can not   possibly let we down . " 

 and the brain of Lord Watlington , who have never before condescend to a New Year 's Eve public fete , be busily at work reconstruct for himself the intricate and immense organisation which underlay the glow surface of the show . and he be think 

 " there be a damn sight more in this fellow than some people might suppose , to look at he . " 

 in ' some people ' Lord Watlington in fact include himself . he too have vision of a sensational triumph for the Merger , and thereby be make glad , for he be the chief of the plutocrat who in secret be lend their financial prestige and credit to Savott 's scheme ; and though he have ten time as much wealth as he could spend , he would have regard the loss of a single penny of it as a heartrending and humiliating calamity . 

 the speech of none of the three man give the slight clue to his reflection . the table be talk incessantly , but the talk have no subject , scarcely a topic , unless it be the oddity of other reveller . 

 Evelyn be awaken from his reverie by the sight of a human being wandering , star , search with his eye , among the table . he know from the human being 's uniform that he be a telephone - man . there should have be nothing surprising in the sight of a telephone - man search the restaurant . but this man 's face be tragic in its alarm and apprehension . his face be enough to ruin the mirth of any festivity . Evelyn think " this simply will not   do . " abruptly he rise from the table , and as the man happen to come near he peremptorily beckon , and the man see the gesture . 

 " what be it ? " Evelyn murmur as the man bend respectfully towards he . 

 " there be a young lady very ill upstairs , sir , and I be look for Dr. Constam . they say he be here , but I can not   see he . and I can not   see Mr. Cousin either . " 

 " very ill , you say ? " 

 " yes , sir . very ill . " 

 " what number ? " 

 " 365 , sir . " 

 " what ? " 

 " 365 , sir , " the man repeat louder . 

 the table be of course listen . 

 " I will attend to it , " say Evelyn . 

 " 365 . that be one of my old number , " say Sir Henry Savott , who have overhear the number . 

 " be you stay here , Henry ? " Lord Watlington ask . 

 " no , Harry . I be in my new house . " 

 " will you kind people excuse I for a minute ? " Evelyn ask . " I be sorry , but - " 

 they excuse he . he leave the table , think : " though why the devil I should attend to it I do not   know . " on his way out he have to pass by the band , the volume of whose sound shake his poise as the weight of a cyclonic wind might have shake it . 

 content 
 Chapter 48 

 tessa 

 on his way to the third floor Evelyn in reply to a question learn from the liftman that Dr. Constam have after all precede he to no . 365 . evidently the doctor have be tell by someone other than the telephone - man that his presence be urgently require up there ; and the probability be that he have leave the restaurant before the excited and confused searcher have begin to look for he . but the liftman could not say who be the occupant of no . 365 ; he be a stranger to that particular lift ; on New Year 's Eve many individual be do other individual ' work . 

 Evelyn knock at the door of no . 365 , one of the six or eight fine suite in the Palace . no answer . he enter . there seem to be no sign at all of very grave illness in No . 365 : no sound , no stir . the door of the lighted sitting - room be open . he go in . 

 Violet Powler be stand in the embrasure of one of the window , apparently absorb in the contemplation of an invisible St. James 's Park . neither curtain nor blind have be draw . the temporary head - housekeeper turn and see Evelyn . 

 " good evening , sir , " she greet he , with placid formality . she be no long the young woman who have smoke a cigarette in his castle on the night of his homecoming from the continent . indeed in the interval he have not see she , though he have several time thought of she with satisfaction , approval , and confidence . he be about to demand somewhat abruptly by what remissness of a chambermaid the blind have be leave up and the curtain open , but Violet 's steady glance move he to control the hasty impulse . 

 " someone very ill here , I understand . I look in myself because both Mr. Cousin and Mr. Pozzi have their hand full . " 

 " yes , sir . the doctor be in there , and I be wait to see if I can do anything else . " she point to a bedroom - door . 

 " who be stay here ? " 

 " Miss Savott . " 

 " Miss Savott - not Sir Henry Savott 's - " 

 " yes , sir ... it be a miscarriage , sir , " she add , laconic . 

 the situation call for further exercise of self - control . the introductory tiding be in themselves astounding . Gracie in the hotel , and her father unaware ! why have the talk at the dinner - table turn at once on Gracie ? and why have he himself take the extraordinary course of enquire into the affair personally ? could these question be convincingly answer with the word ' coincidence ' ? or be there in the universe force , mysterious correspondence , telepathy , whose existence he have hitherto always rather disdainfully refuse to credit ? he still refuse to credit their existence with his reason ; but now , primeval instinct , powerful and authentic , fight within he against the scepticism of reason , and he be as perturb as though he have see a ghost . 

 " you do not   mean to say that Miss Savott 's here and she be - " even as he utter these word he charge himself with clumsy phrasing ; but really for a moment he be somewhat overset : first an astonishing announcement , and then , right on the top of it , a staggering announcement ! and on New Year 's Eve ! with what affrighting suddenness have he not be sweep from the world of light pleasure into a world whose fundamental be crude pain and disaster ! 

 " oh no , sir , " say Violet calmly , unsmile . " it be a - friend of hers that she bring with she . I do not   know the name . " 

 he have a tremendous sensation of relief , temper by a dreadful private admission that he have make an unspeakable ass of himself . 

 sound of pass - key in the outer door . glimpse of a chamber - maid outside a lady advance very quickly into the sitting - room . she wear a scanty evening frock , lilac - colour , and a conspicuous , gleam necklace of large crimson stone . clearly she have come straight from the world of light pleasure . 

 " yes ? " Evelyn murmur . 

 " I be din in the same party as Dr. Constam , " say the reveiler , authoritatively , but in no accent of the West end or Oxford . " he ask I to follow he as soon as I could . I be a nurse . where be the patient ? " 

 Violet make a step towards the bedroom - door ; but the reveller reach it first , open it , shut it , vanish into the sinister unknown of the bedroom : all in a few second . 

 " you do not   expect to see they in party frock , do you ? ' say Evelyn with a short laugh to cover his nervous diffidence . " but I suppose they be entitle to wear they just as much as other woman . " 

 Violet give a transient , reserve smile . 

 " when do this thing begin ? " he enquire . 

 the head - housekeeper relate that she have be summon on the telephone by Miss Savott herself about half an hour early ; but she suspect that the ' thing ' have begin some little time before the summon . she have come downstairs instantly . she have feel helpless , and Miss Savott too . of course Miss Savott and herself know each other of old . the difficulty have be to get hold of the doctor . Miss Savott be much disturb at first , but later she have grow perfectly calm and clear - headed . she know something about nursing ; and so do Violet ; but what could they do till the doctor arrive ? when he do arrive he say that there be no need for the head - housekeeper to remain in the bedroom . the head - housekeeper have gather that the two lady have have a bad crossing , and that that be perhaps the cause of the terrible trouble . 

 " it be amazing what prank woman will play with themselves , " say Evelyn , scandalise and sardonic . " Fancy a woman - ! when be the birth expect , do you know ? " 

 " I think the lady be over six month go . " 

 " and they cross the Channel on a rough day in the middle of winter ! " 

 a silence . 

 the head - housekeeper notice that the Director 's eye be on the window she say : 

 " the chambermaid tell I she have draw the curtain as usual , but Miss Savott have undrawn they again . say she like to see the light . that must have be before the trouble start . " 

 another silence . then Evelyn say benevolently : 

 " I be surprised to find you on duty to - night , Miss Powler . how be it ? " 

 " well , " say Violet , " it be not one of my evening , and Miss Ducker - she be the new , sir : Sixth - really do want to go to a party at Hammersmith , so I let she go . I be easy in my mind if I be here on the spot . " 

 " you should not   be . you must get over that . " 

 Evelyn offer this advice in a somewhat peremptory tone . he remember the time in his experience when he be continuously uneasy during any absence from whatever organisation he happen to be in control of . he have conquer the weakness . she must conquer it . as head - housekeeper she have the right of priority over all her staff to a night off on New Year 's Eve , and for the sake of discipline she ought to have exercise it . what about her lonely old parent with nobody to let the New Year in for they ? and he would have prefer she not to address he as ' sir . ' he have think that the joint cigarette - smoking have end that . perhaps in the presence of other member of the staff it might be well for she to say ' sir ' ; but when they be by themselves ... how could he give she the hint ? then he say , more gently : 

 " I think we might sit down . " and he sit down . Violet hesitate . " sit down , " he repeat , but still gently . she sit . 

 she have shock his masculine sensitiveness by the calmness of the use of the word ' miscarriage ' and ' six month go . ' what could or should she , unmarried , know of such thing ? her sister have not be marry either . Absurd ! as manageress of a big laundry staff , as head - housekeeper of a big place like the Palace with its very mixed assortment of humanity , she must be familiar with all manner of strange and dubious phenomenon . indeed nothing could be hide from she . the content of the mind of such woman simply would not bear investigation . what could such woman have to learn about the secret nature of mankind ? he would bet that she know far more than he do : she know appal thing . and not a sign of the knowledge of they on her tranquil , virtuous face ! 

 " I do not   know a lot about miscarriage , " he say , after a long silence   think audaciously : " I may as well talk to she in her own language " , " but it seem to I that that doctor of our can not   get on with his work without some - er - apparatus that he have not   get in there . he do not   bring anything with he , I suppose ? " 

 " no , sir . when he come I do not   think he even know what be the matter . " 

 " well , it be all very odd to an amateur like I . " and he think : " why be I stay here ? I can not   be of any help . it must be just sheer curiosity that be keep I here . " 

 Young Dr. Constam burst into the sitting - room . 

 " oh , good evening ! " he exclaim , startle to see Evelyn . he be laugh . he say nothing else until he have carefully shut the door . then he look at Violet . 

 " it be no more a miscarriage than my boot . everything be absolutely normal so far as that go . nothing but an attack of indigestion . I think you lady could never surprise I any more , but I be wrong . the creature put out to sea , feel queer , fill herself up with champagne and God know what . train journey and so on . she get here all right , and then as soon as the tension be loose and she have time to think about herself she have rather acute indigestion . pain in the tummy . must be a miscarriage ! miscarriage be blow ! I tell you I tell she I could not   help laugh at she . that do she good . " he laugh unfeelingly , almost harshly . " here I be eat my New Year 's dinner , and I have to rush upstairs because a girl 's get the collywobble . the biscuit be her , and I hope she will have twin . I be just go to find something to soothe her precious alimentary tract . shall not   be two minute . no earthly need for you to stay , Miss Powler . Nurse be undress she properly . " 

 " I say , " Evelyn stop the young man as he be go out . 

 " yes ? " 

 " who be she ? " 

 " ask I another , sir . " he be go . 

 Violet have obediently rise to leave . like Evelyn , she be more relieved than she could show . but , also like Evelyn , she have a sense of disappointment , of have be shamefully cheat of an anti - climax . Comedy have replace tragedy ; and in spite of themselves , in spite of their relief , they both instinctively regret the change . there be something magnificent in dire tragedy , in the terror of it , in the necessity which it lay upon everybody to behave nobly and efficiently . but comedy demand naught from their high self . all they have to do now be to fade ingloriously away . 

 " I be so glad , " say Violet feebly . 

 " yes . " 

 " good night , sir . " 

 " good night . " 

 Violet go . Evelyn stay . he be determined to see Gracie Savott . he be there , and he would remain . he care not a fig for his party below . Dr. Constam return , hurry into the bedroom with a bottle and a spoon . the stylish nurse appear and depart quickly , ignore the presence of the panjandrum . 

 then Evelyn hear faint rumour of an argument in the next room . the doctor 's voice . another voice , no doubt Gracie 's , though he do not surely recognise it . then the doctor reappear , smile grimly to himself . he glance at his watch and at the clock over the mantelpiece . 

 " Au revoir , " he say to Evelyn , in the masonic tone of one man to another when the vagary of woman be concern . 

 Evelyn wave a hand , as if it be hold his stick . 

 " I must look a bit odd , sit here , " he think . but he stay . 

 2 . 

 the length of the eventless interval try his patience . but he would not budge . he could hear automobile hoot in Birdcage Walk . till then his preoccupied ear have not catch a single exterior sound . the bedroom - door begin to open . at last ! the door remain half open for several second . then it open far . he hear Gracie 's voice , now quite recognisable , talk to her friend . he prepare a smile to receive she . Gracie appear . she be now untidy , almost unkempt , in her travel pull - over and short tweed skirt . as soon as he see the expression on her face he dismiss the smile from his own . Gracie be still sternly excited . she do not in the first instant perceive Evelyn . evidently she have be expect the room to be empty . 

 " oh ! " she gasp , take aback . 

 " I just come up to see how thing be , " he say , rise . 

 " that be very kind of you , " she say absently , and she shake hand absently . " I wish that doctor of yours have be as kind - I suppose he be tell you what be happen . " 

 " why ! " Evelyn say , nod an affirmative to the question . he speak soothingly , cautiously , as he shut the bedroom - door , which she have forget . " he have not   be unkind , have he ? " 

 " yes , he have be unkind , very unkind , " Gracie answer with emphasis . and while she speak Evelyn recall from the past the rich , change tone of that voice . " he laugh . that be what your doctor do . laugh . that be all he could do . doctor be awful , especially when they be young . Cruel . they do not   seem to have any imagination . " 

 " but everything be all right , be not   it ? " Evelyn say , even more cautiously . he think : " she will want some handling . " 

 and he contrast her impetuous , agitated vehemence with what Violet 's demeanour would have be in Gracie 's place . he wish for one moment that he have not stay . nevertheless he be admire Gracie , her exuberant vitality , her passion - one might almost say her exaltation . she show no restraint in his presence . the freedom of her behaviour could only be explain on the assumption that they be intimate . Evelyn accept the assumption . it be base not on their excursion to Smithfield together , nor on their incursion into the Prince of Wales 's feather . to Evelyn at any rate it be base on the angry resentment in her voice at their last parting , when he have offer to escort she from his office to the lift , and she have suddenly turn on he like an infuriated tigress , say , " no , please ! I could not   bear that ! " she could not possibly have forget her rudeness in that encounter . yet she be now behave as though nothing unpleasant have happen between they . 

 " everything be all right , " she agree impatiently . " but that be not the point . that poor girl be go to have a baby . which be something , I hope , in a girl 's life . she think she be in for a horrible mess . I think so too . how could she tell it be not   that , much less me? ... last May it be - she would be make love . she be be carry that baby for over six month . Fancy what it mean , all that . night and day . well , of course you can not . but I can . I have   see it all the time . I tell you it be simply terrific . and then she think she be go to lose the baby . all that trouble for nothing ! waste in a most frightful mess ! can not   you feel it ? can not   you feel the awfulness of it ? could not   the doctor feel it ? she be mistaken . she be not   go to lose the baby . but her agony - yes , agony - be just as real to she as though she have be go to lose it . and this doctor of yours merely laugh at she ! joke ! what do he think a woman be ? he do not   know the first thing about be a doctor . any fool who be pass his examination can tell the difference between a miscarriage and a bad attack of tummy - ache . but it take a man to feel . and that doctor can not . he be not   a man . he be a - there be no word for he ... tease she about some champagne she have have , on the top of some peach and some seasickness medicine ! well , if you want to know , it be I who give she the champagne , and I give she the peach . it be not   as if I have not   have she examine before we start . my french doctor see she . he say she be in splendid health . never see anyone well , he say , and it be perfectly safe for she to travel , and if she do have a bit of a shake up it would not   do she any harm . and the voyage be not   really so bad . it be not   good , but it be not   bad , though it be rather bad than we expect , I admit . and she be quite all right till she have the champagne on the train . even here she walk by herself to the lift . she be so much all right that I go down to the grill - room to eat something . but as soon as I have go her nerve go queer and the pain begin . she ring and I be fetch . I can understand it well enough . " 

 " yes , yes , " Evelyn agree , appeasingly . he feel as guilty as if he have be Dr. Constam . " who be this young lady ? " 

 Gracie hesitate . 

 " Tessa , " she answer in a low tone . 

 " Tessa ? " 

 " yes , Tessa Tye , my maid . " 

 " I do not   think I have   see she . " 

 " of course you have   see she . she come into the hotel with I that morning when you be stand in the hall . very pretty . and rather smart too . do not   you remember . she be pretty enough for any man to remember . " 

 " oh yes , " Evelyn do remember . a lackadaisical and self - conscious creature . pretty ? yes . but he would not   have say very pretty . he be thunderstruck . he say : " Married? ... or not ? " 

 " why do you say ' or not ' ? why should not   she be marry ? can not   maid be marry ? can not   they have their own life like other people ? however , she be not   marry , as it happen . that be why I make up my mind to look after she . it may interest you to know - I have not   tell anyone else - to know that when we get here that first morning she try to commit suicide . open a vein with a pair of scissor . yes , that be how she feel then . that be why I keep you wait before you take I to Smithfield . oh , I do not   find out till later what it be she would be up to . I think it be an accident with the scissor . but I get it out of she in the end , when I notice her body and it be star I in the face ! I could not   believe it at first - you never do ... some half - english , half - belgian rotter she have fall in love with in Paris . she fall for he and then he run away . she do not   know his address . I doubt if she know his real name . she carry that baby to New York with I and back again . and I have not   guess - it be not   till after we have go to Paris again from here that she confess . I be not   go to throw she over then . no ! what I have to do be to put some self - respect into she . I take she to St. Cloud . it suit I , because I want to be quiet to write my book . a little hotel there . only one bathroom for the two of we . I call she a friend of mine , Mrs. Tye . I could see she grow before my eye . we make no bone about it . we go around for walk just as if it be the most ordinary thing in the world . and so it be . when we leave St. Cloud you could see how she be half a mile off . some of they must have notice it in the hall downstairs this afternoon , though she be wear a big cloak . she be be maide I just the same . it would not   have do for she to be idle . and the doctor , I mean the french one , say it would do she all the good in the world to work - stoop , run about - you know . and she be a different girl . it be set she up . she use to be anamic and namby - pamby . all that be go . it will be the making of she . " 

 " but why have you bring she here to London ? " 

 " I bring she because I have to come about my book . and I think we should be as safe here in a big hotel as anywhere . " Gracie pause on a self - conscious half - smile . " I could not   leave she behind . she would have fret to death by herself . and I do not   quite see why my business should be hold up because she be go to have a baby . she be get to take the rough with the smooth , the same as the rest of we . do not   think I coddle she . I shall be coddle she in about ten week ' time , I expect . but not yet . we shall only be here for a few day . I have   make all the arrangement at St. Cloud . " Gracie toss her head as it be defiantly , and sit down . 

 Evelyn , agitated , astounded , admiring , very respectful , walk to and fro in the room . he could not express his sensation . " not now . not yet , " he keep say to himself . 

 " do your father know ? " he ask , in a voice artificially negligent . 

 " no . of course he do not   know . why ? " 

 " well , he be din with I at this moment . that be all . " 

 " here ? in the hotel ? " 

 " in the restaurant . he , and your friend Mrs. Penkethman and Lord Watlington . " 

 " but I hear from he at Christmas . I think he be go to the Bahamas for a holiday . " 

 " he may be . but he be din with I to - night . I leave they to come up here . " 

 " do he know I be here ? " 

 " he do not . " 

 " be he stay here in the hotel ? " she seem to be really apprehensive . 

 " no , he be in the new house , so he tell I . " 

 " and I have not   see it . " genuine relief in her tone . " well , he must be frightfully take with the new house . this be the first New Year he be spend in London for year . if I have know he be to be in London I should not   have - " 

 the bedroom - door open - be pull open from the other side . Evelyn be near the window , and Gracie 's face , as she look at he , be turn a little away from the door . Tessa enter . Evelyn see she first , and before Tessa see he . she be wear a peignoir , splendid enough to be one of Gracie 's . it be boldly tie above the waist . no concealment of her condition . but a shameless display of it . the central character of the piece be indeed superbly enormous . pale , worn , pretty face . tousled bright hair . thin bust . and then the swell curve of approach motherhood . Evelyn be thrill . tear come suddenly into his eye . he blush . " ' Interesting ' be the right word for it , " he think , thrill again and again . he exult in the girl 's appearance ; at the same time it put a deep solemnity into he . all this in a fraction of a second . 

 " Tessa ! " cry Gracie , outraged . she have follow the direction of Evelyn 's acutely perturb glance . " what in God 's name be you do ? go back to bed this instant and keep warm . " 

 Tessa have now see Evelyn . she give a faint cry of alarm and vanish . Gracie jump up and shut the door with a bang . the large room with its plenteous and ornate furniture , and its dozen electric light , be empty of a capital presence , impressive , foolish and pitiful . 

 " fool girl be ! " Gracie exclaim , and go on quickly : " well , I think you would well go back to your dinner now . and mind , do not   say a word to father . he would go in right off at the deep end . you do not   know father . " 

 " very well . I do not , " say Evelyn . he think : " what separate life they lead ! and her mother - somewhere in the background . " they shake hand . " good night . I think you be wonderful . this be the great story I ever hear . " what he appreciate as much as anything else in her recital be its breathtake matter - of - factness . 

 she say : 

 " everyone be wonderful when it come to the point . " 

 content 
 chapter 49 

 new year 's morning 

 as , in the restaurant , Evelyn with difficulty make his way back towards the table of which he be the host , he see from the intent face of Lord Watlington and Sir Henry Savott that these two be engage in some sort of recriminatory argument , while Nancy Penkethman be glance aside as if try to dissociate herself from the affray . the rather simple - minded Nancy , however , be not a very good actress . her expression betray a certain constraint . yet it betray also a certain satisfaction , which spring from her intuitional knowledge of the pleasing fact that she herself be the prime cause , though of course not the occasion , of the discord . 

 " so glad to see you again ! " she greet Evelyn charmingly , and at the same time bestow upon Harry and Henry in equal proportion a charmingly mischievous smile . 

 " I be extremely sorry to have be so long , " say Evelyn , feel that he have not arrive a moment too soon . " I really could not   help it . you know , you never do know what will happen next in a hotel . " 

 the demeanour of the other two man change instantly from the bellicose to the perfectly peaceful . and indeed their material interest and their prestige be too closely interweave to permit of anything bad than a tiff occur between they ; assuredly no woman on earth could have estrange they , for each of they have a hard realistic sense of the relative unimportance of woman , beautiful or plain , in the world of their ideal . 

 " we be begin to suspect a fire have break out somewhere upstairs , and you be keep it dark for the sake of business , " say Lord Watlington with a laugh ; and Evelyn laugh . 

 " no , " he say shortly . " it be not   a fire . " he perceive now the risk which he run in conceal from Savott the presence of Gracie in the hotel . Savott and he be work together in the enormous enterprise of the Merger and on a basis of the utmost candour . sometimes they even use their christian name to one another . suppose that Savott be to discover Evelyn 's uncandid reticence concern Gracie , and their card - on - the - table friendship be to be imperille ! Pooh ! Savott could discover nothing . gracie would be off again in a day or two . moreover , it be no part of Evelyn 's duty to be aware of the identity of every visitor in the large luxury hotel on earth . Withal , Gracie evidently suffer from a characteristic girlish deficiency in the sense of danger . Pooh ! dissension between father and daughter could not conceivably bring about dissension between Savott and himself ... why , if Gracie seriously wish to avoid her father , have she choose to come to just the Imperial Palace ? her stated reason for do so be not very credible . 

 Evelyn 's thought run on in this vein . but absolutely no clue to they could be see in his bearing . he be a master of duplicity when circumstance demand it . 

 the restaurant , if as noisy as ever , be less crowded . a ceaseless procession of reveller be pass out in obedience to a large , paint , point hand and a notice which say : " Ballroom . attraction . " 

 " I think now be the moment for we to go and see these mysterious ' attraction ' , " Evelyn suggest . " it will be midnight before we know where we be , and by midnight we simply must be here again . " 

 " but your dinner , darling ! " say Nancy Penkethman , all of whose acquaintance be her darling . " you have not   eat a mouthful . " 

 " no , I have not , " Evelyn concur . " unless soup , fish , and entrée be worthy to be call a mouthful . but there will be some supper after Auld Lang Syne . " 

 Nancy have light a new cigarette , they rise and go , Nancy and Evelyn in front . the high financier behind be now fondly Henrying and Harrying . Henry 's flushed organism be engage in the true business of a gourmand at the end of a good luscious meal . Harry , as usual with he , have eat little , but he have honour the approach of the New Year with a fair number of whisky . 

 the broad corridor lead to the ballroom section of the public apartment be full of jostle people , man and woman , in the same condition as Harry and Henry : relaxed , release into a careless and quasi - shameless jollity , with necktie somewhat disarrange , frock somewhat disarrange , splendid comic hat awry , ill - control mouth , loose smile and laugh , loud tongue . Evelyn could feel their body , male and female , against his , see their face very close : humanity in the mass , odorous , multitudinous , flippant , saucy , brazen , free of social discipline . the too populous corridor be like a suffocating tunnel make light and brilliant by pale toilette , rouge , expose flesh , and jewel . 

 the party reach a large ante - room , round whose wall have be range a series of concave and convex mirror which , distort everything , change beauty into the horribly grotesque , dignity into ridicule , decency into the obscene . the reflection excite high mirth and salvos of hysterical shriek . this , the first of the attraction , be an immense success of humour . 

 next , the ballroom , which , with space for two hundred couple to dance , contain only seventy or eighty person , who watch a stage - spectacle of three youth throw crimson , glitter indian club at one another apparently with intent to kill . but the fly , revolving club seem to have a magic life and volition of their own ; they fly into hand , criss - cross in parabolic curve , lodge themselves incredibly between arm and torso , drop unerringly into pocket . they could make no mistake ; they be tireless on their unende shuttle journey to and fro ; the youth alone give sign of effort and strain beneath their stage - smile . the spectacle be a dazzling exhibition of dexterity on the part of the club , assist by the three youth . but the sparse audience , while applaud at interval , do not increase . 

 the third and great attraction be in a third room beyond . this room be so jammed with spectator that Evelyn 's foursome could not get into it at all . they have difficulty even in maintain a position at the wide door . guffaw , giggle , shout rise out of the dense floor of head like invisible raucous bird . the heat be tropic . at the end of the room , on a dais , Punch , pop up and down in a small oblong of a proscenium , be exhibit his domestic and conjugal existence with Judy , policeman , maid , and executioner . murder be be commit at express speed ; the law be deride ; and Toby watch the farcical tragedy with canine indifference . 

 Nancy , pouting , complain that she could see nothing . suddenly Lord Watlington pick she up by her slim waist , and perch she on his shoulder - a feat which person in the vicinity warmly applaud with cheer . Nancy laugh like a schoolgirl . the drama go on and on ; and still on ; repeat itself . nobody be bore for a moment : everybody be passionately interested in the fate of wooden puppet . 

 then , just behind the foursome , a matchless organ - voice , triumph easily over the din , cry solemnly , warningly , imperatively : " lady and gentleman . a quarter to midnight . " it be the voice of the renowned chief toast - master of the Imperial Palace , in a red coat and knee - breech . Lord Watlington deposit Nancy on the parquet ; otherwise the admonition be ignore . but in a moment the curtain fall on the career of Punch , and at once the room begin to empty . the foursome be shove backwards with violence . 

 " what be you laugh at ? " Nancy ask Evelyn as she smooth down her skirt ; she fear that something be amiss with her attire or her face . 

 " Punch and Judy of course , " Evelyn reassure she . 

 it be not the truth . he be laugh , quietly to himself , at the thought of the mistake of Tessa and Gracie about Tessa 's condition . suddenly it have strike he as extraordinarily funny . he sympathise with Dr. Constam 's unrepressed mirth . it be the funniest thing he have ever come across . and Gracie might say what she choose in protest . it be really funny . but to savour its funniness your sense of humour have to be robust . the pilgrimage back to the restaurant be a retreat from Moscow ; people fall by the way ; insecure possession be tear off in the melée and some of they never see again . 

 2 . 

 in the restaurant as , breathless , the party struggle to their table and drop into chair , the great clock show five minute to midnight . theatre chorus - girl dress as ballet - dancer be enter ; they carry cluster of balloon high on the end of long stick , and man stand on chair to take balloon ; explosion resound . procession of trumpeter trumpet , and of beef - eater not eat beef , enter the restaurant with excessive pomp . the band play " Tipperary . " the colour , the noise , the heat be all increase . every light go out , except the festoon chinese lantern and the illuminated dial of the great clock . in the dusk the last loiterer scramble to their place . 

 the minute - hand of the great clock creep up to the hour - hand until the two join on XII . the band be still . the chief toast - master , in front of the low storey of the clock , raise his mighty arm . the reveller obediently stand to their foot . the band resume , in a new strain . Nancy cross her thin bare arm . the three man hesitate , shameface . then Nancy 's right hand take Evelyn 's left , and then eight hand be clasp in the traditional fashion . and every revel hand at every table be join to another , and soon arm be move up and down to the rhythm of the music . the three man hat the ceremony . only Nancy in her simplicity enjoy it . she sing first ; Sir Henry Savott then sing loudly ; Evelyn hum ; Lord Watlington remain obstinately mum in the shelter dusk . gradually the reveller lose their sham self - consciousness , and sing and wag their arm with a will . 

 the waiter around the room , and the two black - rob girl behind a control desk in a corner , have no share in the grave rite . serious , preoccupy by their duty , they be cut off from revel humanity . the advent of New Years be naught to they . 

 the ageless song end . the light blindingly go up . the band jump gloriously into the feverish waltz from " the Meistersingers . " the waiter start into life . the reveller shake hand and exchange fervent good wish . seven minute have pass , but the hand of the great clock have not budge . they mark an everlasting midnight . they would not venture into the New Year . Time stand still . 

 a young man in a wondrous white waistcoat advanced smile and victorious towards Evelyn 's table . he bow indiscriminately to the party . 

 " well , sir ? " he address Evelyn . 

 " all my congratulation . not a single hitch . a Happy New Year , " say Evelyn . 

 it be the Bands - and - cabaret - manager , Jones - Wyatt , who have be responsible for all the complex arrangement except those connect with food and drink . 

 " thank you , sir . same to you . " he bow and retire , content . 

 a little later Lord Watlington make an abrupt sign to Nancy Penkethman , who submissively rise . 

 " well , my dear host , " say Lord Watlington very urbanely and smilingly expansive . " it be all be extremely impressive . I admire your organisation as much as I like your hospitality . ever so many thank . you will excuse I if I go . I can not   stand up against late hour . " 

 " so sweet of you , Mr. Orcham , " say Nancy , cling to Evelyn 's hand . " I have   simply love it . I never have such a New Year 's Eve before . thank you ten million time . " 

 " very good of you to come , " say Evelyn lamely . 

 " Bye - bye , Henry . " 

 " Bye - bye , Harry . " 

 Henry put a chaste kiss on Nancy 's cheek . the depart pair be go . when Harry decide to go he always act on the decision with ruthless promptitude . 

 then Henry go , offer the same excuse as Harry . 

 Evelyn be alone in the renew multitudinous champagne orgy of the restaurant . but within less than a minute Sir Henry Savott return , rather bustling . he would have pass as perfectly sober have he not be a trifle too sure that he be perfectly sober . 

 " I say , Evelyn , " he say brusquely , " what day be you go back to Paris ? you be go , be not   you ? " 

 " yes . but I can not   settle the date till I hear that the Concorde manager - what be the name , Laugier ? - have get over his attack of flu and can answer question . " 

 " I can tell you that now , " say Sir Henry . " he be back at work to - day . a fellow tell I before I come here to - night , who have see he this morning at the Concorde . " 

 " oh ! well , then , I may go as soon as I have   wire he and get his answer . I will telephone you . " 

 " I will see you before you start ? " 

 " certainly . " 

 Sir Henry depart for the second time that New Year 's morning . Evelyn could explain his return only on the supposition that he have prefer to keep out of the entrance - hall until Nancy and Harry be clear away . 

 Cappone , as fresh as dawn , arrive at the table and suggest that the panjandrum have insufficiently eat . Cappone could watch over the eating of a thousand guest , and not least of the panjandrum 's . Evelyn agree to consider a couple of kidney , which Cappone , have receive congratulation from his chief on the complete smoothness of the jollity of the grand revel , go off into the kitchen to order personally from Maître Planquet . 

 the revel could not die . it be now more vivacious than ever . with the kind consent of the Licensing Authority , champagne and other alcohol be still be generously serve and quaff . and a fair proportion of guest , have convince themselves that the New Year 's Eve dinner be finish , be start the New Year well with a New Year 's morning supper . when the kidney be eat , however , a few craven roysterer be already leave , and a deserted table here and there show plain white . the great clock be now more than an hour late ... 

 she be a unique young woman , be gracie . her phrase , ' I have to put some self - respect into she , ' stick in Evelyn 's mind . she evidently have a sense of fundamental . she have do , be do , a marvellous work with the silly , tragic Tessa . he think of the two of they up there in suite 365 - and the unborn . he picture the luxuriant emboss figure of the foolish Tessa , one instant in the bedroom - doorway . if it could suddenly appear in the midst of the hot , wild - fire revel preside over by Bacchus , Pan , Venus , and all the god of luxury - what a sensation , what a menacing reminder of the inexorableness of life ! 

 why have Gracie choose the Imperial Palace ? she have a sense of fundamental , yes ; but there be streak of folly in her wisdom . he feel obscurely that she be a girl capable of enormity which might be magnificent , but they would be enormity all the same . she frighten his deep prudence . 

 he rise and stroll through the deafen chatter and clatter and tinkle towards the kitchen , still in full - heated activity , there to bestow upon Maître Planquet and three important sub - chef a reward which could not be measure in money . when he slowly re - enter the restaurant a refreshed orchestra have just replace an orchestra which have blow and scrap and drum itself dry . the orchestra - he have be forget they ! after a moment he go downstairs to the band - lounge , a nondescript , large room where a score of aristocratic , exhausted toiler in evening dress , whose earnest effort be requite with five hundred pound a week from the Imperial Palace treasury , lounge in easy - chair and on sofas , and languidly smoke cigarette and imbibe drink serve to they by their own waiter and valet . none but the conductor seem to recognise Evelyn in the haze . 

 " Boys , here be the boss ! " say the conductor succinctly , after he have condescend to the panjandrum 's hand . " wish he a Happy New Year . " the musician lift themselves reluctantly from the chair and sofa , and in turn condescend to the panjandrum 's outstretche hand , and drink in eagerly the sweetness of his prepared phrase ... Duty do ! the panjandrum thought of the grill - room and wistful Ceria . to the grillroom then , via a couple of service - bar , a glass and cutlery reserve , down more stone step - and there his accustomed ear could catch the faint whir of a dynamo deep in the earth 's entrail - up step , up more step , along a narrow stone corridor , bang into the mirror resplendence of the great entrance - hall , across which a stream of coated and cloak and subdue reveller have by this time set outward . in the grill - room corridor he meet Ceria himself . exchange of good wish . 

 " you finish ? " 

 " nearly , sir . " Ceria point through the glaze wall . the interior of the grill - room be an expanse of plain white table ; only three or four table be occupy ; there be twice as many waiter as guest . 

 " well , you have   have a good evening . " 

 " wonderful , sir . " 

 " go to have a look at the restaurant , eh ? " 

 Ceria unwillingly admit that this be so . they go back together to the foyer and glance through the curtain . a pallid and fatigued page - boy accost Ceria with a message . Ceria 's appreciation of the rich , variegated , intemperate scene be indifferent . 

 " Noisy , " say he with his wistful smile , and dismiss it . 

 the great clock be now nearly two hour late : it seem to dwell with serene self - approval in the eternal stillness of divine perfection . the pair have to move aside from the opening between the curtain to give room for a group of depart roysterer . 

 Evelyn thought of Violet Powler , nun - like and seclude far aloft in her bedroom on Eighth , probably asleep . Ceria bid he good night . yet another ten minute and the panjandrum be stand behind the Reception counter in the hall , talk to Reyer . he talk to the deferential Reyer for a long time . they watch the brilliant outgoing stream dwindle and dwindle , then increase in a sudden spate , and dwindle again . now be the harvest of the cloak - room . Evelyn hear , from beyond the ever - revolve door , the hooting of car ; he could see their light flash . 

 he think : 

 " why the devil do that girl choose this place to come to ? it could not   have be because she have a notion she might perhaps come across I again here , could it ? she never apologise to I for her damnable rudeness about her party . " 

 as for himself , he wish to see she again , but not his should be the first move towards a meeting . never ! he would die rather . More and more reveller carry forth their uneasy conscience into the chill night air to confront the New Year and imagine good resolution and the turning over of new leaf . the fete be do . 

 content 
 chapter 50 

 in the rain 

 " you remember you promise to go one night to that Shaftesbury Express lunch - and - supper - counter place . have you be ? " 

 rather an abrupt stand - and - deliver sort of an opening for a telephone conversation at 10 p.m. , think Evelyn , startle . he be alone in his office , smoke a cigar and drink mineral water . 

 " what on earth place do you mean ? " he parry , quite intimately respond to Gracie 's tone . the talk between they on the previous evening have somehow re - establish their intimacy of Smithfield and the Prince of Wales 's feather . but he know very well what place she mean . he have forget Charlie Jebson 's proud announcement of his position as a restaurateur . she have not forget it . nor , probably , he say to himself sardonically , have she forget the fine masculine figure of young Charlie Jebson . 

 " oh , dear ! what a memory ! " come the reply , and Evelyn hear her light laugh . she recall the incident to he . 

 " oh yes ! " he say . " I do remember something of the kind . " 

 " well , have you be ? " 

 " no . it be never cross my mind from that day to this . " he think : " I bet anything she want I to take she there tonight ! " 

 " well , do not   you think you ought to go ? a promise be a promise . " 

 " but surely it be you that promise to go , " he fib . 

 " now do not   pretend ! " come the rich voice , very firmly . it might have be a kindly reproof from an eld sister ! to she he be evidently no panjandrum ; and he enjoy not be a panjandrum . " you know as well as I do it be you who promise . " 

 " well , one of these day I will go , " he say vaguely . 

 " that be just the same as say you have not   the slight intention of ever go . I should like to go to - night . let us go . " Cajolery in the tone . " be you in evening dress ? " 

 " I be not , " he say . " I be in evening dress till pretty nearly three o'clock this morning , and I be take a night off , if you have   no objection . " 

 " that be splendid , " come the voice , eagerness in it . " it will be a night off . if you have be in your glad rag , we could hardly have go . an Express counter be not   quite a suitable atmosphere for a boil shirt . shall I come down ? " 

 " but listen - " 

 " no , I will not   listen , " come the voice . " because I know exactly what you would say if I let you . that be perfectly all right . you and daddy be so thick in these day , it be perfectly all right for your highness to be see with I anywhere at any hour . and you need not   worry about not tell daddy that last night you know I be here . if he get to hear you can easily say you only find out to - day . be a man . and do not   be so damned dignified . " 

 the young voice be allay all his unspoken qualm and fear . the exhortation to shed his damned dignity be a challenge to he which his courage be bind to accept . 

 " it would be a bit of a lark , " he say , with a laugh . 

 " I be come down this minute , " the voice answer . " where be you ? " 

 " in my office . but look here . be your car handy ? mine be not . " 

 " Car ! " the voice exclaim . " we can not   arrive at an Express counter in Shaftesbury Avenue in a car . it simply be not   do . we will go in a taxi , of course . " 

 " I will be in the entrance - hall . try not to keep I wait more than a couple of hour . " 

 Evelyn pick up his hat , muffler , and overcoat from the chair where he have throw they . he tie the muffler twice round his neck , raise the collar of his overcoat , stick his hat on one side , shove his ungloved hand into his deep pocket , and go forth for the bit of a lark . he feel uplifted , and find the hall by contrast more than half dead after the late strain of the New Year 's Eve fete . a sparse attendance in the restaurant . even the distant band sound as if it might shortly expire in a sigh . at the door Long Sam , the head night - porter , be yawn in the lax ennui of the day after . 

 " taxi please , Sam . " 

 " yes , sir , " say Sam Butcher , quicken . " Taxi , " he repeat to a janissary . " Lively . " 

 the door spin , the janissary dash out , stumble on the step . 

 " if I be want , Sam , " say Evelyn to Sam . " I be go out with Miss Savott to Jebson 's restaurant in Shaftesbury Avenue . I do not   expect to be more than an hour at the outside . " 

 after all , why attempt to conceal the lark ? the name of Savott be now illustrious in the hotel . why not be grandly , audaciously open about the lark ? at the same moment Gracie appear , uplifted too , and hurrying . all in three or four minute the lark have be conceive and bring to birth . astonishing . frightening . but jolly . you never know what would happen next with that incalculable girl . 

 " D'ye mean that little place close by the cinema ? " the taxidriver ask , and when tell by Evelyn that that little place be indeed the place mean he give an " oh ! " whose tone indicate that as a man of the world he have cease to be startle at the vagary of people of fashion . at the same time he lift his eyebrow to indicate a mild , weary criticism of people of fashion who would leave an Imperial Palace in order to visit an express counter near a cinema in Shaftesbury Avenue . 

 the conversation in the bumping , danger - affront taxi be constrain , do not flow easily . Gracie say that Tessa be perfectly well again , and be pack for departure the next morning . 

 " it do she good to bestir herself a bit , " say Gracie . 

 " I believe that be the theory , " say Evelyn . 

 " it be the practice - with Tessa , " say Gracie . 

 the Express Counter be very small : a long high counter run down one side of a narrow room , end with a partition at the farther extremity ; on the other side of the room three or four tiny table , with a couple of chair apiece . a profusion of electricity . not a soul visible , except a blonde lady of thirty odd , dress in black , with a thin gold necklet and a gold wrist - watch . she might have pass for a floor - housekeeper of the Imperial Palace . 

 " C'est tre sympathique , " say Gracie at once . " I love the lampshade . " 

 " yes , " Evelyn say , accept her verdict cheerfully . " shall we sit here ? " he put his hand on a chair at one of the tiny table . 

 " no , " say Gracie . " we must sit at the bar . I adore a bar . " they take high chair at the bar , and lodge their foot comfortably on a brass rail provide for customer of stature less than two yard and a half . Gracie loose her leather coat . Evelyn do not even take off his hat ; there be no accommodation for it . 

 " now , " say Evelyn to the bar - woman . " what do you serve here , please ? " 

 " well , sir . we serve the fine sandwich in London . salad . oyster . and the fine chop and steak in London - but only at lunch - time - I mean the chop and steak . and cheese of course - any hour . " have examine and assess and place her customer , she wave a bare forearm towards a range of sandwich imprison in glass on a shelf behind she . 

 " I doubt if I have   ever have the fine sandwich in London , " say Evelyn , put his hat on the counter . 

 " I think oyster , " say Gracie , " and stout . " 

 " Stout ? at night ? Disturb my sleep , " say Evelyn . 

 " and what if it do ? " Gracie murmur , light a cigarette . " stout be such fun , and all fun have to be pay for . " 

 " two dozen oyster and two stout , please , " say Evelyn , acquiescent . and in that instant of abandonment to adventure , it seem to he that he really do not care whether his sleep would be disturb or not . 

 " two dozen Whits and two draught stout , " the bar - woman call to someone hide beyond the partition . " very mild to - night , " she add , to her customer . 

 " ye - es , " Evelyn say . he be not an expert in the art of small - talk across counter . 

 " Windy , " say Gracie . " Gusty . " 

 " well , " say the bar - woman , glance at the leather coat , " if you be motor that do not   matter - unless of course it be a touring car . " 

 " I be think of the sea . " 

 " oh ! channel to - morrow morning . yes , I suppose so . I have   never be over myself , that is , I mean since I be a baby - in - arm . I begin my travel early , I do , and leave it off early too . " all three laugh . " they do say there be nothing like travel for sharpen your wit . but what I say be a bar 's pretty good in that line . " they all laugh again . 

 ' Express ' be a fit adjective for the Shaftesbury . the bar - woman disappear and return immediately with two foamy stout . and the next minute a well - dress man appear with two plate of oyster and the proper accompaniment thereto . he thank the customer for accept they , then vanish , and the bar - woman retire to sit on a stool at the end of the counter near the noisy Avenue . peace and pleasantness within the bright Shaftesbury . Evelyn be happy and excited , as he might have be in a foreign town . he think , and not for the first time : " what a rut I live in ! " 

 " I be not hungry , " he murmur confidentially . 

 " neither be I , " Gracie murmur . " but not one of these oyster be go to be leave . if you have only order a dozen between we I should have ask for more . " 

 she blow away some of the foam from her stout , expose the deep , dark liquid beneath , and drank , and wipe her mouth gingerly with a coloured paper napkin take from a pile of napkin lay handy . they go on murmur confidentially . anybody out of hearing might have think that they be exchange emotional secret charge with terrific importance , instead of remark about the excellence of the oyster , the freshness of the brown bread - and - butter , and the sweet velvet of the stout . the adventure be delicious , bizarre , romantic . Evelyn so feel it , and he know that the incalculable Gracie so feel it . 

 he think : " I wish I could get past her defence . there be no getting near she " - though their knee almost touch in front of the counter . " she must have a sort of a liking for I , otherwise she would not   run after I the way she do . she be very curt and domineering . she be infernally independent . she be an egotist , can not   be anything else . and yet - Tessa ! she be not   be very egotistical over Tessa . she be take risk there . but that may be egotism too . want to flatter herself she be make a grand gesture , defy convention , be herself , go around with a maid as big as a barrel , and so on and so on . ' maid ' : that be good . " 

 he be tell himself that his estimate of Gracie be absolutely impartial , realistic , perhaps cynical . as she be not look at he - she seem determined not to meet his eye - he could look at she . benevolent expression , or the reverse ? who could say ? all he could be sure of be that she have distinction and pride . her clothe be distinguish ; her untidiness be distinguish ; she eat , and she drink stout , with distinction . and with distinction in her curved finger she raise an oyster off its shell , slip it into her mouth . whence this distinction ? be it from the curve of the finger , the hand , the arm , the body - the slow , reflective movement of the jaw as she munch ? no , he be no near the core of her mystery . he be check by her barricade . nobody ever comprehend anybody ; and certainly he refuse the ridiculous notion that woman be more mysterious than man . she be cogitate about something - God know what ! why in heaven 's name have she lure he out ? to eat oyster and drink stout , cover her cogitation with a thin layer of murmurous banality ? it would serve her tantalise beauty right if he abduct she , seduce she by force , and then say casually : " there now ! you can go back to your cogitation again . you have   get something to think about now . " 

 he murmur : " I suppose as you be leave to - morrow you have   finish the business with your publisher to - day ? " 

 " yes , " she say . " that be all right . " 

 " well , " he say , " there be one thing . with your name on the title - page the book 's bind to make a stir in the world . " 

 she raise her face and look he solemnly in the eye . 

 " my name will not   be on the title - page . " 

 " no ? why not ? " 

 " surely you do not   imagine , " she murmur . " surely you do not   imagine for a moment I would let my book be help by the name of a racing motorist and my father 's name and the name of a girl who know all the smart people in London ! because if you do you be wrong . my book will have to stand by itself - or fall . I shall take a pseudonym . that be what I come over about . my publisher be make a fuss over that very point ... he be give in . so it be all right . " her tone have more than solemnity ; it be religious ; it vibrate with the formidableness of mystical passion . 

 Evelyn be daunt , apologetic , admiring ; he have a thrill . " you be perfectly right ! " he murmur gravely , and in his tone too there be emotion . 

 Gracie smile ; a divine warm stillness in her smile , and a magic power in it lift he up . for an instant he hold the key to the enigma ... it slip from he . 

 " I know you would know what I mean , " she say . " some people simply do not   know the language you be talk . it be just jabber to they . " then she turn towards the distant bar - wear who be read a paper - bind novel , and ask loudly " can you tell we what time Mr. Jebson will be here night ? " 

 the bar - woman rise and walk half - way along the length of the counter before call out : 

 " Jim , what time will Mr. Jebson come in to - night , d'y know ? " 

 and the answer baritone voice from beyond the partition ; " the governor will not   be along to - night . he telephone . " 

 " can my husband or I do anything ? " the bar - woman amiably enquire . 

 " no , thank , " say Gracie . " it be nothing . only we know Jebson , and we think if he happen to be here - " 

 Evelyn be glad that Charlie Jebson have telephone . he do not desire the presence of the imposingly masculine Charles complicate the situation . and how could gracie swing so abruptly from her book to Charlie Jebson ? there be a lament disappointment , rather desolate , in her ' no , thank , ' to the bar - woman . no wonder the key have slip from he ! true , they have come to the Shaftesbury to see Mr. Charles Jebson . nevertheless Gracie 's transition from her book to Charlie be too swift not to irk Evelyn 's sensitiveness . 

 " well , " say she after a few moment . " I have   finish my oyster , and " - she stop to drink the remainder of the stout - " I have   finish my stout . " 

 " you would like to go ? " 

 " we may as well . but you have   not finish your . " 

 " can not , " say Evelyn . 

 the bar - woman approach they , novel in hand this time , and Evelyn pay the bill , which be very modest compare with the scale of charge for no well oyster and no well stout at the Imperial Palace . 

 " thank you , " say the bar - woman indifferently . as the bell of the cash - register ring she add : " what name shall I say to Mr. Jebson ? " 

 Evelyn shake his head with a faint deprecating smile : 

 " do not   matter . " 

 " oh , darling ! " Gracie protest benevolently . " I be sure Mr. Jebson would be delighted to know you have   call . " and to the woman : " Mr. Orcham , of the Imperial Palace Hotel . " the bar - woman , suddenly excited , have a sharp , simper attack of self - consciousness . she be no long the experience - wear , life - weary , detach , disdainful spectator of life . ten or fifteen year drop from her age in an instant . she become an ingenuous schoolgirl , bridle , smirk from innocent pride in the august identity of her customer . evidently she have hear of Mr. Orcham , and of his importance in the meat - trade , from the proprietor of the Shaftesbury Express Counter . her husband peep out from behind the partition . 

 " Mr. Jebson will be very proud , and very sorry to have miss you , sir . good night . good night , madam . " 

 2 . 

 Evelyn feel foolish as they leave the room . he also feel rather resentful against Gracie for have call he ' darling ' in front of the bar - woman . in Gracie 's world ' darling ' have no meaning , except in so far as it constitute some sort of assurance that the user of it do not regard the person address as absolutely repulsive and hateful . but the bar - woman be certain to misunderstand it . however , Evelyn would not argue the matter critically . the society , at a bar , of girl such as Gracie have its obvious disadvantage , which the fatalistic philosopher would accept in a lofty spirit of resignation . and at bad ' darling , ' consider as an epithet , be less offensive than the ' sweetie ' which on a previous occasion she have apply to he . he silently swallow the rise poison of his resentment . 

 as they emerge on to the pavement two taxi draw up , and nine strong , full - bodied man miraculously emerge from they , occupy the pavement with their hearty , free masculinity unencumbered by woman . 

 " we will take one of these , " say Evelyn . 

 " can not   we walk ? " 

 " of course , darling . " that be his sole comment on her improper use of a word . Gracie ignore it . 

 the squad of man one by one enter Mr. Charles Jebson 's establishment . the dead hour between nine - thirty and ten - thirty be end . the bar - woman would need all her high faculty of domination , diplomatic retort , and express serve ; for the nine be every one of they evidently expert in bar - not simple , diffident amateur like Evelyn . 

 " it be go to snow , " say Evelyn . " oh no ! " 

 " it be snow , " say Evelyn . 

 " be it ? well , never mind . I love walk in a snow - storm . do not   you ? " 

 " yes . but you will get your foot wet . " 

 " I can change . " 

 " so can i. " 

 they walk briskly side by side . at short interval down the Avenue taxi be wait in long line for the emptying of theatre , and in the cross street wait file of motor - car . small snowflake dally and gambol with one another in the dark air , reluctant to reach the ground . Gracie 's hat begin to whiten . at Piccadilly Circus Evelyn lead Gracie down step into the vast warm roundness of the populous Underground station , and then lead she up step again into bleak low Regent Street . 

 " it be rain , " say Evelyn . 

 " let it , " say Gracie , cautiously unwilling this time to contradict he . " it be magnificent . " she quicken her pace . " think of a hot bath . " 

 then silence . Evelyn agree with Gracie that to walk in the blusterous weather be indeed magnificent ; in the wind and the rain drive against his face by the wind he experience sensation of triumphant vitality such as perhaps he have not have for year ; but he say nothing , and his silence be grim . he feel cruel towards Gracie , stride along , her leather coat now and then graze his thick winter tweed . well , she could indeed stride along - even in her silly fragile high heel , which no doubt she would never wear again after this soaking . at last he could tolerate the silence no more . 

 " you be disappoint at our Mr. Jebson not be on view , be not   you ? " he be openly sardonic . 

 " I think I be , " Gracie answer with acquiescent candour . 

 " you have   remember he ever since Smithfield , have not   you ? " 

 " I certainly have . " some resistance in her tone . 

 " just tell I . what be there in he that be so interesting to you ? I must say I do not   find he terribly interesting . just a well - set - up sort of a - brute . " Evelyn choose the last word to annoy she ; he who never quarrel , who maintain always that social friction be unanswerable proof that somebody have be clumsy - he be aware of a desire to force she into an ugly and perhaps violent altercation . not because she order he about and impose her caprice upon he . nor because she have call he ' darling ' at the counter and all Smithfield would soon know that she have call he ' darling . ' but solely because she have actively show interest in the young butcher : phenomenon of sentiment which seriously offend he - while he sneer at it . she , beautiful , elegant , intelligent , intellectual , civilised , a masterpiece of an age of decadence - she to keep fondly in her mind for many week the image of a tall , powerful , coarsely handsome , self - complacent dandy of a tradesman whom she have see for not more than a couple of minute ! and so brazen about her interest too ! 

 she say calmly : 

 " well - set - up ' brute ' be not   so terrifically plentiful , you know . and a brute be so soothing to the nerve . and this particular brute be a worker . he be get something do , like we be . I love his Express Counter . I could see his individuality all over it . wholesome . and he get up at 3 a.m. to go to Smithfield , and then look after his lovely Express Counter last thing at night . she be funny , that starchy , wrinkle creature behind the counter ! it make I smile , how jealous all man be . anyhow , I have   never meet one that be not . " 

 devilish girl ! with that single word ' jealous ' she have render a quarrel impossible . he have his dignity to take care of . he act a pleasant , easy laugh . 

 " I be only ask , " he say , act gentleness . 

 " and I be only answer , " she say , very amiably . 

 and she turn her head and look up at he through the rain with a charming glance that he feel rather than clearly see in the murk . Danger be past , resentment dissipate . he be happy ; his spirit be lift ; and for no logical reason . 

 " oh ! " she cry , point . " that be marvellous , especially on a night like this . I do admire you for that . you be a poet . " she point . 

 they have come out on the top of the Duke of York 's step , into the full force of the south - west rain - bear wind . not a soul on the Steps . automobile flit in both direction along the Mall below they . lamp on both side of the Mall obscure at moment by the swish branch of tree . beyond , the dark forest of St. James 's Park , with a gleam of the lake . and beyond the forest , high in the invisible firmament , the flood - light tower of the Imperial Palace poke itself brilliantly up to the sky . there be nothing in all London , then , but that command great column of white light . 

 the emotional accent of Gracie 's rich voice move Evelyn . if she be thrill by the tower , he be thrill by her thrill as well as by the tower . the rain on their cheek come straight from heaven . 

 as , after skirt St. James 's Park , they reach Birdcage Walk , Evelyn 's damnable habit of foresight assert itself . he foresee that , all dripping wet as they be , they could not stop talk in the hall of the Palace . it would be too absurd , and too conspicuous . therefore everything that have to be say must be say before enter the hotel . 

 ' you be really leave to - morrow morning ? " 

 " yes . " 

 " there will be some rough go in the Channel . " 

 " oh no ! it must have be blow up for this when we come over . it will blow itself out to - night . besides , who care ? " 

 " I may possibly be down to see you off , " he say . " what time ? " 

 " please do not ! " she say firmly . " I loathe be see off . Monsieur Adolphe see I off be just as much as I can do with . " 

 " I understand . I should be the same myself , " Evelyn concur . 

 within the next few day he too would be go to Paris ; but she do not know this , and he do not tell she . to meet she in Paris might , assuredly would , complicate his existence , and he could not tolerate that . the Hotel de la Concorde , not young tyrannic woman , be his business in Paris . 

 with what a sense of triumph , of tingle warm health , they enter the great , still , mirror hall . Long Sam glance at they . 

 " Wet , sir , " say he . but he be too discreet to show any curiosity as to their reason for arrive on foot and not in a taxi , on a night so wild . 

 cross the hall they leave a trail of drop of water behind they . and in the lift they make little pool . as the lift climb up towards Third , the liftman look enquiringly at Evelyn , who nod . the lift stop . 

 " well , au revoir , " say Evelyn . " you mention a hot bath . " he smile . she smile . they stand together for a moment at the lift - door . they be part . he do not know her address at St. Cloud . he might not see she again for month , year , if ever . it be not he himself , but some volition not his , that say : 

 " I should rather like to hear how Tessa go on . you might send I a line . " 

 she nod , suddenly pull off her hat , which be sodden ; so be much of her hair . she have quite the air of a child , then - delicious . they shake hand . she walk off to her room . Evelyn re - enter the lift to go up to Seventh and a hot bath . 

 " well , I be damned ! " he breathe . he feel relief . 

 content 
 chapter 51 

 after the storm 

 a few day later , on the special " Golden Arrow " steamer , Evelyn experience a surprise and a thrill . the New Year gale have nearly but not quite blow itself out , and after an average comfortable voyage the ship be nose cautiously through the narrow of Calais port , past flag and marine signal and quidnunc and amateur fisherman whose skirt be lift at time by a gusty breeze . although the boat be not crowd , a large group of traveller have pack themselves tightly round the spot where the gangway be to be , apparently lest the boat might start back for Dover with themselves still on board . 

 Evelyn sit reading in a shelter deck - chair . he have a fine sense of freedom . he be alone . he have nobody to look after , because he have nobody to look after he . for Oldham have be leave behind . Oldham and the continent be mutually antipathetic . Oldham fear the sea and despise foreign tongue , and so far as he be concern the recent tour in France and Italy have not be wholly successful . a holiday be overdue to he , he be exile for a week or more to Berkshire and the society of his wife . the good - bye to Evelyn at Victoria have be wistful rather than buoyant . as for Evelyn , it seem to he , in those moment which Oldham 's presence would have render so anxious with a hundred care , that he have not a care in the world . his debarkation be already organise ; and for passenger by the " Golden Arrow " service the Calais custom - house do not exist . when he feel the very faint bump which indicate that the vessel be alongside the quay , he rise slowly , survey his three suit - case range together on the deck , drop the pocket ' Eothen ' into his pocket , and survey superiorly , with a deplorable spiritual pride , the mass of his fellow - sinner who from mere stupidity be inconvenience themselves for no reason whatever . 

 have duly confide his baggage to an instructed porter , he stroll to the rail , aft , and from there watch the foolish urgency of traveller down the slop gangway to the quay . 

 he say to himself , boyish : 

 " I have my seat in the train , like all the rest of we ; there be no custom ; the ship be on time ; I will be the last passenger to leave this ship . " yes , he feel boyish . 

 have it not be for this infantile resolution , he might have miss the surprise and the thrill . the stream of descend passenger have thin ; the hand of the official at the bottom of the gangway be full of land ticket ; and Evelyn be on the point of leave the rail when the surprise and the thrill happen to he . he see Gracie on the gangway . her face be half - turn towards the ship , and she hold by the hand big Tessa Tye , lead she with every precaution down the steep slope . the two of they safe at length on the quay , Gracie take Tessa 's arm , solicitously , even tenderly , and the slim girl and the spreading , ungainly expectant mother walk slowly towards the train , whose engine be send up a thin wisp of steam in the far distance . he be thrill . the expression of watchful motherliness on the face of the girl , the expression of trust on the pinched pale face of the expectant mother , offer a contrast and a harmony which make the most touching sight that Evelyn have ever see . " that girl be magnificent , " he say to himself , and not for the first time . he know that he have witness something unforgettable . Withal , he have lose the sense of freedom . 

 he have swear to be the last passenger to leave the ship , and he be . his seat chance to be in the near coach of the train . the young woman be not in that coach . he superintend the stowing of his baggage , tip the porter , and then , scarcely witting , jump down to the platform and walk along the endless train , glance at every window . he reach the last coach , the coach at the head of the train . there be Gracie at the end of the last passenger coach , talk to an attendant , who by much physical force be close a case for she . 

 " good afternoon , " Evelyn call . 

 she turn , stand high above he in the doorway . " well , well ! how nice ! " she smile . 

 " can I do anything ? " 

 " not a thing . thank frightfully ! " she laugh easily . 

 " everything be all right ? " 

 " perfect . we wait four day at the Lord Warden for the weather . I should not   have wait . but Tessa be really a bit alarmed at the look of the sea . Dover 's a very interesting place . I have no idea! ... and you ? " 

 " hotel business in Paris . your esteemed father 's business . you stay in Paris to - night ? " 

 " oh no ! straight on to St. Cloud . I would not   have to begin all over again to - morrow for anything on earth . I suppose you will honour the Concorde ? " 

 " no . the Montaigne . and if it be not   one of the two good hotel in Paris it soon will be . " they both smile . 

 official on the platform be become restless , and the windy air be very bleak . 

 " I would well be get back to my seat , " say Evelyn . " Au revoir . " 

 2 . 

 Gracie lean her head out of the doorway , smile again , wave a hand as he hurry away . enchant spectacle : young , beautiful , graceful , distinguished , mother to a mother ! enchant ! faultless ! in the warmth of his corner at the other end of the train , a table all to himself , he dispose his chilled limb and his minor belonging for the journey . not a word have be say about meet again . every passenger on the " Golden Arrow " be serve with lunch where he sit . Evelyn do not move . he might have stumble through the length of the shake train to pay a visit to Gracie en route , but he refrain because of the intimidating prospect of have to talk to the expectant mother as well as to Gracie . he read little ; he do not doze . he do not think . he just exist in a haze of vague meditation . Coffee . Cigar . Dusk . darkness . bill - paying . the industrial lamp and flare of Creil . Swift - slide twinkle of squalid suburban station . weariness . a tunnel . Gare du Nord . he look at his watch . the train be punctual . confusion on the echo platform of the Gare du Nord . everyone for himself . Sauve qui peut . hostile and greedy glance of porter . 

 Evelyn have one glimpse of a know face : that of one of the Cheddar brother . tall , physically as splendid an animal as Charlie Jebson , and with feature more refine ; indeed aristocratic . sort of Renaissance prince . Evelyn envy he , and despise himself for envy he . of course he be at the station to meet Gracie , to take charge of she . of course she have telegraph to he . in the jostling crowd a uniformed man , with " Montaigne " gild on his forehead , discover Evelyn , and Evelyn yield himself up like a parcel to the ceremonious care of the uniform . as he trudge along the stone - cold platform , mile of it , he look out for Gracie . she have go , vanish into France . 

 content 
 chapter 52 

 telephone 

 two afternoon later Evelyn be scrutinise sheet of figure in the private office of Monsieur Laugier , directeur of the Hotel de la Concorde , Place de la Concorde . although his chief business be the Concorde , he have choose to stay at the Montaigne , partly because in London he have quite sufficient of the disadvantage of sleep where he work , and partly because on his previous visit to Paris he have stay at the Concorde , and he now wish to get the general atmosphere night and morning of the Montaigne . 

 the directorial apartment be on the mezzanine floor of the courtyard of the magnificent old building which only thirty - five year early have begin its rise from the status of a lovely but chilly palace or ministry to that of a luxury hotel with steam - heating , lift , electric bell , and bath numerous enough to lave the limb of the General Staff of a whole army . 

 the luxury , however , have not extend itself to the directorial room , which be small , low - ceilinge , light by two bulb only , and warm by an anthracite stove of excessive power . the narrow window be shut tight and curtain . the sole ventilation be obtain by mean of a draught under the heavy gild door . the temperature be torrid . in strange contrast with the antique , sombre , soil , ornately panel wall , the elaborate cornice , and the curious parquet of blacken oak , be an assemblage of office furniture of the very new style ; last mechanical , practical ingenuity of Chicago gadget refashion in the last chic of parisian design , wilfully audacious in shape , insolently flout every tradition , rioting in the unexpected , steely , glassy , flimsy . M. Laugier 's desk be as large as Evelyn 's in Birdcage Walk , and far more glittering ; it have apparently about a thousand drawer , and one turn of a handle , as M. Laugier have show to Evelyn , would simultaneously lock every drawer . the slope of the easy - chair could be modify without sound or effort , to suit the idiosyncrasy of any sitter . the cabinet have the intricacy of chinese puzzle . the file would snap and cle to document with the ferocity of tiger . 

 and in the midst , at the end of the desk , sit Henri Laugier , fat as an operatic soprano , with the abdomen of a self - contemplate Buddha , dress , in black , as loosely as the ease - love landlord of a country inn ; black hair , seam slack face , intensely black eye , long black moustache , black beardlet , low collar , flow black tie , podgy hand and short finger stain by the nicotine of countless cigarette ; the late of the cigarette droop precarious from a corner of the directorial pallid lip . laugi have the reputation of be a unique ' figure ' in the continental hotel - world ; and perhaps he presume upon his reputation , part of which reside in the pliocene , immortal black straw hat , which he wear day and evening , summer and winter ; this straw hat now lie on a chair exclusively allot to it as a chair be allot to a privileged cat . M. Laugier come from Carcassone , and be proud of his origin . his eye be say to be absolutely fatal to woman , even at long range , and none who have fall to he ever forget he . a stout old lady still at interval arrive with a grandchild or so to see he at the hour of the aperitif ; her boast , not clearly establish , be that she have be his first mistress . 

 Evelyn and M. Laugier converse now in French now in English as they pore over the serrie column whose nine be like five , five like nine , and seven like nothing in the history of british arithmetic . Evelyn think : " be this man really my subordinate , and be I really suppose to be in control of all his slippery and enigmatic foreignness ? " M. Laugier certainly treat he as a superior , but with an exquisite , soft , forbearance such as he might have use to a noble and powerful savage . the Orcham Merger seem a less simple enterprise here than when it be under discussion with Sir Henry Savott at the Imperial Palace . 

 2 . 

 the telephone faintly rang . M. Laugier clasp the oddly shape french instrument in his lazy , caress finger . 

 " Allo ! Allo ! " he listen with an intent yet dreamy smile . " it be for you , mon cher directeur , " he say , and push the instrument across the corner of the desk towards Evelyn , who say to himself : 

 " it be that girl ! " 

 " Allo ! Allo ! " Evelyn address the transmitter . " excuse I , mon cher directeur , " he apologise to M. Laugier . 

 " I beg you , please , " say M. Laugier , spread his arm in deprecation of Evelyn 's apology . 

 " Mr. Orcham ? " the voice from the telephone enquire . 

 it be that girl . 

 " yes , " he reply , with primness - for he have no intention of allow Laugier to suspect from either tone or phrase that it be a woman who have ring he up . 

 " I have   have a deuce of time get you . you tell I you would be stay at the Montaigne . " 

 " that be quite correct , " say Evelyn . 

 " but you be at the Concorde . " 

 " yes . and very busy , " say Evelyn . 

 " shall you be busy to - night ? " 

 " yes , I shall , " say Evelyn . 

 " how late ? " 

 " Afraid I can not   say . " 

 " could not   you get out of it ? " 

 " I could not , " say Evelyn with careful coldness , more than ever determined that M. Laugier should gather nothing as to the nature of the conversation from the side of it to which he be listen . conceive the old man   not that he be really old   aware that his grave but young superior , in the midst of a highly technical interview , be argue with a young woman about a propose rendezvous ! the notion horrify sedate Evelyn . 

 " could not   you manage to be free by ten o'clock ? " 

 " sorry . impossible , " say Evelyn with dignity . 

 " then ten - thirty . " 

 " I might try , " say Evelyn calmly , after a pause . 

 " why be you so cross with I ? " 

 " I be not at all cross , " say Evelyn . 

 " you be very stiff . " 

 " where be you ? " he ask in a new tone , apparently ignore the criticism . 

 " in a call - box . " 

 " well , you see , I be not . do you understand ? " say Evelyn grimly , and he hear Gracie 's quick , rich laugh of comprehension . 

 " you mean you be not   alone ? " 

 " yes , " say Evelyn . 

 " well now , what about to - night ? ten - thirty ? I must see you . it be rather urgent . I have to come in to Paris to - day , and I must go back to St. Cloud some time to - night , but it do not   matter much what time . where can we meet ? " 

 she have throughout be assume his readiness to meet she provide only the hour could be arrange . the impudent assumption both amazed and please he . she look like be a serious nuisance . but her voice in the telephone be so attractive , even seductive , alluring . and she know it be , curse she ! she be use it unscrupulously .   he enjoy think this against she .   then he remember her expression , her gesture , her walk , as she have convoy Tessa up the platform of the marine station at Calais on the previous day . she be a magnificent girl , and often have he privately admit her grand quality . he feel proud as he listen to her cajole , wonderful voice . she - she so chic , intelligent , magnificent - be run after he ! oh yes ! he fancy himself! ... coxcomb ! and bad name than coxcomb do he apply to himself . but there it be . she be run after he ! " it be rather urgent . " what be rather urgent ? an excuse . she be run after he . rather marvellous , say what you choose ! 

 " well , " she question again , impatient . " where ? " 

 " the Montaigne , " he suggest . 

 " oh no ! that will not   do . I loathe your Montaigne . it be just something chip off Park Avenue . listen ! you know the rue Scribe ? " 

 " I do , " he answer impassively . 

 " I will be there in a car , on the Opera side . " 

 " very well , " he agree . 

 " ten - thirty , mind ! " 

 " yes . good - bye . " 

 " who be with you ? " she be add the feminine postscript . Impertinent enquiry ! 

 " the director , " say Evelyn , more coldly . he would not utter Laugier 's name in Laugier 's presence . 

 " of the Concorde ? " 

 " precisely . " 

 " oh ! laugier . be not   he a dear ? give he my love . " 

 " I will . good - bye ! " he replace the telephone in front of M. Laugier . 

 Assignation with a woman hide in a car in the rue Scribe , Opera side . it be a bit astounding , after all ! a bit romantic ! the impulse to vaunt come over he , irresistible . laugi should be make to appreciate with what tranquil severity he , Evelyn , could talk to a beautiful , wealthy , and headstrong young girl . 

 " she send you her love , " he say , with a casual smile . " Miss - " 

 " Mademoiselle Gracie ? " laugier interrupt eagerly . 

 Evelyn nod , take aback and forlorn . 

 " I imagine to myself that it be her voice when she speak first . " M. Laugier gaze meditatively at the glassy desk . " ah ! La belle creature ! La belle creature ! " it be as if he see she mirror in the desk - top . then he gaze at Evelyn long , a thousand flattering , mischievous implication in his deathdeale dark eye which no illness and no slow convalescence could quench . 

 " eh bien , mon cher directeur , " say Evelyn , finger a sheet of paper . 

 " eh bien , mon cher directeur , " say Laugier . " revenon a nos mouton . " a wisp of a glistening black lock have fall over the pale forehead . 

 in the airless soporific warmth of the little room Evelyn the man of business inexorably resume his investigation . 

 content 
 chapter 53 

 electron 

 when Evelyn reach the rue Scribe at one minute before half - past ten , have leave too early a very friendly dinner with the manager of the Hotel Montaigne , there be no car wait on the Opera side of the broad rue Scribe , and comparatively little traffic to confuse a watcher for a car contain a particular person . no stream of vehicle . no policeman . car pass at interval of a few second . in the near distance motor - bus rumble and great tram screech and rattle over point . the huge edifice of the Opera , dwarf all the house , pile itself up into the velvet starlit sky ; a few window gleam yellow in the hinder part of the building . Evelyn stand wait opposite the entrance to one of the courtyard , in or out of which walk occasionally some vague human being on some mysterious errand . an operatic performance be go forward somewhere in the complex immensity of the Opera ; but it be hide , soundless , immeasurably far off , like a secret and esoteric ceremonial , attend by adept and withdraw from the profane city into another world . Evelyn be alone . he feel alone . wait for a woman in a foreign capital ! he think : 

 " be this dignified ? something furtive and illicit about it . " what could it mean ? what do it presage ? still , it be certainly romantic , at his age - and her . La belle creature , Laugier have call she , with enthusiasm . what do that signify in the mouth of a Laugier ? one objective only could be apply to the belle creature , and Evelyn have several time apply it : incalculable . he anticipate her arrival with the excited interest of a reader await the next instalment of a sensational serial . 

 but she do not arrive . one minute after the half - hour . two minute . three minute . and every second of they have be a minute . the man of passionate punctuality glance at a dim clock affix to a lamp - post . he unbutton his long overcoat to glance at his watch in the gloom . he walk near to the lamp - post and glance again . he be cold , and rebuttone his overcoat . be he in the right street ? he cross the street to examine the street - sign , though he have already examine it once . then he recrosse , quickly , lest the car might come while he be absent from the arranged side . he grow more and more nervous . he be humiliate . twenty - five minute to eleven . she be capable of be half an hour late . ' they ' do it on purpose : at least such be the masculine theory , and there be a lot in it . at that moment , in Paris itself , hundred of man might be wait , wait , and say to themselves bitterly : 

 " she be do it on purpose . " 

 a car slacken speed , swerve towards the pavement . no . it could not be her . it stop , with the saloon - door exactly opposite to he : pretty feat of brake - manipulation . he see a figure in the dark interior of the saloon . no resemblance to Gracie . then a light be switch on within , and Gracie sit suddenly reveal to he , radiant , opulent in a low evening frock which a loosened , effulgent cloak hardly conceal . ' they ' be insensitive to cold , especially on a cold night . 

 the chauffeur have descend and be hold the saloon - door open for he . 

 " I be frightfully punctual , " say Gracie , lean forward . 

 her lovely face be serious , unsmile . 

 " you be indeed , " say Evelyn , raise his gibus . 

 " do get in . " 

 he get in , crush his hat against the top of the door . nervousness . the chauffeur shut the door , and then station himself attendant with his back to the car . Evelyn subside into soft cushion , straighten his hat ; he could detect her perfume , feel the richness of the stuff of her cloak on his hand . out go the light . the next instalment of the sensational serial have apparently start . but not with word . Gracie say nothing , and Evelyn could think of nothing to say , so constrained be he - and no doubt she too . the interior of the car be the most private , the most secure room in all Paris . 

 " and now ? " say he at length . after all he be a man , and the old , and for the sake of his own opinion of himself he must assume an air of take charge of the situation . 

 " well , darling , " say Gracie . " you have not   shake hand . " he grope for her hand and hold it , without squeeze it . " it be much too early to do anything yet . what about go into the Opera for an hour ? they be do ' Le Chevalier a la Rose . " 

 " so I notice , " say Evelyn . " but we shall never be able to get seat , at this time of night , shall we ? " 

 " do not   let that trouble you , " she reply . " you leave it to I , and you will see . " 

 " I should love it , " he say , insincerely but rather convincingly . 

 " it be the good of all the modern opera , " she say . " of course you have   see it . " 

 " yes . I see it in Naples . the boy chevalier , what's - his - name , be play by an aged dame with bow - leg . it finish at two in the morning . " 

 laugh nervously , Gracie lean across Evelyn and knock at the window . 

 " front of the Opera , " she instruct the chauffeur , in French . 

 fifteen second , and Evelyn be hand she out of the car . she give a brief order to the chauffeur . she be carry a book as well as her bag . they climb the step of the façade and through gild gate enter the vast marmoreal and gild vestibule . at the control , she draw a ticket from her bag and present it . she have buy a box in advance . 

 " you have   win , " say Evelyn . 

 she lower the corner of her mouth and half close her eye as she laugh in mild , sardonic enjoyment of her trick on he . Constraint be suddenly go , intimacy establish , the old intimacy of Smithfield . 

 at sight of the ticket , and of Gracie 's frock and cloak , functionary on the cyclopean marble and onyx staircase of honour take on the demeanour of chamberlain of Louis Quatorze , and the pair be waft onward from smile to servile smile . furlong of unyielde marble to walk ! an old , cringing , importunate woman , with hair ribbone like a young girl 's , introduce they into the box , and her harpy - finger close rapaciously and ungratefully on a ten - franc note from Evelyn . 

 the box be like a drawing - room of the ' seventy , not refurbish nor clean since the ' seventy . the fold of its brocade curtain seem to be stiff with the dust of Napoleon III . Loud , elaborate , conceal music be hear , but the drawing - room have apparently no connection with any phenomenon external to it . it be sufficient to itself . glimpse of a fraction of a distant stage with small , moving , sing figure . 

 2 . 

 the pair stroll indifferently across the drawing - room , at the end of which a gilt and velvete parapet protect the unwary from the risk of fall into the stall . they sit down in ornate armchair of gold and white ; in front of they , below they and around they be the auditorium , with a side view of the stage ; and deep down a den of crowd musician fiddle and blow away for life under an excited and ardent conductor . after the spendthrift spaciousness of the approach the auditorium appear small and inconsiderable . but it be build of solid gold , and its tier be support by golden Herculean naked woman , carve in the fearful symmetry of Titan 's daughter , with breast that might have nonchalantly suckle monster of insatiable voracity ; score of these ageless brazen nymph , smile fixedly as they have smile for half a century and more . 

 and everywhere , amid the stupendous gold sculpture and ornamentation , cover the floor , crowd the tier to the topmost , sit midget : the audience , inelegant , shabby , sombre , assist at the secret and esoteric ceremonial hide within the heart of the huge encircle opera - house . and of the ceremonial the stage - spectacle be scarcely the most important part . those of the midget who watch it do so with indifference . which indifference be repeat on the stage by the performer whom custom have wither and use stale . only when some disaster threaten do one or other of they glance in momentary anxiety at the conductor for help . the affair be less an opera than part of a rite . 

 and by no means all the audience of midget watch the stage - spectacle . for a time Gracie 's box and its two inhabitant divide with the stage the popular interest . it be one of the two good box , and perhaps Gracie be the smart woman in the theatre ; but in no metropolitan theatre which have not sink to the level of a tourist - resort would the box have be a cynosure . 

 " why be we here ? " think Evelyn , fascinate by the slatternliness of the stall , where there be man in morning dress and woman in three - piece raiment . 

 Gracie put her head close to his . 

 " this and Napoleon 's tomb and the Folies - Bergere and the Louvre be the sight of Paris , " she murmur . 

 Evelyn smile vaguely , think : " be she a mind - reader ? " he murmur in response : " that be what make the thing interesting . but be that why you come here ? " 

 " do not   you love be a tourist sometimes ? " she say . " I get so tired of be superior I simply must have a change . sometimes I feel like go into a shop in the rue de Rivoli and buy a Baedeker just to carry about with I . do not   you understand what I mean ? " 

 " certainly , " say Evelyn . " but then I never do feel superior . " 

 " no . I believe you never do , " she agree , as if suddenly impress by a hitherto unnoticed truth . 

 " except now , in this box , " he add mischievously . 

 " you be in a mood to - day , " she say with strange meekness . 

 " be not   that one of the Cheddars down there ? fourth row ? near the middle ? " Evelyn ask , have perceive a very stylish young man islande among the slatternliness . 

 " where ? oh yes . I see , " she calmly answer . " yes , it be . that be Leo . I wonder what he be do here ? " 

 " he be take a rest from be superior , " say Evelyn . " look at the Baedeker on his knee . " 

 " not a - " Gracie check herself . " you be tease I ! " she protest cheerfully . then she give attention to the stage , and Evelyn also . 

 he be at last beginning to surrender himself to the make - believe of the story when something happen . the curtain slowly hide the stage . the musician cease to play . the conductor lay down his baton . a mechanical , rhythmic , professional applause sound from two separate part of the auditorium , persistent and formal : an incident of the great rite . the curtain rise again . the beat of the applause be now irregular . a few person in the stall be clap . the curtain fall a second time . then a row of the principal singer appear in front of the curtain , with the conductor , who have be magically transport from the orchestra , in the midst of they . they hold hand like child , bow , smirk , smile , with formal , insincere gesture . the applause grow to be more general , but even now the large majority of the audience be not clap . the artist disappear in a seem ecstasy of gratitude for favour receive . hundred of lamp glow together , change twilight into dazzle day . silence . the next moment the auditorium be half empty . tedium , futility , disillusion descend in an invisible vapour upon the scene . 

 " why be we here ? " Evelyn demand again , in the terrible secrecy of his heart . but , such be the ennui distil from the vapour , he might well have propound question still more desolate : why be we anywhere ? why be anything ? be there after all a key to the preposterous enigma of the universe ? but Gracie be smile happily , meditative , as if to herself , as if she possess the key in her soul . Evelyn think : " how robust , how coarse , be a woman 's taste in pleasure ! " 

 a tap on the door of the box , so discreet , so dubious . the door open with caution , and the ribbone harpy be see furtively accept money . Leo Cheddar enter . Gracie rise and go to meet he . Evelyn stand . he pick up the programme which lie on the broad upholstered rail of the parapet . under the programme have be hide Gracie 's book . he look down at it curiously . it be call , " the Nature of the Physical World . " he have read it in his castle at home and have find it very disturbing , awakening , exciting . if the universe hold an enigma , surely she be the enigma . 

 " Evelyn ! " she be softly call he to the other end of the box . 

 he turn to join the other two , and be introduce . the tall , slim , beautifully clothe , aristocratic young man overtop Evelyn by six or seven inch . his voice be deep and agreeable , his deportment faultlessly urbane . 

 " we be wonder why you be in this galley , " say Gracie , mockingly . 

 " but you know wherever I be I never miss a performance of the ' rosenkavalier'if I can possibly help . I be hear it here for the first time . " 

 " and what do you think of it ? " Evelyn ask . 

 " the performance ? the bad I have ever see . Ignoble in every detail , except the oboe playing . " he smile sadly . " but the opera . the most enchanting thing since ' Figaro ' . " 

 " enchanting , " say Gracie . " that be always Leo 's adjective for the ' Rosenkavalier ' . " Mockery again in her tone and glance . 

 " give I a well one , and I will never use ' enchant ' any more , " say Cheddar evenly . 

 Gracie go on . " I have   always tell you there be a bit too much slapstick in this opera for my refined taste . " she be still quiz he . 

 " I prefer to call it realism , " say Cheddar amiably . " one must remember the period it portray . " 

 " ' period ' - ' portray . ' what an artist in alliteration he be ! " she look at Evelyn . 

 " ' Portrays . ' noble word . " 

 " it be in the dictionary , " say Cheddar . " I do not   believe in let noble word rust there . I take they out - " 

 " and give they a rub up . " 

 " yes , " say Cheddar . 

 his politeness be impeccable . but Evelyn think : 

 " they have   get across one another ... be I the cause ? " his sympathy be with the man . why do woman rejoice in set up discomfort , man never ? he say aloud , to ease the discomfort : 

 " I hear it at Naples last . in fact , the only time I have hear it . " 

 " ah ! " murmur Cheddar . " the San Carlo . that must have be wormwood . " he pass his hand over a pained forehead . 

 " Gall , " say Evelyn shortly , and grin . 

 " now take what you call the ' slapstick ' in the last act . " Cheddar return to the defence of himself against Gracie . 

 he talk earnestly and ingeniously about the last act and its ' slapstick ' stuff . the reputation of the ' Rosenkavalier ' be evidently to he a matter of some moment . though he live a life of unmitigated self - indulgence , though in every detail of material existence he demand and accept as of right the service of other , though he toil not nor span , though he have never know what it be to be overdraw at the bank , though he spend his life in savour his own reaction to work of art , in all the art - including.the culinary and the sartorial - he be a serious youth ; and admit that he neither write nor paint nor compose music , his manner at any rate be an example to the world of the perfection which sustain honest effort might reach in one of the apply art . 

 Evelyn like and admire he , and support he against the naughty malice of Gracie , and regret that she do not invite he to stay in the box for the remainder of the performance . when the musician creep back with lower head into their cave , the two man shake hand sympathetically . Evelyn never see Leo Cheddar again , for the serious youth do not even reappear in his stall . 

 3 . 

 " shall we sit more back for this act ? in this place it be well to hear than to see , " Gracie suggest when she and Evelyn be alone again . all mischief have suddenly go out of she change , shot - silk voice , and her face have an expression of angelic sweetness .   not a syllable about Leo Cheddar .   Evelyn agree . they sit down . there be chair enough in the box to accommodate a Board of Directors . a very long time seem to pass before the light of the auditorium be lower . while they be wait Evelyn say : " I see you have   get ' the Nature of the Physical World ' with you . " 

 " you have   read it ? " 

 " oh yes . " 

 " do not   you think it be perfectly thrilling ? " 

 " I do , " say Evelyn , with emphasis , respond to the vibration of her tone . 

 " only , " she go on , " these scientist do not   really understand , or they pretend not to . I wonder whether any of they have condescend to read Troward . " 

 " Troward ? " 

 " there you be ! of course you have   never hear of he ! I be quite used to that . you ought to read his Edinburgh Lectures on Mental Science . I really mean you ought . they be more exciting than Eddington 's book there . " 

 " and what be Troward 's line ? " Evelyn ask , carefully serious to suit her new mood . 

 " God be his line , " she answer , with a sort of fierceness . " the divine creative mind . that be his line . if the divine creative mind be infinite , we be it . you and I , and all those people there . and these chair and the light from the chandelier . everything . no get away from it . you know the electron , whirl around . of course they be not   the pure form of the divine mind , I mean the first original form . but some fine kind of electron be - that our electron be make of . must be . and they be everywhere and they be all the same and all perfect and all work together , do evolution . God be not   imperfect . if you try hard and keep on try you realise they . I can realise they now and then for half a minute . then I can not , and then I have to begin and try again . but that half minute! ... no , it be not   as much as half a minute . two second , half a second . I tell you - well , I want you to read that book of Troward 's . you will be glad afterwards . I know you will . and there be something else - " 

 as she turn her eager , radiant face to look into his , the chandelier extinguish itself , and her feature become a vague oval to he in the obscurity of the back of the box . the orchestra sound warm , mellow , benevolent . they listen , intent . Evelyn feel the nearness of her presence , her frock , the bodily organism within the frock - she have cast her brilliant cloak on one of the empty chair . this be another instalment of the serial , and it be indeed sensational . she stir , restless as usual . she rise . 

 " I think I must watch , " she whisper , bend over he , and walk to the front of the box and sit down there . Evelyn follow she . 

 the music have now assert its importance over the importance of the audience and even of the musician . the auditorium , light as before only by the radiating brightness of the stage , be a blur of face less distinct than in the previous act . the music mount swiftly to a forte , fervid , imposing , exciting . the music be an envelop atmosphere , intoxicant . as it be involuntarily , Gracie 's finger for an instant touch Evelyn 's knee . he could feel her hand shake . the fine shock of momentary contact be electric . 

 " perhaps this be why we be here , " he think , intimidate , almost fearful of mysterious force unloose . 

 now the music sink to a piano . the glimpsed danger recede ... later , much later , after an unmeasured passage of time , after a period in which time be not and the sens be satisfied beyond any anticipation of the future or memory of the past , exist content and entrance in the present as the music unroll itself bar by bar of the score - three singer conspire to sing together in concert . Gracie sit moveless , upright in her chair , gaze rightward at the stage . Evelyn , on she left , lean his left elbow on Gracie 's book on the rail of the parapet , his left hand uphold his chin , and he too gaze , across her bosom , rightward at the stage . with her left hand Gracie touch his shoulder warningly as if to still he into a more rapt attention to the music . Slapstick , horse - play , farce there have be in the antic movement of the comedy , but it be finish , and it have never distract he from the music , through which exquisite fragment of Viennese waltz have tantalisingly filter . 

 now the mood be serious , lovely , sublime . Beauty be bear from beauty . impossible that the next beauty could exceed the last ; but it do . the interwoven voice of the singer waver in pattern above the mighty change sea of instrumental harmony ascend from the pit , flame curl and uncurling over a white glow of fire . sound louder , sound soft , in a steady , solemn rhythm . ravishment of the soul through the delicate receiving ear . Evelyn do not look at Gracie . the ray of his glance pass by her straight to the three figure on the stage , the conductor 's tyrannic stick , the sway mass of scrap and blow humanity down in the pit . but he be exactly aware of the expression on her set face , and therefrom of the emotion in her heart . and he be aware also of the two thousand blurred face of the audience , distant and nearer , high in the upper tier , low on the floor of the stall . 

 and the whole vast concourse of material flesh in infinite gradation begin to melt , to refine itself , to rarefy itself , into those spiritual electron of which Gracie have speak , glisten , scintillating , coruscating , as they whirl , immaterial at last , on their unfathomable errand in pursuance of the divine supreme plan . individuality cease ; he be not he , Gracie be not she ; nobody in the auditorium be anybody . all be merge into a single impersonal , shin , shimmer integrity of primal mind . Evolution have reverse , and at incredible speed swing back through aon into the causal eternity before the Word move upon the water and before even the water be . . 

 the trio end . Time resume . material flesh be form . individuality separate themselves . Evelyn be Evelyn again , and Gracie Gracie , and the audience become tourist , bourgeois , concierge , husband , wife , mistress , young girl . 

 the story of the comic opera go on its earthly way . Evelyn and Gracie look at each other . he see that her beautiful face be very stern . she rise , beckon to he . he pick up the book and her bag , both of which she be forget , and follow she out . she offer no explanation of the sudden departure . neither of they speak . in the cold street , she wrap tight in her cloak and Evelyn in his long , thick overcoat , Gracie go unhesitating to the left and up the rue Halevy , ignore persistent tout . score of wait car and lounge chauffeur . she walk straight to her own car . the chauffeur salute . 

 " could I make that young man understand the last half - hour ? " Evelyn ask himself , glance at the chauffeur . " no . not if all our life depend on it . but accord to she that cap of his be not   a cap . it be a mass of whirling electron . " 

 they step into the car . the chauffeur , unaware of his own composition , shut the door on they . intimacy once more in the solitude of the saloon . Gracie switch the light on . 

 " it be the only right moment to leave , be not   it ? " she say . " thank awfully for not forget my thing . give I my bag , will you ? " she pull a mirror from the bag and powder her face . " I be simply frightfully hungry . do you know the Caligula ? " 

 " not at all , " say Evelyn . 

 " I be tell it be rather good . in the rue des Trois Freres , near the Place Pigalle . shall we go there ? " 

 " anywhere , " say Evelyn dreamily . 

 the chauffeur , hire by the week with the grandiose car and all their electron , know the Caligula . he manouvre the vehicle backwards and forwards out of the line of car . and soon they be shoot up the curve of the rue Pigalle , with illuminated sign of night - cafés on either side . they cross the blaze , multi - coloured Place , and in a dark wilderness of street beyond they find the Caligula burn red , all alone . 

 content 
 chapter 54 

 CALIGULA 

 " I have   never be here before , " say Gracie as they pass by a negro dwarf - commissionaire out of the dark street into the strangely - light interior of the Caligula . " but I have   hear a good deal about it from french painter and Argentines and thing , and - " the first glance at the wall of the first room make her pause . " well , yes . it be just about what I expect it to be . " 

 she look at Evelyn and laugh . and Evelyn laugh a little , and say : 

 " I suppose everything ought to be see . " 

 the first room of the establishment be separate from the street door by only three foot and a rattle curtain of string of red bead . the large of three room in a suite that form a vista , it seem rather small . it have a tiny bar with a very high counter , and next to the bar an orchestra of three instrument : a fiddle , a sort of inlay accordion , and a kettle - drum with cymbal . the music float discreetly faint ; the drummer caress his drum instead of hit it , and the cymbal have a muffle sound . round the room be range tiny table . in the middle , on a space hardly big than the area of a dray , writhe a pack mass of animal : human being , dancing ; they be close to one another than bee in a swarm , but they dance and appear to delight in the jam and in their asphyxiation . true the heat of the room be temper by an icy draught from the street at each fresh arrival of visitor . the lighting be a reddish amber , achieve by a number of pendant lamp each enclose in a very small globe of paper ; it be as discreet as the music ; it disclose , even if it do not fully reveal , the existence of the room and the reveller . 

 the wall be fresco with barbaric scene - aphrodisiac , orgiastic , murderous - from the short but merry life of the roman emperor nickname Caligula , the man - god who have dare everything in licence , and whose audacity the painter have successfully emulate . the fact that in the twilight of the room the fresco have to be scan with care in order to be completely appreciate add much to their interest . 

 the second room be small than the first and the third small than the second . the third be divide at the end into three alcove , in each a table . Evelyn demand a table in the third room . a beautiful young man raise his arm to signify that , although no table therein be as yet occupy , all be reserve . Evelyn murmur that he be director of the Hotels de la Concorde and Montaigne . the young man bow , appreciative . 

 " in that case , monsieur , one will arrange oneself at once . " and he do , and personally accompany his client to the central alcove , on whose side be depict with considerable ardour the love of Caligula and his sister Drusilla   name by name on her coiffure , with a priest - horse and a massacre in the background . 

 Evelyn sit alone for a few minute while Gracie be titivate in some far retreat . then the beautiful young manager reappear . he have vaguely hear of the Orcham Hotel - merger , though not by name . he talk to Evelyn as to a confrere , and tell he that ten of the chief night - resort in Montmartre , include the Caligula , be under one powerful control , and that the Caligula be the fashionable baby of the bunch . with pride he indicate that the wall - painting be the true origin of its vogue . he then depart and a head - waiter come up . 

 " as we be here , " think Evelyn , " we may as well be here . " and say to the waiter : 

 " Champagne . " 

 " Bien , monsieur . " 

 he name the brand and the year . 

 " Bien , monsieur . " 

 " Caviare . " 

 " Bien , monsieur . " 

 " with chop onion . " 

 " Bien , monsieur . " 

 " ham sandwich . " 

 " Bien , monsieur . " 

 " fresh fruit . " 

 " Bien , monsieur . " 

 " pear , let we say . " 

 " Bien , monsieur . " 

 the waiter write and vanish . 

 when Gracie return , Evelyn say : 

 " I have   order . " 

 she say , submissively : 

 " I be so glad . I hate be ask what I want . because I never know . " 

 " I guess what you would like , " he say . they regard the scene . 

 " it be very amusing , " say Gracie . 

 " very , " Evelyn agree . 

 " you be in one of your distant mood , " say Gracie . 

 smile sympathetically , he shake his head . 

 " be not   you ? " 

 " not in the least , " say Evelyn . " but I want you to know that I do not   live in a universe of superlative . " 

 " I like you for that , " she say , look up at he . 

 never have she seem so virginal to he , so ingenuous , so receptive , as she do then . the innocence of her air ravish he . it be indeed a heavenly phenomenon . he think : 

 " she live alone . no one to protect she with common sense . apparently she know all manner of strange people ; some of they must have tell she to come here , for instance . it be all wrong . her father ought to look after her well . " 

 a man and two young woman , all expensively smart , and French , walk up the vista under escort of the beautiful manager , and take one of the side alcove . the young woman have the melting , bold , fatigued eye , the glance , the sway hip of debauchery ; as shameless as monkey , as elegant as mannequin of a first - class couturiere . when they have disappear into the alcove Gracie raise her eyebrow to Evelyn . 

 " yes , " he murmur . " it be a nice question whether they ought to be on the floor or on the wall . " 

 Gracie , however , ignore the sally . already her mind have flit away from the two Cyprians . 

 " you do not   know , " she say gently , " what I be think while they be sing that trio at the Opera . " her expression be very serious , and as if implore comprehension of what she be about to say . 

 " I think I do , " Evelyn answer , his tone and expression suddenly respond to her . " you be think that everybody and everything in the theatre be kind of dissolve into those elemental electron of your . I can not   explain quite , but it be somehow like that . " 

 she turn pale . beneath her powder and rouge he could see that she have pal . 

 " how do you know ? " she breathe , in a disconcert whisper . 

 " I be feel the same , " he say . 

 " there you be ! " breathe Gracie , solemn , deeply impressed , as if she have just find the full explanation of a whole series of mysterious phenomenon and the confirmation of her secret idea as to their origin . she show emotion , which communicate itself to Evelyn , who feel apprehensive , even dismayed , though somehow agreeably . 

 but the material of the repast arrive , and the topic be momentarily suspend . Gracie drink three - quarter of a glass of champagne . Evelyn watch new visitor , their demeanour , the service of the table , the writhe crowd mass of dancer in the distant first room . the discreet lilt of the music and the low hum of talk mingle together in his ear . now and then a loud laugh , a thin shriek , disturb the general rhythm . he judge that the majority of the man be american , some of whom be with their wife , other with Frenchwomen who probably have choose the Caligula for they . he notice how the english visitor look at the storied wall as if surreptitiously , as if fearful of be catch in the act of look at they . and in a corner of his mind , meanwhile , play fragmentary thought about the grow prevalence of merger and the rationalisation of dubious delight . somewhere , in some office , to - morrow , clerk would be check the nightly return of the ten resort of carousal , and add they up , and prepare statistic for the " Orcham " of the great pleasure - merger . two waiter buzz like fly in front of the table , officious and fussily deferential . Evelyn guess that they must have be apprise of his important identity by the beautiful young manager . when they have at last gone , Gracie say : 

 " do you know , Evelyn - I want to tell you - I know when I first meet you that morning we be bind to have the same idea about thing . I just know it . do you ? " 

 he give the expected answer , sorry that he could not contrive to put a more joyous conviction into his tone . his regret be due to the simple , girlish earnestness of her glance and voice . he have misjudge she . she be not really spoil by sophistication . her sensibility have not be dull by experience . she have the fresh , ingenuous gust of happy emotion proper to a maiden . and she be so wise and serious too . her interest in life be noble . 

 " this be marvellous ! she be marvellous ! " he think , suddenly uplifted . " we be by ourselves here . free ! what a night ! I have   never be through anything like it . it be marvellous ! " 

 and he in turn have a gust of happy emotion . be it not exquisitely strange that in the opera - house they should have have the same illusion , if illusion it could be call ? call it hallucination if you choose - no matter ! and be it not strange that , guess half - playfully at first , he should have divine that what have happen to he have happen to she also ? of course the book have be the cause of it all , but the result be none the less impressive . easy to laugh - especially for an Englishman ! nevertheless - 

 " and there be something else I want to tell you , " Gracie go on , earnestly , confidingly , after a mouthful of caviare : " I be frightfully rude to you when you would not   come to my party that night at the Palace . I simply could not   bear you not come . but all the same I like you for not come . yes , I do . I should have be disappoint if you have come . and I do not   fly off the next morning because I be in a temper with you - you think that be the reason , do not   you ? " 

 " I be not so conceited , " Evelyn smile . 

 " do let us be frank , " she appeal . " I feel so near to you . you be always draw away from I . remember our dance ? now honestly , do not   you think I would leave the Palace because I be vex ? " 

 " yes , " say Evelyn bravely , and feel as though he have snap a chain which be hold he . 

 " well , that be not   the reason . I go off because I be afraid of you ... I know it sound very odd , but truly that be the reason . " Gracie continue without a pause : " I tell you a lie the other day . I do not   come to London on account of my book . I could have fix that by post . I come because I have be think about you for week and week . I feel I be miss you , and it be silly of I to go on miss you . I be say all this because it be easy for a girl to talk than a man . People think it be not , but that be nonsense . I know how man feel - how you feel , I mean . and I go away again because I be afraid of you again . it come over I . but to - night I be not afraid of you . I be very close to you . and I need to be close to someone . I be a beast . yes . I be . you can guess lot of thing , but you will never guess why I be so keen on go with you to that Shaftesbury Express Counter of Mr. Jebson 's . it be because I want to see if I could make you jealous . " 

 " I ! jealous ! " 

 " oh ! I know I do not   make you jealous , darling , though I say all man be . I know you be not , without be tell . but be not   that walk to the hotel in the rain heavenly ? I get specially frightened of you on that walk . I feel like nobody when I see your light tower from the Duke of York 's Steps . you be so wonderful with your hotel . Father 's say so again and again . you know , daddy and I do not   see much of each other , but we be great friend , really . he always say you be wonderful . I do not   know how you be so wonderful , but I can feel it . you make I feel it . and I be walk with you in the rain , all wet , and I be nothing . I know I be nothing . if I have not   know I be nothing I might have stay on at the Palace for a bit . so I just fade out . I know you think I be brilliant , and so I be in a way . but right down in I I be nothing . why should I want to feel near you when I be nothing? ... now do not   speak . do not   answer . I be only tell you all this because I should hate to deceive you any more . I be not go to make any excuse for myself ... 'girl do not   talk as I be talk . ' and all that . to hell with girl ! I be not girl . I be I . that be all . pour I out some more champagne , will you ? a girl like to be look after . I suppose I be girl . but I be I too . be not   that trio too lovely to bear ? " 

 Evelyn say : 

 " you tell I not to speak . but I shall speak if I like . " he smile . " and I shall say what I like . you be miraculous . I say no more . " 

 Instinct warn he to say no more . his eye be speak for he , tell she his admiration , tell she that he be ' near ' to she , and that when he say ' miraculous ' he mean it . he be convince , then , that there have never be a girl like this girl . she be wise in her ingenuousness , in her direct simplicity . she understand . she have say , " it be easy for a girl to talk than a man . " and she be so honest : and so humble : tell he with such sincerity that she be " nothing . " she think that she really be nothing . he be more than touch ; he be shake by the force of his own wonder admiration of her courage . of course he think : " be she in love with I ? " he would not answer the tremendous question . he would only say to himself that she be pathetically lonely in the world , and that she comprehend he and trust he . it be the need to confess this fact that in her opinion have make a meeting between they urgent for this very night . the meeting have happen , and she have confess . he desire , he yearn , to protect she , to assuage her loneliness . her eye meet his , and he see happiness in hers as the result of what she have see in his . and in her happiness he be happy than he have ever be . happiness surge through he . life itself , the essence of life , throb serenely in his vein . there be no sensual image in his mind , and no wish for anything but her happiness . he be content . hotel , a victorious career , autocracy have no significance for he . the poor little lamp be extinguish in a general blaze of glory . 

 she say : 

 " I think I ought to go home . " 

 " now ? " 

 her trust eye implore he . 

 " very well , " he say . 

 the sandwich have be serve . he pick up the plate . 

 " just one . " 

 " well , one , " she acquiesce with the sweetest submission . 

 2 . 

 Evelyn discharge a bill which , even after a deduction of twenty per cent . voluntarily concede to he as a member of the great catering profession , demonstrate that the pleasure - merger be mean to yield large dividend . the pair rise and pass down the room , waft along by deferential bow and smirk ; Evelyn go so far as to shake hand with the beautiful manager . he be wonder why , for so short a stay , Gracie have put herself and he to the trouble of visit the Caligula , when she suddenly stop . 

 " shall we have just one drink before we go ? " she suggest , with bright persuasiveness . 

 since she be irresistible , he yield . but he think : 

 " what next ? and what an anti - climax ! when we have   have the drink we shall have to begin the departure business all over afresh . nuisance ! " 

 the man who be hold Evelyn 's hat and overcoat move away with an unconvincing smile . they climb on to the very high chair at the bar . 

 " and the drink ? " Evelyn question , disappoint in his miraculous girl . 

 " oh ! your favourite , " say Gracie . 

 " what be that ? " 

 " Orange juice . " she laugh quizzically . how do she know that he affect orange juice ? still , he be relieve . the choice at any rate show that the miraculous girl have some sense . she go up again in his esteem . 

 " Deux jus d'orange nature , " she give the order herself . 

 the barman disguise his stupefaction . 

 Gracie turn round to gaze at the dense mass of dancer contort , gyrate , sway , perspire within six foot of the high chair . what a crew   think Evelyn ! foolish face , lascivious , abandon , inane . how grotesquely indecent the face of the old man in the swelter crowd ! how hard , insincere , grasping , or sentimental and sensually loving , the face of the girl ! all pretend joy , in the hope of satisfaction to come ! all utterly despicable ! he be ashamed to be there , ashamed to have Gracie by his side , ashame that she be not ashamed . only the orchestral trio be worthy of a mild respect . they be earn a living , make money - not squander it . calmly , efficiently , indefatigably do their job , they plod on from measure to measure , hundred of measure , thousand of measure , rule the fatuous dancer ; and they would conscientiously plod on and on until five o'clock , when the Caligula close . the entire spectacle be incomprehensible , frightening . and be the spectacle of the dance - floor at the Imperial Palace less incomprehensible ? Evelyn 's mind run back to Volivia , now dance at the Casino de Paris . 

 two glass clink on the counter . Gracie twist her body , pick they up both at once , and hand one to Evelyn . he say , after a sip : 

 " you might tell I just why you have   come to an affair like this . be it amusing , or be it silly ? " 

 " it be both , " she answer . " and do not   you say yourself that everything ought to be see ? I love it because it show what people really be . I be always want to know that . I have   enjoy it . and so have you - so you need not   say you have not . " 

 " then I will not , " he say grimly . 

 " but it be interesting , be not   it ? " she cajole , ignore his grimness . 

 " oh ! it be interesting , " he agree , rather condescendingly . 

 " it teach you , do not   it ? " she be still cajole . 

 " teach you what ? " 

 " about - well , human nature . " 

 " some sort of human nature . " 

 " be not   we all God 's creature ? " she say gravely . 

 he give in with a sympathetic smile nod . he be beat . Gracie 's eye range round the exciting wall ; but while she gaze she seem to be absorb in reflection . 

 then two girl extricate themselves from the throng floor and approach the bar . one be tall and slim , in a closefitte , high - neck gown which render the wearer conspicuous by its long trail skirt . the other be short and plump in the scanty possible flimsy frock . the demeanour of the tall girl be protective . they settle themselves at the bar , next to Evelyn and Gracie . the tall girl furtively , delicately , fondle her friend , with whom she have be dance . 

 " shall we go ? " say Gracie , very abruptly . and in the doorway , as Evelyn hold aside the bead - curtain for she , she murmur harshly : " I can not   stand that kind . " 

 " why not ? " Evelyn demand . " be not   we all God 's creature ? " after be defeat , he have win . 

 in the chill , dank winter night of the street , Gracie 's car be wait with other car , and her chauffeur with other chauffeur , nonchalantly patient . how these chauffeur ate , drank , keep warm , pass the interminable time , be their affair . Gracie 's chauffeur salute very amiably ; he might have have to wait till 5 a.m. 

 " I will drop you , " say Gracie . 

 " oh no ! it be out of your way . I will get a taxi . " 

 " it be not   out of my way . " a pause . " and I do not   care if it be . I will drop you . 1 can be home in twenty minute at the most . " 

 " thank you . " 

 the chauffeur whisk they away . in the darkness of the saloon they do not speak . when the car swerve swiftly round a corner and Gracie be throw against Evelyn , she do not immediately straighten herself . they be enter the Champs Elysées before she say : 

 " you be quite right . " 

 he know that she be refer to her attitude towards the two girl at the bar . 

 " well , well ! who know ? " say he quietly . he be ask himself when they be to meet again . he want to suggest a rendezvous , but his unconquerable reserve prevent he from do so . " it be my place to do it , " he think , impartially . yet he could not do it . the car draw up at the Montaigne . he look at she . she look at he . something expectant in her dimly see eye . he kiss she . the kiss fraternal , friendly , companionable . naught in such a kiss ! such a kiss be a duty . they have be very ' near ' to one another . the kiss give he pleasure , too . and as for she , it seem to comfort she . 

 the chauffeur have hardly descend from the wheel . 

 " I say , " she say , as Evelyn step down on to the kerb . " where shall you be to - morrow , about lunch - time ? " 

 " Concorde , " he reply . 

 " I will telephone you , " she say , and yawn . 

 " that be fine , " he say . " Au revoir . " 

 he think : 

 " I be a perfect boor not to make the first move . however , it be all right ... " 

 the car be go , and she in it . he stand on the pavement for a few second , recall the taste and touch of her soft girlish lip . " I be an idiot , " he murmur . a functionary emerge from the hotel to welcome he . 

 content 
 chapter 55 

 on the BOULEVARD 

 the next morning   a Saturday , after a very short and very restless night , Evelyn be again work with M. Laugier in the latter 's room in the Concorde . but , at work , he have the appearance rather than the reality of earnest application . and , when the Louis Philippe clock strike noon , he begin to grow anxious lest Gracie should telephone to he once more while he be with M. Laugier , because M. Laugier would certainly himself answer the ring , and he have no desire to see a quizzical look on the southerner 's face . noon be the customary lunch - hour for M. Laugier , and Evelyn make a polite remark to this effect . M. Laugier reply that the clock be ten minute fast . it be . they labour until the clock strike the half - hour . there have be no ring . Evelyn be not surprised . he say to himself grimly that with Gracie lunch - time mean any time between noon and three o'clock , or even four . they go down into a little basement room , where M. Laugier entertain his dear director to an admirable , plenteous meal . 

 Evelyn be now more at ease . when Gracie summon he he would be tell merely that he be want on the telephone , and thus he could talk comfortably to the girl from a telephone - cabin , with nobody to listen . of course she be a wonderful girl , but this admit fact do not prevent he from manfully and superiorly curse she . she be really too much of a mixture to appeal to a serious man . her earnest mood frighten he , and her mood of levity pain he . yes , she have nobility , impressive nobility . she have give he to think . nevertheless with a girl like that you never know where you be . the disorderliness of her mind be fantastic . she have no daily common sense and no sense of danger . to be connect with she be to be a kettle tie to the tail of a magnificent mad thoroughbred dog . be she in love with he ? who could say ? probably even she herself could not say . she be a girl who might ruin the career of twenty man out of sheer impulse and caprice , and then be startle twenty time to learn what she have do . he have well bring the affair , courteously , to an abrupt conclusion . he would have no tampering with his career , which have now reach a new and more splendid period . he hop that she would not ring he up . he would have finish with Laugier by five o'clock , and if he do not hear from she , damn if he would not depart for London on Sunday morning ! he would have a sound excuse for do so , as she have omit to give he her address at St. Cloud . she could communicate with he , but he could not communicate with she . 

 well , she do not ring he up . the lunch be eat without hurry , and the after - lunch cigar be smoke as cigar ought to be smoke . at a quarter to three the mutually dear director return to the study of statistic and other document . and now she would assuredly ring up . woman be always confoundedly inconvenient . she would ring up , and he would be compel to go through again his tight - rope telephone performance of the previous day . but there be no call . once the telephone - bell do tinkle , exciting alarm - also a not unpleasant expectancy - but the call be for M. Laugier . four o'clock . Dusk . light . five o'clock . endless afternoon . she have not rung . good . excellent . hang it all ! he be twice her age , and have an objection to render himself ridiculous in the sight of man . the task of the dear director be finish , and satisfactorily . the Englishman , have congratulate the Frenchman on the final result of the exhaustive inquisition , announce that he should leave for London on the morrow . the Frenchman , charm by the congratulation , invite the Englishman to yet another meal - dinner . Evelyn say regretfully that he have an engagement . " ah ! " twinkle M. Laugier . they part in the grand manner , provide a spectacle to inspirit circumambient functionary in the hall . 

 Evelyn come back a minute later , and say to the concierge : 

 " I suppose there be be no telephone message for I ? " there have not . he walk to the Hotel Montaigne , and to the concierge of the Montaigne he say : 

 " any telephone message for I ? " 

 none . he be on the point of ask for a corner seat to be reserve on the " Golden Arrow " ; but he do not ask . well wait a while . she might yet ring . he must give she every chance . at seven o'clock the frightful , desolate vista of an empty evening stretch out before he . the director of the Montaigne be out , and not expect home till midnight . he have an impulse to ring up laugier and say that , through a misunderstanding , he be free after all ; but he check it . too proud ! instead , he get London , twice : first for the Palace and then for the Wey , and at both hotel keep important member of the staff engage too long in quite unimportant conversation . to Cousin at the Palace he say everything except that he should return the next day . besides , Oldham would be still with his wife in the country . not that Oldham be indispensable . he could manage , be manage , very well without Oldham . still - he din alone , read french newspaper . then he stroll about the hotel , chat beautifully with the flattered staff . then he walk to the Etoile - a constitutional . then it rain , and he return in a taxi . then he go to bed . only five minute past ten . clock and watch would not move . he star at they for hour , and the hand budge not . yet they have not stop , for he could hear his watch tick plainly enough . 

 the moment he be in bed and the light out , his thought begin to whirl round and round , and round and round . why the hell have he not take her address ? she might be ill . or the Tessa girl might be ill . Gracie would be extremely conscientious where Tessa be concern . by the calendar he be indubitably twice her age . but not by any other measurement . while he be with she he have absolutely no feeling of seniority . they be equals . he realise more and more in the darkness how wonderful she be . he see her image in the darkness . he have kiss she . damn it ! she have invite his kiss , or at least she have warmly accept it . be this an adventure to be click off as by hang up a telephone - receiver ? she be miraculous - he have tell she so - and because she be miraculous the adventure be miraculous . Paris ! the freedom of Paris ! marriage . have she be think of marriage ? no . anyhow , he would never marry . and never would he allow his career to be fool about with . but she be miraculous . she say astounding thing . she have a unique intelligence . why have he not take her address ? he be miserable , he the eponymous hero of the great hotel - merger in all the annal of luxury . he know he would have no sleep that night ... he awake . four o'clock . he have sleep four hour . at the Palace he could have telephone for some tea ; but the Montaigne be not the Palace - though it would be . he doze at interval . six o'clock . seven o'clock . the electric timepiece on the wall make a disturbing little noise every minute , as its finger be push on . exasperate . he have hear it ten million time . but the Montaigne be not the Palace ... a faint , pale discoloration on the blind . Dawn . eight o'clock . he would ring for tea , and also he would give order for a seat in the train . what an inferno of a night ! he feel like a towel fling into a corner of a bathroom . 

 2 . 

 just as he be about to ring , he hear the telephone - bell delicately murmur on the floor , and he grasp the instrument . it could not be she . but it be , and this be the most incredible , solacing thing that ever befell any Englishman in Paris . 

 " be that you , Evelyn ? " her rich voice , change at nearly every word , again like the sheen of shift shot - silk . 

 " speak . can not   you tell my voice ? I can tell yours . " when he have speak he think : " this will not   do . I must not   use that excited tone . " then he wait . she do not continue immediately . it be a delightful experience to be on his back in the wide bed and in the ease of pyjama , hold the mouthpiece to his lip and the receiver to his ear , and wait for her next exciting sentence . all fatigue have go from he . he understand , afresh , that fatigue be a nervous sensation , an illusion which another nervous sensation could obliterate as a sponge wipe pencil - mark from a slate . 

 " I hope I have not   disturb you too early . " her voice be now tense with that terrible earnestness which on the previous evening have affright he . he recall her manner of say in the Caligula , " I need to be close to someone , " and her manner of confessing that she have miss he and that she have try to make he jealous . a man would naturally , inevitably , think that a girl who talk in that style be in love with he , or fancy she be . but Evelyn could not honestly believe it . in the first place , he could not see in himself anything for she to fall in love with . and in the second place , it appear to he that her accent be too grave for mere love . 

 " be you there ? can you hear ? I say I hope I have not   disturb you too early . " 

 his mind have be wander - as hers too often would wander . 

 " I beg pardon . no , you certainly have not   disturb I too early . in fact , you be about twenty hour late in disturb I . do not   you say you would ring I up yesterday at lunch - time , or be I dream ? " he mean to put some affectionate banter into his tone , but the attempt be somehow not very convincing . 

 " yes . I know , " she say . " but I could not . " 

 " why not ? " 

 " well . I could not . and I have   rung you so early this morning because I know when I awake I never should ring you if I do not   do it instantly - instantly . so I do . " 

 " and you have   just catch I in time . I be leave by the ' Golden Arrow,'and I have to pack and do all sort of thing . and I be not up yet . " still the same unsuccessful effort towards cheerful banter . 

 " Evelyn , you be not ! you can not   go to - day ! " she protest solemnly . 

 " why not ? " 

 " I must see you . " 

 it appear to he that she be repeat the telephone conversation in Laugier 's office . 

 " anything wrong ? " he question , drop the banter . 

 " I - I do not   know . " a hint of desperation in her voice . " we must have lunch together . if you must go back home to - night you can take the four o'clock . surely you can do that for I , Evelyn . " she be plead , irresistibly . 

 " all right , my dear , " he soothe she . 

 " listen ! " she go on , more vivaciously . " you can pack up your thing and bring they along with you , and then you can stay with I till it be time for you to go to the station . you can have my car . listen ! I will come with you to the Gare du Nord and see you off . " 

 " it be ideal , " he answer . " but I would not   agree to be see off by anybody else . "   why have he go out of his way to say a thing like that ? 

 " you be tease I , " she say , as it be plaintively . 

 " I be not ! now what time lunch ? " 

 " I will expect you at twelve o'clock . noon . listen . I will send the car for you to the Montaigne . five to twelve . I know I shall not   be fit to be see till twelve . " 

 " but I can not   get to St. Cloud in five minute , can I ? " 

 " oh ! I be not at St. Cloud . I be in the Boulevard des Italiens . " she give a number . 

 " you must have get up frightfully early . " 

 " no . I come here yesterday . " 

 " be it a hotel ? " 

 " no . " 

 " you be with friend , eh ? " 

 " N - no . it be room . I have to be in Paris . " 

 Evelyn be considerably startle , as much by her tone as by the news ; but he make no comment . 

 " I will count on you then , " she say . 

 " you may , my dear . " 

 the talk end there . Evelyn feel bewilder , perturb ; yet happy - and excited enough in his expectancy . he ring for tea , and he ring for the valet . 

 Gracie 's car arrive at the hotel ten minute before time , and Evelyn 's suit - case be downstairs ten minute before the hour . therefore he have to wait , chat with the concierge . ride by his mania for punctuality , he object as much to be one minute early as to be one minute late . yet he be quite hungrily anxious to set eye on Gracie again . he could not recall every detail of her feature and bear , and he be impatient to refresh his memory . also he be impatient to know the reason of her formidable earnestness on the telephone ; though he keep say to himself : " it be nothing . it be nothing . she be a child , after all . " 

 Rain begin to fall , not unexpectedly . the boulevard have the desolate aspect proper to a wet parisian Sunday . little traffic . few wayfarer . imperfect umbrella sail horizontally along over glisten dirty pavement , each umbrella the canopy of a mysterious , undecipherable soul . all the shop shutter in grey steel , except the tobacco - bureaux , which be open . the kiosk , which offer for sale every newspaper and periodical decent and indecent in Europe , have no customer . 

 the Morris Columns , with their advertisement of the stage of Paris , shine somehow morbidly in the rain . the cafés do no business to speak of . all be depressing , but not for Evelyn , whose age have gradually diminish to twenty - five . 

 the car halt opposite a large but inconspicuous portico between two big shutter shop . Evelyn jump out . his heart be perceptibly beat . he be now only twenty - two . on one side of the portico be a small , discreet brass - plate : " appartements meublé . " the entrance seem very dubious indeed . but within the entrance , against a pair of glaze door , stand Gracie , wait for he , a figure of perfect , serious respectability . she wear a mackintosh and carry a red Baedeker in addition to her handbag . close by she stand a sad , pale houseman , in slipper , striped sleeve , and a long white apron . 

 " well ? " say Gracie , and shake hand . 

 the houseman silently go to the car , seize the suit - case and disappear with they into the building . 

 3 . 

 " C'est ça , " say Gracie to the chauffeur , who touch his cap and drive away . 

 " now we be here ! " she say to Evelyn , and at last smile . 

 " what be the object of that Baedeker ? " he enquire , with a quasi - sardonic blandness . 

 she reply : " I go out specially to buy it yesterday , and I shall carry it with I everywhere . just for a sign to myself that I have   climb out of the rut of be always so correct and rich and know the good place , and be superior to common people . that be why I buy the mackintosh too . I want to be common . I be sick of be in the swim - in everything . it be come over I . I simply have to have a change . if I have not   I do believe I should have - well , I do not   know what ! I think it be rather romantic to carry a mackintosh and a Baedeker and walk in the rain . do not   you ? " 

 " I see what you mean , " Evelyn say negligently . " you be not   feel unwell , be you ? " 

 " no . a bit tired , that be all . why ? " 

 " oh , nothing . I have an idea you look pale ... well , what be the next move ? " 

 " the next move be lunch . we must have it early . " 

 " where ? " 

 " anywhere . the first rotten little place we see . there be lot of them about . place you and I have never hear of . I be sure they be great fun . come along . quick ! quick ! " 

 she cross the boulevard in front of he , and they turn westward towards the Madeleine ; then into the rue Tronchet ; half - way up the rue Tronchet she take a side - street to the right . they do not speak . 

 " now here be one , for instance , " she say , please , stop suddenly at the first corner in the side - street . yes , lo ! a little restaurant and wineshop , situate like a minor public - house in London . an untidy zinc bar on the ground - floor , not as yet very busy . a narrow staircase hardly visible in a corner . 

 " it must be up here , " she murmur , and up she go , Evelyn follow . 

 the dirty bare staircase , which in its middle part be dangerously dark , end in a restaurant of the same dimension as the bar - room . a buffet . a number of extremely small table , cover with coarse grey - white linen . clumsy black - handle knife and black - handle three - pronged fork . salt in lump . Bread in yard . Glass cruet , twin receptacle contain vinegar and oil . Odours . Warmth . no air . 

 a plump , pleasant young woman in soil blue dress and still more soiled white apron be serve some dozen Sundayed customer of the small bourgeois class . they be all absorb in eating , and they be nearly all talk ; and while they masticate and talk they ledge the extremity of their tool on either side of their plate . the napkin , which a few man wear as bib , be of the same material as the table - cloth , but apparently large . the scene be squalid enough , until you regard it as romantic , when it cease to be anything else but romantic . 

 the plump woman , lively without haste or flurry , point to an empty table , with a friendly yet commanding gesture which say : 

 " you be not   absolutely compel to take that table , but on the whole you will be well advise to take it . " 

 they take it . the waitress then ignore they ; she attend to customer in what she deem to be the right order of precedence . 

 Evelyn remove his big overcoat , which be damp . Gracie loose her new mackintosh and dispose her bag and the Baedeker on a corner of the table . they settle themselves on insecure cane - bottom chair . nothing more to do till the waitress should occupy herself with they . 

 constraint and self - consciousness separate they . and they be mark customer . everybody in the room know , and show by curious glance that they be different from the ordinary clientele . Evelyn feel incapable of make conversation . Gracie appear not to care whether they converse or be silent . the waitress at last arrive at their table , and at once display an amiable and genuine interest in their individual desire . Gracie alter her mind twice about dish , but the waitress be not to be ruffle by indecision . 

 " and to drink ? " say she , when the menu be definitely fix . 

 " Beer , " say Gracie suddenly , not consult Evelyn . 

 then they have to be idle until the first dish and hot plate be plant before they . eat for a time obviate the social necessity for talk . 

 the waitress pop her tousled head between they and ask : 

 " that please you ? " 

 " much , " say Gracie . 

 " so much the well , " say the waitress , and leave they . they be still separate by a constraint which , instead of diminish , grow in intensity . as for Evelyn , he fear to meet Gracie 's eye . why ? he do not know . honestly , he could not imagine why . all he know be that he feel ridiculously self - conscious , and that she too be self - conscious . he could not even think consecutively . he do not try to understand Gracie 's motive in this extraordinary caprice . he try neither to examine the immediate past nor to foresee the immediate future . he have to be content with mere existence in an uncomfortable and interminable present . 

 " you have   never be in a place like this before ? " say Gracie . 

 " oh ! have not   I ! " say Evelyn , who be remind of his first frugal visit to Paris a quarter of a century early . 

 Islet of talk in a vast heaving ocean of taciturnity ! 

 the meal do come to an end . Coffee be drunk , thick , out of thick overflowing cup . Evelyn pay the bill , whose total be the equivalent of five - and - sixpence . all the table be fill . two more customer rise into the room from the stairway . 

 " we be interfere with business , " say Evelyn , get up . the waitress warn Gracie of the peril of the dark stair . they reach the street , and take deep breath . 

 " I love it ! " Gracie say with emphasis . 

 " yes , " Evelyn reluctantly agree . " and now what next ? " Gracie glance at he , half tenderly , half slyly . 

 " I be still tired , " she say . " I expect I have   eat too much . I do love it . suppose we go back to my room ? it be not   rain . " 

 content 
 chapter 56 

 DECLARATION 

 " be not   it all lovely and vulgar ? " Gracie exclaim , look at Evelyn for some expression of morbid delight to match her own . 

 " no exaggeration to call it vulgar , " say Evelyn with a humour smile . 

 they have climb some fusty , dusty , ill - carpet stair to what be mark as the first floor , though it be really the second , the first be a mezzanine . Gracie have produce a latch - key to open the double - door lead into her rent flat ; they have go through a small ante - chamber or hall , and be now at the open double - door lead therefrom into the drawing - room . 

 a large and lofty apartment : carve and partly gild cornice , discolour ceiling , heavily pattern wall - paper tear in one or two place , heavily frame oil - painting of landscape and of richly breasted girl whose flimsy drapery be on the very point of slip off to disclose the root of all evil , a life - sized white statue of a woman whose modesty be similarly imperille , a stuff black bear close by it , heavy and cumbrous imitation Louis Quatorze furniture , all shabby gilt , on the mantelpiece a vast ormolu and gilt clock   not go   with vast candelabra to correspond , and a stain crimson carpet which cover the entire floor . see on a stage from the pit such an interior might have pass for luxury . see from within itself it be as hatefully spurious as a false coin . it shock Evelyn . 

 " I adore it because it be so awful , " say Gracie , as they gaze around . 

 " why ? " 

 " well , I do not   know . I tell you I want a change from all that expensive respectability that I have   be imprison in all my life . I like to be vulgar and low sometimes . that be I , you know , and we may as well be honest about it . " 

 " expensive ! " say Evelyn . " you be not   get this show for two franc a night , I be sure . " 

 " no , it be not   cheap , " she change her ground . " but I do not   mind that . it be what I want . and I find it all by myself . come and see my bedroom . " 

 she lead he through a masked door in a corner of the drawing - room along a short passage , and so into a bedroom of the same dimension and in the same style as the drawing - room : enormous bed , two night - table , enormous cheval - glass , enormous sofa , enormous dressing - table , and enormous wardrobe . the room be in a state of extreme disorder : open trunk , open toilet - case , open door of the wardrobe , white fabric protrude from a shut drawer in the wardrobe , garment throw on several chair and on the floor . the garment , however , tend to civilise the room . Evelyn note the costly splendour of Gracie 's brush and other toilet utensil spread higgledypiggledy over the dusty glassy surface of the dressing - table . 

 " the bed 's very comfortable , " Gracie remark , apologetic despite herself . 

 " well , that be a good mark , anyway , " say Evelyn . " then you stay here last night , I see . " 

 " consider I ring you from here at eight o'clock this morning , you might have guess I have not   just get here . besides , do not   I tell you I would only that moment waken up ? " 

 " of course you do , " he agree . " but I think you say Tessa could not   be leave . " 

 " oh ! tessa ! " she answer lightly . " Tessa must stick it for a day or two , like other people ... and you have not   even shake hand with I yet , " she finish , as if add one final item to a series of grievance . 

 they be stand side by side . Gracie have pitch her hat and her handbag and the Baedeker on to the bed , and she be take off her mackintosh . she stop and look sternly at he , one arm out of and the other in the mackintosh . but though her glance be stern , the forward , upward poise of the head and a tremor of the vermilion lip seem to draw he to she . he kiss she . a formal kiss , a kiss of ceremony . little more than a peck . no significance in it , even less significance than there have be in the kiss of the previous night in the car . he know that between many man and woman kiss be a habit , like handshake . and what could a kiss mean when the kisser be wear a big overcoat and the kiss entangle in a mackintosh ? and they be separate now , if not by constraint , by an obscure hostility . 

 Gracie , have get rid of the mackintosh , turn back towards the passage . in the passage be a door . 

 " that be the bathroom and so on , " she say . " you can hang your overcoat in there - and powder your nose . " 

 when he re - enter the drawing - room she be recline with her foot tuck under she on an easy - chair . her eye be close . 

 " sit down , " she say weakly , not open her eye . 

 as he come in Evelyn touch a large gild radiator ; it be very hot . 

 " oh , dear ! " she say . " I do feel so tired . " 

 " I think you be never tired , " he respond , with surprise , but sympathetically . 

 " well , " she say , glance at he covertly , " I do get tired sometimes in the afternoon , and then I rest a bit , and then I be perfectly all right again . we be all up and down . woman , I mean . I say , would you mind if I go and lie on the bed for a tiny weeny minute ? " 

 " do , " say he . 

 " I think I will . " she rise from the horrible easy - chair " here ! you can read this . " she hand he " the Nature of the Physical World , " which have be insecurely perch on a console . 

 he accept it in silence . she leave the room , turn her head at the door to give he a doleful smile . she forget to shut the door , as she forget to shut all door . 

 Evelyn , drop the book , think : 

 " this be rotten . " 

 he feel exceedingly gloomy . still , some intimacy have be reach . she be treat he as an intimate . and he be less ill at ease . there be something rather piquant , interesting , provocative , in the situation , and in her strange demeanour . and at bad they could not be interrupt . they have themselves to themselves . 

 he stroll to one of the big window and look forth at the boulevard . rain , persistent and ruthless . the road and the pavement be mirror reflect the melancholy of the universe . he think he hear a voice , distant , thin , shrill , lack its customary richness . 

 " Evelyn ! Evelyn ! Evelyn ! " 

 " come . " 

 he go to the bedroom , of which the door be wide open . he halt at the door . 

 " yes ? " 

 she be not on the bed ; she be in the bed . under her head be her own pillow . he see her frock on a chair . other garment , which have previously disfigure and civilise the room , be now hide somewhere , and the baggage be stack in a corner . 

 " I think I must have some tea , " she murmur , eye direct towards the ceiling . 

 " well , there be some attendance here , I suppose . I will ring , shall I ? " 

 " oh yes , there be attendance of a sort , " she answer , shift her head to look at he . " come in . come in . I shall not   explode . " she be fretful . he advance into the room . " but they will never be able to make my kind of tea . I be go to get up and make it myself . the thing be in the bathroom . I never travel without my tea - gadget . will you have some too ? " 

 " you stay where you be , " he say firmly , feel sorry for she . " I will make the tea . " 

 " but you can not   make tea . " 

 " can not   I ? you will see in a minute . I have   show more than one person at the Palace exactly how tea ought to be make . " 

 " no . I can not   have you make tea for I . it be not decent . " 

 " please do as I tell you , " he say sharply . 

 she yield with meekness . 

 " you be a darling . " 

 2 . 

 in the bathroom he discover the tea - gadget complete on a tray on the floor , conceal beyond the end of the bath . everything be there : saucepan , teapot , hot - water jug , cup and saucer   two , spoon , sugar , white dry " metra " fuel , a lemon , a monogramme fruit knife , a box of match , and a small canister of tea . it be true that he could make tea . and indeed one of his theory , perhaps sex - biased , be that man could make tea well than woman . while the water be boil he slice the lemon , warm the pot , and drop four spoonful of tea into it . no hitch . no slip . Perfection . the watch saucepan do boil , with startling alacrity . as he carefully carry the loaded tray into the bedroom , he be aware of an even high degree of intimacy . strange vocation for he , be a chambermaid ! but he enjoy it , and be proud . Gracie smile at he celestial thank . 

 " you might stick it down here on the bed . there be plenty of room . and will you mind shut the door ? " 

 " Lady , " say he , deposit the tray on the soil crimson satin eiderdown , which must have have vast and varied experience in keep human body warm , " I be about to do so . but have both hand full of tray - the rest be silence . " he think , carefully shut the door , that a request to shut door come in from the great leaver - open of door that ever live . 

 " I like you when you be sprightly , " she say . " and I like your new suit . " 

 " it be an old suit , " he correct she . 

 " yes , of course . that be what father always say . " 

 " and while I be about it , " he say , " I will shut a few more door . " 

 and have shut the door of the room he shut the door of the wardrobe , open a drawer , straighten some linen that have be stick out of it , and push it to again . Gracie smile at the operation , lower her eyelid . 

 " will you pour ? " she ask . 

 " I shall pour , " he answer , draw a heavy gilt chair up to the bedside . 

 " I be so grateful , " say she , relapse into fatigue after her few sentence of liveliness . 

 he pour out the tea . she turn and lie on her side , face he , and , her head prop on her right hand , take the cup without the saucer in her left hand and sip . 

 " you be quite right , darling , " she say . " you can make tea . it be a gift . " 

 they each drink two cup . 

 " Another . " 

 " no , thank , " she say . " you might put the tray on the floor . it be only in the way . " 

 " on the table will be well , " he say , and move the tray . 

 " will not   you sit on the bed ? " she suggest . 

 he sit on the bed . 

 " now do you feel well ? " 

 " I just want you to listen , " she say , ignore his question . " I have   get to tell you something , and I swear to myself I would tell you instantly we would have tea . all day yesterday I be die to tell you , but I could not   make up my mind to it . I keep put it off and put it off . that be why I do not   telephone you . and it be why I be so stiff and awkward with you at lunch . nervousness . you know - it stop you from be natural . you can not   be natural and easy when you know you have something awful to do and can not   bring yourself up to the scratch . it sort of weigh you down . and I be so tired . I could not   sleep last night . " 

 " nor could I , " say Evelyn . 

 she glance at he sharply . 

 " oh , could not   you sleep either ? " she seem pleased . " I be in a most terrible mess . terrible . I do not   expect you can help I . but if you can not   no one else can . I know I ought not   to worry you . still , when one 's desperate " - she pause - " as I be . Evelyn , my dear - " she be silent . 

 he think , anxious : 

 " what now ? what be the scrape she be in ? it be an infernal shame the way her father leave she to take care of herself . she be incapable of take care of herself . look at she now in this place , and I sit on her bed , and her father not give a damn where she be ! " 

 her face be pathetic to he . the sight of it rouse his protective instinct , his instinct for solve problem and for set people in the right path and see that they keep to it . whatever foolishness she have commit , his wisdom must save she somehow from the consequence of it . and he be convince in his pride that there be no difficulty that he could not vanquish , no trouble that he could not conjure away . a nuisance , of course ; but nuisance have to be squarely confront . the image of the four o'clock train shoot surprisingly through his brain . he have forget it . 

 " well ? " he encourage she . 

 " I be too fond of you , my dear . " 

 as the full significance of those first five word penetrate into his mind - a matter not instantaneous but occupy a few second - his first reflection be : " this be what come of have anything to do with a hotel - merger ! " and his second : " but what be there in I to attract she ? " he have have this thought before , but not so puzzlingly . he open his lip to speak , though he do not know what he would say . she raise her arm for silence , gaze at he with a long , woebegone , martyrise , mercy - implore look . he be not genuinely startle by her confession . he have only be mislead for a moment by the phrase , ' most terrible mess , ' and the word ' desperate ' : which have appear to he to indicate a calamity more material than unrequited passion . now her soul be newly light for he , and he begin to discern a little more plainly the deep of her character . he understand , as by revelation , that different people may have different estimate of the importance of passion . the question be one which he have seldom ponder , and never exhaustively . 

 she proceed : 

 " when I tell you how I have be think of you for week , and how I would come to London just to see you , and all that , I be put it much too mildly . it be far bad than that . one reason why I have   be so keen on take charge of Tessa be to keep my mind off you . yes . I may as well admit it . if you have not   happen to catch sight of I at Calais , I should have try never to see you again . because I be frightfully depressed in London - I mean about you . the walk in the rain be lovely , and we be near - be not   we ? - only somehow thing be very chilly , very chilly . but when we meet at Calais like that , I think that could not   be just accident . I do not   believe in chance , but I do believe in providence - God . yes , I do . I believe God be in everything . I could not   get over that meeting . so I ring you up . I have to . and you be so sweet on Friday night - though you be not   a bit sweet on the telephone on Friday afternoon - and then your know what I have be think while they sing that trio , and your think the very same - well , that be too much for I , that be ! I might have get over the meeting at Calais , but I could not   get over that . I think , surely it must mean something . so yesterday I take this flat , and I have not   the pluck to ring you up until this morning . you know , my dear , I have   be rather in hell , still be . I be not the tiny morsel conventional . no ! but there be something deep in I that say to I a woman ought never to say the thing to a man that I be say to you now . it be against nature ; and nature be not   conventional ; it be against my nature - part of my nature . only , however deep you dig into your nature , there be always a layer that be deep . and it be that deep layer , when I half get down to it , that decide I I ought to speak to you . must speak , in fact . and - and - then you - " 

 he foresee that she be go to remind he that he have kiss she . but he be wrong . she definitely stop . he like she for not refer to the kiss . she be too magnanimous to refer to they ; and she have too just a sense of proportion to give any real importance to such social trifle . how far they have progress in intimacy , and at what speed , since her first telephone call only two day early ! and it be all due to her initiative alone ! he feel once again , and more strongly , the impulse to protect she , to save she from the consequence of her headlong , capricious temperament . he admire her gift of self - analysis ; as for he , he be always very reluctant even to try to analyse himself ; he accept himself as he be , and indeed he regard self - analysis as a rather morbid exercise . nevertheless it suit some people , and it suit she , and she could do it . that bit about she not be conventional but feel all the same how it be against nature for a woman to say to a man what she have say to he - that be good ; it show a masculine breadth of mind . and then deliberately to go against her own axiom of conduct - that show a still great breadth of mind , super - masculine . but of course she do possess a mind ; her conversation continually prove it . and she could be so formidably , so disturbingly serious . with all her disadvantage , she be a creature to respect . impossible , even in one 's most secret soul , to condescend to she . and how marvellous her mere voice ! it enrich everything she say . 

 but for he a woman be either an asset or a liability , and she would be an everlasting liability . long ago he have decide that to live with she would be to live in an inferno mitigate by transient glimpse of paradise . leave she for your work in the morning , and you could never be sure what would not happen to she while she be out of your sight ; you would be on pin until you see she again in the evening , and after that you would have no peace of mind until she be asleep . to live with such a woman would be a career in itself . all these thought run through his mind in a moment . 

 she have put he in a perfect hell of an awkward position . but that be a point which would not have occur to she , naturally ! she be egregiously self - centre . what in the name of God could he answer to she ? Withal , he be happy as well as distract . the situation be terrible , but it be terribly flattering , and there be beauty in it , and the beauty communicate itself to the whole environment . 

 the rain rain hard than ever ; through the interstice of the once - white curtain he could distinguish raindrop slip down the window - pane ; but now the rain , the sadness of the implacable winter rain , be beautiful . her toilet - gadget , offspring of wealth and taste , be beautiful ; the eye could gaze on they with a voluptuous satisfaction . and her blue négligé , or whatever it be - wondrous . and how well it become her hair and her pale face . and they be together in an inviolable solitude . they be on the boulevard , but as safe from pry interruption as in a boat by themselves at sea . for nobody know where he be , and he be sure that nobody know where she be . they be lose and undiscoverable in Paris . something beautiful in that piquant , provocative security . 

 she say , in a low tone : 

 " do not   say anything . do not   answer . I know I have   put you in a frightfully awkward position . I know . I know . " her voice sink . then louder : " will you draw the curtain , please ? it be get dark . I hate these winter afternoon , but I love winter evening ... yes , I know I have   make it awkward for you . I know . " 

 her voice die quite away . she be not so self - centre after all ; he have be unjust to she . ' they ' have an extraordinary faculty for put a man in the wrong . 

 3 . 

 he draw the heavy curtain . he see a light behind he . she be sit up and have switch on one of the bed - lamp . he switch on the other lamp , the one nearer the window . in the soft shade light the room grow quite presentable , and its false luxury authentic . she pat the surface of the bed at the spot where he have be sit , to indicate that he must resume his seat . he obey . it be all a marvellous experience , unique . she have not utter a word . 

 " do not   say anything until to - morrow , " she say . " say nothing . nothing ... You're very dignified . but then you always be . I do admire your dignity . " 

 he think : 

 " to - morrow ! ' and my train this afternoon ? " 

 his train , however , seem to have lose every shred of its importance . it be not his train ; it be no train in particular : it be a train that leave Paris monotonously every afternoon at four o'clock . 

 she be now sit up , and therefore near to he . she look away from he , star with a stern , mournful expression at the expanse of the window - curtain . she turn and look not at his face , but at his right hand , which be rest on his right thigh as he sit half - turn towards she on the side of the bed . she lean forward a little more to pat his hand , maternally to soothe he , girlishly to excuse herself for have put he in a position so intensely difficult . the fold of the blue wrap slip aside . he observe for the first time that under it she be not wear a camisole ; she be wear pyjama , unbuttoned at the neck . she have undress completely and put herself to bed in earnest . as she lean forward he could not fail to see her sumptuous breast , mysterious within the shadow of the loosened , thin - spin garment . 

 what elemental force , raise his left hand , draw it to her shoulder and lay his finger gently on her velvet - cover shoulder ? Madness perhaps , but a divine madness . there be something tremendously exciting in the fact that whereas he be fully clothe and might have walk out into the street without cause remark , she be unseemly for any eye but his . her expression change slowly from sternness to soft , timid bliss . she be very beautiful : her face , her hair , her eye , her lip , her bosom - all be intolerably beautiful . their beauty redeem the entire room from its horrid vulgarity . the lamp have somewhat change the room , and now her beauty , trembling , change it completely . Bliss await he , a dozen inch off . there be no liability , only asset . he cease to reason . he feel that reason be an absurdity . Reason be dissolve in emotion . anxiety , apprehension , career , worldly consideration be cast away and forget . his hand still on her shoulder , he push she backwards on to the pillow , push she violently ; and she yield in ravished acquiescence to his violent gesture . and wait , resign , humble , ecstatic in bliss . 

 he lean over she , and kiss she open mouth . she close her eye . suddenly she lift her head an inch from the pillow and repay his kiss . and he too , have give happiness to she , be happy beyond measure . no matter what the price , the happiness outvalue it . 

 she whisper : 

 " and do you really not sleep last night ? " he nod . 

 she whisper : 

 " so we be both lie awake . " he nod . 

 " be you glad when I ring you up on Friday ? " she ask , whispering . 

 he nod . he could distinguish every detail of her eye as he gaze at she , the down on her cheek . 

 " how pale you be ! " he whisper : the first word he have speak ! 

 " I do not   put any rouge on this morning , " she whisper . " I do not   want to look well . I want to look pale . be it wrong of I ? " 

 he shake his head . 

 " sure ? " 

 he nod , in his heart justify what he imagine to be her motive . 

 she say : " I do not   mean I do it to make you think I look pale - " 

 " but I do think you look pale , " he murmur .   once more he have be misjudge she . 

 " I do it because I want to look pale for myself , " she finish her sentence . " and so you notice I look pale ? " 

 he nod . 

 " very pale ? " she be smile . 

 " rather pale . " 

 " and do you feel sorry for I ? " 

 he nod . 

 " be you sorry for I because you think I be sort of pin away for you ? " 

 " no . " 

 " I be so glad . that would have be awful . I could not   have bear it . then why ? " 

 " I think you be unwell . and you look so tired . " 

 " do I ? well . I be tired . but I be not tired now . be you ? " 

 " not a bit . " 

 " how lovely! ... darling , tell I all you ever think about I . I want to know all you ever think about I . I know I be an egotist , so you need not   tell I that . tell I all the nice thing . " 

 she be a child , he reflect , answer her smile with a smile . fancy be curious about what people think of you , about the impression you be make ! it never occur to he to wonder what impression be himself be make . he just go blandly on his way . perhaps it be he who be the egotist , with his instinctive indifference to outside opinion . 

 he say , louder : 

 " you have not   be very egotistic with Tessa . " 

 " ah ! but that be a special kind of thing . that be show off - to myself . tell I some more . " 

 " I will tell you the fine thing I know about you . I have   never forget it and I never shall . " 

 " what ? " she whisper , eager . " whisper it . " 

 he whisper : 

 " be still and know that I be God . " 

 " but I never say that to you . quote it , I mean . I can remember everything I ever say to you - or you say to I . everything . " 

 " no . but you say it to your father , and he tell I . it puzzle your father , but it do impress he . " he think for a moment of her neglectful father . 

 " but it do not   puzzle you . " 

 " it be the great saying ever say , " he reply . she raise her head and give he a delicious warm kiss ; then , contemplating , slowly stroke his cheek . 

 " how well you shave ! " she murmur . " much well than father . tell I , you be not   annoy that morning when I have the nerve to ask you to take I with you to Smithfield ? " 

 " a bit . for a moment . " 

 " oh ! how honest you be , darling ! I adore you for that . I would soon hear that than something smooth . but do you enjoy the visit - I be with you ? " 

 " yes I do , as soon as I have give myself up to it . " 

 " would not   you like to read what I write about it , in my book . I have   get a carbon of it here . it be in the middle drawer of the dressing - table . " 

 " shall I get it now ? " 

 she nod . he stir . 

 " it must be very uncomfortable for you , on your elbow like this , and your leg all twisted . " 

 yet she have call herself an egotist ! 

 he find the typescript half - bury in glove and handkerchief . he hold it in his hand , without open it . no title on the limp green paper cover . no name . no clue . nothing . he finger the dark green silk which bind the sheet together . her book would certainly show what she think of he , her reaction to he ; and for this reason alone he be acutely impatient to read it . how wrong he have be : superiorly credit himself with indifference to outside opinion about himself ! he be quite as curious concern her estimate of he as she have be concern his estimate of she . through the curtain he could hear the drumming of the raindrop on the pane . 

 " I be to read this thing now , eh ? at once ? " 

 " of course ! " 

 " shall I go into the other room to read it ? " 

 " no . stay here . I should be so lonely . " 

 " I can not   read by those bed - light , I be afraid . " 

 she spring like a leopard suddenly out of the bed , rush to the door , and turn on the chandelier - light , then to the dressing - table and turn on the two toilet - light . 

 " now can you see to read ? " she be stand close by he . the blue négligé be a lovely flimsy thing . below its curve hem show her blue trouser , and below the end of the trouser her foot , bare . her eye flash with joy and pride . he recall the soft assent of her shoulder under his hand , and think : " what an ass I be to hesitate for a single second ! " do one hesitate to enter heaven ? and the pure intimacy - exquisite almost past endure ! he sit down in the sole easy chair , and open the typescript . she move to and fro restlessly . he glance at she with a benevolent reprove frown . 

 " look here , " he say . " if you want something to do , you might take away that tea - tray . I be sure you be like I - you hate to see thing out of place , especially on the floor . in fact while you be about it you might do a bit of washing - up . " his tone be lightly tease . 

 she smile enigmatically . " but there be nothing in there to wipe with . " 

 " there be a million towel or so . I see they . " 

 " very well . " 

 she stoop and pick up the tray , and off she go , lodge the rim of the tray against the door - jamb while she turn the knob . 

 " and leave the door open , " he say . " leave both door open . " 

 " but why ? " 

 " I want to hear the sound of you washing - up . " 

 his false sternness enchant she . 

 " I shall spoil my beautiful dressing - gown , " she object . " take it off then . " she vanish , and come back in a moment in her pyjama and throw the peignoir into the middle of the bedroom floor , where it lie - furnish the room afresh . she be go . he could feel her ardent happiness like a heat ray . soon he could hear , faintly , the sound of crockery under the hand of the new kitchen - maid . he be ineffably happy . out of what strange material could felicity build itself ! 

 in such felicity he would have be unable to concentrate on any other book , but he find that on this book he could concentrate without the least difficulty . it begin with her sensation in Smithfield Market . it be frank , wholly shameless . be it fit for print in England ? well , it must be , since a publisher have agree to publish it . he read on the second page that her companion and escort be masterful without quite know it . she know in herself that he be masterful , and she know it too from the demeanour of other towards he . he expect to find a lot more about her companion . but he be disappoint . the book be about she , not about he . be he masterful ? he suppose he must be . because she could not be wrong . everything else in the chapter be so convincing . he marvel at the total picture of her reaction to Smithfield . he have to admit that he have be blind to some of the secret essence of Smithfield . she be more fully reveal it to he . her reference to the nun be shocking . but beautiful too . on each page she unveil beauty whose existence he have not suspect . 

 he think : 

 " she have a lovely mind ... of course . I know that before . the girl be a genius ! but be she ? can I judge ? she may be able to write this , and nothing else . anyway , she be a genius in herself , even if she sit idle and do not   do a thing . I be a conceited idiot . I have   be condescend to she . " 

 after a short time she reappear in the bedroom . 

 " have you read it - about the meat - market ? " 

 " I have   just this moment finish that part , and I be go on . " 

 " well ? " 

 " I think it be simply wonderful . that be all - for the present . " 

 " you really mean that ? be careful of your word . because I shall believe you . " 

 " I really mean it . " 

 " oh , my dear ! " she breathe . " I be so relieved . you can not   tell how happy you make I . I have a sort of idea it might not   be anything after all . " 

 " well , it be something after all . " 

 " you be a great reader , be not   you ? " 

 " I have   read a fair amount . but I have   never read anything like this - since Marie Bashkirtseff . " 

 " who be she ? " 

 " never hear of she ? no . of course you would not   have hear of she . she be before your time . but in her time she make a devil of a stir in the world . " 

 she approach the chair where he be recline . 

 " thank you , " she say , with extraordinary modesty , and kiss he . 

 he calmly turn a page . 

 " I will tell you some more later . " he bend his eye to the new page . 

 " but you can leave it now , " she suggest . 

 " why ? " 

 " why ! I want to talk . " 

 " I will not leave it , " he say positively . 

 " but do not   you want we to talk ? " 

 " I want to listen to you . and this be you . " he raise the typescript . " have not   you get anything to do ? " 

 " yes . Plenty . " 

 " well , go and do it then . but not here . " 

 " why not here ? " 

 " because you be too exciting . " 

 " very well , darling , " she acquiesce , look for and snatch up her handbag and depart , shut the door . 

 his attention be now distract from the page . what would an impartial observer say ? there he be , at his ease in her bedroom . and she in pyjama ! Pooh ! there be not and could not be an observer , impartial or otherwise . neither he nor she have anybody to consider . they be their own convention - maker . and what be wrong with pyjama ? he be ride by outwear social prejudice . in these day do not both sex go to cocktail - party in pyjama . and her suit , in addition to be at least as decent as an evening frock , be very handsome and very elaborate : obviously intend to be see and admire . the fact be he be be scar by the word ' pyjama ' and its association . silly ! and if anyone be entitle to see and admire pyjama , and she in they , be not he the man ? have she not welcome his kiss as she lie in bed in those very pyjama ? if so , why in the name of reason should he not watch she as she walk to and fro in the pyjama ? yes , utterly silly ! and more - be she not the writer of the astonishing page which have thrill he ? she , the actual author , somewhere outside , probably in the bathroom , obedient to he , submit meekly to his command ! that be what be so marvelous - marvellous enough to be hardly credible . have not such a girl the right to wear what she choose ? and still more - he be happy . and she be happy . he repeat to himself that they be their own convention - maker . and why not ? 

 she return again , but not soon . he be half - way through the typescript . 

 " how do I look ? " she ask , as she stand close by he . her cheek have become delicately rose . she no long want to be pale for herself . she want to signalise her happiness , her perfect content . 

 " you be an artist , " he answer . 

 " say you be happy , " she appeal to he , finger on lip , rather childlike . 

 " I be . " his tone be gay . " well , I see I must not   read any more just now . " she take the manuscript from he . " but I shall not   be properly happy till I have   read every word of it . and that be your fault . I expect you know I have   miss my train . " 

 " you have not ! " 

 " let us guess what time it be . " 

 " three o'clock , " she guess . 

 " I guess five to four . " 

 his watch say five o'clock . they be both astounded . he have always maintain that he have the hour continuously at the back of his mind , to ten minute or so . and now he be sixty - five minute out . his happiness be mysteriously increase , his spirit heighten . 

 " what do it matter ? " he exclaim joyously . " I have telephone to London , but I can call they up again - " 

 " and say you have   miss the train . " 

 " not a bit of it . I have   get my reputation to think of . I never miss train . I will say I have   be keep . " 

 " and so you have ! " she say . " but you be glad , be not   you ? " 

 he nod . she put her arm round he . 

 " I would well telephone to the hotel for a room , " he add . 

 " not yet , " she appeal . 

 " all right . plenty of time . but ought not   you to be get dress ? " 

 " dress ? I do not   want to waste my time dress . shall not   I do as I be ? " 

 " but we shall have to eat , shall not   we ? and I gather we can not   eat here . " 

 " of course we can eat here , " she say . " you do not   know your Paris , darling . all we have to do be to telephone , to Larue 's - say . and order what we like . they will deliver it here , complete ; and they will take away the ruin and remain . I will do it now , shall I ? " 

 " ' do it now ' be a pretty sound motto . " 

 " what would you like ? " 

 " what you would like . " 

 " may I order anything I want ? " 

 " you must . " 

 she run off into the drawing - room , where the telephone be . alone , he smile to himself . 

 she come run back . 

 " tell I what champagne , " she say , as it be breathless . 

 " Krug 1919 . " 

 she vanish . 

 he think : 

 " now where do I stand with she ? I have   kiss she . that kind of a kiss must mean something . what ? what do it mean to she ? marriage ? I do not   care whether it mean marriage or not . no , I do not   care ! " he have be starve of woman for long . the fast be at an end now . 

 she reappear , and lie down like an animal on the hearth - rug , shake her head at the suggestion of the sofa . 

 a little before half - past six he have finish read the account of her reaction to life in London and Paris : fragmentary impression connect only by her individuality ; a series of very light that shoot up into the sky , dazzlingly illuminate the dark landscape with a strange , perhaps sinister reveal splendour , fade , and leave the landscape in darkness again . not all the flash be equally vivid ; the later be not as brilliant as the early ; but on the whole the book be to he what he have call it : wonderful , simply wonderful . it have fascinate and somewhat dismay he . some minute elapse before he could think himself back into the accustomed three dimension of daily existence . he reflect : " but this girl be staggering . " it be scarcely to be credit that there she lie envelop in the blue négligé , on the hearthrug at his foot , her slipper kick off and her narrow foot bare , pore over " the Nature of the Physical World , " which apparently , from the look of the volume , she have by no mean yet finish . twice , with an exclamation , she have spring up and run into the drawing - room , and through two open doorway he could hear she loud , clear , telephone - voice , alter in French her order for the dinner . 

 then they talk , she on the floor and he in the easy - chair , her finger occasionally stroke his ankle . the intimacy of their seclusion ! the intimacy be exquisite to he ! and plainly so to she too ! the old question : what could she see in he ? then a bell rang , and startle he . 

 " do not   move ! " she smile . " it be our dinner . I will see to it . " 

 her tone and radiant glance thrill he . he have never see anybody as rapturously beatify as she be . and he the sole cause ! if he have repel she , what would have be her state at that moment ? she pass quickly into the drawing - room and close the door . he dash on tiptoe , stealthily , into the bathroom to prepare himself for the enchanting meal . 

 " oh ! there you be ! " she say as he emerge . 

 she be come out of the drawing - room . she clasp his hand and without a word they go to dinner . the round centre table be lay for two ; and she must have lay it herself , for the two place be set close together . 

 " it be what be call a cold collation , except for the soup . do you know how to open champagne ? " she laugh . 

 it be all miraculous . at moment she sit on his knee , and they eat from one plate . 

 he think : " this can not last . it be bind to end . it be too good to last . " 

 hardly have they finish when the bell ring , and startle he again . 

 " they have   come for the thing . I tell they nine o'clock . can it be nine o'clock already ? now you go back into the bedroom , that be a good boy . I will attend to all this . " 

 he obey . she run after he into the bedroom , snatch at her handbag , kiss he - a touch only . 

 " here ! " he say . " I will - " 

 " I be the hostess , if you do not   mind , " she say , give he another kiss . and be go . both door close . 

 his heart be thump in nervousness . the thing be bind to end ; and the duty to end it be his . she return . 

 " Coast clear ! " she say . " how stuffy this central heating be ! " she throw down the négligé . 

 " well , " he say , extremely self - conscious , " I shall have to be off soon . " he have say it . he have no feeling at all of have eat and drunk . 

 " but surely , darling , " she murmur , face he with a candid , artless look of pure amazement . " surely you be not   think of leave I here all by myself to - night . " her eye moisten . 

 content 
 chapter 57 

 the GLOVE 

 next morning at about ten o'clock Evelyn , in his big overcoat , be sit on the terrasse of a large café on the north side of the boulevard . the January air be sharp enough , but Evelyn sit in full sunshine under the glass roofing , and an absolutely clear pale - blue sky above . not a trace of mud or dampness on the boulevard and its broad pavement . you could no more believe that the parisian climate be capable of serious rain than you could believe that a pretty and charming woman see at a party be capable of a scowl or a tantrum . 

 the staff be attend to two huge stove whose warmth enable customer to persist in the open - air habit characteristic of Paris . Evelyn have before he on a tiny round table a tray contain chocolate , roll , butter , and a glass of cold water . boulevard coffee he have reason to distrust . Tea , which might have be excellent , would have suit his alimentary tract well than the chocolate ; but he have order chocolate for the novelty of it , for the joy of the first sip , and because he know that he could rely on its quality . the roll nearly equal the roll of the Imperial Palace ; the butter be delicious . he revel in anticipation of the light meal ; he would be sorry when the last morsel be eat , the last drop drunk , and the palate . cleanse water have to be taste . he revel in the generous sunshine . he revel in the incessant traffic , the tooting of horn , the move spectacle of wayfarer brush past his table , a little shabby and hurry , not a single smart girl and hardly a man whose face do not show the latin melancholy , exact , covetous , implacable , and preoccupy by desire ; hundred of those pallid face in the great motor - bus and in the taxis ; sardonic face of the taxi - driver ; occasionally a magnificent auto ; occasionally a tourist - crowd charabanc ; a small policeman with a big white baton ; shop , other cafés right and leave and opposite ; enormous gilt sign on the monotonously similar façade , and sign black against the pale - blue sky ; Morris Columns advertise the performance at the Opéra , the Opéra Comique , the Francais , the Odéon , the Variétés ; the Palais Royal , the Trianon , the Casino de Paris , etc . , etc . : 

 Paris . he have a sensation of vigorous well - being , of adventure , of an unplanned idle day await he . and he have a sensation of freedom . who would have foresee that he could share a bed with a fellow - creature and yet would sleep moveless for more than six hour , awake at nine o'clock , fatigue , but agreeably fatigue , and refresh ? 

 gracie , on be ask at 2 a.m. about the hour of breakfast have say that she would sleep till call , and that if she be not call she would sleep for ever - noon , 2 p.m. ! she be like that . she have tell he to call she . he have refuse ; she must have her sleep out . she have repeat with a yawn that she must be call - she could not bear the thought of lose in sleep the consciousness of bliss . a slightly peremptory note in her rich , tired voice . silence . Sleep . 

 at nine o'clock , by the twilight of a bed - lamp , he have gaze at her asleep . unique vision : relaxed , the lip part , the eye hide , quiet , regular breathing , youth , beauty . he have gaze , and then rise . if she waken , so much the well for her satisfaction . if she do not waken , so much the well for her health , and for his satisfaction in adhere to his refusal to wake she . he have leave the room to bathe ; return ; she still sleep . he have transfer his stud to a clean shirt , open and shut drawer , find another suit and pair of shoe , every operation make a noise . she have not stir . the project of a solitary breakfast on the boulevard have irresistibly entice he . he have discover her latch - key , and creep away , like a thief in danger of be catch . then the sunshine have smite he . yes , he be aware of a sensation of masculine freedom . 

 as he luxuriate in the breakfast he keep mutter , or perhaps only think , to himself : " by God ! by God ! " mean that he have do it , have voyage to Cythera . he mutter 

 " she be mine ! incredible ! she be mine ! what about her father ? curse her father ! " and think of the smooth organisation of the admirable dinner , he mutter : " by God ! she know how to make a man comfortable ! " this have rather surprise he . nevertheless , on reflection it be not so surprising . have she not preside over her father 's household ! he think : " lucky I have my luggage with I ! " then a shaft prick he : " have she scheme that luggage business beforehand ? " no matter ! he draw out the shaft and throw it down . she be marvellous , she be miraculous , and she be his . a virgin ? he shake his head . no matter ! these notion about the importance of virginity be obsolete . what be her sexual history ? he have no right to enquire . her experiment be her own business . one must be fair . beyond doubt she be passionately in love with he . he think of she with extreme tenderness . he could have forgive her anything . a woman of her extraordinary quality be entitle to a code of her own . he exult in she . 

 a waiter have emerge from the interior of the café , to serve another customer who have rap impatiently on the window , Evelyn ask for a newspaper - any newspaper . two very well - dress english tourist stroll past the terrasse . he have a vague memory of have once see they , the woman assuredly , dining in the restaurant of the Imperial Palace . they do not notice he . 

 " by Jove ! " he think , " I might be recognise here at any moment ! " 

 he have a spasm of apprehension . Absurd . suppose he be recognize - what of it ? the boulevard be a free country . and at any moment he could disappear beyond the possibility of trace into the apartment of his mistress . still , he have the spasm , and he admit to himself that he would not have have it if he have be stay , a bachelor , at a hotel . 

 the waiter bring the newspaper . of course it be a continental anglo - Saxon newspaper . but it be uncrumple , fresh as newly gather fruit , and almost as appetising . he spread it out . the first thing he see on the front page be a little inconspicuous couple of paragraph , to the effect that the governmentally appoint Commission to examine and report on the Licensing Laws and make recommendation thereupon be to hold its first meeting on the Wednesday , and that a number of lead provincial and scottish hotel - proprietor be come to London to give evidence . he be thunderstruck . he would have to return to England on the morrow , Tuesday . be he not the leader of the great national agitation for the reform of the Licensing Laws ? and he remember that he have not telephone to London on the previous night . he who never forget anything have forget the nightly telephoning . Stranger still : he have not once think of it till that very moment ! his exultation die out like a finished candle . he become perturb and gloomy , full of foreboding and of disconsolate dejection . probably , as he have fail to arrive home on the previous night , Cousin or somebody would have call he up at the Concorde or the Montaigne , or both , and would have be tell that he have leave Paris . be sure your sin will find you out ... he have have no expectation that the meeting of the Licensing Commission would start so soon . 

 he must go and break the news to Gracie instantly . he in his turn rap on the window . a waiter emerge . he pay the bill and set off . foreboding ! foreboding ! Gracie 's flat be within two hundred yard of the café . he wish it have be far away . he have creep out of the flat like a thief , and like a thief he re - enter it . curious that , though he be completely innocent in the affair of the Licensing Commission , he have a sense of guilt , as if he be conspire against Gracie ; and he could not shake it off ! 

 he begin minutely to plan his procedure in order to minimise both the shock of the news to she and the inevitable result friction . she would no long be the author of the wonderful book ; she would be a girl in whom emotion would supplant reason : he know it for certain . should he take off his big overcoat before go into the bedroom ? or not ? he would not take it off . the sight of the overcoat would at once convey to she the awkward fact that he have be out ; she would be face with it , and no word say . the few word the well , until she have accustom herself to the new situation . 

 2 . 

 the bed - lamp be burn . she have waken , then . no , she be peacefully , touchingly , asleep . he have merely forget to extinguish the light on depart . where have be his wit ? what have come over he ? he purposely shut the bedroom door with a bang . the bang disturb she . she stir , open her eye , see he . she smile all her love . love for he be her first thought . the overcoat apparently do not disconcert she in the least . 

 " Darling ! " she stretch her arm to welcome he . he advance , bent down , kiss she , tenderly fondle she , kiss she again . she hold he close to she , his thick , rough , overcoat press against her thin delicate pyjama . " Darling ! be you go out ? I be so glad you do not   go out without I . why do not   you wake I when you get up ? I ask you to wake I , do not   I ? " her lip be under his ; she be murmur into his mouth . her rich voice be soft with sleep . 

 " do you ? " he murmur vaguely . by a single misconception she have derange all his plan . he would be compel to speak his confession . 

 " I think I do . " 

 " I should not   have dream of wake you , " he say . " you look too lovely asleep . " 

 she go on : 

 " I have   just this second have a most heavenly idea . of course we could have petit déjeuner here . it be not bad either . but let us go out and have it on the boulevard . at some café . " 

 " fine ! " he agree . " it be a beautiful morning . " 

 he perceive the utter impossibility of confess that he have already breakfast on the boulevard . to do so would break her heart , child that she be . he perceive too that in breakfast alone he have commit an outrage . no ! despite the taste of chocolate on his tongue he have assuredly not breakfast . 

 " well , " he say gently , " I be not go out . I have   be out . " 

 ' oh ! darling ! " she protest , but very lovingly . " and I do want to lie here and watch you dress . I have a delicious dream of watch you dress yourself . why do you go out ? " 

 " only to buy a paper . must keep an eye on the world , you know . " 

 " darling , you be funny . of course you must keep an eye on your funny world , " she assent , with ravish humurous charm . 

 yes , she be unique . he would do anything for she , anythingwithin reason and perhaps a bit beyond reason . but he be troubled . he foresaw terrible complication from the momentshe be make to realise that he must leave she the next morning . while he be remove his overcoat , she slip from under the bedclothe and silently take the overcoat from he and put it on , and laugh at her image in the cheval glass . Evelyn laugh too . she seem not a great deal short than himself , and she could hardly be call thin ; yet the overcoat be immensely too big for she ; it cover half her hand , reach to her ankle ; and as she wrap it round her body it doubly envelop she , like a cloak . 

 " how enormous you creature be ! " she say . " still , it shall be my dressing - gown . do not   you love it on I , dearest ? " she glance at he for admiration , and turn up the deep collar . " how be that ? " 

 " I suppose you be somewhere inside the thing , " he answer . " but I do not   quite know where . oh ! be that your head peep out of it ? what a morsel ! " 

 she go to the window , and draw the curtain apart and raise the blind . bright light rush like an inundation into the room , fill it to the ceiling and transform it . the bed - lamp , which to the eye have be the most important object , be now scarcely visible ; it go on burn unseen and neglect . she gaze forth at the blue sky . 

 " the morning have repent , " she murmur . then she examine her feature close in the dressing - table mirror . " oh ! my God ! " she set to work on they . she roam around , do forty thing . 

 " Bath ! " she say ; and vanish . 

 Evelyn sit down to wait . he want to read again the fatal paragraph , but the newspaper be in the pocket of his overcoat . how the devil be he to tell she ? nothing have be say between they as to his departure , but he be deeply aware that she would resent be leave less than two day after she have seduce he .   thus do he too realistically phrase the event to himself .   he hear faintly the water pour into the bath . he observe the detail of the bedroom . she have pass through it like an invade army ; the havoc and the litter she have make in two minute be unbelievable . 

 " Darling ! " he hear her distant voice . " help ! help ! " 

 he hurry into the bathroom . she lie in the steaming bath , white and pale pink , idly splash : amphibious ; a marvellous , shameless , indecorous vision ; but from the door he could not see her face . 

 " Darling ! do give I that dark soap from the lavatory - basin . be it there , or have I - " 

 " it be there . " 

 he give she the soap . her wet finger touch his . 

 " let I see you , " she say . 

 he advance obediently towards the window , and her eye meet his . 

 " what be you hide from I ? " she ask , as it be casually , but with complete assurance . 

 they be necromancer , woman ; they possess the mysterious sens of animal . his guilt overpower he . well , the moment have come . he bend down and draw the newspaper from the overcoat , which she have throw on the tile floor , with her pyjama on the top of it . he fold the newspaper and hand it to she , indicate the paragraph . she begin by let it drop into the bath - water . 

 " that be what I be hide from you , Mrs. Clever . " he try to make his tone airy , amusing ; but fail . she retrieve the newspaper , and read the paragraph . 

 " well ? " she demand . her eye be very wide open as she look at he innocently , candidly , a puzzled child . 

 explain to she why it be essential that he should be in London for the first sitting of the Commission in order to marshal the evidence for reform , and tell she that it have long since be arrange for the visit hotel - potentate to stay at the Imperial Palace , where they would count on his presence and guidance , he say : 

 " the odious fact be , that I must leave Paris to - morrow morning . and I be most frightfully sick about it . I have no idea that the sitting would start so soon . and nobody else have , either . " 

 Gracie laugh , still with assurance , but a less complete assurance . 

 " you need not   worry about the first day , darling , or the first three or four day , " she say , with a confident air that have in it a trace of something akin to condescension . " you probably do not   know much about parliamentary commission . I do . daddy have have to give evidence before they lot of time - well , two or three time - and I have   often hear he furious at their going - on . he say they generally waste at least a week before they get down to work , and they will even adjourn for a week or a fortnight or a month at the first meeting . believe I , darling , I know ! I have   not live with daddy for nothing . no ! " she be calmly quite peremptory , as one who have settle a question once for all . inexperienced in Evelyn , she do not even suspect that her technique be very badly conceive . 

 " that may be so , " he say quietly , benevolently ; " but all the same I shall have to leave to - morrow morning . " 

 he see her face change into a tragic discomposure . she have continue to splash the bath - water . she cease . she have look at he innocently , candidly , like a child . now she weep like a child - a child that simply can not comprehend some cruel decree of a malevolent providence . her grief desolate Evelyn . he be ashamed of that unspoken sardonic thought of his which have define their come together as a seduction by she , not by he . she be ingenuousness itself . Stricken , she need protection , defence , everything that he could give she . she be entitle to the satisfaction of her young instinct . and withal , what a woman ! he recall her phrase : ' the morning have repent . ' how exquisite ! how easily it have come out ! Doubtless she have lovely fancy like that endlessly , all day , every day . the mind in the delicious , forlorn , suffer child be amazing . to see her suffer be intolerable . all have be happiness . now all be woe . he must soothe she , succour she in her irrational weakness . no . there be no ' must ' about it . he most ardently desire and yearn to soothe and succour she . he move near she , bent down , and take her soft cheek in his hand , and raise her face to his . she be still cry . 

 " would you leave I alone here for a Commission ? " she bubble . 

 " Darling ! " he murmur . " you do not   know how I hate to do it . listen . I will run along to the Concorde at once . " 

 " what for ? " 

 " to telephone to London . I shall get the communication quick there than here . I ought to have telephone to the Palace last night that I be not   come . but I absolutely forget . they will be think I die en route . " he smile . 

 " do not   joke about die , " she say , loud . the joke have frighten she , " and as for get the communication , I will get that for you well than any hotel . I know a man at the Quai d'Orsay - " 

 she free her cheek and climb impulsively out of the bath , wet he . and , all wet , she put on his overcoat , and run into the drawing - room , leave a trail of wet footmark . he follow . what decision , what resource she have ! she be no more the defenceless child . she be a woman engage in battle to retain possession of a treasure to her priceless . 

 " what be your number at the Palace ? " she demand sharply over her shoulder . he give the number and wait . in three minute she have use her influence at the French Foreign Office . she ring off . 

 " you will see how soon you will get London ! " she say triumphantly . 

 Evelyn have somehow temporarily dwindle into a nonentity . she pad back into the bath and he after she . 

 " you will see it be bind to be all right , " she say . her self - deception be touching . she believe what she wish to believe . ' they ' all do . he know that there be no hope whatever of it be all right . but he do not say so . 

 " you might turn on some more hot water , " she say . " this bath 's nearly cold . " 

 nevertheless the water be still give off steam . she lie passive , all her enchant body immerse except the head . she lie for a long time . at interval she burst into a sob , and tear fall . Evelyn hang up the damp overcoat , inside out . no soon have he do so than she say , brokenly : 

 " let I have that , will you ? " and get out of the bath , wipe herself , get into the overcoat once more , and pass into the bedroom . 

 " I shall lie down for a while , " she say . 

 and down she lie in the overcoat . comical sight . Evelyn attentively cover she with the eiderdown . then the telephone - bell rang . 

 " what do I tell you , darling ! " she exclaim . he be relieve that she have resume the use of that last word , though he be well aware that ordinarily it mean nothing in her vocabulary . since their union , however , he have decide that it have begin to mean all that he could have wish it to mean . and in fact it have . 

 Voice of Mr. Cousin in the telephone in the drawing - room . it explain that as he have not ring up , Oldham , recall upon his holiday , have go to Victoria to meet his master on Sunday night , and that on the man 's report that his master have not arrive vain attempt have be make to communicate with Evelyn at both the Concorde and the Montaigne , in which place it be understand that he have leave Paris for London . in answer to this Evelyn state with careful vagueness that he have decide to take a brief holiday from his hotel , but have be prevent from telephone news of the change of plan . he enquire about the sitting of the Licensing Commission . the answer surprise and intensely relieved he . and then Cousin begin to talk generally of Imperial Palace affair . 

 Evelyn resist the onset of business ; he prefer to reserve his mind exclusively for the affair of Gracie ; but the force of habit overcome his resistance . he want not to enjoy the familiar sensation of deal with the problem and difficulty of the hotel organism ; but he enjoy it , and he could not deny this to himself . such sensation have constitute almost the whole of his emotional life , until the last two day . Gracie have bring about a revolution in his mind , overturn a throne ; but now the depose monarch resume dominion in a moment . strange ! disconcert ! yet somehow reassuring , comfort ! his thought be far too complex for analysis , especially by one who be temperamentally hostile to the process of analysis . 

 3 . 

 Gracie be envelop in his overcoat on the bed in the next room , incalculable , exact , an exquisite , adore , brilliant , childlike monopolist ... "concerne the arrangement for lodge the northern hotel - manager . yes . no . yes . no . sixth . nothing should be high than Sixth ... " Gracie be lie in his overcoat ... "leave all that to Miss Powler ... " Gracie be unhappy ... the telephone time - allowance have to be renew twice . God ! and an hour or so early he have be visualise the day as a day of idle dalliance without a programme! .. no , he could not give a telephone number to Cousin ; he do not know quite where he would be . but he would telephone to the hotel for news . " Au revoir . Au revoir . " he replace the receiver , sigh as much in apprehension as in relief . before return to the bedroom he reflect , unfruitfully . 

 he be amazed , and a little hurt , to find Gracie lie on her stomach , absorb , scribble fast with a pencil on a block of manuscript - paper . she must have get out of bed , for the eiderdown be on the floor . have she forget her woe and her suspense ? 

 " well , darling ? " she do not look up ; indeed she continue to write . 

 " it be all right , " he say . 

 " I know it would be , " she say . 

 " yes . but not in the way you think . the Chairman of the Commission have catch a chill , and he do not   want they to start without he . it be all postpone for a week . the journalist do not   hear the news yesterday , so to - day 's paper be a bit behind the time . " 

 tenderly he restore the eiderdown . she now look up at he , offer her lip . he kiss she . he clasp she . if she have the whim to write , be she not her own lord ? he feel no hurt . what be hotel , merger , organisation , career ? naught . he be as variable as a woman . his ideal , his desire , change from one minute to the next . his mental process   he admit   be , then , as crude as a woman 's . what alone be certain be that the sight and feel of she affect he overwhelmingly . his instinct to protect she , to please she , to delight she , to produce the smile of bliss on her beautiful face , shoot up resistlessly and rule his being . 

 " Darling , " she say , still half absorb in the dream of her composition . " Breakfast . you must be terribly hungry . " 

 " not very , " he say , with truth . 

 the chocolate reproach he , in the french sense of the word as well as in the English . 

 " will you order something ? " she suggest . 

 " oh ! had not   you well order it yourself ? " he counter . the Englishman in he be intimidate by the prospect of demand breakfast for two in the apartment of a young woman ! 

 Gracie reply : 

 " ought not   a hotel - keeper to be capable of order a breakfast ? " she say the word with a delicious , roguish , and love smile . and he be undoubtedly a hotel - keeper . nevertheless his sensitive pride feel a prick , as if from her disdain of his calling . moreover , could the manage director of the world 's great luxury hotel - merger fitly be describe as a hotel - keeper ? childish vanity ! still , the dart stuck in the wound . 

 " he certainly ought , " he agree manfully . " what will you have , my dear ? " 

 " oh ! anything . tea ? " 

 he nod and leave the bedroom . his hat lie on the centre table of the drawing - room , where he have drop it . he put it on , ridiculously , idiotically argue to himself that a hat on his head might persuade the waiter that he have merely drop in for breakfast with the young woman . he ring the bell , and then , ashame , he go into the little entrance - hall and hang the hat on the hatstand there . the waiter arrive in long white apron , sleeve waistcoat and noiseless slipper , and accept the order with a bland and totally indifferent : " Deux thés complet . Bien , monsieur . " the folly and futility of pretend to a waiter in such an apartment that thing be not what they be become humiliatingly clear to Evelyn . nothing be or could be hide from the waiter . the service be very rapid . 

 Gracie , have hear the front - door close a second time , call out from the bedroom : " be it there ? you go on with your , will you , darling ? I will be there in half a minute . " 

 in less than half a minute she indeed be there , in knicker and camisole , frockless . she say , lightly : 

 " you think I shall be two hour over dress . you will see . I can dress as quick as any woman you ever know . " she sip the tea , tear a roll into two half . " I think I will get my frock on , if you do not   mind , dearest . " and she run off , cup in hand and her mouth full of buttered roll . 

 Evelyn sit miserably alone , sipped tea , eat nothing . Gracie return for a second cup and another mouthful ; she be still frockless , but she have exchange her bedroom mule for shoe . this time she sit close to Evelyn . 

 " of course , " she say , " if it have not   be for that lucky chill , you would have simply have to go to London to - morrow morning . " 

 " I should , " he answer , and add with a sigh : " Duty before - love . " 

 " yes , " she say . 

 she be charming in her sweet acquiescence . she have see reason . tear gone , resentment go . happy as a child . throw a kiss to he , she vanish once more . Evelyn be still not happy . her demeanour be exquisite , but be it not perhaps mysteriously deceptive ? his own be deceptive . at last she return fully accoutred , bag in one hand , glove in the other . 

 " now I must fly , " she say brightly . " the car be be wait I do not   know how long . " 

 " where to ? " 

 " to see poor Tessa , of course . I dare not   neglect she . oh ! damn these glove ! " she crunch the glove into a ball in her hand . 

 " what be the matter with they ? ' 

 " they be the wrong one . " 

 " give I one of they , " he say . 

 " what for ? " 

 " because you have   wear it . " and the fact be that in that moment he do feel a real desire for one of her glove as a keepsake . a very odd desire , for he , but it exist . 

 " oh ! darling ! be not   that morbid ? " she put her arm lovingly round his neck , but she be reprove he . " I could not   do that . " 

 " no , " he agree , force a pleasant smile . " of course you could not . excuse I one second . " 

 he go into the bathroom , merely in order to hide from she . 

 ' morbid , ' be it ? he would not deny that it be morbid . and what then ? she ought to have feel tremendously flatter by such morbidity . he be hurt for the second time that morning . he wait to recover from be so incomprehensibly an ass . then he hear she run back to the bedroom , and he emerge . in the drawing - room he see the glove conspicuously place on the breakfast - tray . he think , querulously : 

 " she should know well than that . one glove be a keepsake . but two be only a pair of glove . no man ever keep a pair of glove for a souvenir . " and he leave the glove where they lay , and sit down in front of they , harshly ignore the fact that she have yield to his morbid caprice . he think , sham but obstinate : " my character be change . why be it change ? " 

 Gracie reappear with another pair of glove . she glance for the fifth of a second at the pair on the tray , and at he . 

 " well , " she exclaim with self - possess , affectionate cheerfulness . " I must be off . " 

 " be I to come with you ? " 

 " oh no , darling ! that would not   quite do , would it ? " 

 " why must you go just now ? " he force a new smile . if she could still be self - possess and affectionately cheerful , he could . 

 she say : 

 " duty before - love , dearest . " 

 this be her unkind blow , for it silence and paralyse he . he glance about the room while she put on the glove . when they be on she come to he and kiss he many time . and her clothe be so exceedingly smart , and so fresh and cool , and her smile so perfect , loving and unvirginal ! but , though his bearing be as admirable as her , his heart would not be comfort . 

 " and when shall I see you ? " he ask . 

 " when I come back . " 

 she be madden , but he refuse to be madden . 

 " and when will that be ? " 

 " oh ! not long . " 

 " two hour ? " 

 " at the most , my lion . " 

 " and suppose I want to go out , how shall I get in again ? " 

 " Sweetest . here be the key . stick it under the mat . if you do not   find it there , ring . I shall be in . if I do not   find it there , I will ring - " 

 she depart . Solitary in the flat , he feel more miserable than ever . he be beloved - yes , perhaps ; nay , surely ! - but he be miserable . everything have go wrong . the suddenly announce excursion to St. Cloud be mere feminine vindictiveness . must be! .. her ' lion ' indeed ! 

 then he happen to look at the breakfast - tray . only one glove on it among the crockery ! she have need no telling . she have understand . while he be look about the room , she have surreptitiously snatch a glove away . she be astounding . there could not be another like she . strange , strange indeed , that this trifle should comfort his difficult heart , exhilarate his mood into joy . but it be so . he pick up the glove , examine it , turn it over and over , smell its perfume . the glove be a precious morsel of herself ; she have leave herself in the glove . he put it into his pocket , and he could feel it there , an authentic treasure . 

 content 
 chapter 58 

 the LOVELY MILKMAID 

 Evelyn be in the drawing - room when he hear voice in the hall . voice of Gracie and a man - doubtless her chauffeur . closing of the front - door . Gracie peep into the room . at last ! she have evidently change her clothe while at St. Cloud . she run into the room , smile in happy anticipation of the reunion . he rise . she kiss he and kiss he , and her embrace give he acute pleasure , pleasure whose intensity surprise he . he think : " yes , I be really in love . " this think itself give he pleasure . she seem not to be able to cease from kiss he . impossible to disbelieve that she too be passionately in love . 

 " you poor thing ! " she say , in eager commiseration . " have you be sit here ever since I leave ? " 

 " not quite all the time , " he answer . " the man come in to do the room , so I go out for a walk . I leave the key under the mat . when I come back it be still under the mat . the man have not   absolutely remove the dust , but he would shift it about a bit . I wait till you have be go two hour and a half or more , and then I think I would well be get something to eat . so I step over to Larue 's . I have a cold snack there . and I have   just come in again . the key be still under the mat . how be Tessa ? " 

 " she be quite all right . but she have to be soothe , and I decide to stay and see her eat - " 

 " you have not   eaten anything ? " 

 " oh yes . I eat with she . then I have to collect some clothe I simply have not   a rag here . " 

 " no . only a wardrobe full , " he interject . 

 " and here I be . sit down , because I want to sit on your knee . " 

 " well , then , take your coat off , and your hat . if you keep they on it will make I feel as if you be sit on my knee in the street . " 

 " how right you be ! I be go to . " 

 she obey and she sit on his knee and secure her position by put one arm round his neck . " you be not   cross with I for be so late ? " 

 " do I look cross ? " 

 she gaze at he . " no . you look heavenly . " 

 " well , I know I do not   look heavenly , but I be not the tiny trifle in the world cross , my dear . " 

 this be true . he have forgive and forget she vindictiveness in leave he , if indeed vindictive she have be . but he still feel a physical weight of oppression in the chest , such as one feel at the announcement of the possibility of a grave misfortune . she be not act ; she be too young and too candid to act convincingly for long together . but he be act . she be ' near ' he   her phrase , but he , despite love , be not near to she . he be afraid . he fear that a disaster have only be postpone . one day , and soon , he would have to leave she . and then - what ? More tear ? more ruthless tear ? yes , her tear be ruthless . she have use tear without regard for the cost of they to himself . passionate love be ruthless . it could not argue . it could not see reason . serious trouble have be avert by an accident , but he have have a glimpse of it . and the imminent menace of it be bind to recur . their situation be not define . it continue from hour to hour . undefine , it could not continue for ever . they have love , but they have not speak , save to assert that they love . 

 and Evelyn could not bring himself to attempt to define the situation to she . to do so would appear too practical , too prosaic . and the situation between they be too delicate in its beauty to bear such rough treatment . how could he say to she : 

 " look here , darling ! all this be lovely , but where be we ? " he must obviously await his opportunity . and to be force to wait exasperate his nerve . such be his character : he have a horror of an undefined situation . he must have his programme clearly before he if he be to be at peace within . no matter what the programme ! he prefer a harass programme to no programme . marriage ? he be entirely ready for marriage and all its risk . but she be just the kind of girl to laugh at the notion of marriage . Liaison ? he be entirely ready for that too , with all its ecstasy and frightful trammel of deceit . but be it to be understand to be permanent ? or merely a charming , transient episode in their life ? no . the latter alternative be absurd , for she be passionately in love with he . he think of she all the time , of her wish and her happiness . he do not think of himself , except in so far as he want an answer to the question , " where be we ? " the question could not be put . it be too crude ... he feel the weight on the chest . but her kiss be surpassingly sweet , her companionship quite marvellous . she be utterly his . and he love she unselfishly . 

 " shall we start out ? " she whisper . " I vote for the Louvre . it be not   three o'clock . " 

 " the Louvre ! " he object . 

 " not to see the Titian Venus ? " 

 " but the Louvre 's so hackneyed . " 

 " that be why we must go there . " she kiss he . " have you forget we be go to be tourist ? what fun ! " 

 " the Louvre then ! " he yield , and this time it be he who kiss she . 

 she slip from his knee , pass into the bedroom , and return , laugh , in the mackintosh , and the Baedeker in her hand . entrance child ! 

 as they descend the frowsy , dubious stair he ask : 

 " got the car here ? " 

 " oh no ! tourist in mackintosh do not   have car . they take taxis . " 

 " of course . what be I think of ? " he agree , join in the make - believe . 

 outside she glance up at the sky and say : 

 " I be so glad it look like rain , for the sake of my mackintosh . " 

 the taxi be roll along the rue de Rivoli , and the Louvre well in sight , and their hand comfortably clasp , when Evelyn suddenly signal to the driver to stop . 

 " what be it ? " Gracie 's face change from joy to alarm . 

 " we shall not   go to the Louvre , " he say firmly , masterfully . " very well , darling , " she instantly acquiesce . " anywhere you please . " her submissiveness make he ashamed , for his tone have be a trick . 

 " it be close on Mondays , " he say with casualness . " we would both forget that . " 

 " I believe you remember it all the time , " say Gracie , accuse he with a laugh ; but when she see on Evelyn 's face the beginning of a half - serious rebuttal of the charge , she cease laugh and put a soothe hand on his knee . " no , I do not   really believe that . what a tease I be ! " 

 he have never notice in she any tendency to tease . 

 " well now , what be to be the next move ? " 

 " I will tell you , " she reply at once . " but you can turn it down if you do not   like it . I want to buy a frock at Jolie Laitiere . of course , darling , you hate shop . " 

 " I love it , " he say . " when I get the chance . especially in a big shop . " 

 the fact be that he be always strongly attract by the spectacle of the organisation of any large commercial establishment , and he consider that in this respect department store be the near rival of the big hotel . 

 Gracie pop her blithe touristic head out of the taxi - window and reinstructe the driver , and the taxi swerve into the rue des Pyrénées . she be gleeful ; the Louvre , demolish in one second , no long exist for she . her mood communicate itself to Evelyn ; her girlishness and the intimacy of the taxi have lighten the weight on his chest ; life be joyous . now they be go up the Avenue de l'Opéra . just south of the Place de l'Opéra there be the customary block of traffic , and score of vehicle be chafe against the white baton on a pigmy policeman . 

 " Arretez " cry Gracie , though the taxi be stationary at the kerb . she open the door and jump down . " that be a car that daddy always hire , in front ! I remember the number on its tail . " 

 she run ahead a few step and tattooed on the window of the car . Evelyn think : " be she mad ? what will she do next ? " he too get out , judge that the safe course be to stick to she . the door of the car swing open . Sir Henry Savott 's head appear . Gracie eagerly kiss her father . already the girl be innocently chatter . 

 " here be Mr. Orcham . I wait three day for weather at Dover ; it be simply frightful , and when I get on the boat he come on board . he look after I on the train . and now he be finish his work and I have   make he take an afternoon off . we be go to the Louvre , only it be close on Mondays ; so I be drag he off to do some shop with I , and he have to buy some cigar . you off to London by the four o'clock , daddy ? " 

 Sir Henry nod . 

 " I think so from the luggage . " 

 it all sound impeccably proper and natural , and Gracie 's demeanour have the perfect grace of easy innocence . but what be the significance of that touch about cigar ? 

 " and where be you picnic , child ? " ask Sir Henry . 

 " oh ! at St. Cloud as usual . " 

 the two man shake hand . Sir Henry say that he have have one night in Paris . he do not pursue the enquiry concern Gracie . he accept her statement with bland and kindly indifference . it be no affair of his where she might be picnic , or whom she might have inveigle into an afternoon off . the block be loosen ; vehicle begin to move ; there be some impatient hooting of horn because Sir Henry 's car and Evelyn 's taxi be impede the outer line of traffic ; car and taxi stand their ground , and the taxi and car behind swerve past they . 

 " I say , Evelyn , " say Sir Henry . " I suppose you be at the Montaigne . I shall probably be telephone to you early tomorrow morning . say nine o'clock ? " 

 Evelyn collect his wit . if Gracie could invent misleading but persuasive detail on the instant , he reckon that he could do as much . he answer nonchalantly : 

 " well , I be not quite sure about to - night and to - morrow . I have   nothing else to do here ... " 

 " everything all right with old laugier ? " Sir Henry interrupt . 

 " quite . quite . and I have an idea of run up to Brussels to - night . I have   hear of a proposition there that might possibly suit we . " 

 " really ? " 

 " yes , " say Evelyn , and think : " if he ask I the name of the hotel I be do . ah ! the splendide would serve . " he say aloud , but in a semi - confidential murmur : " the splendide . " 

 " really ! but you will be back in London to - morrow evening , Evelyn ? " 

 " I might or I might not . it depend . " 

 " but the Licensing Commission business . I see it in the paper to - day . " 

 Evelyn explain . 

 " oh well , if that be so , I shall not   trouble to telephone you to - morrow . it be about the evidence . " Sir Henry glance at his watch , and then proceed to demonstrate that he have be study Licensing Reform with some care . he raise , briefly , several point . Evelyn 's mind have be void of Licensing Reform for day , and he have fear that his erudition on the subject have leave he for ever . but Sir Henry 's question bring it all back complete , absolutely complete . he welcome its return with satisfaction , and answer the question with satisfaction - and fully . Sir Henry might have study the matter with some care , but he , Evelyn , would prove to he that he be an amateur talk to an expert . and Evelyn do prove it . as for Gracie , she amiably and modestly listen to the panjandrum , without the slight impatience . Sir Henry glance at his watch again . 

 " I must be off . I be not quite sure about my seat in the train . I be go to Berlin to - morrow . " 

 " film , daddy ? " 

 Sir Henry nod . he kiss his daughter , shake hand with Evelyn , and be go at once , a second traffic block have be by this time free . 

 2 . 

 ensconce again in the intimacy of the taxi , Gracie and Evelyn broadly smile to one another . 

 " fancy see daddy like that ! I could not   not have two word with he , could I ? " Gracie justify herself . 

 " of course not , " Evelyn agree . " and you be very clever . but what be this about I want cigar ? " 

 " oh ! " she exclaim , and pop her head out and tell the driver to go to the tobacco - bureau under the Grand Hotel . the driver complain that , accord to the police rule , he would have to make the circuit of the Opera in order to reach the bureau . 

 " Deux fois si vous voulez , " Gracie laugh . then she turn to Evelyn . " I notice yesterday you have not   any cigar . a man must have cigar . I intend to buy you some . it be a good bureau , the one under the Grand Hotel be . if it be not   under the Grand Hotel it be next door . anyhow he know where I mean . " she indicate the driver . 

 " this be the height of hospitality , " say Evelyn , and comically raise his hat . 

 " and you be pretty clever too ! " she go on . " what be the bit about Brussels ? " 

 " nothing , " he say . " it just occur to I and I bring it in . " 

 they both laugh again . nevertheless Evelyn be somewhat perturb by the brilliant glibness of the perversion of truth with which she have feed her deceive father . not a word about Tessa .   well , of course not .   if she could hoodwink one man she could hoodwink another . Hers be a rich , wondrous individuality ; but could she be call a reliable helpmeet ? and she have be so light - hearted and prettily shameless in the bravura performance . 

 arrive at the tobacco - bureau , Evelyn be request to choose cigar , and Gracie insist on pay for a box of fifty and on carry the box - in addition to the red Baedeker . 

 he be perturb anew . be it her dream that they two would live together in the dubious apartment for ever ? 

 Evelyn pay off the taxi , and they walk side by side in the throng , noisy , gay street round the back of the Opéra to Jolie Laitiere . at the foot of the wide and high stone - faced façade be a series of al fresco counter , cover with an apparent confusion of stuff , feminine garment and fal - lal of a hundred variety , all of they finger , handle , and turn over and over by crowd of besieging , appraise woman . behind the counter , against the immense window of the store , a row of man stand in the die light and in the cold , hatless but overcoate , who with chill , bluish hand serve the woman while protect the good as well as they could from the rapacious female assault . 

 More business be transact at those counter than have be transact in the whole establishment during its early day . the Lovely Milkmaid have start a long career as a small shop whose dimension be not unsuited to its sentimental title . it have be burn down once , and rebuild three time , large and large , grow incessantly until it be now one of the wonder of the retail world . but it be still call the Lovely Milkmaid , and no Parisian perceive any incongruity in the name . indeed the good will of the mere name be probably worth some million of franc . 

 Gracie and Evelyn go in by one of the ten grand entrance . Heat smite they ; light smite they . the winter day die much early in the store than in the street . electricity be festoon everywhere . dozen of counter , hundred of saleswoman and salesman in black , multitude of woman customer and a few man . incalculable heap of commodity in all tint . lift on every side ascend and descending . huge as the place appear from the street , it appear much more huge within . it be measureless , infinite . in the centre a monumental stairway , all balustrade with lamp , rise in curve from storey to storey till it end at the sixth . above the stairway , in the roof , an incredible chandelier of a thousand lamp ! Gracie push forward through the throng , between the counter , straight to the stairway . 

 " I want the first floor , " she say . " it be more amusing to walk up ... " 

 " you seem to know the geography here , " Evelyn observe . 

 " no . I have   only be here once - for Tessa . she come with I . " 

 on the first floor they be in another universe , the universe of frock , coat , cloak , peignoir . all seem to be disorder ; every individual be preoccupy , busy . yet Gracie have not gaze for ten second at a long straight range of hung frock before a plump little black - rob woman of thirty - five or so materialise magically at her elbow . 

 " Madame desire ? " 

 the plump little woman 's tone , speciously urbane , convey the great truth that the one object of her existence be to devote herself solely to the satisfaction of the wish , however exact or capricious , of Gracie . soon the saleswoman have three day - frock on her arm , and be lead Gracie towards a try - on cubicle in a street of cubicle . 

 " do not   leave I , darling , " Gracie murmur . 

 all three enter a cubicle full of mirror and lamp , and glisten with polished woodwork . the door be shut . 

 " no , not that one , " say Gracie . " my husband love not green . " 

 " a pink then , " say the saleswoman . " Monsieur love pink ? " she turn deferentially to Evelyn , as to one whose preference be a law . " I have a ravish pink . " she leave the cubicle , hurrying . 

 " what be the idea of all this ? " Evelyn ask , but he say nothing about have be make a husband . " be it for Tessa ? " 

 " certainly not . it be for I . " 

 " but - " 

 " you be sweet " Gracie laugh , and kiss he . " do not   you see I want to be a tourist ? these thing I have on do not   go at all with a mackintosh and a Baedeker . " 

 the saleswoman come back with the ravish pink . Gracie take off her mackintosh , and then her frock . Evelyn , abash , catch the saleswoman 's eye with alarm , but the saleswoman 's eye give no sign that she be shocked . Gracie put on the ravish pink . 

 " that suit madame to a marvel . be it not so , monsieur ? " 

 Gracie survey herself in a mirror . 

 " I think it will do , " say she . " I be press for time . " 

 " but madame , " the saleswoman protest against this rapidity of decision . " these other - they be worth the trouble of essay . " 

 so Gracie essay the other . but she hold to her first ideal - the ravish pink , and put it on again . 

 " I will take it . " 

 " it need a quite little touch on the shoulder . " 

 " that be nothing , " say Gracie . " I do not wish that it should fit too well . I will wear it at once . you can send my old frock to my address . " 

 " but certainly , madame , " say the saleswoman , as suspicious now as she be astounded . she seize the old frock , hold it up and examine it . " that , " say she , " that be high dressmaking . " 

 " now can I try on some cloak - in here ? " Gracie ask . 

 " but with pleasure , madame . " 

 another saleswoman be fetch , with an assortment of coat . the first saleswoman remain ; the cubicle seem to be full of woman . twenty minute pass on the choosing of a coat . 

 " and now a hat , " say Gracie . 

 " here , madame ? " 

 " yes . " 

 " ah ! madame , that will be more difficult . the department of hat - " 

 " I supplicate you . " 

 " it be well , madame . " 

 the first saleswoman vanish once more . the second saleswoman be study Gracie 's old hat . a third saleswoman appear , follow by a young girl bear a shallow basket of hat . with five woman in the cubicle Evelyn deem himself extinguish . but as soon as a new hat be establish on Gracie 's head , all four assistant bring he back to life and importance by one combined glance of appeal for approval . a hat be select from a dozen . Gracie resume the mackintosh , strap it at the waist , take the Baedeker , her bag , the box of cigar . and the first saleswoman , price - ticket in hand , escort the lover to a cash - desk , and complex arrangement be conclude for the delivery of Gracie 's cast - off . 

 " Madame can count on it , " say the first saleswoman . " Au revoir , madame . Au revoir , monsieur . many thank . to the pleasure of see you again . " 

 as soon as they be free of the assistant , Gracie laugh with abandonment . 

 " be not   it too lovely ? do not   you adore I like this ? shall we have tea now ? " 

 " where , my dear ? " 

 " why ! here , of course . Upstairs . " 

 they regain the vast curve stairway . he take her arm , and she press his forearm between her arm and body , and lean slightly against he . 

 " try - on 's great fun , " she say . " but it be frightfully exhausting . " because he be support she she want to feel fatigue , and she do feel it . 

 he reflect : 

 " Supposing I be see by someone I know arm a young woman up these stair ! they would instantly think I would bring she to Paris for the week - end - a typist or some girl of that sort , they would think - with those clothe she be wear now . whereas if she have look really smart they would not   have think that , and what be more , if she have be wear her own tre chic thing , I doubt whether I should have take her arm . extraordinary how people always think that girl of a low class than themselves , or a high , be less moral than they be ! " he wonder what Miss Cass would say and do if he try to abduct she to Paris for a week - end . the mere notion make he smile . Miss Cass would assuredly give notice - and with haughtiness too . but at that moment he do not   care who might see he with Gracie on his arm . he abandon himself without a qualm to her capture love , recall sardonically the line of Racine : 

 " Venus all cling to her helpless prey . " 

 he savour the sensation of be a prey - especially a prey which could when it choose turn on its captor and tear she to piece . 

 " what be you laugh at ? " Gracie ask in a low voice charge with her love . 

 " smile , " he correct she . 

 " well , smile . " 

 " your clothe , my dear . " 

 " I be so glad you like they , darling ! " she breathe .   not that he do like they ! 

 " how do you know there be a restaurant in this place ? " he question , mischievous in his happiness . 

 " well , there must be . " 

 " I will bet anything there be not , " he say . 

 " and how do you know ? " 

 " I know because I have not   see a single notice about it , " he say . " they think here that customer come to buy - not to drink tea . and I beg to state that your acquaintance with these big shop be still very imperfect . " 

 " perhaps it be , " she assent . 

 she question a liftman on the third floor . no . so far as the liftman know there be no restaurant in the Lovely Milkmaid . 

 " you be clever ! " she say to Evelyn admiringly . she would lose no pretext for admire he . " I be tired , " she murmur . " let us sit down . " 

 they be now in the household furniture department . Gracie glance around for chair . 

 " not a chair , " she say . 

 " score of chair , " he correct she , and move two chair from a dining - room suite close by , and put they near the balustrade . 

 " I mean chair for customer , " she say . " they will come and complain " 

 " when they do , we will deal with the new situation , " say Evelyn 

 " oh , darling ! I be so happy you be happy . " they sit . 

 " there be one good thing , " say Evelyn . " Anglo - Saxons may come here for frock , but they certainly will not   come here for furniture . " 

 " what do you mean , darling ? " 

 " I mean we be safe . " 

 Gracie make no answer . 

 they both look over the brass - ornament steel rail down , down , into the deep well of the vast shop . the string of electric lamp beneath the railing confused and dazzle their eye ; but they have a general vision of the spectacle of the glitter mart ; the bottom of the well seem to be pack with a struggle mob of woman 's hat , among which a few masculine hat move strangely - hat of intruder , of Paul Prys , who have no right to insinuate themselves into this illimitable , esoteric purdah . the intermediate floor , of which the lover from their vantage could see only the half on the opposite side of the well , be almost equally crowd ; the stairway be as busy with woman as a street , and at short interval crowd lift could be glimpse , slide mysterious and silent up or down . and everywhere , except in the lift , half the woman , bareheade and in black , help the other half , hat and in colour , to adorn their person for the allurement of absent male : while at broad , slop desk man be write out bill and receive cash , cash , endless cash , and in the parcel - enclosure girl and boy be tie up parcel , parcel , parcel . 

 " it be rather wonderful , I must say , " Evelyn remark . 

 " it make I feel sad , " Gracie answer . 

 " Sad ! why ? half a minute ago you seem to have so much happiness in you you do not   know what to do with it all . " Evelyn 's tone be benevolently banter . 

 " there be too many of we . woman , I mean . and we have to fight . it remind I of the world , this shop do : too many woman , and all fight for a niche and try to stretch ten franc into twenty to make the good of themselves . I can see they all naked . I can see into their naked mind , and all their mind be the same . but I have not   see a happy face . every face I have   see be anxious . do you know what this place be - it be the Western Front . " 

 " what do you know of the Western Front , my dear ? you be not   old enough to have be a Waac . " 

 " do not   I know ! I have   read ' all quiet , ' and I have   read ' not so quiet . ' not know the Western Front ! why ! in a few year , ten , twenty , it will be only people as young as I be , and young , who will know what the Western Front be . and I tell you this be the real Western Front to - day . " 

 she have suddenly fall into a new mood , and Evelyn could feel that she want to envelop he also in the mood . he resist . 

 " anyway , " he say , turn to she and smile . " anyway , you have not   be try to make the good of yourself this afternoon . you have   be try to make the bad of yourself . only you have not   succeed . you simply can not   wear bad clothe as they ought to be wear . you give the show away all the time . you tell I the other day - yesterday , be it ? - you want to be common . well , you just can not   be common . and you have   only half - do the job even this afternoon . look at your five - guinea shoe , and your stocking , and your glove , and your bag . and think of your undie . this noble effort of yours to look common be merely pathetic . I would give something to have hear what those vendeuse say about it all , after we have go . they must have wonder what on earth you be up to . " he pat her knee - one touch - affectionately , reassuringly . 

 3 . 

 a silence . she be gaze straight in front of she . 

 she say , in an even voice , as though she be ask the time : 

 " would you like we to get marry ? " 

 he be discompose . there be no end to the girl 's incalculableness . Fancy start such a subject in the public promiscuity of the Lovely Milkmaid ! and what a misinterpretation she have put upon the spectacle of the interior of the Lovely Milkmaid ! he control himself . 

 " of course I should like we to marry . you know I should . " 

 " you know , you do not   love I . " 

 " liar ! " he gently smile . 

 " you do not   know what love be , real love . " 

 " my dear ! my dear ! I undertake to say my ignorance be not   quite as complete as you imagine to yourself you think it be . I be a very learn man . " 

 " Evelyn ! listen ! you see this well . there be a - a chasm as deep as that between we . Deeper . you think I leave you all alone this morning because I be angry with you . it be not   that . I leave you so that I could look down that awful big hole by myself . and I could not   bear to look down it . I pretend it be not   there . and I have   be pretend all the afternoon . because I do want to be nice to you , and I do . but it be be all pretend . I mean pretend about you , not about I . you be everything to I , and I have not   try to hide it . now have I ? " Evelyn do not speak . " but I be not everything to you . you be only try to make yourself think I be everything to you . because you be a heavenly kind man . d'you know why I keep you in my flat last night ? d'you think it be because I be so terribly hungry for you ? it be not   that . it be because I just have to find out whether you love I . I could wait - but I could not   wait to know that - " 

 " but - " 

 " no . please . do not   stop I . let I empty my mind now ; I have   begin . I have   tell you before I be nothing , nothing at all . and I have   tell you I be a beast . and so I be . it be only half true what I tell you about Saturday . I keep you wait all day on Saturday partly because I want to see how you would stand it . and I choose those room so that they would frighten you off , if you could be frighten off . and I ask you to bring your luggage along so that it should be there all ready if you stay . and I have the tea - thing all ready as well . you notice there be two cup . and I have   tell you about leave off my rouge . somehow I could not   help tell you about that , and I be not   really tired yesterday afternoon . but I be to - day . and I do not   ask you to stay the night until the very last thing because I know how nice and shy you be , and I do not   intend to give you time to hesitate . you have to decide one way or the other at once . and - oh ! it all sound frightfully mix up . but motif be mixed up - especially woman 's . now and then yesterday afternoon and evening I feel like stick at nothing to keep you . I will not   go into detail - you can think of they without I help you . but at other time now and then I try to do nothing that would help you . I try to play the game , and I do play it . and I go to sleep absolutely sure you do love I . I be happy . and I dream happy dream of you . and I be happy when I wake up this morning , until I see you in your big overcoat . it be the overcoat that begin it . you could not   lie in bed and wait for I to wake up . you be too restless for something outside I . and then the newspaper . those paragraph . and what you say then ... i've   be happy today too . but I have   be happy in my love , not your . it be happiness to be in love . but it be misery as well , if you be the only one who be in love . now you have   hear . I be a beast . but I be honest . at any rate I have   be honest with you . and I be not go to cry , or whine , or anything of the sort . I be go to be terribly nice , because it be not   a bit your fault . you deserve I should be nice . no , no ! I shall play the game all the time now . " 

 at this moment a middle - aged and bearded floor - walker appear from behind they . 

 " one occupy oneself with you , monsieur , madame ? " he ask with a ceremonious bow , look more at Evelyn than at Gracie . 

 Gracie reply at once : 

 " while essay your chair , my husband and I be discuss the matter , monsieur . " she smile urbanely . 

 " perfectly , madame . at your service , madame . " with another bow the man go away . 

 Gracie make a humorous face at Evelyn , who be startle , even a little shocked by her extraordinary aplomb . he himself be incapable of change his mood with her lightning rapidity . he say gravely : 

 " my dear ! you can only play the game by marry I . " he be determined that she should marry he . he foresee marvellous hour with such a wife . her mind alone would be a continual refreshment and inspiration . she would be an intellectual equal . he ignore the incalculable flightiness of her mind . nevertheless the thought run through his whole being : 

 " her liability will exceed her asset . " and be go . she say : 

 " when you say we be safe here , do you mean you do not   want to be see with I like this by anybody who know we ? " he be about to prevaricate , but he decide not to do so . 

 " I do , my dear . " 

 " but why ? " 

 " well , it be natural , be not   it - in the circumstance ? do not   you think we have an air? .. People do talk , you know . " 

 she go on : 

 " Darling , if you be in love with I as you fancy you be - oh , quite sincerely ! - you simply would not   think of a thing like that . it would not   occur to you , and even if it do , you would laugh at it . no , you would not . you have glory in it . I do glory in it . I would deliberately go out to be see by people we know . it would be magnificent , like walk in the wind and rain . " her voice take on its full richness . " Darling , that be the chasm between we . you be afraid of the consequence of love . I be not . I want every consequence , and I do not   care , because I be in love . you do care . darling , when you say you must go to London tomorrow - and leave I all by myself - " she break off . " you be an artist in your way . I admire you for be an artist - and a great artist . I know woman be suppose to be the enemy of art , when they be in love with the artist . it be be say hundred of time . " 

 " and be not   they ? I be be frank with you . " 

 " a man ought never to be frank with a woman . not one woman in a thousand can stand it , unless he be in a temper . and you be not   in a temper . you be too damnably self - possess . but I happen to be the one woman . I can stand it . to I your frankness be like eat an olive . it be the sharp taste of it I adore . you know , astringent . well , go on be frank . " 

 " you have not   answer my question : be not   woman the enemy of art ? " Evelyn murmur , with an appearance of complete calm . but he be excite by the flattery of the word ' artist , ' which she have so stimulatingly pronounce . she understand he : that be it . yes , he be a creative artist , in his way , as she have say . 

 she answer : 

 " of course woman be the enemy of art , when they be in love with the artist . it be their business to be the enemy of art and of everything else that make man egotist . both sex can not   be egotistic . if they be , it would be the end of the world , and the death of society . man be only amateur egotist . woman be professional . it be their nature , and so it be right , because the divine mind do it . when you see a woman have get hold of a man , firm , and she be force he to fight for his art , and beat he - it be the fine , most gorgeous thing you ever could see ! it be supreme ! it be God himself , work out his plan , that be ! and when she be clasp he tight , and he struggle , and he give up struggle and the artist in he sigh terribly and die happy in her inflexible arm , and she smile , that be God 's smile . it be a tremendous moment . I be tell you ; but I might just as well not tell you . you will not   understand . can not . no man can . only woman can understand what be the great thing in the world . when I hear people say a man have ruin himself for a woman , I laugh . I hug myself . I know of three . there be General Boulanger and Parnell . I have   read nearly everything that be be write about those two . they thrill I whenever I think of they . they sacrifice everything for woman , and the woman take it as a matter of course . that be the spirit . what live ! what ruin ! it be so lovely , and majestic , and awful , I could cry . but God be awful . " 

 she turn and look at he , and Evelyn face she . she have not raise her voice ; her tranquillity be as awful as God ; but Evelyn be determined to meet her eye . he think : 

 " and she be clasp I tight , " and , recall her embrace , quiver as one quiver at a peril past . he say : 

 " and the third one ? " she drop her voice : 

 " Leo . " 

 " Leo ? " 

 " Cheddar . " 

 " oh ! he . " 

 " yes . he . one of God 's error . Leo choose wrong . not his fault , I expect . but he do . and he can not   undo it . but he understand . he be sacrifice everything for I . even his greatness . he might have be great , if he have not   meet I . he prefer be my victim to be great . wherever I go he go . he be quarrel with his brother because of I . his character be as splendid as his mind . but I could not   love he . I tell you I could kneel down and crouch on my breast before he , and wash his foot with my tear , and absolutely implore he to forgive I . but he know there be nothing to forgive . he know it be no more my fault than it be his . " 

 she stand up . 

 " but we have not   finish , " say Evelyn . they gaze at one another . 

 " yes , we have , and I can not   bear this place any long . it be full of vibration that scare I . " 

 " that be the central heating , " say Evelyn grimly , half close his eye . 

 " you can call it by that name if you like , darling . " her tone be soften . 

 the floorwalker lie in wait for they , ready to pounce . carry the chair back to the rest of the dining - room suite , Evelyn make no attempt to evade he ; nor Gracie either . 

 " eh bien , monsieur , " she say to the man . " pour cette salle - a - manger ? " 

 " Monsieur and madame have decide themselves ? " 

 another member of the sell staff of the Lovely Milkmaid come to assist the floorwalker in the sale of the suite . then the floorwalker depart , leave the second man to the job . 

 " what be she go to do now ? " think Evelyn , as he watch Gracie minutely examine the suite . 

 it be a very ugly suite , very banal , the suite of large - scale rationalise commerce ; thousand of precisely similar suite be the pride of modest , comfortable home up and down France . 

 " there be naturally leaf for the table ? " Gracie demand . 

 " yes , madame . two . " 

 " one can buy supplementary chair ? " 

 " but there be six , madame . " 

 " but one can buy more ? " 

 " but yes , madame . " 

 " and another sideboard ? " 

 " but yes , madame . but perhaps it would be more simple to buy two suite , madame , if madame 's dining - room be very large , if madame have many guest . " 

 " that be an idea ! " say Gracie . 

 " what be she go to do now ? " think Evelyn . 

 she buy two suite , and six extra chair - eighteen chair in all . the salesman make a calculation : something over twenty - thousand franc . 

 " payment on delivery , " say Gracie . " to - morrow ? " 

 " ah , madame ! " say the dark latin male with prodigious apologetic deference , " if madame would give I two more day ! it will be necessary for I to communicate with the factory as to the supplementary chair . " 

 " very well , Thursday . " 

 she give the St. Cloud address . the salesman bow almost orientally . twice in less than an hour have Gracie confound the Lovely Milkmaid . 

 when the formality be finish , Evelyn enquire : 

 " and the answer to all this furniture riddle , please ? " 

 she lift her shoulder negligently . 

 " a surprise for the landlady of my little hotel . she be be incredibly kind about Tessa . she be an angel . and her dining - room furniture be all fall to piece . " 

 they descend the stairway in silence , and on the ground - floor make a difficult path for themselves through the ruthless egotistic throng of priestess of the martyrdom of man . Evelyn notice a counter placard : " chemise de nuit . occasion . " without consult Gracie he buy the most expensive , pay for it , stick the tiny parcel into his overcoat pocket . 

 " I do not   very much care for pyjama for the instrument of God , " he say . 

 " perhaps we might have a few flower , " she suggest , ignore his purchase . 

 he enquire for the flower - department and buy flower of his own choosing . 

 outside in the dark populous street , where the sack of the alfresco counter be still proceed , he raise his arm for a pass taxi . 

 " see . what be your number ? " 

 " but we be not   go home yet ! " Gracie protest . 

 " yes , we be - with all these parcel ! " 

 she tell he the number . he tell the chauffeur . he open the door of the little , low taxi . she get in , bow her head to avoid the lintel . just before turn into the boulevard he halt the taxi in front of a confectioner 's illuminate window which display an irresistible assortment of éclairs , madeleine , babas , brioche , tartelette , millefeuille , and petit four . 

 " wait for I one moment , will you ? " he appeal , get out of the vehicle , and presently come back with a quite sizeable fragile parcel . they drive on . 

 content 
 chapter 59 

 TEMPER 

 Parcel - laden , they enter the deteriorated , dubious , garishly - light drawing - room , and see again the statue of the almost - nude woman , the painting of almost - nude woman in the heavy tarnish gilt frame , the tiger - skin , and the clock which one day in the past have slip into timeless eternity at seven minute to three . the red Baedeker be drop on to the centre - table , together with sundry item - the cigar , the cake , the flower , Gracie 's bag , and the slim parcel draw by Evelyn from his overcoat pocket . 

 " now I wonder whether it would be ask you too much to make the tea , " say Evelyn . the formula be ceremonious , but the tone commanding . 

 " had not   I well do the flower first ? " Gracie suggest . 

 " man before flower , " say Evelyn . " organise your energy , my dear . you can see to the flower while the water be boil for the tea . and give I your mackintosh , will you ? " 

 " yes , darling ! " 

 she go away mysteriously smile into the bathroom with the flower and the cake . he hang up her mackintosh and his overcoat and hat in the ante - chamber . he unpack the box of cigar and put it on a side - table with the Baedeker . he take her bag and the slim parcel into the bedroom ; and then he stand idle , wonder what he could do next . he think of his yesterday 's suit and pull it from the wardrobe . after a minute or two she call out from the bathroom : " what be you do ? " 

 " attend to my clothe . " 

 she appear in the bedroom . she have tie round her waist a bath - towel for an apron . in the apron and the cheap reach - I - down frock and hat she look , to Evelyn , perfectly delicious , not to say exciting . 

 " I think I hear brush , " she laugh . " it be like home . not my home at home . a nice little home . " 

 he be brush his trouser lay carefully along the length of the bed . he glance up . 

 " why the towel , my dear ? " 

 " flower , darling . they be rather messy . I want two vas - three . the water be on . " her eye rove about the room . she snatch a vase from the mantelpiece , and disappear into the drawing - room . 

 as he finish brush the suit and restore it to the wardrobe , Evelyn reflect : 

 " and that be the girl who make that frightening speech to I in the Jolie Laitiere? .. like a home , be it , a nice little home ! a disreputable appartement on the boulevard ! and I bet it be not   cost she a penny less than five pound a night ! " 

 he would not admit , even to himself , that it be like a home . but he feel that it be , and that he be the master in it . he be ingenuously happy and tyrannic in it . he love the towel - apron . he hear the rattle of crockery . he hear she pass busily to and fro between the bathroom and the drawing - room . he say to himself that she be do his will . but the menace of her speech in the furniture department of the Jolie Laitiere shoot lancinating dart into his mind . as he be draw the curtain together she come , apronless now , into the bedroom with a vase of flower and deposit it on a table . 

 " Tea 's all ready , " she say in a quiet tone falsely casual , and throw her hat on to the bed . 

 then she take his hand and lead he , a male child - tyrant , towards the tea . be it symbolic , that act ? be he the victimise captive of her ideal ? " I will teach she ! " he think grandly . 

 he feel a condescend pity for Leo Cheddar , the hopeless prisoner . he be bind to despise Leo for a weakling . and yet , on the previous afternoon , as he sit on the professional egotist 's bed , have not he , Evelyn , in a single moment become utterly weak at the sight of her beauty ? be she his , or be he her ? he have strange fear in the midst of his masterfulness . 

 the tea be indeed all ready , very neatly arrange on the centre - table , the cake on two plate , and a vase of resplendent flower between they . she have be very quick , and very efficient too . he could not deny that she have the capacity to make a man comfortable . 

 " it be delicious have tea together like this , " say Gracie , as , have fill the cup , she bite into the first cake . " you be a terrible sultan , but you do have idea . when I think of you lunch all alone and I lunch all alone to - day I feel as if I could weep real tear . I be frightfully sorry , darling . iwa a beast . call I a beast . " 

 he smile magnanimously . 

 " now do not   be forgive . I could not   stand it . call I a beast . " 

 " Beast ! " say he obediently . 

 her mouth half full , she stop eat the cake , as if a new thought have occur to she . 

 " and you have   get more than idea - you have   get taste . anyhow in confectionery . this brioche be the fine ever ! oh ! and I must make quite sure what your taste be like in something else . " 

 she jump up and run into the bedroom and come back with the slim parcel , which she undo . she shake out the fold of the nightdress , and , close at Evelyn 's side , hold it against her figure . 

 " it go with the frock , " he say . 

 she move away , and examine herself as well as she could in the overmantel mirror . not satisfied , she pull a chair on to the tiger - skin and perch tiptoe on it , so as to have an entire view of the garment in the glass . and then laugh quite loudly . 

 " be not   it too comic ? " she giggle . " and when you think there be million of girl who would really adore it - and man too ! " 

 " it be exactly what you deserve , " say Evelyn . " and I should like some more tea , please . " 

 " oh ! " she protest , step down . " do not   imagine I do not   adore it ! because I do . so do you . we be both a bit morbid in our liking for ugliness - when it be ugly enough . yes , I admire your morbid taste . Poor Tessa would drop dead if she see I in this affair ... your tea ! your tea ! " she throw the nightdress across his knee , and pour out another cup for he . he calmly fold the garment in its original fold , and pitch it with accurate aim on to an easy - chair . 

 " now we will continue , " say Evelyn . 

 " oh ! you need not   be afraid , " she exclaim . " I shall continue till every one of these cake be eat . " 

 " I do not   mean tea , " he say . " I mean we would continue about that chasm of your . " Gracie 's face change . " I always like to have everything clear and straight ; and the soon the well . you have   be upset because I tell you I should have to go to London to - morrow morning . " 

 " and leave I here all alone . " 

 " yes . and leave you here all alone . well , you know , I could not   help it happen like that . just a chance - " 

 " have not   I say before that I do not   believe in chance ? " she interrupt he . " and there be not   any chance . how could there be ? it be a sign . Fate mean it , so that I should see what your real feeling be - in time . if it have not   happen like that I might never have know what your real feeling be until it be too late . now I do know . it make no difference that you have not   have to go to London after all . I know . and it be not   chance . I be not blame you , darling ! you be you , and you can not   alter yourself . " she be sweet , but grave . 

 " but can not   you see ? " he reason . " can not   you see I should not   have go because I want to go ? I should have hat to go . the very thought of go be awful . but I should have have to go . there would not   have be any alternative . it be good to look fact in the face . " 

 " no alternative ? " 

 " no . " Evelyn be almost curt . he add , to placate she : 

 " of course if I have be ill - but so long as I could physically go , I should just have have to go . " 

 " what about morally ? " she ask . 

 " morally ? " 

 " yes . you say ' physically . ' be physically more important than morally ? in your opinion ? " 

 he hesitate . 

 " no , " he agree . " instead of ' physically ' I ought to have say ' physically and morally . ' " 

 " so you think you be morally able to go ? " 

 " I think I should have be morally compel to go , Mrs. Counsel - for - the - prosecution . " 

 " well , " she say . " if this be cross - examine , it be only because I be try to get . everything ' absolutely clear and straight ' - for you and for I too . that be what you say you want . " 

 " quite ! " he admit . 

 " this licensing business be the most important thing on earth for you . " 

 " not at all , " he cheerfully contradict she . " the most important thing on earth to I be to keep my word , my engagement . you see , I be indispensable to the case for Reform . I put the case together . and I be the engine that drive it forward . " 

 " so that if you do happen to be in for a serious illness , the campaign would fail . there be nobody to take your place . you have   teach no one else the job . you have   deliberately keep yourself indispensable . you be the director of the fine hotel in the world , it run perfectly so long as you be in charge , but you do not   believe in the maxim that a director ought as quickly as he can to teach the people he direct how to carry on without he . " 

 2 . 

 " see here ! " say Evelyn . " where do you pick up these notion about organisation ? " 

 " daddy , " she answer . " daddy always say that a boss who be indispensable be a rotten organiser and a rotten boss . he use to take that line sometimes about my housekeeping . darling ! " she proceed with no pause . " you need not   answer . I do not   want to catch you out . I will admit that now and then a man may really be indispensable , and if he do not   stay on the spot everything fall to piece . here , for instance . here you be indispensable . no one can take your place here . you be so indispensable that nobody could possibly be more indispensable . all this hotel and licensing business and so on be only machinery for living . here it be a question of live itself . it be more vital than any machinery could ever even begin to be . I daresay it be most frightfully important that customer in your restaurant should be able to get champagne and whisky every night till 2 a.m. instead of 11 p.m. still , champagne and whisky be only help to live . sort of preliminary to be properly alive . but here , you and I have get past preliminary . we be live . or we be live , until you come in this morning and tell I while I be in my bath that you must stop live - and I too - because you have to rush off to London to argue with M.P. 's and thing about whisky and champagne . " 

 " be that quite the way to put it ? " 

 " it be the only way I can put it , darling . and any other way would be merely the voice of common sense . you will not   tell I that you do not   know that common sense be not the law of law . if you tell I that , I tell you you just do not   know the first word about live . Jesus Christ never say anything about common sense ... darling ! please do not   fidget your leg . " she leave her chair and with one bind plant herself on his knee , and curve her arm loosely round his neck . " Darling ! " her voice soften into a dreamy tenderness . " we be divine last night , darling . God be pleased with we . but this morning ... to - day - " 

 " yes , " say Evelyn , and his tone be hard because he hat she , he be afraid of she , in that moment . " and you be be the professional egotist and do all you can to cure my egotism . you be try to make I ruin myself , and you call it work out God 's plan . " 

 " no , no . " 

 " you say so yourself this afternoon . " 

 " but surely you can see I be exaggerate , then ! " she exclaim . " I be always ready to compromise ... if only you would give we a few day , a week . you could easily have arrange that , with all your cleverness . but no ! we be in heaven last night . and this morning , the very next day , when I be lie in my bath in front of you , you smash our heaven to piece . you could not   keep your whisky and champagne waiting . not an hour ! as I say , I do not   blame you . it be myself I blame . I be mistaken , not you . I lay a bet , and my stake be everything I have . and I have   lose . you understand love in one way , and I understand it in another . but I can only live with a man who understand love in my way . I do not   say my way 's right . but it be my way . darling ! " she kiss he . " I do love you . you can not   guess how much . and you love I - in your way . but your way would kill I . no . that be not fair . I should be kill myself . " she kiss he again . " that be a good - bye kiss . " 

 and Evelyn think bitterly and tenderly : 

 " and I suppose that be what she call play the game ! " he say aloud : " my way ! my way ! but that first night at the Palace , when I refuse to go to your party because I have work to do and you get angry , you tell I afterwards you like I for refuse . " 

 she reflect a moment before answer : 

 " that be different . you be not   in love with I then . " 

 3 . 

 he be about to make a retort , when the door - bell rang . he have not quite settle the nature of the retort ; what he chiefly feel be that he must hide his irritation well than he have hide it in his previous remark ; you could not , decently , be cross with a young woman who be still sit on your knee and kiss you , even though she have use the word ' goodbye ' ; moreover , she do not , could not , mean it . she spring from his knee . 

 " I will answer the door , " he say , stand up . 

 " you will do nothing of the kind , thank , " say she , faintly show irritation . 

 " what reason have she to be irritated ? " he ask himself . his attitude to she have not change . hers to he be change from moment to moment , in a manner totally incomprehensible , not to say inexcusable . 

 she return from a parley in the ante - chamber bear a large cardboard box . 

 " hello ! " he exclaim brightly . " what be that ? " 

 " my old thing , from the Jolie Laitiere , " say Gracie . " they be pretty quick , be not   they ? " the second half of her reply be evidently mean to mitigate the perhaps excessive curtness of the first . 

 she go straight by he , through the masked door , along the corridor into the bedroom ; and her chin be raise . his instinct and desire be not to let she out of his sight . but he sit down again , because he dislike to think of himself as run after she . all his thought be resentful . good - bye , indeed ! what damn nonsense ! and dangerous nonsense ! woman , however , have no sense of danger . they be all - woman . within a few minute the desire to see she have become irresistible . he stroll into the bedroom , grandly , masculinely casual . the Jolie Laitiere frock have be fling on the bed , and Gracie , in her knicker , be bend over the open cardboard box . 

 " what be you do ? " he ask in a kind tone ; but the word ' my dear ' refuse to add themselves to the question . 

 " I be put on my own thing , " she say , not look up , and draw forth the frock which have win praise from the saleswoman at the Jolie Laitiere . 

 " but why ? " 

 " that game be finish , " she say . " I do not   feel like be dowdy any more . it be no fun . " she slip on the frock , and as her head emerge from the neck of the frock she turn and face he , shake down the skirt impatiently . her glance , defiant , and rather hard , displease he . still , he could control himself , be a man . 

 " I think I will try one of your cigar , " he say , in a neutral tone , and leave she , and after some trouble open the box of cigar . " this situation have get to be handle , " he say firmly to himself as he light the cigar and walk back into the bedroom . 

 " what a heavenly smell ! " she murmur agreeably . she be perfume herself . 

 " your scent or my cigar ? " he ask , with equal mildness . 

 " your cigar . " 

 " yes , it be what I call a pretty good cigar . now , my child , I want you to - " 

 " I be not so much of a child as you think I be , " she stop he . 

 " now , my dear girl , " he begin again . " I be go to ask you to do something for I . I want you to do it to please I . take that frock off and put on the other one . I love to see you in it . you invent a most amusing game . do keep it up . it be great and original fun . do oblige I . I should feel frightfully gloomy if you would not   play any more . it would spoil everything . " he smile , vary the tone of his voice , do all he could , by employ a semblance of airy , affectionate humour , to be persuasive . 

 she shake her head . 

 " no , thank . I have   change now , and I be not go to waste this scent either . " her tone be challenge ; her feature be begin to be contort into a vindictive ugliness . 

 Evelyn , amazed and hurt , think : " only a few minute since she be sit on my knee , and hang round my neck , and kiss I , and say how she love I . and now she be all alter ! and I will swear I have not   say a word , not one word to upset she . on the contrary . what sort of a creature be she ? " still control himself , he continue aloud : " I always think woman like to dress to please man , and - " 

 " you think wrong then , " she stop he once more . " everybody who know anything at all know that woman dress to please woman . I mean , they mind what woman think far more than what man think . man be not   judge . woman be . and if a woman have to choose between please a man she be fond of and please a woman who hat she , she would please the woman every time - in her clothe . " 

 " but even if that be true ... " 

 " even if it be true ! it be true ! " 

 " well , let it be true . you know it before you start the game , and you do not   care . why have you alter ? " 

 " listen to I , " she answer . it strike he that she be now use the same tone as when she have flare up at he at the Palace on the night of his refusal to go to her party ; also , the vindictiveness of her expression be candid and intense . " do you imagine I can not   read you like the front page of a newspaper ? if you do you be mistaken . you just make up your mind to come the grand over I . you say to yourself you would force I to keep on wear that dowdy thing . you think you would show I who be the master here . just because I have   be fool enough to tell you and show you how I have   go crazy about you . " 

 " not at all , " he protest unconvincingly . 

 " I say yes ! " she cry . 

 he see that she be inexplicably lose her temper . " oh , very well ! " he think superiorly , and wait . 

 " the truth be , " she cry , louder and louder , " and you may as well know it , you be conceited . you be always conceited , and I have   make you more conceited . you show it the whole time ! you simply can not   move without show it . you be take advantage of I every minute , that be what you be do ! " 

 he sit down , near the door , think what a brilliant idea it be to sit down . 

 " now , come here ! please ! " he beg she . if only she would obey , he could restore she to his knee , and soothe and fondle she into be rational . 

 " there you be again ! " she cry . " I be in love with you . so I be to be your slave . finger up , I come . finger down , I go . " 

 he shake his head , with a gesture of fatigue . 

 " you say you be in love with I , " he resume , very low and careful . " I believe you be . and I be quite sure I be in love with you . " 

 " you be more sure than I be , then . " 

 " but I be ! " 

 " so you say ! but I will just ask you one question . this morning , the very next day after you have make love to I , you be ready to leave I because of something you would see in a newspaper . " 

 " well ? " 

 " suppose they telephone to you to - night that you be want in London to - morrow , should you go ? " 

 he reply uncompromisingly : 

 " yes . " 

 " of course ! " she sneer . " and after all that explanation I give you this afternoon ! of course you would go . and glad to . man soon get tired of a girl who be be fool enough to let out that she be in love with they ! I have   hear that from lot of girl , and mother too . but you just do not   know what love be . you take everything for grant . man generally do . and you be bad than most . I be an idiot , but I would soon be an idiot than a conceited ass like you be ! " her eye be radiant with fury , her fine nostril twitch , and she lean forward in her defiance of he . 

 " oh , if that be it ! " Evelyn explode . " if that be it , I would well be off . " he throw his cigar fiercely into the fireplace . 

 " yes , you have ! " she provoke he far . 

 " but before I do go , I will tell you what I think of those explanation of your . how they strike I . silly . absolutely silly . there you be , choose your word , and think you be be so damned eloquent , and feel conceited about your book because I have praise it . and your explanation be perfect bosh . all over the place ! all over the damn place ! " he have not yet quite realise that he too have lose his temper ; but he be distinctly aware of a sensation of voluptuous happiness in his outbreak . " not an argument in the whole bloom performance that could not   be riddle to piece by any man who take the trouble to argue . not that anything you say be worth an argument ! you the author of that book ! you must be if you say so . but do not   you forget that I read it under your influence . you look after that all right , do not   you ? you manage to lie on the floor and watch I read it , do not   you ? but I wonder what I should think of it if I be to read it a second time . " he have stand up . 

 " and now you can go ! " she shout . " I have   listen to you . Most woman would have shut you up . but I be different . off you go . " her hand be clench . 

 4 . 

 he do go . in the ante - chamber he throw his overcoat on anyhow , seize his hat and go , and bang the door . he feel hot and he be breathe hard . he turn westward down the boulevard , but he know not whether he have turn westward or eastward . he merely move on , rather quickly . 

 " she be absolutely awful , " he exclaim , half - aloud . and , " of all the " and , " she must be mad . " and , " what excuse can there be ? " and , " I be jolly glad I let she have it . " and , " what an escape ! my God ! " 

 he repeat all these remark several time . one or two passer - by glanced at he apprehensively . when he have cool a little , he look round , and discover with surprise that he be in the rue du Faubourg St. Honoré . how he have arrive in it he could not remember , for he have no recollection whatever of go down the rue Royale , as he must have do . 

 the night be sharp , with a clear starry sky . he begin to notice the crowd of wayfarer , the noise of traffic , and the January night - frost . he button his big overcoat , whose front have be fly loose . he think : " seem to I my coat - collar be high than my overcoat ! " in other man he be very scornful of this negligence . he put his hand to his nape yes , the coat - collar be half an inch high than the collar of the overcoat ! he halt , set it right , with an angry tug at the coat behind , and walk on . he decide that he would send for his belonging . she be dreadful , dreadful ! the utter lack of reason ! the injustice ! he hat injustice . the same thought run round and round in his brain . 

 be it what they term a lover ' quarrel ? no , by Heaven ! he say : " my character 's change . I notice that not long since . I can not   remember ever lose my temper before . well , anyway not for age . " he pass the H"tel Bristol . what sort of a new - fangle noisy place be that ? he turn down the avenue Matignon . he be in the avenue des Champs Elysées , majestic and vast and beautiful in the night . an illuminated shop on the south side appear to be mile away , and full of mysterious magic . he think : " it be childish of I to lose my temper , if I do lose it . but there be limit to patience . " then he feel humiliate because he have lose his temper . he , at his age ! he be no well than she be . yes , he be well , because she would begin it , but he be not enough well . she be magnificent in her defiance . her nostril ! her burn eye ! her stance ! nevertheless an impossible Tartar . she might be a genius , but she be hellish . imagine she as a wife . you could not . 

 about send for his thing . how could he ? he could not . he might go to a strange hotel ; but he would have to give his right name , and then the hotel would know that he have have to send for his luggage to a dubious flat on the boulevard ; and that a young woman have open the door of the flat . besides , his thing be not   pack . 

 no ! he have his dignity to think of . he must jump into a taxi at once , and go and get his luggage himself . and he must be very calm and cold and dignified . no alternative ! none . he have blunder . he must repair the blunder . he could ; and he would . and the incident would be a lesson to he . by God ! it would be a lesson to him! ... what injustice ! what infernal foolishness and cheek ! a conceited ass , be he ? ah ! and she - what be she ? he would like to know . no doubt she be magnificent in her madness . but - he hesitate , and then raise his hand to a taxi - driver , and give the address . the taxi have wing , for it fly . no trafficblock , no slackening . in five second , so it seem to he , the taxi have pull up at the portico of the house of furnished flat . should he keep the taxi , or pay it off ? easy to get a fresh one on the boulevard . he pay off the taxi . he climb the stair very slowly ; yet he be at her door in an instant . he pause , because he be afraid , so afraid that his hand shake on the bell push , and he touch it before he have definitely decide whether or not to touch it . hour pass . 

 then the door be open . she be wear the Jolie Laitiere dowdy ravish pink frock . she be smile . he enter . she slam the door . she burst into tear . he put his arm round she . not a word be say . 

 content 
 chapter 60 

 the cash - girl 

 " now you must not   cry , " say Evelyn , in a voice low and tender . " I do not   like to see you cry . " he charge his voice to the full with tenderness , think : " I have never be as tender as this before to anybody . " then he add , on a note of humour equally tender : " well , you may cry for three minute - not more . and I will not   look at my watch . " 

 he peep down , to glance at she avert face , and see a plaintive , weak smile . there they stand , uncomfortably , near the door in the drawing - room , Evelyn not dare to move she towards a chair , or not have the wit to do so . she murmur something inarticulate . 

 " what ? what do you say ? " 

 " hanky . my bag . handkerchief , " she snivel . 

 " Bag be blow ! " say Evelyn , and take out his own handkerchief . 

 he try to raise her face , but she resist ; he feel delicately for her eye and with extreme care wipe they . then he try again to raise her face , and she no long resist . his hand press on the top of her forehead , he push her head backwards , until her face be in full view beneath his . her eye meet his eye , and she smile . her shoulder rest softly upon his left arm . all her body be limp , lax , acquiescent , utterly yield to his will and strong muscle . it confess its weakness and the weakness of her spirit . he lightly brush away the last trace of moisture from her shin eye and a stray tear from her soft ripe cheek ; the handkerchief fall to the carpet . her smile die as if from exhaustion , return to life , die , return , stay . moment agitate and exquisite . the woman paint in their gilt frame , and the sculptured woman on her pedestal , regard the human scene with the callous indifference of goddess ; the clock stir not a finger : the room be a phantasm . only the two body , hold together by their invisible mysterious soul , be alive under the garish downpour of light from the chandelier , whose pendant faintly tinkle now and then in response to vibration set up by footstep overhead in another abode of human being invisible and mysterious . no recrimination , no explanation even , nor justification . silence . word be unnecessary , because there be absolutely nothing that need to be say . in the quarrel word have lose all meaning , and perhaps be now discredit . as for the quarrel , it merely do not exist ; more strange , it never have exist ; that which be annihilate have never exist . 

 " you would well sit down , " Evelyn murmur , and lead she to an easy - chair . she sit , recline in the abandonment of emotional fatigue . Evelyn have an impulse to kneel at her knee . he check it . he could not persuade himself to kneel ; the posture would have be sentimental , ridiculous . he have win the battle ; conqueror do not kneel . still less could he have kneel if he have lose the battle . he lean against the side of the back of the chair and stroke her cheek , endlessly , and so compassionately that sometimes he do not touch it . 

 when he think of the annihilate past , as he do , he think of it as something which , even have it have existence , would have be entirely negligible . its sole importance lie in the fact that out of its nothingness it have engender this marvellous bliss . and he have not win ; neither of they have win ; he would have hat to win . his desire be to preserve her equality with himself . self - complacency ? perhaps . 

 absorb in contemplation of Gracie , he yet could detect in the far distance of his mind , faint as the rumour of boulevard traffic through the close window , fragmentary rumour of the unreal quarrel . be it true that woman dress for woman , not for man ? it be not true . woman submit themselves to the judgment of woman only in so far as concerned the efficiency of their effort to please man . woman do not think in criticism of a woman : " that frock do not please I . " they think : " that frock do not achieve its aim , which be not direct at I at all . " example of the girl 's inability to think straight , or , in the alternative , of her instinct to think dishonestly ... no . the quarrel be not grow real to he . even when he recall her phrase , ' conceited ass , ' he smile ; he could have laugh . it have no significance . nothing of the quarrel have significance . the memory of the quarrel do not humiliate he now . he have not be wrong , nor have he be right . they be both of they beyond good and evil . they have ascend , for a while , to the plane of pure , unconditioned existence . she lift her hand and gently seize his , and look up at he . 

 " I suppose I ought to be get ready , " she say , in quite a prosaic tone . 

 but how enchantingly ! it seem to he that all the prose of their life would for ever be poetry , that within the dailiness of life their joint existence would always be pure and unconditioned . unresolved problem ? Pooh ! trifle of less than no importance ! she rise slowly ; he hold she against fall ; they pass silently into the bedroom , where she have leave the light burn . 

 on the bed , the Lovely Milkmaid nightdress be lay out in all its graceless attractiveness for the morbid . at any rate her repentance and surrender seem to Evelyn to be thorough . he be pleased . she hat to be his ' slave ' - with what scorn she have utter that word ! - but she love to be his slave . he be more than pleased , he be more than content . he feel that he could be wondrously kind to a slave . she put her hand on his shoulder , and say with apologetic timidity : 

 " what time be it ? I think I shall soon be hungry . " the admission have the instant effect of lower the plane of their mood to the normal , the humdrum , the safe . and they both become cheerful . 

 " oh ! it be not late , " he say . he too be aware of the onset of hunger . but he would not admit it . slave might confess hunger , not master . 

 " what about dinner , darling ? " 

 " where would you like to eat ? here , same as last night ? " 

 " if you prefer it , darling , " she answer , submissive but reluctant . 

 " not at all , " he say . " anywhere you please , my dear . I want you to choose . " 

 " A durand ? " she suggest . 

 " have you ever be in a durand ? I have not . " 

 " no . but I be die to try one . it ought to suit this frock . " she smile . her childlike fancy have return to the idea of the game of mackintosh , Baedeker , and Jolie Laitiere frock and hat . 

 " they be awful , be not   they ? " 

 " I hope so , " say she . 

 " you be a funny little thing ! " he pat she . 

 " shall we go now ? " she cajole , less humbly . 

 " be not   it frightfully early ? " 

 " not for cheap tourist like we , " she say . " they always dine early . " 

 yes , she be a child . 

 " right then ! but be not   your lip a shade too brilliant for a Restaurant Durand ? " he would show she that he also could act the child . 

 " I be just think of that , " she say eagerly . " wait two minute . wait here . " she run laugh into the bathroom . 

 he be quite youthfully happy . when she emerge , she present her face for his inspection . 

 " will it do ? " she ask . 

 " I love it . " 

 she have remove every trace of rouge and powder . her cheek be pale , her lip a pale , imperfect crimson . she look unwell . the artlessness of her complexion appeal to he as the nightdress appeal to he . 

 " I have not   wash my face with water for year and year , " she say . " but I could not   do anything with my nail . the stuff would not   come off without too much trouble . " she display she elaborately manicure hand . 

 " hide they ! hide they ! shocking ! " say he . " even if you do forget to buy proper glove . " 

 she have notice a Durand in the avenue de l'Opéra , near the Café de Paris . in less than another minute they be on the way . how different be the bliss of the walk from his miserable , tragical , solitary promenade to the Champs Elysées ! be they walk , or float ? 

 2 . 

 " there be thirty - two Durands in Paris , " say Gracie , as they stand a moment hesitant at the door of the restaurant .   no welcome official at the door . 

 " who tell you that ? " 

 " Uncle Laugier . " 

 " you seem to know the old rascal pretty well . " 

 " no . but daddy and I have stay several time at the Concorde , and Laugier be rather a dear . " 

 the large interior , like the exterior , of the Durand have the sedateness of panel brown wood which might have be mahogany , or rosewood , or even synthetic wood . the mirror and the small window - pane be bevel , and the bevel split the light of the lamp into glint of all the colour of the spectrum . many small table arrange in row strictly rectilinear . waitress in black and white . one man , short and fat and shabby in morning dress , oversee the entire place . two enormous sideboard bear fruit that appear to be artificial but be not . a brass - protect service - door , which the waitress kick open as they enter with hand occupy by tray of food . a broad staircase , with indiarubber tread , show that there be another room upstairs . the restaurant be nearly full of dowdy , staid people of all age from twenty - five to that of Methuselah , eat seriously . no sound , or hardly a sound , save the faint clatter of knife and fork on earthenware . Paris ! 

 the overseer advance to meet the new arrival . 

 " Two ? " he ask in English , imperceptibly bow , with a slight smile . he direct they to a distant table , still encumber with the debris of a recently finish meal . then he leave they . after a time a stout , very deliberate , middle - aged waitress come up and restore to the table its virginity . 

 " do let I order , " say Gracie mischievously when at last the waitress draw a menu from the bib of her apron and present it , first to Evelyn , who indicate that she be present it to the wrong person . the waitress shut her lip together , and stand patiently impatient while Gracie scan the card . Evelyn hear the order : vermicelli soup , skate , cutlet , fried potato , creme caramel , carafe of red vin ordinaire . the waitress write nothing , remember everything . 

 " this place be a million time bad than where we have lunch yesterday , " say Evelyn . 

 " I should just hope so ! " say Gracie . " I should have be very disappointed if it have not   be . but have not   I choose the perfect Durand dinner for you ? " 

 " you be the kind of girl that get murder and nobody can guess the motive , " Evelyn reply . he feel gaily sardonic . 

 " you will have to eat it , " she enjoin he . 

 " oh ! I shall eat it , " say he . " if I die for it . " 

 " I think it be all heavenly , " she say , glance round . " it be nice of you to let I come here . I shall bring Tessa here now , for a treat . it be the very place for expectant mother - I buy Tessa a wedding ring . " 

 he gaze at her pale , virginal face , think : " well , there be one good thing about she - she be deprave ! " her morbidity strongly attract he . there be no end to it , no end to her unpredictable caprice . he be absolutely determined to marry she . ' good - bye kiss ! ' nonsense ! 

 the wine appear first . then , after an interval , the soup . she take a spoonful of the soup , swallow it with a noise , and look at he for approval of this realistic touch . 

 " when you think , " say she , " that in thirty - two Durands at this moment respectable people be eat vermicelli soup ! you know , it be exactly the same menu in all these place . " the soup be hot and wet , and as interesting as a uniformly overcast sky . 

 " what be that you be write this morning , in my big coat ? " he demand . 

 " I think I will take my mackintosh off , " she say , and do so and Evelyn hang it up on the rack behind he where he have hang the big coat and the hat . then he repeat the question . 

 " I tear it up , " she say . 

 " but what be it about ? " 

 " oh , nothing ! I be not go to write any more . " 

 " it be something about I , " he say . 

 " it be not . you flatter yourself . it be about I . I have   only get one subject . that be why I be not go to write any more . " disillusion and sudden melancholy in her rich voice . " I want to work . " 

 " but be not   write work ? " 

 " mine be not . it be fun . " 

 he think : " she be like all the rest of them . flirt about all over the place . can not   stick to anything . she give up motor - racing . now she be give up writing . but when she be my wife I will put the fear of God into she . " he be absolutely confident of his power to form she . 

 " what sort of work ? " 

 " you see that girl there at the cash - desk , " she say , and without move her eye from he go on : " look at she . see those black wristlet to keep her cuff clean ? you may be sure they be white linen cuff to match her open - work collar . see her hair ? she be not like any other girl in this place - I mean on the staff . see the expression of her face ? no , you can not   get it from here . " 

 " no . I can not , " say Evelyn as he look , scrutinise . 

 " I notice she as we come in , " say Gracie . 

 " I do not . well , what about she ? " 

 " see how she can not   move so long as she be at that desk . rather like an A.B.C. or a Lyons cash - desk , be not   it ? " 

 " do you patronise those place ? " 

 " yes , sometimes . they be far more interesting than your Palace restaurant , darling . and the tea be just as good ... and she have to sit on a stool - it be not   a chair . and she have to sit there behind that grill until the last customer have go . same for lunch . I expect . she never speak to anyone unless a customer ask her something . she be not   quite as solitary as a bus - driver in the Strand , but she nearly be . she just sit behind that grill and look at bill and take money and give change . now that be the sort of work I want to do . no , you need not   smile . please do not   smile . it be . I should love the monotony . it would be so restful . she love it ; I could tell from her face . she can be herself . she have time to be herself . I want to be myself , only I never have time as I live now . that girl 's job be well even than be a nun . it be nearly as good as be in the grave . " 

 the solemn sincerity of Gracie 's tone as she speak those last word dismay he . 

 " I should like to do that girl 's work for year and year , " Gracie continue . " nothing would happen to I . I be tired of thing happen to I . she be meek . she have to be . blessed be the meek . it be a blessing I have   never have , and I need it . you do not   know how much I need it . I do not   know how much I need it . I do not   know who I be . and I simply must know who I be . could not   I have a job like that , in one of your hotel ? not in London . on the continent . I can talk both french and italian frightfully well . do you understand how I feel ? " 

 " yes , I understand , my dear , " say Evelyn . " but be you ready to what I call talk straight ? " 

 " yes . I adore straight talk . " 

 " truly now ? " his voice and an upturned finger warn she . 

 " truly . neither you or anyone else can be too straight for I . " 

 3 . 

 " well , listen , my dear . in the first place , the girl have not   only get to look at bill and take money and give change . she have to enter every bill on a sheet . and when the last customer 's go she have to add up the sheet , probably several sheet , and wait while somebody else check the total . and she have to count her cash , and the cash have to agree with the total , and she can not   go home till it do agree with the total , and if it be more than the total she do not   pocket the difference - oh no ! but if it be less than the total she have to find the difference out of her wage . and all the time while she be take money and pay it out , that be what she be think about . she be not   think about herself and the mystic beauty of be meek and the virtue of monotony and so on . " 

 " darling , you be laugh at I , " grace interrupt he with sweet plaintiveness . 

 " I be not ! " he rap the table in emphasis . " I be perfectly serious and I be just talk straight . however , I will stop , if you can not   stand it . " 

 " you go on . I be sorry . but do you imagine I could not   do the add - up business and the counting ? of course I could . I be very good at it . as if I have not   keep the house - book at home for daddy . and they be no joke either . " 

 " I do not   say you be not   good at it , " he reply , soothingly . " but you could not   do it . I mean you could not   keep on do it . you say you have   keep your father 's house - book . but who be keep your father 's house - book now ? not you . you keep they as long as you feel like keep they , and then you turn they over to someone else to keep , someone who have to keep they whether she feel like it or not . the moment you do not   feel like it you chuck it . and quite right too ! " 

 " but I could keep book whether I feel like it or not . " 

 " you be wrong . you could not . that be the whole point . it be not   your fault . you be not   bring up to it . that cash - girl there be bring up to it . she be always be use to be in a certain place at a certain time , whatever the weather , and whatever she feel like . if she can move her foot , she be get to arrive on time and stay until she be finish . she be be discipline . it take year to learn discipline , and you must begin early . you have to begin to learn discipline before you can talk . there be no other way - that be , if you be to be happy under discipline . that cash - girl have learn one accomplishment that you have   never learn and never will , and she take year to learn it . " 

 " what be that ? " 

 " she be learn to stick it . you have   never learn that - you have   never have the chance to . you could no more stick it as she stick it than you could learn to play Beethoven sonata in public without be laugh off the platform . you think that that girl 's work be easy and you could do it on your head . it be not , and you could not . it require gift that be beyond you . you be young , God know , but if you want her quality you ought to have start out after they twenty year ago . " 

 he add , in silence to himself : 

 " I might twit you about throw up motor - racing and want now to throw up writing ; but I will not . I will spare you that . you have   have all you can swallow . and all this talk be a pure waste of time . I have   get something else in store for you , and right down in your heart you know it . " 

 " be not   you be a little hard on I , darling ? " 

 " hard , my dear ? no . only straight . a straight line be the near way between two point . a line be not   hard . and I will tell you another thing . you could not   get a responsible place like that girl have . you just apply , and you will see . they would ask you quick enough what experience you have have , and they would ask for your testimonial . and then when you could not   deliver the good they would laugh at you . " 

 " but everyone have to begin . " 

 " not at your age , and with your money . sell all that you have and give to the poor . and make your father do the same , so that he could not   help you when you do not   feel like stick it ; and you might have a chance . you would probably die of the experience , or do something bad , but you would have a chance . oh yes , you could get a place . I could push you into some kind of place , just as you be , if I be an unscrupulous scoundrel . but you would only be play at it , and everybody would know you be only play at it . I can hear the other girl talk among themselves about you . ' oh , she ! she be a scream ! and keep girl that want a job out of it ! ' you would like that , would not   you , my dear ! " 

 a considerable silence . the buxom matron remove the remain of the raie au beurre noir . Gracie 's plate be empty except for the spine of the fish , but Evelyn have eat little . the matron with placid indifference set down tiny cutlet , and minute quantity of vegetable which have apparently be weigh to the near dram in chemist ' scale , accurately accord to a doctor 's prescription . the matron make no enquiry as to the reaction of her customer to the Durand diet . Evelyn thought , of Gracie : 

 " have I drive any of the mysticism out of she ? when be it she be talk about secret sign with a capital s , and fate with a capital f ? oh yes , my see the paragraph in the paper be a mystical sign - that I do not   really love she . ' no such thing as chance ! ' what a world the witch live in ! and what a sardonic devil I be ! still , she ask for it . it be ask and ye shall receive - when I be the person that be ask . " 

 nevertheless , beneath all this sharp irony his tenderness be flow into she . he divine from her glance that she be as aware of the one mood in he as of the other . 

 " Darling , how can I argue with you ? I can not . you be too strong for I . you be ruthless . I do not   say you be not   right . have not   I tell you I be nothing - nothing ? " 

 " I be not ruthless , " say he , with love . " it be common sense that be ruthless . " 

 " it do not   seem to help I , " she murmur . " what I always want be encouragement . " 

 " not encouragement on the wrong path , " he say . he be startled to hear that she always want encouragement - she so independent , so full of initiative , so adventurous   as in the affair of Tessa . be he get down to the deep of her individuality ? 

 " then the right path - what be it ? " she ask gently . 

 " you be rich , " he answer . " and you can not   not be rich . you have   get to go on be rich and spectacular and all that . it be not a bad thing , really . have its us in what political journalist call the fabric of society . we other be entitle to have something to look at . of course I know you will say I be talk like a manager of luxury hotel . but I mean it . if I do not   I should not   be what I be . in any case it be not the slight use sell all you have and give to the poor , or try to do job that plain ordinary girl can do ten time well than you ever could . that would only show that you be afraid of your responsibility and want to shirk they . that would show you be a coward , and you be not . we be all discourage and discontent and cry out for the moon at time . " 

 " but I must do something ! " she plead . " and I be not   bring up to do anything . " 

 " that be the sin of the father . the father have eat what - ever - it - be - sour grape - and the child 's tooth be set on edge . that be what you have   get to stick - not sit at a desk and count thirty thousand franc a day for a hundred franc a week and your food ... well , you have   see through motor - racing and you have   see through writing "   he fail after all to leave out the jibe , " but there be Tessa . you have   take on that responsibility . the baby be not   bear yet , and your responsibility there will not   be do with until either you or both mother and baby be dead . and it will need a lot of thinking about . and I shall rely on you not to do anything that will set the child 's tooth on edge . and you will have to marry , you know . and your husband will be all you can manage for year . and if you have child you will have twenty pretty busy year set they a good example . the fact be , you will not   have a moment to spare . and if you do happen to find you have some leisure on your hand , it will be up to you to think out some scheme . nobody else can do that for you . the preacher will now step down from the pulpit . this cutlet ought to be put in the British Museum . egyptian antiquity . no . Elgin marble . " 

 " Darling ! I have   never hear you like this before . " 

 " no . you have   think I be just an ordinary man . you see how mistaken you have   be . " 

 " and so you think I must marry . " 

 " you can not   avoid it . " 

 " but who ? " 

 she smile at he weakly ; he could not interpret her smile , which somewhat trouble he . 

 " I be nothing , " she breathe . 

 " that be exactly as it ought to be , " he say . " I have   always swear to myself I would never marry "   he might have add " again " ; but he be sure that if he do she would question he closely about his first wife , and such question would have irk he ; " but if you be nothing and I marry you , I shall not   be marry . see ? " 

 she continue to look at he with her love , disquieting , undecipherable smile . 

 he think : 

 " her money may be a regular curse to I . on the other hand it may not . also , her father might go bankrupt , over the film . " 

 the creme caramel follow the cutlet . 

 " well , " he say , have taste it . " I propose we go . " 

 " where ? " 

 " any place where we can dine . " 

 " Sweetie ! " she protest . " I be so sorry you have not   enjoy it . I have   enjoy it all . but we can not   eat another dinner . " 

 " then I must have some cheese . let us order two portion , and I will eat both . " 

 when at last he demand the bill , she say : " I will pay it . " 

 " no . " 

 " but I want to . it be my dinner . " 

 " no . " 

 " well then , give I the bill and the money , and let I pay at the desk . " 

 he give she a hundred - franc note , and a tip to the impassive matron . 

 " it be not   good and it be not   cheap , " he mutter to Gracie . " and woman do not   understand food . " 

 he follow she to the cash - desk , put on his overcoat as he walk between the empty table . stand by Gracie at the desk , he examine the face of the cash - girl , and in spite of his wish not to do so he seem to see in the face all that Gracie have see . something significant ought to have happen , but nothing do . Gracie , tender the money , smile at the cash - girl , who hand she the change and stamp the bill . 

 " merci , madame , " say Gracie , 

 the cash - girl appear to be a little startled , but do not respond , even with a smile . no doubt Gracie would say that she be dream her private dream of meekness behind that casual , insensitive glance . 

 " there be one good thing about this restaurant , " say Evelyn in the street , as Gracie bestow on he the change . " no music . " 

 then , to atone for his persistent irony , he take her arm possessively , and make she happy . her smile be modest enough ; but Evelyn , impress , think that her general demeanour have a certain grandeur , and he be proud of it . 

 content 
 chapter 61 

 the HELPMEET 

 " Evelyn , you have not   forget to telephone to London , have you ? " 

 Gracie , who have change the reach - I - down frock for her peignoir , come as far as the door of the drawing - room , where Evelyn be smoke the second of her cigar . she have ask he to sit in the drawing - room for a while . her tone now be serious . ' Evelyn , ' she have begin , not ' darling . ' and she speak as if she realise , in the way a wife should , that communication with the Imperial Palace be a duty not to be neglect . 

 " oh ! it do not   matter . there will not   be anything , " he answer very casually . he be in an easy - chair , with his back to the masked door . the next moment she be perch on the arm of his chair , and bend towards he . 

 " darling , you know you ought to . you know they have not   get your number and they will be expect you to ring they up . do be a good boy . " 

 yes , she have take the role of thoughtful wife , gently determine that her husband 's interest should be protect , even against himself . after pretend not to notice her nearness , he glance at she , happily ; for he enjoy the unusual sensation of be look after . true , Miss Cass be devoted to his high welfare , but her method be less delectable than Gracie 's . 

 " Woman ! " he exclaim . " what in God 's name have you be do to yourself ? " 

 she have make up her face again with the utmost elaboration of artifice . 

 " I feel positively indecent in that restaurant , " she laugh . 

 " you hide your feeling pretty well then ! " 

 " of course I do ! it be my own fault I go out naked , and I have to stand for it , without make you uncomfortable too . besides , you be so interesting . now , darling , you must do your little bit of telephoning . " 

 " shall not ! " he say , play the recalcitrant child . all his sensation be novel and delicious . 

 " I will get the hotel for you , " she whisper , and go to the telephone . 

 he puff voluptuously at the cigar , and in a sultanic style watch she do the chore . she be a serious girl . he have always know that at heart she be a serious girl . and in the restaurant he have beat she and silence she . she be marvellously his to command . not another word from she about her infantile scheme for find herself . she have accept the ultimatum . 

 " they will ring you when you be through , " she say , rise from the instrument , on which she be certainly a very accomplished virtuoso . 

 he expect she to stop on her way out of the room and kiss and caress he . but all she give he be a trifle of a satisfy , warning nod . he solace his disappointment by the reflection that there be a time for everything and that in her opinion the present be a time for seriousness . how changed she be , the explanation doubtless be that he have be form she : the man 's business ! he ponder dreamily upon she . she be not a woman , and hers be not a love , to be lightly lose . what a helpmeet ! what a comfort ! and her nerve be all pacify now , after the storm . ' they ' need a storm at interval . a quarrel , a scene , a wild expenditure of nervous force , be a physical necessity for they . emotional instability : that be their weakness , poor exquisite thing ! . 

 the telephone bell ring . he smile and sit still . it ring more than once . Gracie come run into the room ; she must have drop her peignoir en route . he continue to smile , mischievously . 

 " Evelyn ! what be you think of ? " she pull he out of his chair . 

 " all right ! all right ! mind my cigar ! I be come . but I will not   touch the damned telephone until you have   kiss I with your sticky vermilion lip ! " 

 she kiss he , wifely . as soon as she have see he safe with the instrument to his ear , she disappear again . his eye catch she in the act of vanishing , and it wink at she . it laugh because of the comicality of her evident notion that without her moral spurring he would have be feckless in a difficult world . he chat gravely with Cousin for two period of three minute . at the close he say : " very well . I will give you a ring about ten in the morning . " he replace the instrument . Gracie be stand at the door . she have assume the lovely Milkmaid nightdress ; she be indeed more or less loyally play the game . 

 in the bedroom he put his hand on her half - bare shoulder , and survey she and shake she , and laugh loudly , as if unable to contain his joy . 

 " you be uproarious ! " she say . " or be you pretend ? anything exciting at the Palace ? " 

 he shake his head , and turn suddenly to empty his pocket into the small of the drawer which Gracie , out of her rich , have bestow upon he for his exclusive use .   Home !   in his hip - pocket he feel a soft protuberance . it be her glove . he slip it into the drawer surreptitiously . then , happen to glance at the bed , he observe that she have lay out thereon , with a scrupulosity of balanced line that Oldham could not have equal , his pyjama . final touch of conscientious , forethoughtful wifeliness . 

 and yet , later , though nothing lack in the responsiveness of her love ardour to his , there seem to be always a veil over her wide - open eye when she look at he , peer and probe in silence into the secrecy of his mind . the veil foil not her vision but his . have give apparently everything of herself , still she be withhold something : so he surmise , subtly disconsolate in joy , baffle . 

 the bed - lamp be extinguish . darkness . the intimate warmth of her invisible body . the faint , faint sound of her delicate breathing . relaxation of limb . tiny friction of apprehension in the confused , vague activity of his sympathetically fatigued brain . check stirring of the limb . a crumpled rose - leaf in the pillow . subdued yawn . intense wakefulness . uncontrollable racing of the machine of thought . 

 " you can not   sleep , darling ! " 

 " I shall , soon , " he answer , startle but reassuring , in a tone to imitate sleepiness . 

 blinding light . with her feminine instinct for drama , she have switch on the lamp at her side of the bed . she raise herself on one elbow . 

 " something be go wrong at the Palace , " she assert sadly . he shake his head lazily , and notice again the coarse ecru lace at the top of her nightdress . 

 " nothing to speak of . nothing . what make you think there be anything wrong , my dear ? " 

 " you say you would ring they up again in the morning . I hear you . and as you do all your hotel - telephoning at night - at least that be what I understand - " 

 " now just to show you how mistaken you be , I will tell you exactly what I do hear to - night . Ceria - the Grill - room - manager - have not   be see for two day . and our head - housekeeper be ill - but not seriously . that be all , and if we never have anything bad - " 

 he smile , but cease to smile when he see tear in her eye . one of they reach the prominence of her cheek - bone and then drop on to his shoulder . 

 " believe I , " he say , caress she . " it be nothing serious . " 

 " but why do not   you tell I ? " she murmur . " I ask you if there be anything at the hotel , and you shake your head . " 

 " ' anything exciting , ' you say . well , there be not . and I do not   want to spoil your evening with any of those thing . why should I ? " 

 " but I want my evening to be spoil by those thing . I do not   care whether they be serious or not . it be just those thing that would make everything so lovely between we . if you keep thing from I it mean you do not   believe in I be able to take they just right - not too seriously and not too unseriously . oh , darling ! " 

 the grieve , dignified , affectionate expression on her face make he contrite . 

 " my dear , it be not   that at all . " 

 " really ? " 

 " really ! " he asseverate the word with a calm emphasis , but she continue to gaze down at he seemingly unconvinced . however , the tear be quench . 

 " that housekeeper , " she ask . " be that the one that come to I when Tessa have the attack ? " 

 " yes . Miss Powler . Violet Powler . " 

 " oh ! I know she ! I be only wonder if it be she who be your head - housekeeper at the Palace . you know , her sister use to be daddy 's housekeeper . " 

 " and Violet be too , for a time . " 

 " yes , but I be not   at home much then . she be splendid . Susan be fine too , but I think I should admire Violet Powler more than Susan if I know she . I wish I would get some of her quality . " Gracie sigh . she show no curiosity as to Ceria . " darling , put your arm round I . we be not   a bit near . and shall we ever be ? " 

 he enfold she . she be weep again . she weep on his face . 

 " there , there ! " he murmur . " you be only tired . " he hold her close . how long ? he could not guess . at length , kiss he , she gently free herself , put the light out , and go immediately to sleep . 

 it be a wondrous , enlarging experience . but disturbing , disconcert . yes , he have to admit that inexplicably they be not ' near . ' but it be she who be far away . 

 2 . 

 the next morning , when he open his eye and grunt - first sign , grunt , that conscious cerebration be about to be resume - the room be dark , but the door be open , and there seem to be a faint light in the passage ; and in this light he seem to see , vaguely , the figure of Gracie , which immediately vanish . he feel for she in the bed ; she be not in the bed . he close his eye again and yawn , wonder - not without apprehension - what she could be about . he think : " I must have go to sleep after all . " yet he could hardly believe it , because he have make up his mind in the night that he would not and could not sleep and have reconcile himself to the situation . 

 then the chandelier light be switch on from the door , and Gracie come into the room bear a tray . she appear to be dress , except for a frock ... she put the tray on the side of the bed where she have lain . the tray contain breakfast for two . her smile as she lean across the bed , over the tray , be angelic ; it express joy , pride , and devotion , all in a high degree . 

 she say : 

 " I do like your funny old front tooth . oh ! how rough your complicated chin be ! " 

 " here ! " he say . " what be the meaning of this miracle ? I wake up , and breakfast walk in by magic . " 

 " well , " she say , draw a chair to the bed and sit down . " I get the roll and butter from the house , but I make the tea myself . I have   be up for age , and I be frightfully well , and I do not   wake you up , do I ? you wake all by your little self . well , I have the water ready just off the boil , and the tray ready , and as soon as you begin to be a bit restless , I make the tea , and here we be . my poor darling , I know you have   have a bad night . I could feel it all the time while I be asleep . I can , you know . but when I wake up you be asleep , and so I simply creep out of bed . I do not   turn on the light . I just take your watch into the bathroom and it be a quarter - past eight . so I get busy then . I dress in the bathroom . and I must have come in here about ten million time for thing , and you never hear I ! but I could hear your breathing . you sleep like a child . if you snore I do not   think I could have bear it . I do want to see you asleep , but of course I could not   in the dark . now , you comic child , sit up and drink some tea . " he sit up . " wait a moment . he must have his mummy 's dressing - gown over his shoulder . " she arrange her peignoir on he . 

 " oh ! he do look funny ! " then she pass he the cup . " I have   stir it . " 

 " but I do not   take sugar . " 

 " you will , this morning . make a change for you . " 

 her tone be most exquisitely loving and tender . to listen to it , to watch her eye , be worth a month of bad night . and his sincere conviction be that he have never taste such tea . he think : " I have not   half appreciate my girl . she be astounding . I will lie in bed for hour and let she do what she like with I , look after I . only woman can look after man . they have a way ... no man could do it a quarter as well . " another of his sincere conviction be that he have never be so happy as he be then . the sensation of bliss be acute . 

 " she make his night bad than it would have be - she know that , " say Gracie , " and she be so sorry . but he know what she be . how be the tea ? " 

 " perfect . " 

 " I should have give you chocolate , but I could not   be sure of it here . " 

 " why chocolate ? " he ask . 

 " you like chocolate for breakfast when you be in Paris , do not   you ? " she look at he with a sort of love , teasing , mischievous shrewdness . 

 " sometimes , " he murmur . he guess that she must have taste chocolate on his lip on the previous morning , and know that he have fib , then , in pretend to she that he have not breakfast . and she have know it ever since yesterday morning and say not a word . duplicity ! no doubt she could surpass he in duplicity . he drink three cup of tea , and finish the last roll regretfully . she pick up the tray in a very business - like manner . 

 " now he can lie down again . wait a second , though . " she free he from the peignoir and go off with the tray . 

 " what time be it ? " he ask , when she be at the door . 

 " I will get your watch . " 

 in a moment she return with the watch . " a quarter to ten , " she say . " I must get London for you , dearest , now . " 

 " London ? " 

 " you tell they you would telephone they this morning at ten . " 

 " yes , perhaps I do . but I need not   bother about it until to - night as usual . " 

 he be full of delicious sloth . 

 she bent over he and gaze at he with an indulgent smile . " I love to see you put off thing , " she say . " with all that common sense of yours that always make I feel so small and silly . it be such a relief . " she kiss he , and her lip linger on his cheek . " all right . we will attend to London later ... you're in a heavenly mood this morning . " she leave he and sharply draw back the thick curtain with a metallic swish of brass ring on the brass pole . then she trip towards the door , and switch off the electric light . 

 " you be not   go , be you ? " he demand as she open the door . 

 " only for a minute , darling . " she go away , shut the door . 

 Daylight have deprive the bedroom of some of its romantic intimacy . the morning have a neutral colour ; so far as he could judge from a glimpse of a bit of sky through the window , it be overcast : large cloud , and they be stationary . he be a little disturb by what she have say . ' in a heavenly mood this morning . ' be he not generally in a heavenly mood ? and could it be true that his common sense about thing make she feel small and silly ? undoubtedly , whatever his own mood , he have grow hypersensitive to her . he would hate to think that her appreciation of he have any reserve , that his demeanour fret she in the very least . he ardently desire that their relationship should be without flaw . he be impatient for she to return . his eye need she . he would not lose a moment of she . yes , she be manage he , think for he , regardful of his interest , with her prim , girlish , ravish assumption of superior wisdom . even the moment of her absence be divine . 

 she come back , mysteriously smile , and slip on a frock - not the reach - I - down . she have be undress ; in five second she be dress , fit to receive ambassador , radiate energy and efficiency ! 

 " shall I do ? " she seek his approval . 

 he nod , content . indeed , she be exceedingly beautiful , and her chic match her beauty . and she be his . he be continually surprised , and rather incredulous , in spite of all evidence , that she be his , anxious to please he . what astounding good fortune ! how proud of she he would be when the time arrive to exhibit she as his wife ? the contrast between the tired , weep - you might almost say deliquescent - girl of the later night , between the racing - motorist , between the author of her amazing book , between the fiery fierce fury , and this prim adorable feminine wife , this clever wise housewife , this helpmeet ! she be five girl in one . bewildering ! there she stand , chatter in a manner original and charming about the weather , and about his shirt . she seem to be learn in the lore of his shirt . she must have be explore they in secret while at some time or other he be out of the room . 

 " I think you might wear the black and white stripe , " she say . naturally her choice be his law . " do let I change the stud . anyhow I will . " she laugh , hum a tune . 

 why worry about get to heaven , when you be there already ? damn the Palace ! and the Orcham Merger ! and every hotel in the Merger ! 

 drop the black and white striped shirt , she run out of the room . what next ? she be very ' near ' to he , surely . but be she ? even in the early night there have be the veil - tenuous , nearly diaphanous , but a veil - baffle he , though possibly it have add to her allurement . be the veil now tear away , or do it still delicately separate they ? when first she have mention ' nearness , ' he have privately smile at the fancy . but now ' nearness ' preoccupy his mind before everything else . be she near , or be she withdraw ? he wish she have never put the fancy into his head , for he could not put it out again . 

 she reappear , in a hurry . 

 " I have   get London for you , darling ! " she announce casually , in a submissive tone . 

 " but - " he be dumbfound . 

 " I think I would well , " she say . " when you have   ' phoned we shall know where we be . " 

 he want to be cross with she ; but he could not . she have deceive he , cheat he , take far too much on herself , force his hand ; but he could not be cross with she . after all , it amuse her girlishness to manage he , give she a sense of power   quite illusory . and why should he not telephone at once ? he would have to talk to Cousin soon or later . 

 she seize his dressing - gown , and by her serious glance draw he from the security of the bed . she hold the gown for he . 

 " your slipper , darling . " 

 she propel he towards the drawing - room by an affectionate wifely pat between the shoulder . the sensuousness and the sensuality of the night be their own justification   he think as he hasten , but even so this wifeliness , this housewifeliness , seem to purify they . one of his old - fathioned puritanical notion ! 

 " well ? " she question anxiously , when he return . 

 " it be really nothing , " he reply falsely . 

 " but how be your Miss Powler ? " 

 " she do not   seem any well . " 

 " be she bad ? " 

 " he do not   say , " Evelyn say equivocally . 

 " who do not   say ? " 

 " Cousin . " 

 " and the Grill - room - manager - Ceria , be it ? " 

 " no news . " 

 " darling , do not   you think you ought to go back ? " 

 " certainly not . why should I ? it be all in Cousin 's department . it be nothing to do with I . be the hotel to stop because one person 's ill and another missing ? it be up to Cousin to deal with the thing . that be what he be pay for , be not   it ? " 

 " what do you tell he ? " 

 " nothing . I only say I would call he up again to - night . " 

 " darling , you be not   easy in your mind about it all . " 

 " I be perfectly easy in my mind . here one day you be terribly hurt because I think I ought to leave you , and the next day you be positiveIy urge I to go . do you want I to go ? " 

 " yes . " 

 " why ? " 

 " because I be sure if it be not   for I you would not   dream of not go . " 

 he know she be right there . he look away from she . his conscience be side with she against he . Cousin be undoubtedly perturb , and have undoubtedly transmit his perturbation to his superior . but Evelyn would not face the prospect of leave she ; he merely could not . 

 " well , there be plenty of time , " he say glumly . " I could not   catch the ' Golden Arrow ' now . " 

 " why not ? " she say . " you have   get lot of time . it be only just after half - past ten . I will run out to the Wagons - Lits office . " 

 " there will not   be any seat . " he know that he be in full retreat . she smile and kiss he . 

 " there will be seat , " she say . " do you ever see the ' Golden Arrow ' full in January ? I never do . why , when we come over it be half empty . what a good thing I have   put the stud in your shirt for you ! you will catch it easily . you go and have your bath and shave off that beard , and I will do your packing . " she embrace he fondly . " darling , I could not   bear to think I be make you slack . I could not   bear it . and if you do not   go , I should know I be make you slack . it would spoil everything . " 

 woman be devilish . 

 " but hang it all ! " he cry . " I can not   go off all in a rush in this style . it be so sudden . and I do have a rotten night . " 

 she kiss he again . 

 " I will turn on the bath - water for you . " 

 " and I loathe be in a hurry , " be add . 

 " you will not   be in a hurry , " she say , and go into the bathroom 

 3 . 

 the whole episode be incredible . if he have see any other man behave as he be behave - putty in the hand of a woman because he could not   resist she - he would have scorn that man . 

 Sudden , by heaven ! it be more sudden than an earthquake , than a street - accident . his mind be a chaos of resentment and revolt . why be she persuade he to leave she ? for the sake , not of his conscience , but of her ... the hour ? be it really only just after half - past ten ? he search for his watch and see it on the night - table , where she have put it . twenty - two minute to eleven ... what finally decide he to leave she be the realisation of the calamitous injury to the idyll if he should defy she . her distress would be terrible , her brave hiding of her feeling would be still more terrible , and he himself would be sink deep in gloomy unease . 

 despite the usual obstructive conspiracy against train - catcher on the part of all Paris traffic and traffic - policeman , they reach the Gare du Nord at twelve minute to twelve , in the automobile which Gracie have telephone for . Gracie have do nearly everything , get the railway ticket and the seat , telegraph to the Palace , finish the shirt - stud , achieve some packing , and generally make straight a pathway before the traveller 's face . as for her packing , it seem to Evelyn to be outrageously and ruinously comic , but he have feel oblige to temper his criticism of it , because the earnest girl have show herself very sensitive about it . during the drive he have be far less apprehensive than Gracie as to the chance of miss the train ; partly by reason of the fact that he would have be well content to miss it , and partly by reason of the fact that his mind have quite another preoccupation , namely , his return to Paris . Gracie have not mention the question of his return ; no single word have she say as to it . Evelyn think that she ought to speak of it first . and he have wait and wait for she to mention it . 

 at the station she masterfully attend to each detail preliminary to board the train , just as though he have never travel alone in his life , just as though he be a simple schoolboy depart to school . she act and she pay ; and she would have it so . 

 " I hate this train , " she observe as they climb up into the coach . " it be so pleased with itself . " 

 " but you always take it . " 

 " yes . but I hate it all the same . I would soon go second - class by the ordinary train and let it be as crowd as it like . this be so superior and conceited ; it make you feel ashamed . " 

 there she be again , yearn to be ' common ' ! except for one traveller at the other end , the coach be empty . 

 " do not   I tell you , darling , there would be plenty of room ? " she say with kindly forbearance . 

 the suit - case be stow under her order ; she tip the porter and the carriage - attendant . seven minute to twelve . now she would , she must , speak of his return . 

 " this train be awfully stuffy , " she say . " let us go out a minute . " 

 in the doorway of the corridor , where for an instant they be unseen , she suddenly kiss he . her kiss and her glance have a voluptuous quality which remind he of Volivia 's performance on their first evening together , at the Palace , and of her remark , " we all know what we be . " what sort of a girl be she ? he say to himself that he know nothing about she . she love he ; she think for he ; she be efficient ; she have initiative . but he know nothing about she : he could not guess what be pass in her brain . the veil separate they . she love he , but he be disturb and unhappy . he be almost persuade that he have never be so unhappy . time fly . and they be both tongue - tie , and they do not move . 

 " what be you go to do now , my dear ? " he ask . " shall you stay on in that queer flat ? " the enquiry would give she the opportunity to reply that she would stay there for his return . 

 " Queer ? " she say . " what do you mean , darling ? " 

 " well , be not   it ? " 

 " I do not   know what you mean . " 

 " do you call it respectable ? " 

 " it be just as respectable as any suite in any of your hotel , darling . do your people ask for marriage - certificate from visitor ? what be the matter with the flat ? the picture ? have you ever be to the Paris Salon ? " 

 " oh ! I suppose it be all correct , " he capitulate . 

 " I tell the waiter when I take the place that my husband might be come to join I . " 

 " but the ring ? " 

 " well , do you imagine if I buy a ring for Tessa I should not   remember to buy one for myself ? oh , darling ! you be funny , you know ! " she raise her left hand . six ring on it , include an alliance ! he have never notice it . " however , " she go on . " I shall leave my queer flat this afternoon . I must not   neglect Tessa . she will need I more and more now ... oh ! I remember what you tell I in the Durand last night . I remember every word of it . " 

 she move now to the open door of the coach , and he follow she . the platform have the quiet which presage departure of a train . the majority of its population , their head upturne , be talk and laugh with unseen passenger in the train . a boy come along with a selection of newspaper and magazine , all English . Gracie buy a bunch of they at random and thrust they into Evelyn 's hand . 

 " I be forget you would want something to read , darling ! " she say . " you would well read . if you read you will not   worry so much . I do hope you will not   find thing too bad at your wonderful hotel . " 

 he resent her inflection . he resent the assumption that he be worry , and that his hotel could not function perfectly without he , and that he be leave for the sake of his hotel . he be very proud of his hotel . 

 " my hotel will be all right , " he say with a difficult smile . " I should not   be surprised if I come back here to - morrow . " after all she have not mention his return ; so that at the last minute he find no alternative but to mention it himself . astounding , absolutely astounding , that she have avoid the slight reference to it ! shocking ! monstrous ! and yet , her kiss ! 

 " but , darling , you can not   do that ! " her tone be startled and very serious . 

 " why not ? " 

 " you have not   get any excuse for come back - just yet . even as it be , do you think your staff be not   talk about you , and wonder why you have not   give they an address , and why you have   be stay on in Paris after your work 's finish ? nobody ever find any but one explanation of these thing . and if you come , where should you stay ? you would not   come to your own hotel , and you would have to leave an address at the Palace , would not   you ? what address then ? you see , you have   always be so respectable - that be your trouble . when you have   start a bluff you can keep it go for a while , and your respectability help you . but if you drop it , and then try to start it again - well you be bind to be do in . if you tell they to - morrow morning you have to go back to Paris at once , what would they think ? and if you go off without say where you be go , what would they think ? even to explain these two or three day you will have to invent a pretty good story . no , darling! .. Isn't   it strange how thing turn out ? yesterday morning you be say you positively must leave Paris to - day - and you be leave Paris to - day ! darling , I will write you . " 

 the train give the mysterious shiver which precede movement . Gracie jump down . Evelyn have so many thing to say that he could say nothing . the situation be beyond his handling . Gracie step away from the edge of the platform . she stand below he , look at he . she stand straight . she be all youth , elegance , and beauty . and her face have an expression of such proud , dignified sadness , disillusion , and despair that it intimidate Evelyn . then he see tear in her eye . she make no effort to hide they . she remain quite still , cry . imperceptibly her figure begin to slide across the space frame by the doorway of the coach . the train be in motion . 

 content 
 chapter 62 

 MELODRAMA 

 the distance between Victoria and the Palace be short ; the early night be fine and cold . greet Oldham and Brench , his chauffeur , with a somewhat casual kindliness - casual because he be absorb in a dream - Evelyn tell they that he would walk home . throughout the journey to London he have brood upon the multiple enigma of Gracie 's character , act and demeanour , and his relation with she , with no clear result . he have postpone any reflection about the problem of the hotel , think : " time enough when I get there . " but when he step off the train he suddenly realise that postponement must go no far . he try to face the problem . what he do not perceive be that the man face they be not the old Evelyn . the new Evelyn see the hotel , and the Merger , in a mist , which no effort could disperse . whereas Gracie would appear out of the mist with all the solid and detailed reality of life itself . his interest in the Palace be not authentic . 

 as he pass into the courtyard and glance up at the dark familiar façade , he see a window open on the second floor and a youngish woman appear , and behind she hang a bird - cage silhouette against the brilliant electric light of the room within . then the window be close and the curtain draw . 

 he climb the step under the portico rather nervously , salute in silence an overcoate janissary who be all deferential smile of welcome . the revolve door swing round for he . he have the sensation of revisit a forgotten world , and then each aspect , feature , and particularity of it return into his memory . he picture every floor , nearly every room ; he know what everyone be do - or ought to be do . his mind descend into the deep engine - hall where Ickeringway , the chief engineer , and his man be engage in meet the heavy winter demand for light and heat ; it dart into the bill - office and into the strong - room ; it see the different section of the staff finish their evening meal ; and the last touch be give to the table in the restaurant ; and Violet Powler in her sick - bed ; and housekeeper count linen , and the page - boy write in a book the time - detail of every ring upstairs as it be signal in coloured light on the indicator in the corner behind the Reception - counter ; and he see the ring visitor and the doze visitor ; and Cousin and Pozzi and Miss Cass and old Perosi await he , and many other individual hardly less important key up to a hundred per cent . efficiency on the chance of a summon from he . 

 and the entire organism seem phantasmal to he , bizarre , unnatural , negligible , even indefensible . why be he in London ? why have he leave Paris ? why have he allow that astounding girl to bundle he out of Paris ? he would have pay a high price to be in Paris again at that moment . he have the illusion that one embrace , the mere feel of her frock in his arm , would have mystically solve the multiple enigma of Gracie and of their relation . 

 he hop that old Mowlem , the head hall - porter , would not be in his cubicle . but old Mowlem be in his cubicle , have hurry through his dinner in order to be there for the panjandrum 's arrival . he shake hand with the magnificent and hoary Mowlem , as always after an absence from the hotel . he feel guilty before Mowlem , before the immense rectitude of Mowlem . his private affair be no concern of Mowlem 's ; but he feel guilty . he be deceive Mowlem . he know now that he be another Evelyn , whereas Mowlem confidently take he for the old Evelyn . what would Mowlem think of his master 's proceeding in Paris , be they reveal to he ? a few conventional exchange of greeting between they , on Mowlem 's part sincere and hearty , perfunctory on Evelyn 's . for Evelyn 's brain have in the very instant be startlingly occupy with a new , unthought - of difficulty . 

 " I be an idiot . where be my wit ? " he reflect . " I ought to have cable to she . " 

 an omission surely easy to rectify ? not at all . for he could entrust the telegram to no one . hundred and hundred of people in the place , ready to execute his demand , devoted people very many of they , and some of they on confidential term with he , people from whom he have the habit of conceal naught . Miss Cass , for example . but could he dictate to Miss Cass : " arrive safely . I kiss you tenderly . write . your lion " ? or anything like it ? could he even write any such message and hand it even to a page - boy for despatch ? unthinkable ! of course he have always intend to cable , but inexcusably , incredibly , he have not envisage the precaution necessary . he be commit to daily deceit . he , the panjandrum , must henceforward go forth , make a mystery of his errand , and send off his own cable ! he who never do anything for himself except think and talk 

 " who be it who be get that bird - cage on the second floor ? ' he ask Mowlem , with a smile and in a tone artificially light . 

 " bird - cage , sir ? " 

 " yes . no . 216 . " Evelyn could give a number to every room see from the outside : more than Mowlem could do . 

 " 216 . that be Lord and Lady Levering , sir . " 

 " not - " 

 " yes , sir . " Mowlem permit himself one of his infrequent mildly humorous smile . 

 " well , I be - ! he have some courage . " 

 the aged Lancashire peer   cotton , a zealot , a ferocious fanatic for total abstinence , be the self - constitute leader of the opposition to the movement lead by Evelyn for Licensing Reform . he be a terrific fighter . he have at least a couple of million of money , and be ready to spend a lot of it in utterly smash Evelyn 's movement . and he have choose to make Evelyn 's hotel his home for the sitting of the Licensing Commission ! Characteristic of he ! Evelyn admire he for a grand old belligerent . ought Cousin to have admit the old cock ? certainly Cousin have be right to admit he . still - Mowlem glance significantly and warningly at Evelyn . Evelyn look round and see an aged , erect man , envelop in a tremendous overcoat , come towards the door with a youngish , buxom , somewhat coarse - feature woman - the woman of the bird - cage . Evelyn recognise the man from press photograph . he be ninety - one ; the woman must have be at least half a century his junior . he have marry she - his fourth wife , apparently he could not exist without a young woman to handle - and she have wheedle he into allow she to travel with a bird in a cage . but you could see at once , from his mien and her , that he be her ruler . not unjustifiably do he regard himself , with his long white hair , white moustache , shaggy clear eye , and pure white complexion , as the fine living witness to the value of total abstinence . 

 just as he never ' drank , ' so he never swear ; and yet he swear all day and every day , for his bearing say continuously in a language impossible to misunderstand : 

 " I do not   care a damn for anybody on earth ! " 

 he call in his loud , firm , authoritative voice to Mowlem in pass : 

 " my car here ? " 

 " yes , my lord . it be this minute come . " 

 if Mowlem have be engage with any person less important than the panjandrum , he would have leave his cubicle to escort the splendid Methuselah to the car , but Evelyn could not be leave . Lord Levering give Evelyn one careless glance and go out , attend by a mere janissary . Lady Levering be carry a plaid for his shoulder . 

 " his lordship do not   know who you be , sir , " Mowlem murmur , as if apologise for his lordship . 

 " he will do soon , " say Evelyn . 

 " they have   bring their little girl with they , " say Mowlem . " she do not   look more than ten or eleven . the image of his lordship . " 

 a remark which Evelyn ignore ; but it engender in he the novel idea that he himself be perhaps not too aged to become a father . 

 " anything new as to Mr. Ceria ? " he be about to enquire . he do not put the question , which he decide be too delicate for any ear but Cousin 's . instead he ask : " what be the late about Miss Powler ? I hope she be well . " 

 " well ? oh yes , sir . I hear from Mr. Maxon she go out an hour and a half ago . " 

 " really ! " 

 Evelyn hide his astonishment . early in the day Cousin have tell he on the telephone that the temporary head - housekeeper be not at all well . and now she have go out ! 

 " I shall be back in a few minute , " he say to the surprised Mowlem , and depart . in the broad thoroughfare he call a taxi off the rank and , where he could not be overhear by janissary , instruct the driver to drive to the near post - office . it occur to he that to lead the double life be a business both onerous and humiliating , and be in love an ordeal more arduous than the direction of many hotel . 

 2 . 

 when he return from his degrading excursion , the illuminated sign over Mr. Cousin 's door attract he as he be on his way to the directorial office . he go in . accord to etiquette , the less important personage should have be summon by the more important ; but Evelyn dislike any formal expression of his own importance , though he could check unceremonious familiarity well enough when he choose ; he even regard the importance itself as a nuisance , if a necessary nuisance ; withal his attitude towards both his importance and the expression of it be full of contradiction . in the outer room Miss Marian Tilton jump up from her desk at the sight of the Director , warmly greet he in her thin , vivacious , worldly voice , and ask after the Channel and his health . yes , Mr. Cousin be in . 

 " Mr. Plimsing be with he , " she say , with an intonation to imply that very strange matter be afoot . her eye , not her tongue , utter the word ' Ceria . ' " oh ! and Miss Powler be well . she go out this afternoon . we be all so glad . " her eye , speak again , subtly and very strangely connect the name of Ceria with the name of Powler . it be a marvellous exercise in benevolent innuendo , and characteristic of Miss Tilton . 

 " I would hear she be go out , " say Evelyn drily . 

 " oh ! I beg pardon , Mr. Orcham . I think you might not   have . " she open the inner door . 

 " Mr. Orcham , Mr. Cousin , " she announce . Evelyn enter , and she softly shut the door . 

 the french manager and the nordic detective stand up . More greeting . more small - talk about the journey and about health . More manifestation of pleasure at the sight of the Director . plimse mechanically consult his jewelled wristwatch . Evelyn feel that he would be relieve when he have settle down again into the daily groove . 

 " well , " he say . " shall we sit ? what be the late news ? " 

 " About Ceria ? " Cousin suggest . 

 " about anything . " 

 " plimsing have just be tell I . tell Mr. Orcham , Plimsing . " 

 the detective clear his throat . 

 " the fact be , sir , " say Plimsing , " I have   be rather handicapped in my investigation by the fact that Mr. Cousin think it well not to call the police in - at any rate at present . " 

 " quite right , " say Evelyn . 

 " yes , sir . I quite agree . of course I do mention the disappearance at Scotland Yard , but unofficially . the car have be trace . " 

 " the car ? I never know Ceria have a car . " 

 " no , sir . nor do I until yesterday . either our friend be somewhat secretive or his colleague here omit to tell I of it . I hear of it as the result of discreet enquiry in his neighbourhood . the car be find several day ago on the Great North Road , have apparently be run into a milestone and bent its front axle . the accident must have occur at night . but something go wrong in the identification of the vehicle . notice of change of ownership have not be give , and the affair be far complicate by Ceria have recently change his garage and not give his name at the new garage . extraordinary negligence . his mother and two sister go off very suddenly to Italy before Christmas ; no one know why ; they be italian subject , sir . Scotland Yard be inclined to think there might be something in that . I reserve my opinion . a false clue may give rise to endless trouble , especially when you have no official standing . no one seem to know the address of the lady in Italy - if it be Italy they go to . in the neighbourhood report be not unanimous . some say Ceria be in the house , other say not . I must not omit to point out that the family have an italian maid . she have disappear . I try a few likely place in Soho and Clerkenwell , but without result . my difficulty be to get into the house . this would have be easy for the police , but for I it be an illegal act . however , this morning at an early hour , after suitable warning at the Hampstead police - station to keep the officer on the beat out of the way , I do effect an entrance by a lavatory - window at the back of the house . of course this be very confidential , sir . the electricity be work - I mean it have not be turn off at the main switch . before leave I turn it off , as a measure of precaution against unauthorised . intruder . not that I be authorise myself , sir . " 

 Mr. Plimsing smile and finger his tie - pin . 

 " I make an exhaustive search , sir , " he continue . " Ceria be not in the house . nothing suspicious . his bed have not be make since he sleep in it . but exactly how many day have elapse since he do sleep in it , I could not conjecture . the dressing - table be very dusty , but not disarrange . the top of the brush be as dusty as the table . the comb be miss . there be no letter in the letter - box . there be no food in the kitchen or the larder , except a tin of biscuit , half empty . all the crockery have be wash and put away . one saucepan be dirty . all the blind and curtain be draw . " 

 Mr. Plimsing proceed with his report , and Evelyn and Mr. Cousin continue to listen with seem interest . but as for Mr. Cousin , he be listen in the slightly perfunctory manner of one who hear a story for the second time . and far , he have his latin , sardonic , reserved air of listen with forbearance to the child which for he be in nine Anglo - Saxons out of ten . as for Evelyn , he would not interrupt , but his attention wander . he notice the horizontal crease in Mr. Plimsing 's black waistcoat , and the evidence of strain on the low button and buttonhole . Mr. Plimsing 's girth be increase ; Mr. Plimsing ought to be warn to eat less , and to eat no potato , bread , or other starchiness ; Mr. Plimsing ... 

 then he begin to forget Plimsing and to recall his visit to the post office and the inscrutable look of the girl behind the counter as she read and count the word of his cable . Pooh ! they be accustom to all kind of telegram , those girl be ; they must be . the cable would now be on its way to Paris and St. Cloud . soon Gracie would be read it . have he be wise , or silly , to sign the thing ' Lion ' ? would she smile critically at the word , or would she be delighted , touch , that he have remember the strange french term of endearment which she have once , only once , use to he ? and about her share of the love correspondence , cable or write ! he feel apprehensive ; for he be live in a glass house . he hop that if she indulge in any odd telegraphic tenderness , she would put they into French . because Miss Cass know no French , and Miss Cass of course open all telegram . but even so , there would be danger , owe to the inconvenient similarity of the two language . the word ' tendresse , ' for instance . Miss Cass 's lightning intelligence , upon which she somewhat naively pride herself , would translate such a word correctly , and with horror and sinister satisfaction , in the hundredth part of a second . yes , he be helpless , he could not instruct Miss Cass not in future to open telegram . indeed , he could hardly instruct she not to open letter . she do open the majority of his letter ; but he admit that she have an uncanny power of divination which withhold her envelope - opener in doubtful case . 

 not that Evelyn have hitherto have anything to conceal ! he could live , and he have live , in a glass house with mind undisturbed . but now he have something very important to conceal , and he must persevere with his double life , amid danger , until his engagement to Gracie should be formally declare . if ever ! why do he add ' if ever ' ? an absurd proviso ! and yet , be he sure of she ? a weight of anxiety oppress he . 

 the monologue of the detective have cease . both the detective and Cousin be await some pronouncement from the panjandrum . 

 Evelyn say : 

 " we do not   seem to have get very far , do we ? now , Plimsing , have you form any theory about this disappearance ? " 

 " frankly , no , sir . not yet . " 

 " none at all ? " 

 " well , sir , I could not   call it a theory . but - " 

 " well ? you be not   on your oath , my friend , " Evelyn encourage he . 

 " the whole Ceria family have disappear , " say the detective , after a short pause . " and the maid have disappear . all Italians , I beg to point out . the Imperial Palace be a hotel with an international clientele and an international staff . it be a very suitable and likely field for any activity , good or bad , of an international nature . accord to what I hear and read in the paper , there be a lot of friction between France and Italy , and all sort of movement be go on . two detective have just be over to the Yard from the Paris Surety , as they call it , and from what I be tell confidentially at the Yard , the tale those two man tell - well ! " 

 " do you mean to say that Ceria be mix up in some anti - fascist plot ? " Evelyn demand ; and Cousin give he a quizzical glance . 

 " no , sir . I do not   mean to say any such thing . but people who be busy on some scheme might have reason for want to shift Ceria . " 

 " but this be melodrama , " say Evelyn . 

 " yes , sir , it may be . but when a whole family disappear , and a maid , melodrama be what I should call it myself . and it be along those line that I should look for a clue there be be melodrama in this hotel before now , sir . and if you ask I , I do not   know of any big hotel where there have not   be melodrama . " 

 ' that be true , " Evelyn admit ; for he remember at least two instance , include a manslaughter suspect to be a murder , whose scene have be the Imperial Palace . and Cousin and Plimsing remember they .   the press have be admirably reticent .   a new vista of speculation open in Evelyn 's mind . why not melodrama ? Melodrama exist . 

 " and there be another thing , sir . " 

 " yes ? " 

 " I have not   be able to see Miss Powler . Dr. Constam would not   let I . say she be too ill . of course I do not   tell he why I want to see she . I give he to understand it might be about some missing saltspoon . " 

 Evelyn be really take aback by the detective 's astounding insinuation , which drive the figure of Gracie completely from his thought . despite the shock , he gather his wit together , and make an instantaneous decision to say nothing whatever : a policy whose wisdom he have prove in previous crisis . 

 plimsing wait vainly for a word . both his superior be silent . 

 " I know , " the detective go on ; " I know Ceria have be see the lady . and what do I find to - day ? she be suppose to be so ill that I can not   see she , but I find to - day that she be go out of the hotel by herself . she go out by the Queen Anne door and proceed into Birdcage Walk , where she take a taxi . it be observe that she be a little lame . " 

 Cousin , who have comprehend and enjoy Evelyn 's policy of silence , say casually : 

 " that be her sciatica . " 

 " Sciatica " say Evelyn . " be that what be the matter with she ? I think you do not   quite know . " 

 " I do not , " say Cousin , " until to - day . Constam confess to I this morning that he have be mislead she and all of we . she have have some symptom in the umbilical region , and he tell she that they might be very serious , and she must stay in bed and keep perfectly quiet for quite a fortnight . but now he tell I that those symptom be without importance and he know it . she be really suffer from overstrain , and she be in danger of a complete nervous breakdown . he argue that as woman be what they be , a diagnosis of overstrain and danger of a breakdown would not be sufficient to keep she in bed and idle . that be why he put emphasis on the other symptom . Constam believe that he have no illusion about woman . the sciatica be more recent . it begin only yesterday , very slightly . she tell he that her mother have have sciatica as a girl . " Cousin gaze meditatively at the opposite wall as he speak . 

 Miss Tilton knock and enter with a note for Evelyn . the sight of Miss Tilton remind Evelyn of the connection which a few minute early she have imply , without state it , between Ceria and Violet Powler . he open the note and read : 

 " DEAR SIR , I be confine to my bed , and should like to see you about something important . might I ask you to come up when convenient to yourself . with apology . your obediently , V. POWLER . " the note be write in pencil . 

 " well , Plimsing , " say Evelyn calmly . " we shall hear more from you to - morrow , eh ? "   he be think , ridiculously " how the devil do a fellow with his paunch manage to squeeze through a lavatory - window ? " 

 " I may see you later , " say Cousin to Evelyn . " shall we dine ? " 

 " Charmed . nine o'clock , " Evelyn decide . 

 as to the content of the note , he say not a syllable . it be exceed strange that a woman who have just be out and about should write to announce that she be confine to her bed . 

 content 
 chapter 63 

 VIOLET and CERIA 

 there be no answer when Evelyn knock at the door of the head - housekeeper 's room on Eighth . he open the door and go cautiously in . 

 except for Miss Maclaren 's frame photograph on the wall , and the absence of cushion , the room have much the same appearance as on his visit to the former Mrs. O'Riordan many week early . same sofa in the same place near the fire ; same eiderdown ; and same cat - the cat be one of the asset of the Imperial Palace Hotel Company Limited , and count among landlord ' fixture . but the woman under the eiderdown be Violet Powler , instead of the betrothed of an irish baronet ; and she wear the coloured frock in which Evelyn have last see she on the night of his previous arrival from the continent . no alluring negligé for Miss Powler ! 

 " oh , Mr. Orcham , thank you very much for come . I be so sorry about the chain of authority , but - " 

 " ' chain of authority ' ? " for a moment Evelyn fail to catch the allusion . 

 " you remember you tell I that Mr. Cousin be the next above I in the chain , not you . " 

 " that be all right , " he say , with a reassuring smile , rather please that she should have begin by recall his phrase and admit the irregularity of the request in her note . 

 " I could not   have talk to anyone but you , and it be not   really about the hotel I wish to see you ; and yet of course it be . " 

 " that be all right , " he repeat . " I would well sit down , have not   I ? " 

 " please do . " 

 she have be lie on her back when he enter , and have turn only her head . now , as if to look for a chair for he , she attempt to turn her body , and he observe a slight contraction of the facial muscle indicate pain . 

 " sorry to find you ill , " he say , move the easy - chair so that he could see she as he sit in it . 

 " I be not what you would call ill , " she answer , " in myself . it be only sciatica . that be what Dr. Constam say it be . but it be nothing to speak of till I go out this afternoon . " 

 " so you have   be out ? " 

 " yes , sir . I have to go out . " 

 " but I hear the doctor order you complete rest . " 

 " oh , that be not   for sciatica . the sciatica only come on two day ago . I must say go out 's make it much bad . I have   send for Dr. Constam to come and see about it , but he be not   in the hotel just now . he will be in some time this evening . " 

 " you say you be in bed . " 

 " in my note ? yes , I have be . and I be go back to bed , but I find I could not   quite manage it . so I lie down here and Beatrice get the eiderdown for I and take my shoe off . " 

  odd similarity between Violet Powler 's case and Mrs. O'Riordan 's . 

 " I suppose you have   be overwork . " 

 " oh no , sir . but when Dr. Constam tell I I must stay in bed I do . " 

 " you have not   be stay in bed much this afternoon , I be afraid . " Evelyn be benevolently ironic . 

 " it be like this , Mr. Orcham . I have a letter from Mr. Ceria , and I feel I ought to go and see he at once . " 

 she make the motion of swallow . for the first time she have give a sign of nervousness , and her nervousness communicate itself instantly to Evelyn . 

 " Melodrama ! " he think , very impatient for she to continue , but incapable of show she that he be impatient . why have Ceria choose the head - housekeeper as the person to be write to ? what be there between they ? plimsing have perhaps not be so wildly wrong , after all . Evelyn have be wrong , not the detective . and he , Evelyn , ought to have know that the utterly cautious and judicious and experience plimsing would not lightly have connect the name of Ceria and Miss Powler . the detective 's tact and discretion in the discharge of duty demand the most delicate wiliness have earn the admiration of all the head of department , every one of whom be an expert in the vagary of human nature ; and his work be appreciate by Evelyn perhaps as much as any . and here be the ex - laundry - staff - manageress practically admit herself to be the key to the puzzle of Ceria 's disappearance ! fascist plot ! anti - fascist plot ! vanishing of italian individual , family , servant - maid ! and the matter - of - fact english girl from South London in the centre of the mystery , the sole recipient of Ceria 's confidence ! but she have cease to be the Laundry - staff - manageress . she be change . her deportment , her tone , her self - confidence be all still develop - though heaven know that in her mild way she have be confident enough before ! she have indeed become the head - housekeeper of the world 's chief luxury hotel . her manner of send for and address the panjandrum be alone sufficient proof of an extraordinary feminine capacity to acquire a new status and be at ease in it . 

 Evelyn wait , say nothing . 

 " I must tell you , " she continue . " Mr. Ceria ask I to marry he . " 

 " really ! " Evelyn exclaim quietly . but he be startle . what could an italian see in a staid english girl ? attraction of contrast , he suppose . love and marriage appear to be in the air . he have leave love in Paris ; he have be in the hotel less than an hour , and discover love in London . he himself have be dream of marriage , and Ceria have be dream of marriage . 

 he hear pride in Violet 's voice . 

 " yes . of course , Mr. Orcham , this be very private . I be only tell you because - " she stop . 

 " of course ! but I have no idea - " 

 " I have not   any idea either . not the least . you know , sir , when Mr. Ceria have that scheme for a special New Year 's Eve evening in the grill - room and it could not   be do , I feel very sorry for he and I expect he - well ! and he would tell I all about his mother and sister one Sunday afternoon . they be away , still be , and I expect he be feel lonely . and he come up here to see I once or twice about the floor meal and so on . no one could help like Mr. Ceria , could they , Mr. Orcham ? " 

 " no . he be certainly very likeable . " 

 " and then one evening he suddenly break out and - ask I . " 

 " you be surprised . " 

 " yes , I be , until after he would do it , and then I be not   surprised . I could see it all then . oh yes , I could see it plain enough . and really I be frightfully sorry . " 

 " when be this ? " 

 " the day you go to Paris , sir . and I think I would only see he four time - I mean to what you would call talk to ! and I do think it very strange for a man to propose to somebody after he be only talk to her four time . " 

 " well , " say Evelyn , very judicially , " I do not   know about that . " 

 his thought fly over to Gracie . he could sympathise with Ceria . not in four day but in twenty - four hour have he fall in love , and far more than fall in love , with Gracie . he be conscious of falseness towards Violet Powler . she be think of he as a man of dignity , a man of settle moral habit , a man who could and do live serenely in a glass house ! if she guess the truth , or half the truth ! if she could picture he love Gracie , gracie sit on his knee in a dubious Paris flat , he buy chemise de nuit for Gracie , quarrel with Gracie ! the thought be affright . and as for the rapidity of love , he know all about that ! 

 Violet say : 

 " of course I have to disappoint he . " 

 " of course ! " Evelyn repeat her word . 

 " I do not   believe they sort of understand english people , Italians do not . they can not . there be a very bad scene then , when I tell he I could not   accept he . not that he do not   believe I . he do . but he be so upset it be terrible . the poor boy quite lose his head . somehow I manage to keep mine - I do not   know how . oh ! I need not   tell you how glad I be when I get he out of the room . I do not   know where to look . I be afraid I do rather go to piece when I be by myself . but - excuse I trouble you with all this . I ought not   to . " 

 her face twitch . 

 " you be in pain , " say Evelyn . 

 " no , it be nothing , thank you . " 

 " sure ? " 

 " it be not   half as bad as it be when I come in . and if you know just what a thing be , it be easy to stand it , somehow , a pain . there I be again , go on about myself ! I have   only tell you about Mr. Ceria and I so that you can understand why he be write to I . " 

 " quite . I quite see . it must have all be very try for you , " say Evelyn soothingly . and to himself : " and she have her worry with the excellent purkin too ! " she be in demand . Cousin 's left eyelid , droop , have once hint to he that old Perosi be just possibly look upon she as serious tutor do not look on their pupil . 

 " yes , it be , " she agree quietly . 

 her demeanour and her tone have throughout be noticeably quiet . she might have be relate some episode of Floors management , instead of the strange passion of a handsome young man with an irresistible smile for herself . she have not trouble to give her reason for decline Ceria 's offer . she have somehow assume that Evelyn would need no explanation of the refusal , she be a sedate english girl , and he be with all his charm a foreigner as to whose individuality and way of thought nothing could be safely predict . she have refuse he by an insular instinct , and finally . she might have show he some kindness in his adversity , but between benevolence towards a man and marry he there be an incalculable difference . she be not of those woman whom an adventurous and thoughtless disposition fling into dangerous experiment . she have sense , and be fully conscious of it . and yet her quiet ' yes , it be , ' in response to Evelyn 's remark that the affair must have be very try for she , have an intonation which indicate that ' try ' be hardly the right adjective for the occasion . the affair might have be try , but also it have flatter she , please she , quicken her existence . from Ceria 's discomfiture and grief she have draw a feminine joy . already Evelyn have hear pride in her voice . and now her glance , subtle , subdued , momentary , be a glance of triumph . 

 she lie on a hotel sofa , under a hotel eiderdown , in a common South London frock ; she be ill ; she be in pain ; she stir with difficulty ; she be a housekeeper ; she be prosaic . but she be not prosaic , she be romantic . she be not a housekeeper , she be a girl desire and unconsenting . she be not ill , she be tingle with the sharp animation of essential life , and pain be less than nothing to she . she have live , be live . the transient gleam in her eye as she glance at Evelyn light her sober face , and for an instant transform it and her frock and the eiderdown and the sofa and the whole environment as a streak of lightning bafflingly perceive on the horizon behind a forest irradiate the landscape and the firmament - and leave darkness again . 

 Evelyn feel a tremor at this glimpse beyond the reticence of a soul . the cat sidle casually up to his foot , survey he , yawn , and stroll away . 

 " tell I , " say Evelyn . " I do not   understand . when Ceria disappear and the entire place be disturb about he , why do not   you inform Mr. Cousin - at any rate give he some hint - that you might be able to throw some light on the mystery ? Mr. Cousin have not   the least notion that you be mix up in it . " 

 " I do not   know Mr. Ceria have disappear , " Violet answer , " until I get his letter early this afternoon . I never be so surprised in all my life . you see , it be on the same night he disappear that I have to send for the doctor for myself . " 

 " do you mean to say that nobody say anything to you at all ? " 

 " nobody ! " 

 " it be very odd ! " 

 " I expect Dr. Constam give order to everyone that I be not   to hear a word about hotel business . it be Beatrice who bring I the letter . I do not   want to let on to she , but I do just mention Mr. Ceria after I would read the letter ; and then she admit he be not   here . she look rather awkward for a minute , I must say . but she end by tell I the fuss there would be . once she be start she can not   be stop , Beatrice can not . she do enjoy tell I . one good thing - she have no idea who the letter be from . she think she be tell I something I simply do not   know anything about . and all the time a lot of it be in the letter I have in my hand . I send she out of the bedroom and then I dress as quick as I could and go off , and it be a great chance I be not   see on this floor . if I have be goodness know what would have happen ! " she smile to herself . 

 " do Ceria ask you to go and see he ? " 

 " yes , sir . " 

 " up at Hampstead ? " 

 " yes , sir . at his house . he say in the letter that he be in dreadful trouble about not turn up for duty here and not write to Mr. Cousin . so I go - of course . I feel as if I be to blame . " 

 " and then ? " 

 " he be all alone in the house . his mother and sister be away in France . he have tell I that long ago . " 

 " but there be a servant - italian . " 

 " yes . but she have a brother marry to an english girl , and this sister - in - law would not   hear of she sleep in the house while the lady be away and only Mr. Ceria there . so she sleep at her brother 's - he have a café or something in Chelsea . he write I that after - after he have have that scene with I he go home and take out his little car for a drive to calm himself . he like drive at night . and he run the car into a tree - " 

 " a milestone . " 

 " yes , I believe he do say a milestone , now I come to think of it . it be my belief the poor man do not   know what he be do , he be in such a state . he be shake but he be not   hurt , because he could walk . it seem he walk a long way . I do not   know where the accident happen - it could not   have be anywhere near Hampstead . in the end he come back home to Hampstead . middle of the night . and the next morning he feel he could not   face the hotel . and he could not   bring himself to telephone . but he do telephone to the maid and tell she he be leave the house until his people come back , and she could take a holiday till he send word to she again . I do not   know where he go , and I do not   think he quite know either . and he say that each day he stay away from the hotel and do not   let they know , the hard it be for he to do as he ought , and so he do not . he just let thing drag on . you can understand it , Mr. Orcham , can not   you ? anyhow , I get his letter this afternoon , say he would be at the house all afternoon , and would I come ? he be quite quiet . that make it all the bad . I could not   tell you half he tell I , not because there be anything you ought not   to hear . I could not   remember it all , and it be all so mixed up . he look ill . in fact he be rather change . you can not   imagine how he be . he be terribly afraid of you , Mr. Orcham . I never think any man could be as upset as he be , though he be quite make up his mind to take my refusal . if he have not , I should have walk out of his house . I do not   know what to do with he . I think I would well put his bed straight for he . and he promise I he would go out somewhere and have a proper meal . while he be tell I he walk all over the house and I have to follow he . that be how I see how his bed be . oh ! you can not   imagine ... if I have not   see it I could not   have believe it . " she cease . 

 Meanwhile Evelyn have gradually , in private , be resume his role of director of the Imperial Palace Hotel . he be harden his heart . every shred of melodrama have be strip from the affair , which have become a poor little pseudo - romantic tale of weak , conscienceless passion . not love ; passion ; southern passion ; despicable to anglo - Saxon restraint . nor be he uncritical of Violet Powler . it be she herself who have refer to that supreme law of the hotel 's organisation , the chain of authority . she have say that she could tell to nobody else what she have tell to Evelyn . but why not ? Duty be duty , however unpleasant . and her duty have be to enlighten the management of the hotel without a moment 's delay . suppose that Evelyn have not , unexpectedly , return from Paris , would she have withhold her story ? 

 " I be an ass , " think Evelyn . " what be the good of supposing ? I have return ... and she be ill . " 

 the more he consider her bearing , the more he be impress by it . she have tell a very difficult story , and tell it courageously and straightforwardly . no nonsense ! no insinuate feminine appeal ! no attempt to impress he , Evelyn ! no attempt to justify the unparalleled conduct of the man whose mad worship of she must have incline she to judge he mercifully ! she have indeed accomplish a remarkable feat of truthfulness , impartiality , and self - control . how would the present Lady Milligan , or even Gracie , have behave in similar circumstance ? it disturb he to think how either of they would have behave . but as for Ceria , though he have cease to criticise Violet Powler , his verdict on Ceria grow harsh . ' the poor boy , ' she have commiseratingly call Ceria . ' poor boy ' be damn ! Ceria have commit the sin against the Holy Ghost . he have fail the hotel . he be wonderful , perfect , in his professional capacity as Grill - room - manager ; but he have fail the hotel , and from mere weakness of fundamental character ! he have allow the distracted suitor in he fatally to undo the Grill - room - manager . he be bad than Miss Brury , for Miss Brury , when she go in at the deep end , be at least engage in protect the interest of the hotel . Ceria 's defection be utterly unrelated to the hotel . and therefore inexcusable . man of character do not permit themselves to lose their professional head over a love - affair . they face the music . there be not a head of a department in the place who would not be hotly indignant if he hear what Evelyn have just hear . 

 a stirring on the sofa . 

 " it be not   his fault ! he could not   help it ! " Violet splutter . she give one sob . she be cry . she stop cry , and most absurdly , most comically , most pathetically , pat her wet eye with the edge of the eiderdown . Evelyn be abash , daunt . he feel as though he have collide violently with something unaccountable and frightening in the dark . 

 he rise from his chair with a nervous movement , and walk to the window , and wait , pull aside the curtain and star intently at black nothing . what be Gracie do with Tessa at that moment ? perhaps she be write a letter to her lover . her letter would certainly be very exciting composition . he would have give much to be rid of the PowlerCeria situation . why be hotel - employee so cursedly human , fall in love , and leave motor - car against milestone in the middle of the night , and disappear , and get sciatica , and lie on sofas , and sobbing , and weeping , and whimper silly compassion for adult male cry - baby ? he be feed up with it all . the ideal be robot , mechanical , bloodless , tireless , without bowel and without human tie . 

 he hear the door open at the end of the room and a woman 's rapid , bright , vivacious voice . he would not move from the window . 

 2 . 

 " well , Miss Powler , this be a startler . out of bed ! oh ! and you be dress too ! I be glad . I have   only a minute , but I think I would dash in and tell you I call at the Laundry this afternoon in my time off as you ask I last night , and I see Mr. Purkin about those seventy - one pillow - slip . I tell he exactly what you say . I assure you my modest female politeness to the great little man be just heavenly , but he be furious , perfectly furious . some man be very funny . he say he could not   believe his eye when the lot of they come back to he yesterday . he say they have be finish exactly like all the other and there could not   be any mistake , and they be not   rough at all . and to make sure he would put one on his own pillow last night and it be absolutely smooth , and if he have not   sleep well it be not   because of the pillow - slip , it be because he have be so upset . I have all I could do to keep from laugh , but of course I do not   laugh . can you imagine the gentle creature put the slip on his pillow himself and lay his dear little precious head on it and then not sleep ? and he tell I in the most serious way ! and I would never see he before ! perhaps it be just as well you do not   warn I what you be let I in for . if you have I should have be prepare and that would have spoil it . " a resonant , jolly laugh , possibly somewhat too loud for a head - housekeeper 's room . 

 Evelyn drop the curtain in spite of himself and turn . " oh ! oh ! I do not   know you be engage . so sorry . excuse I . " 

 " this be Mr. Orcham , " say Violet in a flat , casual voice . " this be Mrs. Oulsnam , sir . " 

 Evelyn see a plump , rather short girl with a quite undistinguished face , but gay , laugh eye and lip . she might have be any age under forty . Evelyn have never see she , know nothing about she except that he have arrange with Cousin to have she transfer from the Majestic . since she be Mrs. Oulsnam she must possess , or have possess , a husband ; but she have no air of be a Mrs. ; she be the bear Miss , even if she have have half a dozen child . 

 " good evening , Mrs. Oulsnam , " he greet she . 

 " good evening , sir , " she reply , in an entirely new voice , subdue , murmurous , respectful . in no other respect do she betray trepidation . 

 " how I take the life out of they ! " Evelyn think . " I never know they as they be . " 

 but Mrs. Oulsnam show not a sign of discomposure , and offer no apology for her garrulous cackling . in her eagerness to tell a story to Miss Powler she merely have not observe the presence of the mighty panjandrum near the window , and at first , when he have move , she have not guess his identity .   he be wear a tweed travel suit , and have no resemblance to the formal autocrat of the large luxury hotel . 

 " she will make a fine tale of this to some of the other , " think the panjandrum sardonically . still , he would not   hear she tell the tale . and somehow his heart be momentarily lightened . 

 " well , I will leave you , Miss Powler , " say Mrs. Oulsnam primly . 

 " but how do it all end ? " Violet demand with authority . 

 be she display her authority for the benefit of the panjandrum ; or would she have use the same tone if he have not be there ? the panjandrum could not decide . he would never know . he would never , and never could , know anything worth know of the rock - bottom psychology of the woman member of his staff . they be mystery for he . they hide their nakedness from he in a veil of ceremony . 

 " I soothe he as well as I could , Miss Powler , " say Mrs. Oulsnam , still prim and murmurous . " but he say he be come up to see Mr. Cousin . " 

 " well , thank you , Mrs. Oulsnam , " say Violet . 

 " good night . good night , sir ... oh ! I think everything be in order for the Rajah , Miss Powler . " Mrs. Oulsnam nod and go away . you would have think butter would not   melt in her mouth . 

 3 . 

 although he feel slightly perturb at this merest suspicion of a slur on his darling , matchless Laundry , which have stricken with naive wonder so many american hotel - panjandrum , Evelyn offer no remark on the droll incursion of Mrs. Oulsnam . trouble between the Palace and its Laundry be Cousin 's affair , not his , and Cousin must settle it and settle it satisfactorily . it be a detail not important enough for the august notice of the Director . yet he would have like to handle the thing himself . he be amuse to think that Violet Powler be stand up to the ruler of the Laundry . surely she would not have complain about nothing . she be not that sort . he surmise that in a real set - to she would beat Purkin . he have a vision of the serious , conscientious Purkin put a speciman slip on to his own pillow . a less conscientious person would certainly have tell Violet 's emissary that he have sleep excellently with his head on the pillow - slip allege to have be roughly finish . but not Purkin . 

 there be a knock and the door open again . fluffy pink Agatha enter . at the formidable spectacle of the Director she hesitate , flush . 

 " come in . come in , " say Evelyn . 

 " thank you , sir . " 

 Agatha become as secretarial as she could in the stress of the moment . 

 " I have   only bring the report for Miss Powler , sir , " she say . 

 " well then . only give the report to Miss Powler , " Evelyn smile . 

 Agatha obey , add to Violet as she do so : " and there be this about the imperial suite . " then she quickly depart . 

 he think : 

 " that child 's work rather late . " and he recall also that accord to Constam Violet Powler have narrowly escape a breakdown through over - work . some revision of hour or duty or both might be advisable . Violet be hold a thin sheaf of paper in her hand . 

 " may I look at those ? " he ask formally . 

 " certainly , sir . " she give he the sheaf which comprise brief note of the day from each of the Floors . evidently the head - housekeeper have be initiate some organisation of her own . 

 " but I hear from Mr. Cousin , " say Evelyn , glance at she , " I hear you have be prescribe complete rest . and here I find you be give battle to the Laundry and receive report at night from the Floors ! what be the object of have a doctor ? " 

 " well , sir , " Violet answer , " you know what woman be . " she do not smile . " I have not   be give half an hour a day to my work . but I must keep an eye on thing , and I like the staff to come in and see I . and then the Rajah arrive tomorrow . " 

 " do Dr. Constam know you be attend to business ? " he demand , ignore the point about the Rajah . 

 " not from I , sir . " 

 " then you be deceive he . " he smile , and Violet smile weakly in response . 

 " I suppose I be , sir . but it do I good . and besides - " 

 " besides what ? " 

 " Dr. Constam 's be deceive I . do he think I do not   know ? I know there be nothing the matter with I except I be a bit tired - and this sciatica now , of course . and he be be pretend I have   get something wrong inside I , just to frighten I into be completely idle . " 

 " somebody tell you that . " 

 " no , sir . no one tell I . I guess . " 

 " have your mother be to see you ? " he say quickly , to hide the fact that her second - sight , or second - hearing , have make an impression on he . 

 " oh no , sir . I only send she a post - card to say I be too busy to go home on my usual night . if she know I be under the doctor she would worry to death . but I shall tell she about the sciatica , because that do not   matter . she know all about sciatica . " 

 " she may know all about sciatica , but do she know her daughter be a wicked and deceitful woman ? " Evelyn laugh . then think , " why this badinage ? it be out of place . " and as Violet do not immediately respond to the badinage he go on , alter his tone to the grave : " to return to Ceria . why do he ask you to go and see he ? " he restore the sheaf of paper to she , and begin to move up and down the room . 

 " he do not   like to come here , and he want to talk to I about what he ought to do . so he ask I to go to he , " Violet reply , smoothly but firmly . 

 " what he ought to do ? do about what ? " 

 " about return to his work . " 

 " then he have a notion of return after all . that be something . " a chill sneer in Evelyn 's voice , disclose his resentment against the young man . " if he think he ought to return , why do not   he return and have do with it ? there be no need to consult anybody . " 

 Evelyn know that he should have show some consideration for Miss Powler , as the innocent cause of the trouble ; but he be not perfectly master of his tone ; and , have use the wrong tone and be ashamed of it , he grow a little desperate , and , to justify himself to himself , determine that the wrong tone be really the right tone , and that he ought to persist in it . the interest of the Palace demand such a tone , and if Miss Powler suffer by it , and even if she be ill and in pain , that could not be help . moreover , have she not express a tearful sympathy for a man who merit no sympathy ? Evelyn deliberately foster his own indignation ; it have be a spark , genuine enough - he blow it into a fire . and , as he wait for Miss Powler to speak , he put more coal on the fire , and blow again , and find a sombre , half - voluptuous joy in the procedure . 

 Violet do not speak . 

 " be she be obstinate ? " Evelyn thought , and continue aloud : " and so he have the nerve to send for you , though he know you be ill ! " 

 " no . he have no idea I be ill . he could not   have have , because I do not   send for the doctor until the morning after he would - he have disappear . " her tone be now mild and placatory . 

 " she be try to humour I , be she ? " think Evelyn . " soft answer turn away wrath and so on ! well , it shall not   turn away wrath . do she imagine I be a child to be deceive by those dodge ? " he say aloud : " even if he do not   know - " 

 " but he really do not . " 

 Evelyn control his exasperation . 

 " I say even if he do not , he ought not to have appeal to you . I repeat , there be no need for he to consult anybody . but if he have to consult someone , he have experience colleague here , friendly colleague too , whom he know year before he ever hear of you . they be the proper people to consult . mind you , I be not blame you . " the assertion be unconvincingly make because it be untrue . he be blame she - for her hysterical outburst , ' it be not   his fault , he could not   help it . ' he have treat that cry rather lightly at the moment of utterance ; but now he very seriously object to it , and the more so for the reason that by its revelation of her secret attitude it have frighten he , impose itself upon he . 

 he say aloud , with an assumption of formidable judicial calm : 

 " you say he could not   help it . I say we do not   want man here who ' can not   help it . ' and we do not   want man who , when they be in a fix solely through their own fault , send for our head - housekeeper and take she away from her duty . remember , you yourself say he do not   know you be ill . therefore for anything he know to the contrary he be take you away from your duty . " 

 " I expect he send for I because he think I should understand , " say Violet , as it be meditatively , but uncompromisingly . 

 " but do you understand ? " Evelyn proceed . " do you appreciate that a man occupy an important position in this place can not   be permit to behave as Ceria have behave ? he ask you to marry he . you refuse - and quite right too ! and then forsooth he absent himself from his job and give no explanation and no warning even . if he have only telephone or wire he be ill , everything would have be all right . when a head of department say he be ill , we accept what he say . we do not   hold a court of enquiry and demand doctor 's certificate . but Ceria do nothing - nothing . he just leave we in the lurch . oh yes ! the grill - room , I have   no doubt , have be function as usual . but that be no excuse for Ceria , and no thank to he . and think of the disturbance and all the anxiety for Mr. Cousin , and other too . a good thing we happen to have a detective of our own here . otherwise Mr. Cousin would have have to call in the police . a nice thing , Scotland Yard make a hue and cry after a missing head of department who be only hide himself because he be be cross in love ! think of the effect on the hotel! .. well , Miss Powler , Ceria send for you . you go . and he consult you . what then ? what do you advise he to do ? " 

 " I tell he he ought to come back at once , sir . " 

 " and be he come back ? " 

 " he be afraid . he ask I to speak to you first . " 

 " but he do not   know I be here . " 

 " yes , he know that . " 

 " how ? " 

 " I tell he . Beatrice tell I before I leave that you be expect back about seven . she would hear . of course everybody have hear . " 

 " and so what he really want be that you should make an appeal to I on his behalf . he dare not   do it himself . he shelter behind you ! nothing do , Miss Powler ! nothing at all ! Ceria be an excellent manager of the grill - room , so far as we know . but we do not   know far enough . his behaviour when I sit on his ridiculous scheme for a New Year 's Eve show in his precious grill - room ought to have enlighten we . we pass it over . Mr. Cousin , I may tell you privately , do suggest to I that some notice ought to be take of that . but I say no . I say we must excuse it because it evidently spring out of his enthusiasm for his work . but this new affair have not   the remotest connection with his work . and far . if he be capable of go on in this style because of a crisis in his private life , how do we know he would not   do something fatal if a really big crisis occur in the grill - room ? we do not   know . we should never feel safe . you have   hear what happen to Miss Brury and to Miss Venables when they fail we . it have to happen . we can not   have these upset . to certain rule there simply can not   be any exception . nobody be indispensable . now honestly , do not   you think I be right ? " 

 the last word , say in a persuasive , almost kindly tone , be a tremendous concession to Violet . conceive the Director deign to ask a housekeeper whether or not he be right on a fundamental question of managerial policy ! Evelyn , self - approve , consider that he have show himself a very reasonable human being . 

 Violet , as she gaze at the ceiling , answer resolutely , indomitably , and with a mild defiance : 

 " I be sorry , sir . but as you ask I , what I say be there be an exception to every rule . " 

 " so be I sorry ! " Evelyn snap with a great and not unsuccessful effort to keep his full dignity . 

 he be thunderstruck , and despite himself he have a sensation of alarm . have the earth cease to revolve ? he be be defy , for the first time in the history of his Palace rule . he could hardly believe it . no other head of a department , not even Cousin , would have carry a defiance of opinion so far . no disobedience in her remark . if she have decline to accept an order she would either have resign or be dismiss . but an employee could not be punish for an opinion , particularly when the opinion have be demand . she would not resign . 

 she might resign . he would not , could not , dismiss she . the idea be wildly ridiculous . he certainly desire to keep she . but still more he desire her support for his opinion . he glance at she - she do not glance at he - and he see she as a being very challenging and very feminine . yes , she be a human individual as she lie there on the sofa . she be all woman . she have attraction ; but , very strangely , he feel a repulsion for she . in his heart he be furious against she ; he hat she . that high cheek - bone underneath the curious curve of the cheek , that bosom , that soft brown hair , those flicker eyelash . she draw he ; and she repel he horribly . curse she ! she have amazingly succeed in her job . and she have amazingly stand up to Purkin : which in itself be a prodigious feat . and now she be stand up to the Director . he have have to do with hundred and hundred of employee , but never one like she . she be a girl of quite unalarming aspect ; but she have undoubtedly alarm the Director . he be very uneasy , and he do not know why . the interview be end in a manner totally unsatisfactory . 

 " well , Miss Powler , " he say , grandly . " I regret you have   have all this trouble while you be ill . but you want to see I , and I think I ought to come . I do hope you will have a good night and get well quickly . I will see that Constam have a look at you this evening without fail . " 

 " you be very kind . thank you , sir , " she say , negligently . 

 Evelyn leave the room . 

 content 
 chapter 64 

 she letter 

 it be after a quarter to ten when Evelyn and Mr. Cousin finish their rather rapid tete - a - tete dinner in the little nondescript room where they have once entertain Miss Maclaren with a lunch and the conversation which she have so sharply criticise to her new friend Violet Powler . they have eat the dinner quickly because Mr. Cousin wish to make his regular evening tour of the restaurant and , particularly , the grill - room ; also because he have to inspect the imperial suite , which be be very specially prepared for the august arrival on the morrow of his highness the Rajah and retinue . far , Evelyn have an engagement of his own in his private office . at dinner he have relate to his subordinate the principal fact elucidate the great Ceria mystery , and Cousin , a telephone be always on that meal - table , have at once transmit they to plimsing - but to nobody else . the panjandrum and the sub - panjandrum , the one apparently and the other as usual really unperturbed , have agree that the only right policy be to await the next move from Ceria . meanwhile the grill - room be take no harm under the control of the very experienced French under - manager . three time during the meal the waiter have be send away in order that the two chief might talk of their secret at ease . they have , however , reflect silently upon the strange affair at much great length than they have speak , Mr. Cousin be by nature rather taciturn and Evelyn have be render taciturn for the moment by the intensity of his musing upon the reaction to man of two entirely different woman - Violet Powler and Gracie . 

 as the chief slowly cross the hall in the direction of the grill - room , an imposing figure , with a cigar still more impose , come magnificently up the length of the foyer . 

 " that be your levering , be not   it ? " Evelyn mutter . 

 " Oui . " 

 " I would well meet he . " 

 " Oui ... good evening , Lord Levering . I hope you find everything to your liking to - night in the restaurant . " Cousin make a beautiful obeisance . 

 " can not   say that I do , " be the magnate 's strong , loud , inexorable , but quite cheerful reply . 

 " sorry to hear that , my lord , " say Cousin with similar cheerfulness . " may I present Mr. Orcham ? Lord Levering , sir . " 

 Lord Levering glare inquisitorially at the panjandrum ; then hold out the shiny ivory hand of old age . 

 " so you be the foe ! " say his lordship , shake hand , and shut together his splendid tooth . 

 " I be the arch - foe , " say Evelyn . 

 " well , " say his lordship , " we shall soon be over the top , eh ! what ! " 

 " the soon the well , " say Evelyn . 

 " your strategy be wrong at the start , " say his lordship . 

 " oh ! how be that ? " 

 " you would like to know . but you will not , " say his lordship , and laugh grimly . 

 the laugh be the laugh of an old man , but not his handshake nor his bearing , though the bearing be extremely deliberate . climb the carpet stair up into the entrance - hall , Lord Levering have have the air of carefully consider each step in advance . he be old enough to be old Dennis Dover 's father , and Evelyn 's grandfather ; but he could have pass for seventy , and seventy in his case seem youth itself . behind Evelyn might have stand the spectre of death , and Lord Levering might have be defy both death and Evelyn . 

 " I be not as young as I be , " he go on , " and I expect to be tell I have not   move with the time . this be my first taste of your hotel , for instance . I will tell you what your hotel be , " he glance at Cousin . " it be a drinking den . that be what it be . at least the restaurant be . if your restaurant be the time , perhaps it be just as well I have not   move with they . I have   see enough alcohol drunk to - night to float a company . and I hear this be what you call your extension night , and you keep it up till two o'clock . I would like to know what your female customer look like when they wake up in the morning soak in the poison you give they - at how much a glass ? and what sort of a day 's work their man do next day . and young woman as brazen as strumpet paint their face in public ! even strumpet do not   do that in my young day . and smoke like chimney . " he puff gorgeously at his immense cigar . " and then I be positively tell you keep young man here , pay they , to dance with libidinous old woman . hold they in their arm , woman they have not   be introduce to , and clasp their fat body , and smirk at they , and make eye at they , and canter round with they . that be what be not to my liking in your restaurant , you , sir , I do not   know your name . " he look at Cousin again after gaze at Evelyn . " your food 's good . and so be your mineral water . but for the rest - you have   hear of the fall of the Roman Empire . we use to learn at school that Waterloo be win on the play field of Eton - not that I go to Eton . no , I go to the mill . I do not   know where Waterloo be win . I should have say myself it be win at Waterloo . but I know this . the Roman Empire be lose in circus and orgy , and the British Empire 's be lose in your restaurant . yes , right here , and now ! and yet you laugh at I if I fight your propose arrangement for lose it quick . want to get it over , I suppose ! you wait till prohibition come , as it will . " 

 the restaurant orchestra could be distantly hear , accompany the loss of the British Empire with a tango . 

 Evelyn say , laugh : 

 " I shall be very interested to see prohibition at work . it be be such an unqualified success in America - " 

 " you laugh , Mr. Orcham . but you be laugh on the wrong side of your face . as regard America , do not   forget that America be not   a law - abide country . England be . and if England vote for prohibition , it will obey Prohibition , sir . and then where shall you be , and where will your fancy man and your fancy woman and your fancy dividend be ? " 

 " no doubt in the soup , " say Evelyn . 

 a plump little woman emerge from the lady ' cloak - room and walk up the stair . 

 " come along , Maria , " Lord Levering address she sharply . " when you girl get into one of those place , God know when you will come out again . ten minute I have   be wait . " 

 his tone , despite the word , be markedly benevolent . but Lady Levering frown and drop her coarse low lip and be silent . Lord Levering do not trouble to introduce his wife , whose acquaintance he have make in the first tea - shop ever know in Rochdale . 

 as the pair move away towards the lift , Lord Levering turn back to Evelyn for an instant . 

 " I do not   mind tell you where your strategy go wrong , " say he , grimly genial . " you will never do anything with this Licensing Commission . you ought to have begin by pack it . I do . good night to you . it be the rule to shake hand before a fight . " he shake hand again heartily with both Evelyn and Cousin . 

 " it be fortunate there be not   many people about , " say Evelyn , smile vaguely , somewhat self - consciously , when he and Cousin be alone . 

 " Ça n'a pas d'importance , " say Cousin . " this be only his second full day here , but everyone know he and his style . Lady Levering be not really offend by he . she quarrel with he once a day on purpose . " 

 " why ? " 

 " so that he shall not   kiss she , I be tell . she will come back here soon and order a liqueur brandy . she do that yesterday after lunch . so long as he do not   kiss she she be safe . " 

 " well , it be a shame ! " say Evelyn . " he be a great fellow . " 

 " C'est malin , les femme ! " Cousin murmur . 

 then they both laugh . Mr. Cousin direct himself towards the grill - room , and Evelyn go to his private office . Miss Cass be work at her desk in the outer room . 

 2 . 

 " hello ! " say Evelyn , with no preliminary greeting . " I tell they to tell you I should not   do anything to - night . you know I never do till next day , when I get home . " and in fact he have have no time even to look in at his office . dash off to cable to Gracie ; dash back and be catch by Cousin and plimse in a most urgent crisis ; be catch again by Violet Powler ; long interview with Violet ; then dress for dinner while listen to Oldham 's experience in the country . not a moment to himself . 

 " good evening , Mr. Orcham . " Miss Cass greet he with pleasant indifference , as a worker might reply to a shirker . " I have a few thing to do , and I think perhaps you might just look in . " 

 Evelyn think : " all these girl work too hard . " Violet Powler have nearly have a breakdown . he feel guilty . be he a slave - driver ? 

 " any telegram for I ? " the word be utter before he have consider they . they be a symptom of his preoccupation with Gracie ; she might have cable her love or something of the sort . 

 " yes sir , one . " 

 he be alarmed . have Miss Cass open it ? 

 " who from ? " 

 " Sir Henry , sir . " 

 he be relieve . 

 " and there be a very long letter from Sir Henry too . from Berlin . I have   leave they on your desk in case you do happen to come here , and I would go . " 

 " thank . and you ought to be go . Tuesday be not   one of your late night . you will be fall ill . " 

 " I be just go , " say Miss Cass with decorous but masterful dignity . she tend he like a mother ; she watch over his flower and his Malvern water ; and she hold that she have nothing to learn from he about the management of the human machine . 

 " good night . " 

 " good night , sir . " 

 Evelyn pass into his own room , where the desk - light be burn . he be glad that the interview with Miss Cass have be so short . the cable from Sir Henry Savott have to do with the Merger ; also the letter , which comprise ten quarto page on german note - paper . Sir Henry might be busy on his film scheme , but apparently he be still determined to prove to Evelyn and the world that his attention to the progress of the hotel - merger be as minute as ever . Evelyn scan the cable and glance through the letter , which raise a large number of complex question . he thrust both document into a drawer , out of his sight and out of his mind too . then he light a cigar and sit down and smoke very slowly , show respect for a cigar worthy of it . then he get out a sheet of note - paper , and his reserve fountain - pen , which be keep with the notepaper , and write the date on the sheet , and even the hour . 

 " my - " he begin . " my what ? " he stop . " my everything . " that be rather good . 

 he want his office to be the isle of Cythera . he want to yield himself , helpless prey of Venus , to drown , to expire in bliss : as when , weary of all else , one sink with ecstasy into enfold sleep . he want too many thing that night . not a single lamp , but several , burn in his brain ... Lord Levering be a terrible old man , and you could not hate he . he might win the battle . mean , deceitful , low - down creature , his wife ! Disloyal . you could hate the wife . but not the venerable bruiser . Lord Levering have the legion of the Nonconformist Conscience behind he . and even if the Commission favour Reform , vote - catch politician in Parliament in their pusillanimous fear of the vengeance of the Conscience , might shelve the Commission 's Report or even condemn it in the Lobbies . ' drinking - den , ' ' lounge - lizard , ' ' libidinous old woman , ' ' fall of an empire , ' etc . , etc . preposterous ! but something in it , something in it ! he , Evelyn , might be a Spartan by temperament   be he ? what about the boulevard flat ? , but he be commit to expensive luxurious hedonism ... 

 he listen for the noise of the departure of Miss Cass . not a sound . that woman 's appetite for work be morbid ; it be deprave . he would order she to go ; he could not be at ease while she stay . no , it would be a mistake to open the door and let more of the vulgar air of the world into the scented grove of Cythera . ' scented ? ' he sneer at the word which have utter itself in his sentimental mind . he rise and refresh the fire which , tired of wait for succour , be nearly dead . 

 3 . 

 the image of Violet Powler tease he . Gracie could not think straight . he have always think of Powler as a woman who positively could and do think straight . she could not . ' they ' be all alike . have anything to do with they - and your peace be go ! damn her ' exception to every rule ' ! Ceria be impossible , and indispensable he be not . she be affect by Ceria 's unhappiness and its consequence because she be the author of his unhappiness . Ceria worship she : therefore he must be save from his own act . nonsense ! yet , now , Evelyn could understand Ceria 's madness for Powler ; for , upstairs in her room on Eighth , he have have one glimpse of she as a girl human , feminine , as a Venus , this head - housekeeper whom hitherto he have look upon as a sexless functionary . she have behave , as a functionary , marvellously ; she have surpass his hope . and not the least - indeed perhaps the great - of her feat be to rise up from a bed of some degree of pain , and dress , unaided , and go forth , doctor - defying , at the call for help , and face the winter day and the desperate man , and counsel he , and make his bed for he , and force promise from he , and then return , too ill to put herself to bed again , but not ill enough to prevent she from send like a queen for the Director and defy the Director as she have defy the doctor ! grit in she . she be no doll stuff with bran . and Evelyn could not deny , in the disturbing honesty of the central core of his mind , that she have infect he with the microbe of sympathy for the poor little love - lorn italian recreant . but he would annihilate the mischievous microbe by force of straight - think will . 

 the telephone bell ! he could hear it faintly ring in the outer room . ring - ring , ring - ring , ring - ring , ring - ring . Miss Cass have go , then . with an impatient savage gesture he get up and strode into the outer room . he might have ignore the ringing . but he long for another grievance as a man long for another whisky . it be only the conscientious Smiss , ask whether the Director desire to see he that night . the Director soften his voice . politely and appreciatively he thank Smiss and tell he to go home . instead of drown in some enchanted lake in the arm of Venus hide within the secret grove of Cythera , the Director feel himself drown in the vast sea of the life of the hotel . 

 he return to his desk . 

 " my dear everything . be you in bed ? be you wear the nightdress I buy you?" ... how the hell do you write a love - letter ? look here ! he be in love . he ought to be able to write a love - letter ! true , this be almost his first love - letter , for his wife before their marriage have live so near to he that correspondence have be unnecessary . true , he be worried , preoccupy , by professional care . no ! they be naught . the chief of his worry be gracie herself . be he in love with she ? he argue that he must be , but how could he be sure ? he be only sure that he do not feel happy . gracie so baffle ! a grand figure - at moment ! a heroic figure - at moment ! but at other moment - what ? a genius . lovely always . intoxicate in her acquiescence . oh yes ! all that . he think of her ardour in surrender , her smile , her wifely initiative , her strong volition ... the affair be so strange . the opera , the cabaret , in one night . two day and two night with she ; the exquisitely awful quarrel ; and the last morning of violent surprise . 

 and the morning be the morning of this very night on which he be try to write to she , Tuesday . on the previous Friday morning the affair have not begin . in the space of a few day he have change his life , change her , bind himself for ever . and he be suffer . affliction be his . oh ! to be free of woman , with their damnable complication ! to live solely for his work ! nevertheless , his yearning to be with Gracie , to caress she , to gaze close at her face , to forget everything in she - this yearning excruciate he . 

 " I want to share you intimately , and I want you to share I intimately . I have   have a fantastic time since I get here . " he scribble hard , tell she without any reserve , and in detail , the story of Powler and Ceria , the episode of Lord Levering , Lady Levering 's brazen disloyalty . he fill two sheet , front and back , at terrific speed . " darling , I love you . Thine , Evelyn the so - call lion . " 

 he would not read what he have write , lest he might doubt its sincerity or deride its phrasing . he address and stamp the envelope - penny extra . he push the sheet into it , stick it down with a thump ; turn off the light , leave the room . 

 4 . 

 at the lift he say to the liftman : 

 " get a pass - key from someone , and go upstairs to my room and bring down my hat and overcoat . " 

 he go into the empty hall . Long Sam be on duty . Reyer have just come on duty . he nod smile to Long Sam , and talk to Reyer .   Reyer be certainly due to get a rise in the world .   and all the time he be carry the letter . if Reyer could read it , have the least notion of its content ! it be like a bomb in his hand . he drop it into the vermilion letter - box . safe . no long a bomb . 

 visitor pass through the hall . one of they , a young woman , pretty , and endow by heaven with much self - confidence , argue at length with the attendant at the Enquiries counter about the departure of the Indian Air Mail . the liftman arrive with the hat and overcoat . 

 " you see , " say Evelyn to Reyer , " I be not borrow your to - night . " and to Long Sam : " I be just go out for a short walk , Sam . " 

 Long Sam look at he benevolently . a janissary swing the door . he walk towards Westminster Bridge . no distance . cold . not a star . the leafless tree in the park move in the wind with scarcely a sound . the Palace tower be still illuminate . suddenly , while he face round to look at it , the tower go out ... the Abbey loom above he . the Clock Tower of Parliament gleam forth the time of night ... he stand on Westminster Bridge , see the curving , twinkle , noble river ; a menacing red lamp here and there in the string and group of white lamp . in the distance on the left bank of the river he could see the light of two great hotel . one of they be the Majestic . his word be already law there , as at the Palace . romance . he be thrill . he think of Rome , Paris , Cannes , Madrid . romance on a tremendous scale . 

 woman ! what be they ? toy , distraction , delectation , retreat . but , though Ceria might not be indispensable , woman be . he feel their monstrous power . Gracie be in bed , wear that nightdress with ecru lace . no ! perhaps the fear of Tessa 's disdain have prevent she from put it on after all . and Violet Powler , stern , sleepless from sciatica . 

 content 
 chapter 65 

 CERIA 's office 

 the next morning Violet , in a dream , be try to do something that Mr. Orcham do not want she to do , and the presence of his restrain hand on her arm grow strong and strong till it wake she up . the dream remind she of an incident in the engine - hall on her first day in the hotel , when she have show alarm at the unexpected sound of a suddenly - start machine , which alarm Mr. Orcham 's firm hand have still . the reality be that Beatrice Noakes be rouse she with tea and bread - and - butter , accord to order . 

 " where be I ? " Violet ask of the fat , smile chambermaid . she recognise nothing in the room . the wardrobe have change its place and increase in size , and the window could not be see at all . 

 " in your new bedroom , miss . I should say Miss Maclaren 's . " then Violet recall that Dr. Constam have insist on she sleep in that room , because of the trouble of carry she along the length of the corridor to her own . yes , at last she have the head - housekeeper 's bedroom as well as the head - house - keeper 's sitting - room . the news of Miss Maclaren 's convalescence have not be very reassuring ; and it now seem as if Violet 's exalted post would in due course , and soon rather than late , be change from the temporary to the permanent . she cautiously move her limb in the bed . no pain . she move they less cautiously . no pain . 

 " I be well , Beaty , " she say . 

 " it be they violet - ray , miss . Violet to the Violet , miss . " Beatrice grin . 

 a nurse , by mean of a portable lamp , have under Dr. Constam 's direction give Violet five minute of the ray on the previous night ; and , unknown to the patient , a sedative afterwards . 

 " I do believe I be quite well , " say Violet . 

 " well , miss , " say Beatrice . " Dr. Constam do say to I - he be always very nice and friendly like with I , and to be sure I have   be here a lot long than he have - he say it might be three day or it might be three week , and I say , I say , with you it be more likely to be three day . there be some here as would be three month with it , not three week , because when they get down nothing will get them up again . but what I always say - " 

 " Beatrice . Fetch Miss Jixon for I , will you ? she be bind to be about somewhere . it be frightfully late . "   Miss Jixon be the secretarial Agatha . 

 Violet 's mind , as she drink the tea , advance its tentacle eagerly , graspingly , towards the idea of the arrear of work that must have accumulate during the period of her repose . she finish the tea and step boldly out of bed , and find her slipper . she feel quite firm on her foot . energy be form in she , like sap in a tree . Dr. Constam would be angry with she , of course . 

 " damn the doctor ! " she exclaim aloud , defiantly . " he tell I he should cure I , and he be vex because he have cure I . well , he can be vex ! I be certain I have   have ten time more of his repose than be good for I . " 

 she be half dress when Agatha enter . 

 " Agatha ! " say Violet , forestall all greeting and enquiry . " before I forget . tell everyone I shall not   want any more of those report to - night . I be perfectly well again , have a splendid sleep . Sciatica all go . have you bring the letter ? no ? well , bring they to I in half an hour . and any message from Craven Street about the new carpet for 441.And find out what be happen about the leak in the radiator in 275 . and telephone Mr. Cousin and see if Mr. Purkin have write to he about come up . and - that will do for the present . run along . we shall have a big day to - day . oh ! if Dr. Constam ring up , say you have   see I and I be much , much well , and there be no need for he to come and see I until he be quite free . " 

 Agatha depart , with a scared glance . 

 " the little thing can not   understand I get a move on . she be fearfully slow , " think Violet . she be critical . in her private mind she be always critical and exact , but seldom show it : though behind her invigorate , helpful smile , the really intelligent could divine a certain condescension towards the weakness of other people 's human nature . Agatha be really intelligent , and therefore Violet have upon she an intimidating effect at time . just as Violet be make up her face the telephone - bell ring in the sitting - room . she look about she for her black frock , and do not instantly discover it . at her urgent behest , all her possession have be transport from the old bedroom to the new , but they be not yet in place . she go into the sitting - room frockless . 

 " who be speak ? " 

 " Ceria . I have   come . " 

 she hesitate , dismayed and irresolute . Ceria 's voice be abash , foolish , guilty . she have advise he , instruct he , to resume his duty that morning , and have promise that she would ' speak ' to Mr. Orcham . but she be not expect the young man quite so early . 

 " where be you ? " 

 " in my office . " 

 she hesitate again . 

 " I will come down and see you there , " she say brightly and smoothly . " that will be well than you come up here . I will be down in three minute . " 

 she find the frock , slip it on , examine the appearance of the head - housekeeper in the wardrobe mirror , scribble a note tell Agatha to await her return , and go forth , as on the previous afternoon but less fearsomely , into the open , dangerous country of the corridor . 

 less fearsomely ; yet she be aware of grave qualm . her mood be rash rather than courageous . she frankly admit to herself , as she descend on the lift , that she have accomplish nothing whatever with Mr. Orcham . the Director , incomprehensibly harsh , shockingly pitiless , be against she . she know too well his attitude towards even the appearance of disloyalty to the Palace . he would allow no excuse , except physical excuse . if only Ceria have telephone that he be ill all would have be different . she recall , on this point , the Director 's very word . but the tiresome Ceria have not telephone , have entirely lose his head . still , he have come . he be there . that be a fait accompli   she think in French , which the Director would have to face . he surely would not send Ceria packing . no , he could not . 

 2 . 

 the door of Ceria 's office be shut . she tap , and walk straight into the absurd little room . a pile of open letter lie on the tiny desk - accumulation ; and a few unopened envelope - the morning 's batch . evidently Ceria 's official mail have be deal with in his absence . nobody be indispensable . and there sit Ceria , bow , limp , shamefast . he do not rise at her entrance . he have no notion that she have be what the doctor term ill , no notion of the miracle which have make it possible for she to come down and see he and watch over he and inspire he . 

 " I be so glad you be here , " she begin cheerfully . 

 " yes , I be here . " Ceria say in a weak , half - despair tone . " but what be I to do ? " 

 he expect guidance from she . without it , he be helpless . he be the very image of disastrous woe . he be a beat child : he , the once brilliant , resourceful , successful ruler of the famous grill - room , the rival of Cappone , the darling of the Palace . 

 " I have bring he down to this , " she think , prick to the centre of her soul . she want to cry , but if she yield to tear she might ruin everything . she would not cry . she be the man , and he be the woman . " poor boy ! he can not   help it . it be not   his fault . " how often have she use that phrase to herself ! and she have use it to the Director , who have throw it on the floor and trodden on it . " it be my fault . I must have encourage he without know it . I do like he . he be a dear . " 

 she would have pay any price to succour he , to put he back on his pedestal , from which love of she have tragically cast he down . " if I marry he , if I even give he the least sign , he would be a new man . I could make he the great man in the world . he might have a fashionable restaurant of his own . would not this be the simple way ? I could go to Sir Henry 's and Ceria could find a new place , and then when we have save some money - and he be such a dear ! and he worship I - how funny ! I ! and he would do anything I tell he . and I do like he . nobody could help like he . " 

 she softly touch he on the shoulder , bend a little over he . he could not read her mind . he be in a trance of despair . she touch he , but he could not touch she ; she be unattainable . naturally she be unattainable , be peerless among all woman . 

 " now I will tell you , " she begin gently . " who have you see ? " 

 " no one , except Maxon . I walk quickly from the staff entrance and no one see I ; at least no one speak to I . " 

 " that be splendid ! " she say . " I do not   want you to see anybody - at first . " she seem to convey that he have be do she will and be a good boy . 

 " have you speak to the Director ? " Ceria ask timidly . 

 " oh yes ! I think that will be all right . " 

 not only the last word themselves , but her manner and tone be a deliberate lie . she lie because she could not tell he the truth . he be at a terrible crisis , in which he need help very delicately render , and only she could give it . the rough truth might , would , have undo he . moreover , she hop , or so persuade herself , that what be now a lie would in the immediate future be the truth . and far , he have put the question to she in nearly the same accent , tentative , timorous , certainly not sanguine , in which he have ask she to marry he a few day early . 

 that scene be permanent in her memory . it have pass in her sitting - room on one of his afternoon visit , in the slack period when he would have be at Hampstead have not his trio of woman go away and leave he alone . Pathetic , it be to she , that her answer have not astonish he ; it have merely destroy he , destroy the man he be . despite her secret critical propensity , she do not even in secret criticise his weakness . criticism could not live in her pity , and in her totally irrational sense of guilt , and in her self - depreciation . what , she have wonder again and again - what in she have attract he ? she be so prosaic , so matter - of - fact : while he be the mirror of romance . true , though in practice she be anti - romantic , one part of she , she could appreciate romance , foreignness , the exotic . 

 and now , suddenly , in his little office , she divine for the first time that he feel in she the same romance which she feel in he . what be prosaic to she be exotic to he . and do he conceive himself as exotic ? she think not . she be sure not ; though here her imagination be work in unaccustomed way , and therefore imperfectly . she could put herself in the place of a laundry - girl or a chambermaid or a housekeeper , but an Italian be extremely different . Withal , Italian or not , she have lay he low with her refusal . she have make he into a victim . and the bad be that he be an apologetic victim . she be ashamed of her strength , her self - control , her unshakable commonsense ; which last , however , have not prevail to obviate her feeling of guiltiness towards he . she have warily question Perosi about he - the old man have invent a method of kill two bird with one stone by impart to her much information about the hotel and its personnel through the medium of french conversation - and she have hear measure but genuine praise of Ceria : his table - side manner , tact , charm , resource , unique skill with the clientele , which like he as sincerely as his own staff like he . and now - ! she be continually say to herself that brief phrase , so heavy with disturb implication : " and now - ! " 

 then the thought recur to she powerfully : " I could make he . " she mean that she could recreate he , and well than he have be before she have blight he . and the resolve to ' make ' he - quite apart from any idea of marriage between they - fill her whole mind and heart , inspire she , and inspirit she , so that she begin to be cheerful and her face lighten . she speak to he firmly but yet tenderly . 

 " you must go on just as if you have not   be away at all . everybody will be glad to see you . do not   begin explain or find excuse . you have   no call to explain anything to the people under you . it be none of their business . you can do it all right . of course you can . in fact it be quite easy . whatever you usually do at this time of the morning , do it now , as if nothing have happen . " 

 " yes , " he interrupt she . " but Mr. Cousin ... and Mr. Orcham ? I must tell they I have   come back . I shall have to see one of they , perhaps both of they . " 

 she smile indulgently . 

 " of course you will have to see they . but not at once . you go on with your ordinary work and go into the grill - room at lunch - time as usual . and you will see - you will see how nice everyone will be . you will feel well . they will make you feel well . they will make you feel more equal to thing . and then this afternoon you can go and see Mr. Cousin or Mr. Orcham . they will know you be back , then . they will have hear . and do not   you go and think you have not   be ill , because you have . that motor - accident be enough without anything else . you be ill ; your nerve be ill ; and it would have be more sensible if you have send for your maid back and go to bed and have a doctor . but as you be here - well , you be here ! and if you ask I I think you have   be wonderful . yes I do , really ! you do not   know how wonderful you be . if you will only do as I say I be perfectly certain there will be no trouble . there can not   be . now I shall rely on you , dear Mr. Ceria . I will answer for you to anybody , and I be sure you will not   let I down . why ! I should like to know how many man who have be in a motor - accident , in the middle of the night too - " her tone change in an instant , become stern and hostile , and she speak louder . " you may have be ill , Mr. Ceria . I do not   say you have not   be . I be sorry . but I can not   help that , and I have to think of the Floors menu . you may say they be not in my department . but what I say be , the visitor complain just as much to I as they do to Mr. Perosi . they have   be complaint about the short menu for week , and - " 

 make an infinitesimal sign to Ceria , she turn round . in a look - glass at the end of the room she have see a figure atthe door , which have be leave open on her entrance . 

 3 . 

 " oh ! I be so sorry , " she address the figure . " be not   you Mr. Fontenay ? I come to see Mr. Ceria about something on the Floors . I be the head - housekeeper . I can come another time . I know I must not   interfere with grill - room business . " while talk she move out of the room , stop quite close to the door and to Fontenay . but she do not shut the door . 

 " yes , miss , " say the Frenchman , who have hear all that Violet have intend he to hear , and no more , of her remark to Ceria . he be a man of middle - age , well favour , grey - haire , the second - in - command of the grill - room , of which he have be efficiently take charge in Ceria 's absence . his attitude to Violet be courteous , reserve , and receptive . 

 she continue , still more loudly and clearly : 

 " you know Mr. Ceria have have a motor - accident . he be not   hurt , but he be be rather upset by it . I think he must have faint , and I daresay he lose his memory . if he have not   he would have telephone to you or get someone to telephone . anyhow , he be too much upset to go home till last night . I be afraid I have not   be go the right way to work with he . if you hear I I do hope you will not   say anything . I have   have some worry upstairs , but I know that be no excuse for speak to he as I do . I believe he be come here to - day when he really be not   well enough to come . but he tell I he be quite recover . if he have not   I should not   have talk as I do talk . " 

 " yes , miss . " the second - in - command smile sympathetically , add in a low voice : " it be Mr. Rocco who wish to see Mr. Ceria . he hear that Mr. Ceria be in the hotel . Mr. Rocco - there have be a misunderstanding - it be urgent . " 

 Violet think : 

 " Fancy the poor boy hop he have not   be see ! as if everything be not   see in this place ! " and she recall something of what Perosi have tell she of the terrific conference between Rocco and Ceria about the bewilder taste of customer . then , dismiss all that as secondary , she make one decide step towards the interior of the office , show Fontenay she back , and wink at Ceria and then smile at he with enheartene tenderness . a slight vivacity in his answer glance content she . 

 " I think I would well go , " she murmur , front Fontenay . " Least say , soon mend . I be sure you understand , Mr. Fontenay . " 

 " yes , miss . " Fontenay bow as she depart . 

 she be uplifted , even happy . she have instantaneously seize the situation and save it . she have give Ceria his cue . she have change the complexion of the affair . her version of the explanation of his mysterious vanishing would spread through the grill - room staff and thence to the general staff of the hotel in five minute . it would have precedence of other version . it be plausible , and who could deny its truth ? why have she not think of it on the previous afternoon ? as for reconcile what she have tell Fontenay with what she have tell Mr. Orcham - well , that be a difficulty that could be meet later . be she proud of herself ? she be . and she be pleased with her final smile to Ceria . at any rate he would admire she for her quick - wittedness . of course he would be regret all the more that he have not win she ... have he lose she ? could she keep a heart of flint towards he ? 

 she go upstairs in a dream . she be out of the lift before she know she have be in it . she walk along the corridor , but ithad no floor . what italian girl could have do what she have do ? Conceited - that be what she say to herself she be . 

 Fluffy Agatha be obediently wait for she in the sitting - room , document range on the sofa , note - book in hand , coo to the cat . 

 " now , my dear , " say Violet gaily . 

 content 
 chapter 66 

 she letter 

 the office of Sebastian Smiss be over the Queen Anne entrance . of late week its importance in the cosmo of the Palace have greatly increase . Mowlem , the head - hall - porter , and Skinner , head Queen Anne porter , be continually be ask for its exact location by unfamiliar caller . Smiss , like other work director and head , have of course always have his secretary , in whose girlish yet sometimes bored eye he be the real effective central figure of the cosmo ; but now he have two secretary , and they be both employ to the full capacity of their eager appetite for hard labour . Mr. Smiss wou1d be at his desk till ten , eleven , twelve o'clock , night after night , and the young woman take it in turn to stay with he . thus have it happen that Evelyn , on the evening of his arrival , have be ring up by Smiss at something after ten o'clock . Smiss exult , quietly , in his new excessive toil ; hence naturally the two secretary exult , but not always , in theirs . the Palace indeed have little or no use for retainer who be not ready to exult in work till they drop . 

 Mr. Smiss have somehow , without try to do so , get the well of his co - director , Reggie Dacker , in the perhaps unconscious rivalry between they for a seat on the Board   not yet officially form   of the Orcham Merger . he have win , not because of his superiority in foreign language and in experience of the Works Department , but because of his high power of intense , tireless application , of his voracity for detail . Evelyn have begin by favour Dacker for the post . fact , however , have make Evelyn gradually change his mind . and now everybody know that Smiss have mysteriously become , under Evelyn and Sir Henry Savott , the work chief of the improvise organism which be create an organism vaster than itself - the Orcham Merger . " ask Smiss . see Smiss . Mr. Smiss will know . " such be the phrase the constant repetition of which be establish the young man in his new role . 

 no one save Sir Henry Savott have realise the complexity , the enormity , and the difficulty of the mass of detailed manouvring which have to be accomplish before the Merger could be float out on to the market . certainly Evelyn have not realise they . everything have be settle , all the main contract sign , and yet it appear daily afresh to Sebastian Smiss that nothing have be settle and that no contract duly sign and seal and stamp could withstand the war tug of interest . Smiss be confront each morning with whole range of mountain of trouble , rear by a mischievous providence during the night , which it be necessary to raze to the smooth level of a plain . the more Smiss do , the more remain to do . 

 and the trouble arise in utterly unexpected quarter of the compass . the Duncannon Hotel , which all have at first regard as the most amenable item of the nine , have prove the tough ; the manager there create snag almost daily . and as for the Escurial at Madrid - often Smiss have regret that he could speak and write Spanish . eight or ten english solicitor   include Mr. Lewisohn and Mr. Dickingham   be deep in the affair of the Merger , besides french , italian , and spanish lawyer whose code of conduct and whose ingenuity in delay answer to letter and evade the point of letter notably embitter Smiss 's already sardonic estimate of human nature . and there be accountant , surveyor , valuer , financier , sub - financier , secretary , secretary ' secretary , nameless agent of all variety to add to the grand confusion of the melée . and every one of they stand for a sectional interest which he fight for without the slight apparent consideration for the general welfare . 

 happily Mr. Smiss have no wife , mistress , or other hobby . happily he live near the hotel , eat nearly all his meal in the hotel , and maintain health by orange - juice and fifteen minute of very scientifically devise morning exercise naked in his bathroom . who could believe , see he at work , that he even eat . his meat be the Merger ; his drink be the Merger and orange - juice . what he really live on be the consciousness that he be make his reputation with Evelyn and the originator of the Merger . 

 2 . 

 Sir Henry Savott , rather imperious in a shapeless lounge suit , sit by his side at the loaded desk . Sir Henry have magically arrive from Berlin , via Ostend . he could sleep on train and in ship , and he be as energetic as though he have just rise from a feather - bed in some farm - house a league from anywhere . Sir Henry gaze upon Sebastian Smiss , so dandiacal , dapper , and quiet . and Smiss gaze upon Sir Henry 's masterful face with the cruel , regular tooth . and they dislike one another . Sir Henry dislike Smiss because he could never penetrate the six - inch armour of bland reserve within which Smiss protect himself , could never exasperate Smiss into raise his meek voice . Smiss dislike Sir Henry because , at work , he have the demeanour of a bruiser rather than a gentleman . Smiss particularly object to Sir Henry 's manner of address Smiss 's defenceless principal secretary , who be summon by bell into the room every few minute either to take down note or to produce document . for Smiss be a perfect gentleman before the Lord , and could read Cicero 's wisdom without a dictionary . 

 but the two have a mutual respect . Sir Henry see in Smiss a marvellous subordinate , a man whose mind be a large chest of tiny drawer all full and all in order . and Smiss see in Sir Henry a Titan ; brutal , possibly ill - breed , but a Titan . 

 Sir Henry glance at his watch and compare it with the clock . 

 " Time 's up ! " say he curtly . " I have an appointment . you be safe for a week , Smiss . " 

 " I think so , Sir Henry . " Smiss give a gentle but chill smile . " if this barbarian have be to Balliol , " think Smiss , who have be to Balliol , " he might have be a little more civilised . " 

 at that moment Evelyn stroll in , and beheld Sir Henry with extreme astonishment . no greeting from Sir Henry - he have an appointment . 

 " I say , Evelyn , " say he . " there be just one nuisance about the Duncannon . you will be able to straighten the thing out for I . "   not ' for we . ' ' for I . ' Smiss be of no account . 

 " yes ? " say Evelyn , and to Smiss , benevolently : " good morning , my boy . how be you ? " 

 " good morning , Mr. Orcham , " say Smiss , think : " although he be never at Balliol , or even at Cambridge , the Director be a civilised being . " 

 Sir Henry violently describe the nuisance , and Evelyn could straighten it out , and do - but only by happy chance .   for Evelyn 's work in the Merger be such as he alone could perform , and have to do with policy , and rearrangement of staff , and internal reconditioning and reorganise . it do not touch the Merger itself ; it assume the existence of the Merger , which in fact do not yet legally exist and could not legally exist until the work of Sir Henry and Smiss be complete .   in two minute Sir Henry have yet once again demonstrate that the nascent film - merger be not absorb he in any way prejudicial to the Orcham Merger . Evelyn admire Sir Henry as much as Smiss admire he . the Titan 's grasp both of essential and of detail be wondrous . 

 nevertheless Evelyn consider that the Titan , have surprisingly arrive in the Palace , ought to have call first on the Director thereof instead of go straight to Smiss . 

 the conference adjourn . Evelyn have come to speak to Smiss about the Works Department in Craven Street , of which Smiss have have special charge until the Merger have begin to monopolise his time . but Sir Henry draw the Director out of the room . 

 " you be pretty friendly with Gracie , be not   you ? " he say , after explain the circumstance of his fly visit to London . his voice be subdue to the confidential . 

 Evelyn feel a shock . 

 " yes , " he answer . " I think we be very good friend . " what do Gracie 's father know or guess ? 

 " do she ever say anything to you about Leo Cheddar ? " 

 " nothing much . she do once tell I something about he . she be get a fairly good opinion of he . I like he myself . " 

 " oh ! you have   meet he then ? " 

 " quite accidentally , in Paris , one day . " 

 " oh ! there you be ! she be get a good opinion of he ? I always think she have , but she be never say so to I . I find a cable from she here this morning . it have follow I from Berlin . she do not   say so in so many word , very cautious she be - sometimes ; but my notion be she mean to marry Leo . I should rather like it . I want she to marry , and Leo 's quite her sort . " 

 " really ! " say Evelyn . " well , if it suit both you and she I be glad . " 

 " I be rather excited about it , " Sir Henry add , and hurry off without even shake hand . 

 Evelyn return at once into the room , and , drag Smiss 's mind from the Merger , discuss the Works Department with he for a few minute . the first onset of the news concern Gracie have produce no effect at all upon Gracie 's lover , except that Sir Henry 's admit excitement about it surprise he , and that the swift transition in Sir Henry from the steely financier to the somewhat naive father have both amuse and please he . he like to see people betray their humanity . he reflect that if Sir Henry approve of Leo as a son - in - law there must be quality in Leo that he , Evelyn , have not observe at their short interview ; for Leo live wholly for the art , whereas Sir Henry would probably have contemplate the destruction of all the art - at any rate all the fine art - with some equanimity . 

 as the talk with Smiss proceed Evelyn begin to think more and more upon the capacity of the hard - headed for self - deception . because Sir Henry desire to be rid of every trace of paternal responsibility for Gracie , he have read a preposterous significance into some word or phrase in some wild cable of Gracie 's . if the arrogant man only know that his highly esteemed and serious Evelyn have just spend two night in the girl 's flat , and have love she and quarrel with she and love she , he might have sing a different tune . however , papa would one day in due time learn the relation between they , and then - would he be glad or sorry ? Evelyn be inclined to think that he would be glad ; for Sir Henry at bad be not a snob and do not give tuppence for ' honourable ' as such ; and to have Evelyn within the fold of the family might assist the prosperity of the Merger . 

 Evelyn be in a kind of dream when he leave Smiss . he could not decide what job among many await he he would do next . he go slowly downstairs in his dream . then he think : 

 " I suppose there be nothing in it . " 

 the thought startle he for one instant . no more . the idea that there might be something in the wording of the cable have not occur to he before ... no ! of course there be nothing in it . obviously there could be nothing in it . he have not hear from Gracie , and the absence of a letter have disappoint he very much indeed . but he know his Gracie ; he know woman . a girl who would leave end of lingerie stick white out of imperfectly close drawer in wardrobe be the girl who would miss mail , or while passionately mean to write would forget to write or postpone writing until too late . besides , the conveyance of letter from St. Cloud to Paris might be grossly inefficient , no doubt be . France be not England . the afternoon delivery would assuredly bring a letter and a wonderful disconcerting , annoying , and enchant letter it would be ... he be in Cousin 's private office . why have he go there , how he have reach there , he could not say ; because he be in a dream . Cousin sit alone . 

 " you have hear about Ceria ? " say Cousin . 

 " he be return . he be at work . " 

 " oh ! " 

 " he have not   be to see I yet . " 

 " oh ! " Evelyn 's voice be blank . 

 to Cousin 's amazement Evelyn walk out of the room , omit to shut the door . Cousin want guidance as to the treatment of Ceria ; and he have receive none . he think that the attitude of the Director be very odd , very unhelpful . but how could he divine that Evelyn be in a dream ? 

 his dream carry Evelyn away to his own office . no ! there could be nothing in the cable . it be a remarkable fact that , though Gracie be continuously in his mind , though he live again and again the marvellous hour in the boulevard flat , though he be most disturbingly in love with she , he have , for an instant only , the incredible thought : " if there be anything in it , what a solution it would be , what a simplifying of my life ! " which think be as shocking to Evelyn as it would have be to anybody to whom he might have confess it . he scorn it , scoff at it , rout it ignominiously out of his brain . 

 why a fully occupy man , such as Evelyn ought to have be , should , after spend time in apparently important but really quite purposeless wandering into various department of the Palace , have go off to lunch at the Duncannon , Evelyn could not have explain , even to himself . he have nothing to learn about the food at the Duncannon , which be not quite first - rate , and would remain not quite first - rate until the well - entrench chef and a few other culinary officer have be take by the scruff of the neck and eject with violence from their stronghold . after the lunch he have a plan for visit the Laundry , but he abandon it , decide that he have no wish to mix himself up at that juncture in the polemic of the pillow - case . 

 he might have summon Ceria ; but wherefore ? he discover in himself no symptom of interest in Ceria . besides , Ceria be Cousin 's business . he be much too inclined to relieve Cousin of responsibility in delicate situation . 

 3 . 

 he enter Miss Cass 's office in the afternoon . Miss Cass , with her assistant , sit sternly at her desk , and give her chief an accuse glance which say : " you be not   take this hotel seriously . you be in one of your rare funny mood , and you be shirk . if I shirk , I should soon be hear about it . " 

 she speak sharply to her assistant . she have to speak sharply to somebody , and to the panjandrum she could not . Evelyn keep she in idle conversation , under the strain of which she grow restive . no more than Mr. Cousin could she guess that the panjandrum be in a dream and agitate by the dream . 

 the door open and a page come in with the afternoon mail : a sizeable bundle of assorted envelope and packet , tie up with string . Evelyn have time his return very well . he hold out his hand , and the white - gloved page deliver the bundle . 

 " now let us see , " say Evelyn , undo the bundle . it be as if he have say : " I happen to be here , so it occur to I to amuse myself with this trifling menial task of untie a bundle . " 

 among the first envelope he touch be one with a foreign stamp and the post - mark of Paris . his hand shake . a woman 's writing . to make his manouvre artistically complete , he choose a few other unbusinesslike envelope . 

 " here you be ! " he say to Miss Cass , push across to she the rest of the mail . " I will look at these myself , " and retire quickly to his room with the select few . 

 quite a competent bit of acting ; but Miss Cass , he know , be a perfect she - devil of suspicious insight . he sit down in privacy , but not on his own monarchical chair . a fine , rather large , distinguished hand , have Gracie . he be sure it be her , though he have never see her handwriting before . he hesitate to open the cheap , flimsy , foreign envelope . all his body be tremble . he open the envelope . 

 the letter be write on the diaphanous rule notepaper of the Café de la Paix . that be Gracie all over . she wish to write to her lover , and so , impulsive , she have pop into the most famous or notorious café in the world and order a drink and say to the waiter in her rich voice : " Donnez - moi de quoi écrire , s'il vous plait . " he could hear she say it , imperiously , yet not ungraciously , and with a smile . he look first at the end of the letter , to see with what phrase of hot love she have sign it . ' your loving ' ? ' your devoted ' ? ' thine ' ? ' thine ever ' ? ' darling . I fondly kiss you ' ? ' your longing'? .. none of these phrase in conclusion . no phrase . merely the initial ' G. ' a chill settle on his damp skin . he read : 

 " DEAR EVELYN . you will understand . I be deep in grief . do not   hate I , but I do not   think you will , you be so supersensible . why say it over again ? I say it all yesterday afternoon after we have be to the Jolie Laitiere . perhaps you do love I , but not in my way . and it be too early for you to know for certain in yourself whether you love I or not , even in your way . you may think you do . I know you will never love I in my way ; you could not . your sense of proportion be too just for that . yes , I love you , but I shall cure myself . and it be more important to I to be love than to love . to be love without a shred of any reserve be a necessity for I . I have   feel it for year ; but I have   never have it - I mean I have   never have it to live in , like an atmosphere day and night . if I be not absolutely everything to a man , then I will be nothing to he . that be how I be make , and I can not   help it . I be an egotist . well , I can not   help that either . they say there be more happiness in love than in be love . not for I . I be not the sort of woman for you . you need the other sort . and you will find it , and soon than you think , perhaps . you do not   wish I to apologise to you , do you ? I should never have be content if we have not   try our experiment . I should always have regret not try it , because if I have not   try it I should always have suspect that I have miss a chance . you will be miserable , but it be worth it , be not   it ? you will forget it . it will fade out of your commonsensical heart . good - bye , lion . I see Leo this afternoon , and I tell he I would marry he . he be ask I several time . he be very happy . it be touching . I be not happy yet , of course , but I shall be . the atmosphere of his love will make I happy . I have   send he away while I be write this . naturally he know nothing of we , and will not . good - bye . G. " 

 so she have compose this crucial letter , and write it - with a scratch pen , in the stir and promiscuity of the Café de la Paix !   Impulse !   so , ' deep in grief , ' she have propose to the worship Leo ! of course , if one man could not satisfy her instinct , and another could , she be right to forsake the first for the second . she be justify in flout convention for the sake of honesty . and she have do well not to delay . his ' commonsensical heart ' admit all that . yes , he could put himself in her place . she be she ; she could not change by an effort of will ; and there be no more to be say . 

 he open the other letter , but do not read they . Gracie 's envelope he tear into little piece and burn on the fire ; the rest of the envelope he tear vindictively into little piece and throw on to the floor . her letter must be answer at once . when he have answer it , he would know well where he be . he go to his own chair and write : 

 " DEAR GRACIE .. thank you for your letter . good - bye . your , E. O. " 

 he address an envelope - to St. Cloud . he begin to read her letter again , but he could not bear to finish it . he rip it to fragment and drop they carefully on the fire . no vestige leave now of his love - affair . 

 " here ! " he say curtly to Miss Cass in the outer office . " you can deal with these . " 

 " give I a twopence - halfpenny stamp , will you ? " he say to the man at the Enquiries counter in the entrance - hall . he do not care what the man might think of the spectacle of the panjandrum who have two secretary ask in his own person for stamp at the Enquiries counter . the letter disappear into the vermilion post - box . " some contrast between this one and the one I post last night ! " he think grimly , glance not without an absurd self - consciousness round the hall - as if everybody in the place be not only star at he but read his mind . there be appreciably more people than usual about , and they have an unusual air of animation . he beckon boldly to Mowlem . 

 " what be go on here ? " 

 " his highness the Rajah have come , sir . his highness have go upstairs , the lady as well - veil , sir . and we be expect another motor - car yet . but there will not   be any more lady - people be hop there will be . " Mowlem smile with due ` dignity . 

 " oh ! that be it , be it ? " Evelyn murmur casually . 

 he have have news by telephone in Paris of the suddenly decide visit of the Rajah . Cousin have talk of it , with a shade too much unction , at last night 's dinner . Violet Powler have mention it as one of her excuse for have disobey doctor 's order . her secretary have bring a special report concern the imperial suite . and now the rumour of it have draw a regular collection of quidnunc , gossiper , curiosity - monger , journalist , and God know what into the great entrance - hall . a lot of fuss about a mere twopenny Oriental , in a hotel which have house european king in the great day when king still flourish . 

 Mr. John H. Harbour , the american cigarette - king , be a much more important visitor - and rich , rich though the Oriental be . Withal , the Palace be do pretty well to have the second or third rich millionaire in the United States and a Rajah with veiled lady , together on one floor - and in the dead season too ! Immerson would make fine use of the gorgeous coincidence . and if only the Palace could have boast of the presence of Henry Ford stick away in an attic Immerson 's cup of joy would have be run over . thus Evelyn reflect sardonically . 

 but behind these light fancy , far withdraw in the dark jungle of his mind , terrible thought be crouch and creep . monstrous , her conduct be ! monstrous ! when , at precisely what moment , have she determine to jilt he ? no doubt at their tea - colloquy after the Jolie Laitiere escapade . and yet after that , that same night , she have ... no doubt she would defend her false acquiescence by the plea that she have be loyally play the game to the end . and the next morning , her wifeliness , her anxiety that he should return at once to London to do his duty! .. she care not a fig for his duty ; she merely desire to reach the end at the early possible moment ... 

 love he , do she ? that would depend on what you call love . she might be a genius - she be - she might be a miracle of a girl , but she be a wanton , for all she ' be - still - and - know - that - I - am - God . ' well , she have not be very still ... she have weep with nobility at the Gare du Nord . yes , because she be the world 's great histrionic performer ! she have seduce he , deliberately ; and thereby create a tragedy , and she know the right spectacular gesture for the tragedy and at the Gare du Nord have execute it . why , even as she weep , she must have be meditate upon the warning cable to her father . she have probably despatch the cable from the Gare du Nord itself , within five minute of the departure of the train . that be the ' sort of woman ' she be . true , she be not ' the sort of woman ' for he ! Truer than she imagined! .. and the simpleton Leo ! would she ever tell he of her ' experiment ' ? no fear ! her duplicity would be inexhaustible . ' they ' be all alike ! all ! the fact be notorious . and how many ' experiment ' have she try prior to the ' experiment ' with himself? .. never would he have admit it , even to his most secret soul , but the dire wound be the wound to his pride ... monstrous ! monstrous ! 

 4 . 

 there be a stirring in the hall . Mowlem have go forth into the portico . the belate automobile - last of the Rajah 's ! Evelyn impatiently shrug his shoulder - those strong shoulder which Gracie have admire . he could tolerate no more fuss about the Rajah , and he walk away , bitter , ironic , sarcastic . he would allow people to guess his attitude towards the visit of the Rajah ; he simply do not care ; but none should get a glimpse of the thought hide behind the irony and the sarcasm . he go back to his office , and his face - he convince himself - be an effective mask , even to Miss Cass . he be proceed straight to the inner room , but she halt he . 

 " Mr. Orcham . " 

 " well ? " he answer with a deceitful blandness . 

 " there be just come down a message from the Royal suite - Mr. Harbour , you know , sir - for Mr. Cousin to go up there at once . some difficulty . Miss Tilton have telephone I that Mr. Cousin be out - she think he be go to Craven Street about something urgent for the Rajah . " 

 " what be the difficulty with the cigarette fellow ? " Evelyn negligently demand . to refer thus to a visitor - any visitor , to say nothing of the second or third big american millionaire - be to outrage the etiquette of the hotel ; but Evelyn enjoy commit the outrage upon Miss Cass . he feel reckless , and his recklessness wear an appearance of the gaiety of a man who have not an anxiety in the world . 

 " I can not   say , sir . " 

 " can not   Mr. Pozzi go ? " 

 " Mr. Pozzi be not   in either , sir . " 

 " well , he ought to be . " 

 " yes , sir . but Mr. Harbour ask particularly for Mr. Cousin . it be Mrs. Harbour who telephone , Miss Tilton say . " 

 " oh ! Mrs. Harbour , be it ? well , I will go up myself . " 

 he use a tone to imply that if he go up himself , Mr. and Mrs. John L. Harbour would have to deal with someone who would stand no nonsense from millionaire , Rajahs , or anybody : indeed , they would have to deal with the head of the unparalleled Orcham Merger . a cynical energy be rise in he and must be employ somehow . he might have be jilt by a wanton , he might be in the deep depth of misery , but he be Evelyn Orcham . 

 there be considerable animation in the broad second - floor corridor . Evelyn have go up by the east lift ; the west lift have be reserve for the sole use of the Rajah and his retinue , the imperial suite be westerly , while the Royal suite lie easterly . in the western distance Evelyn see some pile of baggage of exotic aspect , and two attendant in rich oriental costume stand sentinel at two door . other attendant , in european costume , be move with grave deliberation to and fro . at several door , give on the south or inferior side of the corridor , people , apparently visitor resident in the hotel , be look curiously forth . at ordinary prosaic time they would have be too haughty to permit themselves the role of inquisitive sightseer ; but the exciting rumour of the arrival of a picturesque Rajah and his court have get the well of their sense of dignity and propriety . Lady Levering and her daughter be sightsee . it be fortunate that the Imperial and the Royal suite between they nearly monopolised Second on this occasion , so that the number of spectator be small ; otherwise the corridor might have look like a street full of bystander when a procession pass through it or an accident occur . 

 the accommodation of the imperial and Royal suite vary accord to the demand of the occupant . room could be add , or subtract , to suit requirement . more often than not there be no imperial suite and no Royal suite , but just suite . the Royal suite could be divide into two first - rate suite , and the Imperial into four . the Rajah , when he travel , travel in sovereign state , and in addition to the four suite with a northern aspect command the park he have take several trifling suite , sufficiently important to gratify the taste of most visitor except film - king and film - star , on the inferior side . 

 as Evelyn knock at the main door of Mr. Harbour 's Royal suite , he see one of the oriental sentinel of the imperial suite suddenly stand back and salaam . the aristocratic figure of a very dark and handsome slim young man in a lounge suit and white turban emerge from a doorway . the figure pause a moment , and then , follow by two satellite of almost equal distinction , walk down the corridor towards the west lift . the Rajah ! although a hundred or more foot away Evelyn could recognise the gait of sovereignty . so the Rajah be young . Evelyn in his simplicity have always imagine Rajahs as fat and bearded and venerable . 

 the main door of the Royal suite be open by another young man , in another lounge suite similar in style to that of the Rajah , but not finish off with a turban . 

 " yes , sir . " 

 an american voice and an american jaw . Neckwear recall the advertisement page of the Philadelphia " Saturday Evening Post . " 

 " Mr. Harbour , or Mrs. Harbour , want to see the manager , " say Evelyn with mildness , feel uncomfortably that in his haste he have cast himself for a too minor part . 

 " but say ! you be not   Mr. Cousin . we ask for Mr. Cousin . " 

 " my name be Orcham . Mr. Cousin be not in . I be what you may call Mr. Cousin 's superior officer . " 

 " well , I think Mr. Cousin be the head - god here . will you please come in , Mr. Orcham ? glad to meet you . boss , this be Mr. Orcham . " 

 he have turn to address a stout , middle - aged man who be come out of a room to the left , where be congregate a miscellany of person of both sex , two of whom , girl , be seat and tap at typewriter . the busy room be evidently the cigarette - king 's antechamber for caller and clerk , and the stout gentleman be evidently the cigarette - king himself . 

 " Mr. Orcham ? Mr. Orcham . this be a great pleasure , Mr. Orcham , " say the cigarette - king very amiably . " come right in . "The cigarette - king heartily shake hand with Evelyn . " I be very sorry to miss meet you when you be over on our side . Mr. Staten 's an old and value friend of mine . he tell I about you . he be a lovely man . you have   get some hotel here , Mr. Orcham . I have   not stay here before . Mrs. Harbour like the Majestic . " 

 " that be mine too , " say Evelyn . 

 " oh , I know . be a lot of talk down town in New York about your Merger , Mr. Orcham . you have   get a great thing there , sir . " 

 Evelyn , please by the knowledge thus display , at once like Mr. John H. Harbour , who have a firm grip , a pleasant democratic smile on his round red face , a jaw surpass that of his young " Saturday Evening Post " secretary , a heavy , protrude , hang low lip , and a cigar which depend from his gold - stud tooth as lightly as a cigarette . the state of be the second or third big millionaire in a continent of millionaire have clearly not demoralise he . yet he have the air of his high rank . he would have pass for what he be in any company . indeed , it be impossible that he could have be aught else but a major millionaire ; and his glance announce to the observant , without , however , a trace of self - complacency , that he manufacture twenty million cigarette a day - and sell they . 

 he lead Evelyn through a large drawing - room into a small one . they sit down . a cigar be offer to Evelyn . 

 " no , thank , " say Evelyn . " but if I may have one of your cigarette - " 

 " you sure can . " 

 Evelyn suspect that Mr. Harbour be not feel quite at ease . 

 " Mrs. Harbour use this room as her boudoir , that be why I bring you in here . it be Mrs. Harbour you have   come to see . " 

 yes , Mr. Harbour be certainly nervous . he call out loudly : 

 " emily ! " 

 after a couple of minute emily enter , from the farther door . she be a lady of perhaps fifty - five , five year young than her husband , and a little less stout , but not much ; with a gigantic bust tightly and smoothly encase - no promontory - in a plum - colour dress which have long sleeve and a long skirt . her iron - grey hair surmount a broad , set , grim , uncompromise face . no style , no distinction , no powder , no rouge . she have the stiff inelegance of shyness without the shyness . her appearance and manner give poor support to the widely hold sexual theory that woman will adapt themselves to change of class and of circumstance . she be bear to be a provincial matron , and she have remain steadfastly a provincial matron throughout the astounding series of leap in the circulation of her husband 's cigarette . she have have neither the wit to learn nor the wisdom to forget . she be immutable . and she bestow upon herself such personal prestige that she compel thoughtless beholder to believe that it be Mrs. Harbour , not Mr. Harbour , who have invent and be manufacture and sell the famous Harbour cigarette . 

 Evelyn detest her gaze , her voice , her handshake , and the way she receive Mr. Harbour 's introduction of he and brief recital of his claim to special notice . and he feel a benevolent contempt for the cigarette - king 's obvious subservience and his cautious fear of she . he rise , and she do not invite he to sit down again ; but he sit down . 

 strange that he should immediately transfer some of his detestation of she to Gracie . ' they ' be all alike , and so on , though no two woman could have be more acutely dissimilar than Emily Harbour and Gracie Savott . 

 " well , Mr. Orcham , " Emily start , " I want you to know that I be from Kentucky - " 

 the rest of her remark be in that key . she have be inform that the new gentleman next door be a Rajah or whatever it be . and he would come with a harem . with her own eye she have see the harem , or part of it , on a neighbouring balcony . and she suppose there be eunuchs too . such a terrible outrage would never be tolerate in the Mississippi Hotel in Louisville . and she could not stay , and Mr. Harbour could not stay . it be an insult to white people , Christians , even Roman Catholics it would be an insult to . and the Harbours must leave at once . not another night could they stay , with a harem next door . 

 " I be not aware of any harem , Mrs. Harbour , " say Evelyn . 

 " then what be all those creature ? " Mrs. Harbour demand . " that be all I would like to know . with their veil and gauze and thing . " it might do for London and Paris , but as for she she have make up her mind about it , and if she would ever have the slight idea that such thing could be ... 

 at first Evelyn suspect that a wild farce be be stag for his diversion . but of course the suspicion be ridiculous . Mrs. Harbour , though utterly incredible , be true . and you might as usefully argue with she as with a rhinoceros . he settle his policy in an instant ; it be base upon the maxim : the visitor be always right . he say : 

 " I admire your stand , Mrs. Harbour . of course we innkeeper be not quite our own master . the Rajah come from one of the old reign family in the East . his forefather have live in what I daresay they would think be splendid civilisation for many century , long before Britain be colonise or America discover . but I admit that all that be beside the point . yes , I fully admit it . I would ask his highness to leave , but that might lead to serious trouble , in fact to international complication , for he will be lunch with King George tomorrow . " 

 " but not his harem , I hope . " 

 " certainly not . if harem there be . " 

 " if ' ! then what be they ? nautch girl ? I know the world , Mr. Orcham , and I know that there must be immorality , but to flaunt it openly , and in a respectable hotel where respectable people stay never think , never expect - " 

 " Mrs. Harbour , " Evelyn venture deferentially to interrupt she , " I agree . I agree . and let I say that you have teach I a lesson which I shall always remember . and I do hope you will accept my sincere apology . " he say to himself : " if it be to be a farce , I will be farcical . " and he go on to be still more farcical , until he fear lest Mrs. Harbour would rise in fury and strike he for an impudent clown . groundless apprehension ! the hide of the rhinoceros be undamaged . Mrs. Harbour grandiosely accept his humble apology and the hint that she have deflect the dangerous curve of his life . could she have smile , she would have smile . 

 " now as regard leave , " he say . " I fully understand your scruple about stay here . I sympathise with they . you wish to leave at once . we shall be exceedingly sorry to lose you , for visitor like you and Mr. Harbour mean a very great deal to we . we do not   get they every day , no , nor every year . still , we have bring your leave we on ourselves . now I have two other hotel , the Majestic and the Duncannon . I think you would rather approve the Majestic , and I may say that it be even well now than it use to be . I will personally guarantee ... I will see to everything myself ... I will telephone myself and give instruction - " 

 in five minute it be arrange that the Harbour ménage with its retinue should be transfer to the Majestic . 

 " I think Mr. Orcham have meet we very fairly , my dear , " say Mr. Harbour . these be his first word in the interview . his relief be touching . he light a new cigar ; its predecessor , scarcely half - smoke , be extinguish and cold . 

 Mrs. Harbour nod assent to her husband 's remark . at the outer door the two man , alone together for a moment , contrive to maintain an admirable seriousness . 

 " this Merger of yours be a very interesting proposition , Mr. Orcham , " say the cigarette - king . 

 they chat . and at last Evelyn say : 

 " I have   really nothing to do with that side of it ; but I will speak to Sir Henry Savott . I be sure he would feel flattered . " 

 outside in the corridor , which be still busily astir and now have add the watchful old Perosi to its float populace , Evelyn 's thought follow one another thus : 

 " this have not   really happen , because it could not   have happen . that Rajah , with two thousand year of civilisation in his way of walk and hold his head as he walk , shovel up and throw into a corner by the Kentucky squaw from Louisville . nobody will believe it . who could ? the cigarette - king 's in fear of his life of she . why make twenty million cigarette a day when this be all you get for it ? a good stroke - it will divide the publicity between the Palace and the Majestic . palace do not   need publicity , Majestic do . must find a good picturesque reason for the flitting . Immerson will think of one . Immerson will simply go off his head with joy . he be never have anything to touch it . monstrous ! monstrous ! they be all alike . she be so damned attentive and efficient yesterday only because she would positively make up her mind to get rid of I . no ! well , perhaps she want to make I regret she all the more with her thoughtfulness and her smart organising ; make I realise afterwards what a complete all - round sort of a creature I would lose . ' be still and know that I be God . ' how do she make that square with what she be do ? I suppose she think that it mean be still and be herself and let everything else go , and God create she as she be , and so it be all right , and it do not   matter what happen to other people so long as she be herself and act herself . do not   matter about I , for instance , so long as she be herself . it be enough to make you laugh . I be miserable , and what a fool I be to be miserable ! she be ruin I . no , she have not . I will not   let she . I will show she . but they be all alike . monstrous ! I be miserable . Idiot ! 

 " I hope she will appreciate my letter . my letter be a masterpiece . there be something tremendous about that girl . there never be another girl like she . what a mind ! what breast ! I be miserable . she could make a mackintosh and a sixty - franc chemise de nuit look stylish and expensive . say she be in love with I . well , I believe she be too . and I hope to God she will not   be able to sleep for thinking of I . no . she be only in love with herself . do not   she say she be an egotist and they all be ? she will ruin her Leo Cheddar , though . I have   escape . not his money . no , she be not mean . she be magnificent , curse she ! she will draw the soul out of he , and eat it and drink it , till there be nothing leave . what breast ! and what a voice ! she be glorious . I have   escape . what kind of a mess would she have make of I ? and I have   escape and I be miserable . and nobody know , except she . I will send she a wedding present . six nightgown from the Stores . Chaste anglo - indian taste . then she will have to explain they to she Leo . ' the Nature of the Universe ' ! the Nature of Women ! they be all alike . she be terrific , but the Kentucky squaw be more terrific , because she be get nothing but her self - conceit to do it with . she be ugly and stupid and old , but she can do it . she be do it , and she will keep on do it until she drop . she ought to be abandon to a brutal and licentious soldiery , that squaw ought . teach she a thing or two . but it would be no use . they would not   touch she if you bribe they . she be safe . she be safe even from the cigarette - king . if he do not   amuse himself with something less like a female rhinoceros he be the big ass that God ever make . 

 " if she be the mother of the Rajah she would rule the Rajah and all Java and Morocco and Cambodia or wherever it be he come from . she would stick behind the purdah , and she would be the boss of all the Orient . and nobody could tell how in hell she do it . and would not   the odalisque have a thin time ! like hell they would . but I have   beat she , if she be never be beat before . she do not   see I be laugh at she . what a woman ! she would swallow anything . the top of her bent be high than the Himalaya . I be miserable . Fancy her take that boulevard flat all on her own ! and buy the Baedeker . an artist ! female Don Juan . Donna Juana . that be it . Donna Juana ! always run around and make out to herself that she be search for the ideal . and I believe she really believe it . a whip might keep she in order . it be the only thing that would . and I never think of it . what I ought to do be to go back with a cane and rip everything off she , and give she a hiding until she faint away , and then when she come to make her kneel down and beg my pardon for be thrash . that be one argument we always have , muscle , the muscular argument . oh ! what a rogue and peasant slave be I ! and it be the one argument they understand . I be dash if my stomach be not   all cold lead . curious the connection between mind and body . it be all imagination , but my stomach 's like lead . " 

 5 . 

 as Evelyn stroll along the corridor and walk downstairs - he would not take the lift because he want to luxuriate in his sinister thought - a lamp burn vividly incandescent in his brain ; another lamp , not either of the old one ; the lamp of destruction , not of creation . but like the other it be magically invisible . those who see he at the end of a corridor , or on the unfrequented stair , see the panjandrum of the hotel and the Orcham of the Orcham Merger , calm , urbane , reserved , mysterious as become the acknowledge monarch of the world of luxury hotel . 

 at the very moment when he be cross a corner of the entrance - hall towards his own retreat , he see Cousin enter in haste through the revolve door . and Cousin see he and hurry to he . Cousin clearly have something of importance to communicate . but Evelyn have something of great importance to communicate , and by right of precedence Evelyn begin . he be in a state to explode with the Kentucky squaw story ; there be story which can not be restrain ; and this be one , and no one in the hotel would more finely savour it than Cousin . they turn their face a little to one of the pillar of the entrance - hall , and Evelyn narrate the tale . 

 " yes , " Cousin answer with his aloof smile , " I could believe anything of these anglo - saxon lady . but it be necessary that this affair should be arrange . " 

 " at once . I leave all the detail to you , mon cher . " 

 " Hm ! " say Cousin musingly , as if say : " it be all very well for you to give the order , but it will want some do . " 

 " send up Pozzi or someone to offer any help they need about pack , and then get busy on the Majestic . " 

 " I have   just come from Craven Street , " say Cousin inconsequently . " I want to see you . Collifant be on strike . " 

 Collifant be the manager of the Works Department . 

 " on strike ? what do you mean ? " 

 " about a light de repos that the Rajah have ask for . " 

 " what on earth 's a light de repos ? a day - bed ? " 

 " yes , that be what you call it . he say he can not   supply it today or to - morrow . he say the Rajah 's visit have exhaust he already , and exhaust the carpenter too , and it can not   be do until the day after to - morrow . he will not listen to the suggestion of overtime . he say the carpenter be work all last night , and there would be an insurrection . the Rajah object to a sofa , or at least they say he object . it must be a day - bed . I think it would be well to buy one . that man Harris in Oxford Street might have one , and in any case he would know where to find one . " 

 " not on your life ! " Evelyn exclaim .   the old lamp be burn afresh .   " what be the point of have a Works Department , I should like to know ! " 

 " well , I have do all I could . " 

 " but I have not , " say Evelyn . " I will go over to Craven Street myself , and I will see whether Master Collifant will strike or not . I never hear of such a thing . if we want a day - bed we will have it , and we will have it from Craven Street . " 

 " thank you , " say Cousin drily , half maliciously . he be conscious of a relief profound and unexpected . he add : 

 " Ceria come to see I . " 

 " well , you give he notice ? " 

 " no . I receive no instruction from you . it seem to I you have decide nothing - when I speak to you . " 

 then what do you say ? " 

 " I listen . he tell I that he have not be in a state to telephone or write . I say to he that he should carry on - for the present . " 

 " but last night I give you - never mind now . I be off to Craven Street . " 

 the panjandrum turn sharply away . his head be full of the Craven Street situation . the Ceria situation could wait . all his resentment against Gracie , all his blight contempt for the Kentucky squaw , be transfer to the preposterous Collifant . he would show Collifant what be what . Collifant should contrive a day - bed , perhaps out of nothing ; but he should contrive it . and instantaneously . the panjandrum could be as implacable and as imperious as any rajah . 

 he pass with careful consideration through Miss Cass 's room . she be alone now . Rajahs . seraglio . veil woman . ancient oriental civilisation . aristocracy of the East . all those thing flow together and form - a visitor to the Imperial Palace ! the visitor be always right . what the visitor desire he must and should have . the absurd Collifant be outrage the cardinal principle of the Palace , of the entire Orcham Merger . Gracie be naught , curse she ! in his private office Miss Cass 's meek assistant be on her knee on the carpet laboriously pick up one by one tiny fragment of envelope , lest the disdainer of opulent squaw and the purveyor to oriental civilisation function only two floor above her head might on his return be offend by the sight of they . 

 " sorry , sir , " she apologise for her conscientiousness . 

 content 
 chapter 67 

 works 

 it be Mrs. Oulsnam who tell Violet of the Rajah 's imperious demand for a day - bed in the more intimate of his drawing - room . Mrs. Oulsnam fly up to Eighth full of the news and of fun . she give her opinion that a nicely cover mattress on the floor would have suit his highness 's reclining habit well than any day - bed . she laugh at his objection to a mere english sofa , see that , like most oriental potentate , he evidently have a desire to be as western as possible while in the West . she laugh also at the total absence of day - bed in the furniture of a hotel with the international pretention of the Palace . agreeably giggle , she surmise that the Rajah 's fancy for the day - bed must be due to the fact that he have only quite recently hear of the existence of day - bed as a western institution , and be determined to be in the movement . 

 Violet , who have be converse on the telephone with Ceria , say at once that she should attend to the matter personally . Whereat Mrs. Oulsnam be much relieve ; for , as the bright among the floor - housekeeper , she have be charge with the delicate responsibility of satisfy the Rajah 's eccentric requirement in the way of furniture , and for all her gaiety of spirit be begin to feel the strain . 

 a certain inco"rdination of effort , due to Violet have be lay aside , vitiate the activity of the Floors . Mrs. Oulsnam be not aware that the power of Mr. Cousin himself have be directly invoke by the Rajah 's french secretary . and Mr. Cousin do not know that Violet have resume duty . he would have know , have not her subordinate and other , secretly from Violet , conspire to conceal her dangerous defiance of Dr. Constam from the superior authority . Violet have impulsively take the day - bed job to herself , because in a flash , even as Mrs. Oulsnam be speak , she have an idea . she have never before hear of a day - bed , but she recall have see , amid the litter of the carpenter 's shop on Eighth , an article which now seem to she to correspond with Mrs. Oulsnam 's description of what a day - bed be . 

 off she hurry to the carpenter 's shop , and there it be , with a pile of old chair and light occasional table stack on the top of it . the only carpenter present in the shop first tell she that it be nothing , then that it be junk , then that he have hear year early that it be suppose to be a bit of ' old empire . ' anyhow , it be break , and the part miss have long since utterly vanish . 

 it be in truth a two - end light de repos , not Empire but Louis Philippe ; lack one of its end ; with bronze on its mahogany side ; upholstered in wear and fade green and gold silk ; a pitiable object . the carpenter say that to restore it properly would involve very expert labour and a fortnight 's time . Violet 's reply be to request he to extricate it and get it down to the good - entrance instantly . she explain that she be go to take it herself to Craven Street in a taxi . the carpenter say that it would not hold in a taxi . Violet say that it would hold in a taxi if the taxi be open . 

 pleased with her own initiative , she run off to prepare for the street . she descend in the good - lift with the day - bed and the carpenter . a brilliant Laundry motor - van be unload basket in the dark tunnel of the good - entrance . Violet have some acquaintance with the driver . know that he must have to wait there for an hour or more for his cargo of afternoon soil linen , she instruct he in a friendly , firm tone of assured confidence to drive she and the day - bed to Craven Street , and to help the carpenter to stow the day - bed into his van . the driver hesitate and yield . Violet feel triumphant . Heaven be aid her enterprise . she admit privately that to travel through West end street in winter in an open taxi with the end of a french day - bed protrude backwards beyond the hood would have be rather ridiculous . 

 the porter hoist she into the van after the day - bed , upon which she have the happy notion of sit down . then the porter bang the door of the van , and Violet find herself in a darkness blacker than that of the tunnel . the darkness be total save for slit of very faint light at the jointure of the double door and below they . a jerk , and she be throw violently against the remain arm of the day - bed , to which thenceforth she clung for her life . the voyage begin thus stormily , and the storm increase ; now and then it attain the rank of a temp . the day - bed crawl to and fro in the vast , mysterious interior of the van . while the van be in motion she could hear nothing but its tremendous roar and the rattle of its vibration . when it stop she be frighten by the menacing thunder of circumambient traffic . 

 " it be bad than be on the blasted ocean , " she mutter . not till that memorable journey have she realise the awfulness of the peril of the central thoroughfare of London . and the van be infest with icy draught . and less than twenty - four hour early she have be a bedridden invalid . and trouble might be await she at Craven Street , for Mr. Collifant , the new Works - manager , be notoriously a pernickety fellow . but she be content , and she feel equal to anything . Mr. Ceria have inform she by telephone that he have pay a formal visit to Mr. Cousin , and that Mr. Cousin have not pitch he out of the hotel . she feel sure that the bad of the Ceria affair be over . she have save Ceria . his voice on the telephone be as beautiful and as wistful and as grateful as the meek smile he have give she in his little office . he be her victim , and she have rescue he from ignominy and ruin . never could she desert he . 

 the distance from Birdcage Walk to Craven Street appear to be about a hundred mile . either that , or the driver be abduct she . then the van come to a definite halt . she try to open the door , but they be fasten on the outside . she shake they , and tear a glove . she call aloud . no answer . at last the door open to the rattle of a chain and pin . bless be the gleam of electricity after the black darkness . the driver stand below she . she put her hand on his uniformed shoulder and jump down . 

 " well , " she laugh , look at her damaged glove . " I have   arrive - what be leave of I ! " 

 2 . 

 the Works Department of the Imperial Palace be reallynot in Craven Street at all , but in Craven Place , beneath the immemorial shadow of Charing Cross Station , which rise above it like some gigantic relic of an extinct race of Titans . the van have come to rest under another archway cut out of two storey of what have once be a modern town residence . no one come to greet the van . 

 " can we get it down ? " Violet ask . 

 " I can not , miss . " 

 " you can if I help you . " 

 they get the day - bed down . 

 " that be all , thank you , " she say . " good night . " 

 the driver back into the Place , and be go . Solitude with the forlorn day - bed . not a sound except the low hum of the motor , within , which work the sewing - machine , and fitful booming echo from the height of Charing Cross Station . she begin to climb up the flight of stone step lead to the office on the first floor . luck favour she once again . the junior carpenter from the workshop on Eighth , who have come on a professional errand to the Works Department , appear at the top of the step on his way back to the hotel . 

 " Frank , " she cry , " just get someone . tell they I want the lift for a piece of furniture to go to the Upholstery . " 

 Frank touch his cap . it take nearly ten minute to transport the day - bed to the Upholstery on the second - floor , but the operation be at last successfully achieve . 

 " Mr. Collifant about ? " Violet ask a girl who , with some dozen other , man and girl , be busy in the large , bare room , cover the nakedness of assorted chair . 

 " I think he be in his office see someone , Miss Powler , " say the girl . 

 " then run and find Mrs. Rowbotham for I , will you ? iwant she this minute . " Violet speak with authority because she have authority . the head - housekeeper of the Palace herself buy all material for the Upholstery , and give her own order for the fashioning of it . and Mrs. Rowbotham , forewoman of the Upholstery , be her washpot . 

 Thin , anxious Mrs. Rowbotham , whose ambition be to resemble an under - housekeeper of the Palace as closely as possible , appear with a face of apprehension . she quite unconsciously love difficulty , therefore create they if they do not exist . she behold the forlorn and ancient piece of cumbrous furniture with alarm . that , for the Rajah 's suite ? which room of the suite be it mean for ? Violet have give she the number , Mrs. Rowbotham open a shallow drawer in a huge chest of such drawer , and produce the plan of the room , accurate and full of minute detail , scale half an inch to a foot . and she measure the dimension of the sofa . where be it to be in the room ? in what spot could it be place without a general disturbance of the rest of the furniture ? yes , well , it might do on the south wall . but of course everything have to be think of - Miss Powler would admit that . 

 Miss Powler admit that ; but she would not be fuss . the fantastically elaborate organisation of the Works Department , while it always impress she , be apt to make her impatient , especially in a crisis of haste ; but now she be not to be make impatient . she feel the blandness of an assured conqueror . she have find the day - bed , bring it to Craven Street in a Laundry van ; there it be , and it be go to be upholstered immediately and in accordance with her own idea . the material - she describe it to Mrs. Rowbotham , who be afraid that not enough of it remain in stock . a girl fetch the material , and there be enough of it . but what about the broken wood at the damaged end of the day - bed ? do Miss Powler really mean that the stuff must be flounce at the end to hide those old scar ? Miss Powler do . and then the polishing of the visible wood ? 

 and so on . and then finally Mrs. Rowbotham 's great question : 

 " what about Mr. Collifant ? I take my order from Mr. Collifant . and you know , Miss Powler , he be - " 

 " Mr. Collifant 's engage just now , and the day - bed 's very urgent . it must be start at once , and finish somehow in one hour . I shall stay here till it be do , and I shall take it back with I . I will settle with Mr. Collifant . if Mr. Collifant be not   available , I can not   help that . I have   get my own responsibility as head - housekeeper , and if I say a thing 's want it be : and Mr. Collifant know that as well as anybody . it be not as if the Rajah be an ordinary visitor . " 

 Mrs. Rowbotham be hem in on both flank . she yield with a sigh , but she yield . a man and a girl be draw away from other work ; a table be clear for cut out the material . furniture - paste be bring for the summary polishing of exposed wood . not a moment to be waste , not a second . 

 Violet be uplifted by the sense of dominance . she be not in the least ill , could not credit that she have ever be ill . why be she so eager and so arbitrary in her resolution to get the day - bed restore ? if she have not happen to recall the existence of the day - bed , if she have not be a girl of unusual character and resource , the Rajah might have have to do without his day - bed , be he ten time a rajah . but because she be she , the Rajah should have his day - bed , and with astounding promptitude . she could perform miracle by mere volition , and she be perform one now , and everyone of importance in the Palace would hear of it . 

 then a man of thirty - five or so , with a dark face and a heavy dark moustache and rough dark hair and a thick defiant figure appear in the doorway . Mr. Collifant himself . he be scowl . Violet marshal her nerve for another conflict . David against Goliath . 

 Mr. Collifant perceive at once that something out of the ordinary be afoot . he see a piece of furniture that he have never see before ; and he have have no official notice of its arrival . he see employee engage on a task which be obviously not in the schedule of the day . be he no long master in the Works Department ? every employee in the room have a guilty or a constrain look . he turn on agitated Mrs. Rowbotham like a tiger . Mrs. Rowbotham glance at Violet for help . 

 " I be afraid it be all my doing , Mr. Collifant , " say Violet , placatory , and briefly explain the situation . she do not know that Mr. Collifant have just emerge from a very try interview with his superior , Mr. Cousin , nor even that Mr. Cousin have be to Craven Street or have interest himself in the affair of the day - bed . she think that she alone have the grave matter in hand . she do not know that Mr. Collifant have tell Mr. Cousin that the creation of a day - bed be absolutely impossible . Mr. Collifant turn on Violet , and in do so he throw a curt , savage order to the man and the girl to stop the new work and go back to their scheduled job . Mr. Collifant do not usually behave thus ; he usually control himself to correspond with the Imperial Palace tradition of a quiet courtesy under all provocation . but under a provocation quite unparalleled and quite inexcusable , the real Mr. Collifant be come out . 

 " can I speak to you a moment ? " say Violet , and leave the room . 

 Mr. Collifant murderously follow she . beyond the door , unheard by the staff , Violet explain far . Mr. Collifant shake his head angrily . Violet continue : 

 " I be very sorry I could not   consult you . but I could not . this day - bed job be really urgent . I tell you so as head - housekeeper . I have   come here on purpose . if you stop it I shall hold you responsible and I shall go at once to Mr. Cousin and report . " and she think : " and a nice mess I be get myself into ! it will be war between he and I now for ever and ever . " 

 " I shall report to Mr. Cousin too , " say Mr. Collifant , but he go back into the room and growl : " here ! you ! you would well get ahead with this thing . " 

 Violet have hear he thus announce his own defeat , set out on a stroll through the other room ; for she could not stay with Mrs. Rowbotham and the day - bed ; to watch the process of upholstering would have be as exasperating as to wait , watch , for a kettle to boil . and she could not stand still . she be too excited to stand still , and too happily excited . she have an attack of moral pride , and her individuality be extend so that the entire Works establishment could hardly contain it . if there be to be endless altercation with Mr. Collifant , let there be endless altercation . she have strong weapon than he have ... she be in the large room of the department , on the first floor - the carpet - room . a large carpet   for no . 141 at the Palace , have be sew , be be finally par at the edge , prior to the definite hemming . woman be on their knee all around it . 

 Violet observe , and say not a word . how romantic be everything ! the day - bed be thrillingly romantic ... she be in the mattress - room , where a man be arrange ten thousand spring within a small oblong ... she be in the eiderdown - room , where eiderdown be be fill and stitch in pattern with the initial " I. P. H. " in the centre . one girl bend upon a table have her mouth protect by a pad ... she be in the sewing - machine - room , where a dozen woman be loose and withhold the power of electricity in needle upon all manner of stuff ... she be in the window - blind - room , and in the furniture - repair - room . she speak to none . 

 then she see a mirror , and examine herself , her face . she deem it a plain sort of a face , but the eye be very bright indeed , flash , challenge eye . she smile , in order to judge whether or not her smile have win charm . she decide that it have . victory seem to enhance her appearance . she fancy that she look young . she be excessively conscious of herself . it be not the meek who be bless ... 

 Ceria ! she must cure Ceria of his present meekness . she would endow he with a supply of confidence from her own private overwhelming store . of course Mr. Orcham have be quite right in a way . she could realise that now , in her serene triumph . Mr. Orcham care only for his hotel , and he be right . the hotel must come first and come last . loyalty to the hotel ! terrible retribution for disloyalty , even if you could not   avoid it ! same as in war , if you lose your head and desert , you have to be shoot , and it would be silly to say you do not   know what you be do when you desert ... what shock wicked nonsense ! in another way Mr. Orcham be most frightfully wrong , and well he must know it . as if a hotel count for more than a human being ! 

 however , she have get Ceria back at his post , and all difficulty would settle themselves . they always do . it be not in her character to exaggerate difficulty . her tendency be to minimise they . some employee be continually worry about friction between member of the staff . other worry about their work and its value to the hotel . she belong to the second class . friction be easy lubricate by ignore they . 

 unexpectedly arrive at a door , she open it and see the day - bed . she be re - enter the upholstery - room from the other end . Mr. Orcham , of all people , be converse with Mr. Collifant . both man be very serious . Mr. Orcham glance at she and glance away . the mantle of moral pride slip from her shoulder ; it do not fall to the floor ; it be annihilate ; there be no mantle . Kind of conjuror 's trick . 

 content 
 chapter 68 

 the scene 

 " I think you and I can go now , " say Evelyn , call across the room to Violet , who come forward at the word . 

 he have already decide exactly what he would do and how he would do it . Violet could not decipher even his general mood , so reserved be his voice in its urbanity . but she feel sure that he would support she in the attitude which she have adopt towards Mr. Collifant , who after all be only an executive officer whose principal duty be to carry out the instruction of , among other , the head - housekeeper . 

 Mr. Collifant say nothing , and look at nobody , but he glare resentfully at senseless object such as the window . 

 " I think I would stay , sir , and take it back myself . " Violet glance at the day - bed , which under the hand of three worker be already lose its appearance of incurable antiquity . 

 " I have   arrange all about that , " say Evelyn , with decision . " you quite understand , do not   you , Collifant ? " 

 " yes , sir , " Mr. Collifant reluctantly mumble . 

 " you can come with I in my car , Miss Powler . I leave word for it to follow I . I come here in a taxi . " 

 " yes , sir , " say Violet , feel herself now under the sway of a high power . 

 Evelyn , who be in hat and overcoat , walk quickly out of the room . Violet follow submissively . she have no idea why the panjandrum have pay a visit to the Works Department at just that crisis , nor could she guess what have pass between he and Mr. Collifant - except in so far as the manager 's appearance give a clue . the car be wait . 

 Evelyn stand aside and ask she courteously to get in . when Brench have shut the door , Evelyn bend down and extinguish the interior light in the car , which drive off . 

 Violet say : 

 " I see the house next door be to let . you will have four hotel now to deal with , and perhaps the Works Department will have to be enlarge . " 

 she think that this suggestion be rather bright , have value . Evelyn think the same ; he have not be aware that the next house be to let , nor have he consider the probable necessity of enlarge the Works Department to cope with the need of the Merger . but he conceal his appreciation of the girl 's brightness . he be in no state to award any good mark to she . moreover , he be in Paris drive in another semi - dark car through other winter street , with another young woman by his side . the sensation of the nearness of a girl in a car have deliver he into the past and into Gracie 's treacherous , delicious arm . he think grimly , of Miss Powler : " if she know ! .. 

 he say aloud , with negligence : " yes . we have   get it in view . " one of his daily allowance of fib . he think : " I will mention that to old Dennis . she have a head on she , no mistake ! curse she ! " 

 the conversation , after an interval , shift to the damnable weather , then lapse . 

 2 . 

 in the entrance - hall of the Palace , Violet , content to have be see arrive with the panjandrum in the panjandrum 's car , have a surprise . 

 " I would like you to come to my office if you can spare a minute , " say Evelyn to she . 

 " certainly , sir . now ? " she be mystify by his tone , which be unexceptionably polite , even amiable , but somehow blank , like a windowless and doorless high wall . she have a qualm : anything might be on the other side of that wall ; anything ! still , she could accuse herself of no sin in her professional work . on the contrary her notion be that she merit a little commendation for enterprise and despatch . 

 as they go through Miss Cass 's room , Evelyn say coldly to his chief secretary : 

 " I be engage , and I do not   want to be disturb . " 

 Miss Cass think : 

 " hello ! what be this ? " and , silent , she give he a slow , stern nod ; and a tiny quick nod to Violet . through the secret channel of the vast organism of the hotel she have already learn something of the day - bed business and have hear of the strange impending departure of the cigarette - king for the Majestic . 

 " sit down , will you ? " say Evelyn in the inner room , remove his hat and overcoat and light a cigarette . 

 Violet know then - what she have know before while refuse to admit it to herself - that trouble exist , and that she be concern in it . she take off her glove , and loose the black coat which she have buy to wear with her housekeeper 's dress when she go out on hotel errand . but really , instead of divest herself , she be put on the invisible armour of defence . she have an uncomfortable feeling of perplexity and pique . she be still worried about her protégé Ceria and resentful of Evelyn 's attitude to he . accord to Dr. Constam , who stand officially for the hotel , she be ill , and therefore deserve the treatment due to an invalid and an invalid who in the interest of the hotel be display all the activity of perfect health .   incidentally she now begin to be fatigue .   and finally she have do a wonder for the hotel , and the hotel ought to be grateful to she , for really she need not have - etc . , etc . and the panjandrum be evidently prepare himself to be unpleasant . she have no ground for this assumption . she simply direct her feminine x - ray apparatus into the Director 's brain by way of his glance and his gesture and his tone   all irreproachable , and know with absolute knowledge that thing be so ! ah ! the last time they have be together it be midnight and she wear her green frock , not this prim black affair , and he have give she a cigarette and their cloud of smoke have mingle . her x - ray apparatus , however , furnish no information as to the condition of her own nerve . she believe that they be normal and in excellent order . 

 Evelyn be regret that he have give she the cigarette that night . he be painfully absorb in thought of Gracie and her wickedness . or rather , he want to be painfully absorb , but the hotel would not let he . he be much exercise about Ceria . he blame himself for not have instruct Mr. Cousin that Ceria must leave . Ceria might go to the Majestic or wherever else Cousin choose to send he . Evelyn have be weak , irresolute . and to allow Ceria to stay at the Palace as though nothing have happen would show further weakness . what on earth do Ceria mean by his prank of an operatic tenor ? monstrous ! monstrous ! that girl be lark around in Paris , smile at Leo Cheddar and return his kiss . and only yesterday - or be it the day before ? - she have ... he , Evelyn , have dash off to the Works Department to put the fear of God into Collifant , and to command that a day - bed should be create in a moment out of nothing . and he have find that another person have have the infernal cheek to put the fear of God into Collifant and to cause a day - bed to be create out of nothing - well , you might say almost nothing ! without say one word to anybody ! and there be other matter . enough to make a man lose his temper ! not that Evelyn would lose his temper . no . his nerve , thank heaven , be in ideal order . 

 he take the seat of authority behind his desk , and make some note on a pad of the topic which he have to discuss with the head - housekeeper . he write with deliberation . let the woman wait ! 

 suddenly he look up and begin : 

 " you be ill last night , Miss Powler , in the doctor 's hand . but to - day you be up and about . I be amazed to see you at Craven Street . be it wise ? we do not   keep a doctor here for he to be defy . " he smile , to soften his word . weakness again . but he be so absurdly good - natured . " you might easily have a relapse . serious . and then where should we be ? where would the Palace be ? the first duty of everyone on my staff be to keep healthy . there be such a thing as too much zeal , especially with you woman . " 

 be his tone right - the proper mixture of urbanity and severity ? he really must watch over his tongue . that playful phrase which he have use to she last night , about whether her mother know that her daughter be a wicked and deceitful woman - that phrase be silly ; it be mischievous ; it make a wrong atmosphere between employer and employ ; familiarity be a mistake , even with the good of them . she hear a phrase like that , in his accursed nice tone , and naturally she think she can go and do what she like ! 

 Violet answer mildly : 

 " I quite see what you mean sir . but perhaps you do not   know that Dr. Constam send a nurse last night to give I violet ray for my sciatica . and they make I sleep as well , and really when I wake up this morning the sciatica be quite go and I have not   feel it since , not one bit . " she smile , with correct submissiveness , think : " well , what be come over he ? he bring I into his precious hotel , and I be sure I have   work for he . and now he .. ! I be the good one to tell whether I be well enough to work or not . do he take I for one of those hysterical creature who will go on till they drop , simply because they have not   any sense and they think it be grand ? if he do , he be mistaken . still , he be not   go to make I lose my head . and my tone 's perfect . last night he be charming , and to - day he be all nerve . something else have upset he , and I be to bear the brunt of it . all right ! all right ! he will recover . but if he think he can put I in the wrong and make I play the idiot - " 

 " at any rate , " Evelyn go on , after a judicial pause , " there be one thing you ought to have do . you ought to have see the doctor before you get up this morning , and obtain his permission . if you have a doctor in , you must show some respect for he . there be a code , and all sensible people obey it . I wonder what Dr. Constam would have think if he have see you out of bed - again . I know what he think when he hear you would be out of door yesterday . a doctor be somebody . you know what savoir vivre mean . you have not   be practise it . " but he smile once more . 

 " Dr. Constam might not   have be able to come , " Violet argue . 

 " do you ask ? " 

 " no , I do not . " 

 " well then ! " 

 " I do send he a message , " she say , think : " what be all this about code and thing ? and savoir vivre ? he be make a fuss over nothing . I be well , and here I am! .. he be try to be nice . and he be worth work for . I do wish he would stop his lecturing . if this be all he have to say , I might as well go and get on with my business . that day - bed ought to be here soon . he look at you in a nice way . his smile 's nice . every now and then he look a bit like a boy - just for a second . and yet he be so hard about Mr. Ceria ! " she smile , and she feel as if she be know the panjandrum well . 

 Evelyn pore over his note : a formality quite unnecessary , indeed a somewhat puerile showing - off by the man of affair ; for he know perfectly what his next topic be . 

 " now about Ceria . " he pause . 

 " yes , sir ? " 

 at the mere name of Ceria the restive animal in Violet 's mind jibbed and rear . she control it masterfully , and with a calm , superior inward smile . she have come to a very definite decision about Ceria . she have a duty to Ceria , and it be the most important of all her duty . she realise again , almost exultantly , her power over he . she could make Ceria : her relation to he be that of a creative goddess ... unguide , unaide by she , he might well sink into ruin . with her moral help there be hardly any limit to the potentiality of his achievement . he possess all the quality necessary for brilliant success , except one , and that she could and would supply . she would stop at nothing to supply it . 

 she think of he tenderly . she recall all his word , tone , glance hopeful and despairing , smile , gesture , attitude , when he and she have be together . he be innocent of evil , and she would not see he crush . he be in her heart . not that she love he as a woman be suppose to love a man . and yet , so very tender be her thought of he , she do love he , with the soft affection , as a goddess can love a mortal martyrise by fate . he be more to she than anybody or anything in the world . if she could not save and recreate he otherwise she would marry he and take the risk of life with a mysterious and incalculable foreigner , who would not understand she and whom her reason would not understand . but her heart would understand and enfold he . and , for he , she would abandon the dream of a thoroughly english home rule by english habit and custom and ideal , and submit herself to one of those uncomfortable compromise which be an unavoidable consequence of the mixed marriage . she would exist for ever with an essential stranger . she would have hybrid child by he , child who also at moment would be stranger to she , and incomprehensible by her Englishness . she have have glimpse of mix marriage : there be one in Renshaw Street , on which her fretful mother have often make carping comment ; it be the wife there who be foreign , a serious and economical woman ; but the whole street sympathise with the english husband , to whom it attribute a special virtue because he be English . well , a whole street might sympathise with she if circumstance render marriage the only method of carry out her duty to Ceria - she do not   care . and she look at the panjandrum 's maleficent face , and secretly defy he . 

 " I be bind to tell you , " say Evelyn , " I think you be wrong yesterday afternoon . as soon as you get Ceria 's letter you ought to have go straight to Mr. Cousin and tell he you know Ceria be back at home . your first duty be to the hotel . it be not   even as if you be engage to Ceria . personally I do not   think that even that should have make any difference , but I admit the thing might be argue . however , you be not   engage to he . you refuse he , and he be nothing to you . so there be no excuse . I be sure you will agree with I that it be good for I to speak plainly . " 

 " oh yes , sir , " she say with coldness . " I much prefer that . then we know where we be . " 

 " and I must tell you something else . you remember what I say to you last night about Mr. Ceria when you be lie onthat sofa in your room . I abide by it . my opinion have not   change in the least . " he be about to add : " and I intend to act on what I say . " but a new expression on Violet 's feature stop he from finish . a dangerous expression ; it intimidate he ; he fear , not she , but a scene . and he would not have a scene . 

 " but Mr. Ceria be there to - day , work as usual . and he be see Mr. Cousin , " say Violet firmly . 

 " who tell you ? " sharply , like a cross - examine barrister . 

 " he do . on the telephone . " 

 " I be aware that he have see Mr. Cousin , " say Evelyn . " but what be that get to do with it ? naturally if Ceria come back he come back to work . do you expect Mr. Cousin to prevent he from work ? this hotel have to go on function . " Evelyn very much want to say more and to say it with sarcasm ; but again he be intimidate . he proceed , not pause : " and now about Mr. Collifant . before you give order to the people under his control , do you make any attempt to see he ? " 

 " no , sir . I be tell he be engage , and as my business be very urgent - " 

 " but be it very urgent ? even if you have be keep half an hour , would that have matter ? this hotel would not   come to a standstill because of half an hour 's delay in supply an article that nobody have ever hear of before . and you would not   have be keep . Mr. Collifant be only engage with Mr. Cousin , and if Mr. Cousin have have the slight idea that Mr. Collifant be want on urgent business he would have understand at once , and perhaps help too . it be not   as if you do not   know all about the chain of authority . the chain of authority work upwards as well as down . suppose someone come along and give order to one of your floor - housekeeper without a word to you , what would you think ? as a result of your interference Mr. Collifant have give I notice . I have not   accept his notice , but I may have to . now Mr. Collifant be a very good man . " Evelyn be think : " it be true I go to Craven Street intend to have a row with Collifant myself , but she do not   know that and it be get nothing to do with she . it be not   true that he be a very good man , and I do not   care so much if he do leave ; but he be good in some way , and anyhow I be not go to have a lot of woman spread themselves and upset man so that they give notice . I be be very effective with she because I be talk to she so quietly and reasonably ; but I be be firm too , and I shall go on be firm . I can see she be calm down a bit . now with a girl like Gracie you never know . it be quite on the card she will treat Cheddar as she be treat I , and write to I and ask I to forgive she . but I shall not . what be off be off - with I . no , I would not   make it up . and if she come over here to vamp I - she might - well , I do not   know . she have point . it be possible I could tame she . oh , damn ! " he say to Violet : " you see my point , Miss Powler ? " 

 " yes , sir , " Violet answer perfunctorily . she think : 

 " but he do not   give I a word of thank for what I do . I have get the day - bed for they , and nobody else would have get it . I do get thing do . but he say nothing about that . oh no ! no encouragement to do your good in this place . it be all code and rule - red tape . why do he edge away from the subject of Ceria so quick ? I must have Ceria clear up . I tell Ceria positively I would speak to Mr. Orcham and everything would be all right . positively . he must let Ceria alone now he be come back . Ceria 's see Mr. Cousin and he be work and I tell he everything would be all right . can not   the Director see reason ? he simply must see reason . if he do not   - " 

 she be fill with a passionate protectiveness for Ceria . she think of nothing else . there be nothing else , for she , but the salvation of Ceria . her heart and her brain be aflame . she actually feel hot . her hand be dry and hot , and then clammy and hot . but she think : " I will be calm and cool . he be excited himself . you can hear it in his voice . he be only try to be collect . he be pretend , with his nine hotel . but I do not   care if he be boss of nine hundred hotel - he must see reason . " 

 3 . 

 Evelyn say : 

 " you know , more tact , more discretion be need in your work than you appear to realise , Miss Powler . for instance , there be your trouble with Mr. Purkin . however , I will leave that for the present . but I must remind you , though I have   never mention it before , that you do not   succeed in keep the peace with either Miss Venables or Miss Prentiss . both very good in their way . you be put over they , and you could not   keep the peace . I do not   say you do not   try . all I say be you do not   succeed . " he be think : " I always think she have plenty of tact . that be why I bring she here . and now I be accuse she of no tact . well , there it be ! " 

 Violet be shock to the point of utter amazement by the man 's injustice . she think : " never mind . all this be nothing . Ceria 's the only thing that matter . I will not   let he upset I . " and when she do speak , her tone be almost a cooing . she say : 

 " but , really , sir , the trouble with Miss Venables and Miss Prentiss begin with Miss Maclaren . they be jealous . and anyone could understand their be jealous . " 

 " yes , of course , " say Evelyn . " but Miss Maclaren be sicken for her illness . and as for their be jealous - " 

 " and they be still more jealous of I , " she interject quietly . 

 " as I be say , of course they be jealous . it be natural . but do not   you know that jealousy be a very common thing indeed in this place ? I be always meet with it and have to deal with it . and Mr. Cousin too . when we choose a head - housekeeper , even temporarily , we choose she partly because we believe she will be capable of deal satisfactorily with such ordinary little thing as jealousy . we do not   imagine there will not   be any jealousy and the machine will always run smoothly . we know it will not . if it do there would not   be any need for tact and so on . anyone can be tactful when there be nothing to be tactful about . that be so , be not   it ? " he think : 

 " and hang it ! be I be tactful now ? or not ? this ought surely to be a lesson to the girl . " 

 " yes , sir , " Violet reply , still perfunctorily . " I be sorry . " she think : " but you have not   lose Venables - you have   get she at the Majestic . and as for Prentiss , she be a good riddance , and well you know it ! " in the same instant she say aloud : 

 " and what about Mr. Ceria , sir ? " 

 " why ? what about Ceria ? " he think : " what the devil have Ceria to do with she ? " 

 " what be you go to do about he , sir ? you will excuse I ask , but I feel rather responsible . " 

 Evelyn think : 

 " well , I be dash ! do she think she ought to take a hand in run this hotel ? however , I have   calm she down . now be the time to be firm . " he say aloud , with emphasis , and a condescend smile : " I have   tell you I have not   change since last night . and I do not   see that you be responsible - in the least . and even if you be - the managerial policy of this hotel remain . " he think : " yes , I be be hard on Ceria , and all the grill - room staff will be against I . perhaps I ought not   to sack he ; but I have   say it , and I shall stick to it . must ! " 

 some people would say that the panjandrum be not now behave very well . but some people be super - human , whereas Evelyn be only human ; and possibly also his character have be somewhat impaired , under the year - long ordeal of be an autocrat . 

 " well , I think it be very unfair , " Violet exclaim with bitterness unmasked . 

 and her thought correspond exactly with her word . she have no thought of the advisability of restrain herself and keep calm and employ tact or any other such paltry device . she have forget all that ; forget all about prudence and discretion ; she be high above these meanness ; lift to a new plane , the plane of indignant emotion , and heedless of all consequence . she think furiously that the Director be very unfair . 

 as for Evelyn , he be tremendously startle . he admit to himself with disgust that her previous demeanour have deceive he into a misjudgment . 

 " now please , " he begin . " please do not   - " 

 Violet jump up from her chair , and her coat fall a little away from one shoulder , and her bag and glove fall to the floor . her eye be on fire , her neck flush ; her mouth be half open for an explosion . 

 " she be not so bad look . she be magnificent . she be beautiful . " the thought flash through one part of Evelyn 's mind and be go . but in another part of his mind glow dully and steadily the thought : " damn these woman ! they be all alike . all . I have an idea she be not   like the rest . but she be . she be not   the girl I take she for . she be somebody else . damn she ! " 

 he look at she and look away , smile awkwardly . 

 Violet say , her voice rise till Evelyn begin to be afraid that Miss Cass would overhear from next door : 

 " last night I speak the truth , Mr. Orcham . I do not   know why , except that I want to be honest with you . it be waste . I might have tell you the tale that I tell to Mr. Fontenay to - day , and you would have believe it . and I wish to God I have ! everything would have be all right then . but I tell you the truth . and you have   take advantage of it . I say it be very unfair , but it be bad than that . it be simply frightful . frightful ! " 

 her voice resound in the hard , masculine room . Evelyn be dumbfound , and more than a little overwhelmed . she be not   like the rest of they . she be like a fury . she be transform from a head - housekeeper into a fury . she move towards his desk and stand above he , shoot angry dart down on he from her blaze eye . Mr. Cyril Purkin have never see she in such a state , nor her sister Susan . but a couple of recalcitrant laundry - maid have see she in such a state once ; and her mother once , after a whole Sunday of complaining , and the spectacle have cure Mrs. Powler of public lamentation for quite a month . 

 Evelyn be shake by the exposure of the woman in she . sex will out . but he be not daunt for more than a few second . the exposure of the woman in she suddenly excite he , and lead to the exposure of the man . he have just be preach in his offensive male way that anyone could be tactful when there be nothing to be tactful about . and now - he care no more for tact than Violet do . 

 " Miss Powler , " he angrily exclaim , " will you oblige I by leave the room ? " 

 " yes , " she answer . " I will . and please take my notice to leave , Mr. Orcham . you would not   take Mr. Collifant 's , but you will take mine . it will not   matter to you . I be only ' temporary ' . " she laugh . 

 he sink slowly into his chair , think , aghast : 

 " this will not   do . this be absurd . Tact ! Tact ! I be clever than she be . I bring she into the hotel , and it would never do for I to let she go after a row . there would be too much talk . besides , she be a first - rate housekeeper , and they be rare . she be rather marvellous in a temper . I have not   a notion of it . though she be awful ! Mrs. O'Riordan be nothing compare to she . no , nor Gracie . she be kiss Leo Cheddar before dinner . Tact ! " but his interest in Gracie have suddenly diminish . he recall a phrase in her letter - something about it be too early for he to judge yet whether he be in love with she or not . 

 he say : 

 " please sit down . " and , as she hesitate , " sit down . " 

 Authority . the man dominate the girl , bring she to her sens . 

 Violet sit down . in her obedience he feel a glow of masculine conceit . he be happy . she be a woman , be she ? well , he be a man . why do not   she burst into tear ? he hat woman to cry . but now he want she to cry . he would have be happy if she have cry . she do not cry . 

 " Miss Powler , " he say very quietly , " people like you and I can not   behave in this style . it be not worthy of we . and really you can not   give I notice all in a minute because I do not   manage my hotel as you think I ought to . it be not right . now I want to suggest to you that you withdraw your notice , and let us forget this . you may think quite differently to - morrow . and perhaps I shall . " 

 a silence . 

 " very well , " say Violet . " I withdraw my notice . " 

 " thank you . I admire you for do that . it be what I expect from you . " 

 Violet pick up her bag and glove . 

 " but , " she say , gaze at he with face avert , " when you say you may think differently to - morrow , do you mean about Mr. Ceria ? " 

 " I make no promise . I can promise nothing , " Evelyn answer firmly . 

 Violet say : 

 " I will stay on . I will do my good for the hotel . but thing can never be the same between we again . good afternoon . " 

 content 
 chapter 69 

 EASY - CHAIR 

 in three month much happen . though each event take by itself may seem small enough , the totality of event always amount to a considerable change in the world . it be forenoon on an early day in April . in the world of the Imperial Palace much have happen since the early day in January when Evelyn have return from Paris to London to discover the true domestic explanation of the mystery of Ceria 's disappearance and to quarrel with Violet Powler . 

 Dr. Constam 's vindictive hope be realise : Tessa have have twin , thus exceed the arrangement make for her delivery by Gracie . Miss Maclaren have surprisingly reach full convalescence , and have leave the St. James 's Hospital . but she would never resume duty at the Palace , for the reason that , the origin of all her trouble have be fashionably diagnose as dental , she have catch the fancy of her dentist , a middle - aged Scotsman and a widower , and be engage to marry he . Old Mowlem have retire from the revolve door of the great entrance - hall , and in some remote spot secret and withdraw be hold converse with a spirit in the form of a literary ' ghost , ' who have undertake the job of put his invaluable reminiscence into bright journalistic English ; the work be about to appear serially in a morning paper , and popular success have be predict for it on its appearance in book - form . Skinner have be promote from the Queen Anne entrance to the main entrance in Birdcage Walk , and be now head hall - porter of the Palace . and already there be page - boy in the Palace who have never hear of old Mowlem . Reyer , no long night - manager , have be promote to a high position in the Minerva at Cannes . Mr. Cyril Purkin have effect a love - match with a superior nurse - maid just young enough to be his daughter , and be spend himself and his substance , but not neglect the Laundry , in a vivacious attempt to satisfy her appetite for pleasure . 

 and as if these thing do not suffice to prove that the earth revolve , the Craven Street premise , not under the dominion of Mr. Collifant , be be enlarge to thrice their former size , and be supply some hundred of new carpet to the Majestic , which need they . 

 but perhaps the most sentimentally interesting occurrence of the three month be the death of a housekeeper who have have charge of old Dennis Dover 's home and whom father Dennis have quite gratuitously assume to be immortal . a very severe blow for father Dennis . decide that he could never risk a new , unfamiliar housekeeper , he have instal himself in a small suite at the Palace , where he have live as a child . the suite be not the suite of his infancy , but it bear the same number , and for its number he have choose it . on the other hand , among the moveless permanency , Violet remain at her post ; Ceria , smile again , remain at his post ; and Perosi at his ; and Beatrice Noakes at her . 

 Father Dennis , much more than three month old , be now sit uneasily in an easy - chair in his suite on Fourth . with he be Sir Henry Savott , Lord Watlington , and Mr. John H. Harbour . these four man - not exclude even father Dennis - recke little or nothing of the event above enumerate . their thought be centre upon an affair which they regard as surpassingly momentous . the joint work of Sir Henry Savott and Sebastien Smiss have be complete ; every minor , as well as every major , contract have be sign ; a prospectus have be draft , re - drafted and finally settle ; the prospectus have become a chief ornament of the financial advertising column of the principal newspaper ; the Orcham International Hotels Company be before the public ; the List of application for share have be open that morning , and the four man in father Dennis 's sitting - room have just have telephonic information that the List have be close at noon , the share have be apply for several time over in about a couple of hour . success ! brilliant success ! success surpass all hope ! three of the man be happy and show their happiness . Sir Henry Savott display his tooth with glee because he have unload vast responsibility on to the invest public , and still more because he have receive a cable from Paris to say that his daughter Gracie expect to be a mother . Mr. Harbour - unaware that to an anxious Sir Henry he have appear with his financial backing like an unexpected angel from heaven - Mr. Harbour carry his abdomen joyously to and fro in the room because , for a sum trifle to he , he be destine to be a notable figure in the Europe of luxury hotel , and still more because he be free for at least a month of Mrs. Harbour - to whose uncompromise puritanism nevertheless he owe his personal introduction to Evelyn Orcham and to the Europe of luxury hotel . Lord Watlington , perch nervously restless on a piano - stool , be happy because he be once again intimately connect with a triumphant flotation , and still more because he too have grow financially intimate with the titanic Harbour , and perceive in this friendship prospect of new and large fortune and an increase hide influence upon the stock - market of two hemisphere ; Lord Watlington have not invent a cigarette , but he know himself to be a cleverer man than the stout , democratic cigarette - king . 

 Father Dennis , on the score of the Orcham Merger , be neither happy nor unhappy ; he be indifferent , for he suspect that at a pace ever quick he be steadily near the frontier beyond which merger lose all their exciting interest . and he be definitely unhappy on the score of his easy - chair . it be the easy chair in the room , but for old Dennis it be not easy . he have frequently complain of the uneasiness of the Palace easy - chair . he have go so far as to assert that there be not a single truly easy - chair in the whole hotel . the ground for this criticism lie in the peculiar conformation of the low part of old Dennis 's backbone . he now sit and grunt and grumble and squeak , try rather ineffectually to be cheerful and benevolent , try to pretend to himself that the Orcham flotation , not the easy - chair question , be the major question of the day . 

 the four man be wait the arrival of Evelyn , who be strangely absent himself . after all , he be the head of the Merger , and ought surely to have be with his colleague on this sublime occasion . they think more than they speak , and the talk be spasmodic . Sir Henry Savott be think about his unborn grandchild , who would carry on the family if not the name , and about his profit , actual and potential , from his own child , the Orcham Merger . and both Lord Watlington and Mr. Harbour be think about the Savott profit . everything have be make clear , all the card have be put on the table again and again . yet Lord Watlington and Mr. Harbour could conceive way in which the astute Sir Henry might have get gain which no enquiry could ever disclose ; and that possibly the capital of the Orcham International Hotels Company be great than it ought to have be . but also Lord Watlington and Mr. Harbour have doubt as to this , and at moment secretly admit that peradventure they be be unjust to the sole parent of the Merger . 

 Father Dennis , suddenly cease pretence , interrupt the various reflection of the trio of cham with a hoarse , whisper : 

 " I be damned if I do not   try a gridiron ! " and with a frown of exasperation he hoist himself to his foot . 

 everybody assume a pained expression of sympathy , and everyone think : " the old man 's get past it . he will not   be Chairman of the new Board for long . " 

 " but , my dear Dover ! " Sir Henry almost coo . " let I find you another easy - chair . let I telephone to Miss Powler . she will discover one . " 

 " you may be able to sell pink for blue , my lad , " say old Dennis with enigmatic , kindly grimness , " but you will not   find what I call an easy - chair in this hotel . I ought to know . who be Miss Powler ? " 

 " head - housekeeper . " Savott show a lenient surprise at the question . 

 " oh ! she ! never set eye on she . do not   know she . " 

 " but I do , " say Sir Henry gently . " may I use your telephone , my dear Chairman ? " that morning , so persuade be he of the goodness of God , he feel ready to obey all the precept of the Sermon on the Mount , even the simple . 

 2 . 

 Violet be eat her lunch alone , with " the hotel - keeper " prop before she , in the housekeeper ' section of the staff restaurant below stair , when in dash young Agatha , who be only convinced that she be do her duty if she be do it in a hurry . 

 " please , they have   telephone for you to go up to Mr. Dennis Dover 's room at once . it be Sir Henry Savott who ' phone . " 

 the head - housekeeper , now not ' temporary , ' drop her spoon and fork into the vestige of a sweet and , pick up " the hotel - keeper , " leave the table . 

 this , she think , must be truly important business , for on a day so important only important business would be allow to arise for discussion . the whole staff of the hotel be more or less excited by the flotation of the Merger . some be uplifted , they know not why ; other go about murmur that thing would never be the same again in the Palace , and their excitement take the form of qualm concern the future , qualm which be sharpen rather than allay by a vague report that wealthy invest people be tumble over one another in a fierce struggle to get hold of share . many member of the staff have apply for share , with a promise from that influential gentleman Mr. Smiss of preferential treatment . among they be Oldham , who still retain possession of a little more than half of his thousand pound . 

 Violet , whose business it be to know everything on the Floors , know that several of the very high personage be with Mr. Dennis Dover in his sitting - room . no doubt Mr. Orcham among they . why have not Mr. Orcham himself telephone , instead of leave Sir Henry to summon she ? the answer seem obvious to Violet . for three month she have have no contact with Mr. Orcham . only twice have she even see he , by chance in the corridor , on which occasion they have exchange non - committal salutation . once she have be on the point of enter Mr. Dover 's suite to enquire after his comfort , but the news that Mr. Orcham be with he have alter her purpose , and she have depute the official mission to Mrs. Oulsnam . 

 all her dealing have be with Mr. Cousin , next upwards in the chain of authority . her relation with Mr. Cousin be admirably perfect . his demeanour , like her own , be always reserve , and yet friendly . he speak sense , and he listen to sense ; and when he have decide he have decide . why therefore should she ever have have speech with Mr. Orcham ? Mr. Orcham be beyond she in the firmament . everybody be aware that Mr. Orcham have be more and more withdraw from the actual daily overseeing of the Palace . Mr. Cousin have tell she that Mr. Orcham now have other and great matter to attend to , and the fact be evident . 

 nevertheless Violet , with her realistic feminine unreason , be convince that , but for their calamitous affray , Mr. Orcham would have continue to meet she , despite his new preoccupation with eight other hotel . she appreciate Mr. Cousin 's adroitness in make excuse for Mr. Orcham 's aloofness without seem to make excuse . a man who would gratuitously smooth the rough face of thing be the man to please she ; for she too have the instinct thus to smooth . but she see through the adroitness . she have at length definitely relinquish the hope of contact with Mr. Orcham , who have introduce she into the Palace , and whose protégée she have once be ! 

 her private meditation have often be sombre , especially in the night . but she be seldom uncheerful , even to herself , for long . the figure of Mr. Orcham , with his irregular tooth and his sudden funny movement and tone and phrase , have be her original inspiration to work hard for the hotel . the inspiration be weaken ; but not her ardour . she have develop a passion for the welfare and the efficiency of the Palace . she study its organisation day and evening . she maintain a bright acquaintance with head of department . she be ready to be of use to anybody and everybody . she know everybody by name . out of the Palace she be like a fish out of water , and her parent notice this , critically . Mr. Powler have permit himself to suggest that she be ' get morbid ' about the Palace , with her late arrival in Renshaw Street and her early departure therefrom . 

 she have quietly ignore the cautious complaint . and sometimes she would relate with pride how her hint for the betterment of the working of the hotel have be soon or later act upon . for instance , as to the hour of the housekeeper . after several floor - housekeeper have be eliminate , in accordance with Mac 's plan , an extra one have be engage , and a completely new system of housekeeping surveillance devise .   she see the hidden , active hand of Mr. Orcham guide the revolutionary change . or at least he have approve , while give no overt sign .   to have mention this at Renshaw Street be one of her mistake . naturally her parent have ask how it come about , if hour be short , that she be never free of the hotel . question which she answer but lamely . 

 on the way to obey the summon , she call in at her room to titivate . Mac 's photograph have vanish , and the wall of the parlour have a forlorn air . she must buy some picture , and deliberately make the place a home . for it be to be her home for ever and ever . but be it ? why have she be summon ? do the high personage intend to transfer she to some other hotel more in need than the Palace of her service ? probably . she feel flattered , but sad . still , if she be invite to leave the Palace she would leave it ; she be a soldier in the army , and an invitation be a command ; she be in the hotel - world for life . 

 there be one satisfaction : she know that Ceria be secure . Mr. Orcham have yield there . not that she be sentimentally interested in Ceria . she have consistently keep Ceria at a proper distance . she have swear to save Ceria , and she have save he . the Ceria - Violet account be balance and closed and her role of creative goddess to he be do . if he continue to sigh for she - well , it could not   be help . she would marry no foreigner , nor any man whom she be not gloriously in love with . she have see love glorious on the face of couple in Battersea Park on Sunday evening in the summer . her conception of love be more negative than positive ; she conceive it as an emotion utterly unlike the tepid excitement which during a few week she have experience in the society of Mr. Cyril Purkin . 

 she enter the lobby of father Dennis 's suite without knock , and then knock at the sitting - room door . no sound of talk within . well accustomed to introduce herself to all manner of celebrity and notoriety , male and female , title and untitled , plain and picturesque , haughty and genial , in the factitious privacy of their temporary home , she have lose such trifling nervousness as have ever trouble she . but she be nervous now , not because of the prestige of the personage to be interview , not even because of the suppose gravity of the interview ; rather because Mr. Orcham would be one of the high personage . she knock again . 

 " come in . " 

 she open the door , and the next instant be in the midst of great man . but Mr. Orcham be not among they . Mr. Dover she have see once at a distance , Mr. Harbour she have once long ago speak to while placate the hardly placable Mrs. Harbour . Lord Watlington she recognise from his photograph in the paper . Sir Henry of course she know . Father Dennis give she the benevolent smile of an old fellow who have finish with woman except as a spectacle agreeable to behold . Lord Watlington ignore she , look out of the window with boredom on his face . Mr. Harbour be ready to be sympathetic . Sir Henry surprisingly step forward and shake hand , say that he be glad to see she . she smile and bow . 

 " Miss Powler , " say Sir Henry , take charge , " you know the suite my daughter have here last year - I forget the number . " 

 " 365 , " she inform he . 

 neither of they know that whereas Sir Henry be refer to Gracie 's first visit , Violet be refer to her second , of which Sir Henry have no knowledge . but on each occasion she have have the same suite . 

 " by the way , you will be interested to hear that my daughter be expect a baby . " Sir Henry could not contain the great news of his approach grandfatherhood ; it come forth with a rush , of its own volition . 

 " I be so glad ! " say Violet . her eye say far more than the word . she really be glad , if only because of Sir Henry 's ingenuous delight . 

 Lord Watlington 's boredom seem to be intensify . 

 " yes , I shall tell she I have   tell you and how pleased you be ! well , in the bedroom there be a peculiar sort of easy - chair . " 

 " I know the one you mean . " 

 " could you get it for we ? this one here " - he indicate the empty chair - " do not   suit Mr. Dover , and I think that that one would . could you get it for we ? " Sir Henry 's attitude be the attitude of an owner of the Palace : at any rate he be the creator of the Merger ! 

 " certainly , Sir Henry . " 

 " now ? " 

 " certainly . " 

 " thank you . " 

 Violet make a quick exit . in the lobby she laugh , partly from relief at the absence of Mr. Orcham , and partly at the comical difference between what she have be anticipate and what have happen . steel to listen to a proposition unpalatable but epoch - making for she , she have be ask to supply an easy - chair ! Withal , she feel some twinge of disappointment . the spirited heroine in she would have prefer Mr. Orcham to be in the room   so that their relation might be define after a long period of indefiniteness , even have the result be unpleasant . she always do like to know where she stand with anybody . and the ambitious , adventurous heroine in she regret that no fresh adventure await she . why have they send for the head - housekeeper to procure a mere easy - chair ? clearly because despatch be desire . she slip downstairs to Third , and abruptly enlist a valet en route . the suite comprise room 365 , 6 , 7 , and 8 be , she know , occupy but the visitor might not be in . she knock at the bedroom door . no answer . she enter . the room be empty . 

 " here ! " she say to the valet . " pull that easy - chair out , will you , and take it upstairs in the lift to Mr. Dover 's sitting - room . get Fred to help you . I will be up there before you . " 

 while the chair be leave , the door between the bedroom and the bathroom open , and a magnificent dame in full street attire begin a vex enquiry . 

 " excuse I , my lady . this chair have to be repair . I will see that you have another one at once . I think there be nobody in . " 

 Violet follow the chair . in Mr. Dover 's lobby , in front of the shut door of his drawing - room , she wait for the easy - chair and the valet . 

 " this be the chair you mean , be not   it , Sir Henry ? " she say , have open the door . 

 3 . 

 Evelyn have a rendezvous with the other in father Dennis 's room - choose because the old man have now reduce the fatigue transport of his large and heavy frame to the least possible - but he have be delay , by an encounter with a man much old than father Dennis - Lord Levering . 

 the panjandrum ought to have be cheerfully happy . he be not . the flotation of the Merger be obviously a triumph of finance . Savott , Smiss , and - on the purely publicity side - Immerson have employ the fine technique . the name of Orcham resound everywhere in the press . Miss Cass spend much of her time in decline for her chief the specious allurement of interviewer and photographer . the chief 's salary would have be consider high even in the United States , where accord to report no official worth his salt receive for his salt less than fifty thousand dollar a year . and his commission on profit might well double his salary . but he be uneasy about the profit , and he falter before the immensity of his responsibility . he , not Sir Henry Savott , be the Merger . without he , nothing ! without that mysterious little contrivance which he carry in his head and call his brain , the structure of the tremendous Merger would almost certainly tumble to piece . frightening thought ! the prospectus of the new Company be a work of art , the figure in it dazzle , the list of Directors majestically impressive . but Evelyn whisper to himself : 

 " what have all that to do with managing hotel ? there be not   a soul on the Board who know the first thing about hotel , except Smiss and I . I would not   put sixpence on any of the foreign director . except Smiss and I all of they be manipulator of finance , parasite on the industry , perhaps necessary parasite , but parasite . " 

 and he have recently visit the Escurial at Madrid , the management of which have engender apprehension in his anglo - Saxon mind . apparently the Director of the Escurial believe that if he rise at midday he be apply himself seriously to business . 

 far , the panjandrum have just receive from John Crump , secretary of the Imperial Palace Hotel Company , the draft of the agenda of a meeting of I.P.H. shareholder , at which be to be pass a resolution for the winding - up of the Company ! to initial the draft agenda be like order a funeral . the I. P. H. Company would cease to exist , and the Imperial Palace , once a unique individuality , would sink to be a mere unit in a motley herd of hotel . not to speak of the little Wey Hotel , which in his late youth have be all that Evelyn rule in the world . 

 Grave matter ; grave happening ! and yet they disturb he less than another development which have hit he in the face that same morning . he have see Savott early and receive the news about Gracie from the excited grandfather - to - be . Savott have proudly show he the cable : " darling daddy , I be go to have a baby . gracie . " there must be a genuine attachment between these two , despite the strange separateness of their life . Evelyn picture Gracie in the swell condition of Tessa , whom he have twice glimpse . she would be a handful for a man , especially for a dilettante such as Leo Cheddar . and Sir Henry would be buzz around the pair like a whole swarm of wasp . Sir Henry have already announce his firm resolve that that invaluable baby should be bear on english soil . Evelyn envy Leo . not that he be in love with Gracie or have any regret concern his loss of she . he have no regret , and he be not in love . the conflagration in his heart have die out as rapidly as it have flare up : like a fire of old newspaper . but it have leave he with a black and empty grate ; the great conception of marriage , companionship , quarrel , domestic anxiety , procreation , parturition have be implant in he , and then sterilise so that it could not grow . he be solitary , continuously dissatisfied . he be the busy man in London , and he , really , have nothing to do . he want comfort , and none could comfort he . his secret be still his secret , and Gracie 's . of course he have confide in nobody . he have a few friend , include particularly father Dennis ; but he could not bring himself to confide in any of they . he be live on dust - sandwich , and the dust be his extraordinary material and vocational success . 

 this be Evelyn when by chance he meet Lord Levering in the bill - office , where the venerable , lusty millionaire be discharge his last bill , to an accompaniment of forthright remark on everything . the session of the Licensing Commission be finish , but no date have be promise for the Report . both the antagonist have work hard and tirelessly , and in the course of month have become superficially quite intimate . also they have learn to admire each other . 

 " well , my friend , " the teetotal millionaire accost Evelyn . " you have   make the profit - you have   skin I alive with these damned bill of yours - but I have   win . " 

 he speak gleefully and loudly , never care who might overhear . the correctly dress bill - clerk , lean over mahogany and brass , be thrill to hear , but they know their duty of feigned deafness and practise it . 

 " well , " say Evelyn . " I have my shareholder to think of ... so you think you will win ? " 

 " I do not   think . I know . and so do you , sir , " insist the snowy , shaggy , cold - eyed disputant . " I have   be read report of parliamentary Commissions for sixty year , and they be always sit on fence and weigh pro and con in a balance . the present gang of hair - splitter will make a lot of recommendation with a lot of reserve , and the result will not   be worth a fig to you . and even if they give you everything you would get nothing , because nobody will read the Report , and no party will touch it . too dangerous for vote - catcher to meddle with . it will be postpone again and again until it fall to bit . it will be in every king 's Speech for half a century , and then it just will not   be . I will tell you something - you will soon be old enough to learn thing . they say that what England stand for be justice . infernal nonsense ! english justice be hang . what England stand for be the status quo . and that be what I stand for , and that be what you have   be up against . but you have   put up a good fight , Orcham . I have   smash you to smithereen , but I like ye . I be leave this afternoon . come in and say good - bye to Lady Levering . woman love good - bye . " 

 Evelyn laugh gaily . Lord Levering radiate gaiety at all time , save when he radiate terror . but the panjandrum be think : 

 " he say I know he would win . and I daresay I do . " 

 the admission do not depress he . what be Licensing Reform to a man without personal interest ? and yet a few month ago , when his personal interest be as negligible as now , he have be capable of passion about Licensing Reform , and could violently curse D.O.R.A. to hell . 

 Upstairs he see two valet manouvre an easy - chair out of Mr. Dover 's small lobby into the corridor , and he hear a woman 's voice : " do not   forget to put that in the bedroom you take the other one from - at once . " Violet Powler 's voice ! 

 " what be all this ? " he demand . 

 " Miss Powler , sir , " reply one of the valet , and explain what be be do . 

 Violet have stoop to smooth out a crease in the lobby carpet , which have be derange by the passage of the chair . she straighten herself and beheld Evelyn . 

 " oh , good morning , Mr. Orcham , " she greet he in a light , friendly tone , just as though there have be no sort of estrangement between they during the whole of the past three month . 

 the tone startle Violet as much as it startle Evelyn . the fact be that she have use it without think and before she know what she have do . the unexpected sight of he have somehow draw it out of her subconscious being . abash , she hesitate one instant and then go into the room , from which she have just come . 

 Evelyn , who be in the outer doorway , hesitate more than an instant . to he she seem to be wonderfully at ease . her habit of speech to he have always be deferential but never humble . there be perhaps more of the equalitarian in her attitude towards authority than in that of any other member of the staff , except Mr. Cousin and the redoubtable Rocco . Evelyn like this demeanour , which she have exaggerate only on the unique occasion of their brief quarrel . he like to think that she be incapable of the kowtow , and that she regard the difference between they as purely official , not in the least a human difference . if he be democratic by reasoned conviction , she be democratic by instinct . 

 what do her tone imply ? it must imply , he reflect , that whereas he have be nourish a grievance and some resentment , she have not . she have forget ; woman could forget . he would forget . his mood be change ; he feel happy , or less unhappy . he have have a glimpse of her expression - that characteristic air of be ready to consider benevolently and sympathetically any proposition that be put to she . in her rather high cheek - bone there be a suggestion of self - reliance and individual power . her official frock be conspicuously smart , and she carry it , and herself , with dignity . of her method and deed as head - housekeeper he have full knowledge from Cousin , who , while never actually praise she , subtly disclose his opinion that she be an improvement on Miss Maclaren in style , and on Mrs. O'Riordan in tranquil temper . Evelyn have never say anything to Cousin about the quarrel . as his relation with Gracie be hide , so be his brawl with Miss Powler . 

 well , the estrangement be apparently end . he loathe estrangement either outside or inside the hotel . yes , he be relieve , and admit his relief . he do not think of Miss Powler as a miracle of enterprise efficiency in hotel - housekeeping , as the woman who have learn her job more quickly than any woman ever do in all the history of the Palace . not at all . he think of she as the girl to whom one midnight he have impulsively offer a cigarette , and whose mere demeanour or way of exist have comfort and soothe he when his nerve be on edge . several time he have regret offer she a cigarette . now he be glad that he have offer the cigarette . he pass into father Dennis 's sitting - room . 

 4 . 

 the old man be test the chair . Violet bend over it from behind , and be apparently try to peer between the sitter 's back and the back of the chair . Mr. Harbour and Sir Henry stand near , spectator absorb in the operation of fit the chair to the man . Lord Watlington be still perch on the stool , restless and impatient . 

 " be that any well , do you think , Mr. Dover ? " Violet ask . 

 Father Dennis whisper hoarsely : 

 " I will say this . it be not bad than the other torture - rack . yes , I believe it be well . " 

 " it seem well for the small of your back . but if it be not   I will have the back re - stuff for you to - day . I will have it do in the workshop here , Mr. Dover . " 

 " yes . you be very kind , " Mr. Dover squeak and growl . " and while it be be do I be to lie on the floor , I suppose . " he twist his head round and smile at the head - housekeeper . 

 " oh ! Mr. Dover . I will promise to find you something soft than the floor . " 

 Violet laugh . the other two smile , but not Lord Watlington . Evelyn smile . no one give attention to he . Violet might have glance at he for confirmation of her offer . she do not . 

 " I think it will do , " father Dennis whisper . 

 Violet , unaware of the permanent trouble in his vocal chord , assume that he have a very sore throat . 

 " it be not   easy to tell right away , " she say . " if it be not   just what it ought to be , will you get someone to telephone I , and I will come up . " 

 " a cushion would do , anyhow , " Lord Watlington remark , staccato . 

 " only woman like cushion , " say Violet , with a new variety of smile , half humorous and half propitiatory . 

 Sir Henry Savott laugh ; he be pleased at his success in suggest a particular chair . 

 " good morning then , Mr. Dover , " say Violet . " if I do not   hear I shall take it it be all right . " 

 " thank you , my dear , " father Dennis grunt . Violet embrace the rest of the party in one bow , and , pass close by Evelyn , leave the room . 

 " Evelyn , " father Dennis demand , " be that the young woman you take from the Laundry ? " 

 " yes . why ? " 

 " nothing . only she be so damned like a lady , nobody could tell the difference . I could not . " 

 " her father 's a town - traveller - in proprietary food , " say Evelyn drily . 

 " marry above he , I expect . " 

 " no . I have   see they both . " 

 Father Dennis say : 

 " then he may be one of those nature 's gentleman you hear so much about . I have   never meet one myself . " 

 " why ! " say Mr. Harbour . " I say to my wife when she come in to see we before we leave for the Majestic last time - you remember - " the cigarette - king grin privately to Evelyn - " I say to Mrs. Harbour that she would be an asset anywhere . " 

 " yes , " Evelyn concur negligently . 

 Lord Watlington jump up , unable to wait long , and burst out : 

 " I can buy the Splendide at Brussels for a million franc . I stay there two night last week . what about it ? " 

 " but it be sell , " say Sir Henry . 

 " I know that . it be for sale again . that be all . " 

 " be not   that enough to make we not want it ? " say Evelyn , control his astonishment . 

 he have casually improvise the possibility of include the Splendide in the Merger month ago in Paris to give colour to his story of a project journey to Brussels . and in the meantime nobody have even mention the Splendide to he . Savott must have perfunctorily mention it to Lord Watlington and then forget it . 

 Lord Watlington give a little gesture of dissatisfaction ; but he check it , and say very quietly : 

 " but listen here , Evelyn . it be you who speak to Henry about it . " 

 " yes . but I hear thing afterwards that put I off . " 

 Lord Watlington throw up his hand . 

 strange how fib return to the fibber after many day ! 

 " we have   just have a ' phone message to say that the list have be close , Evelyn , " say Sir Henry . 

 " I have one too , " Evelyn answer lightly , as though such news be naught , as though the absence of such news would have surprise he . he add : " and I be tell that letter of allotment will open at a premium of one and a half . " 

 " who be the prophet ? " 

 " Immerson . not that he would agree he be a prophet . he say he know . and I bet he do . he be very much in with one or two Stock Exchange clerk . " 

 the conversation droop . the fact be that the news , the large , the enormous general success , render all embroider comment otiose . there it be ! the five man fall into an anticlimax of contented exhaustion . Evelyn 's sense of happiness increase . the prospect of the immense labour which lie before he be now far less intimidating than half an hour ago , even a quarter of an hour ago . he do not examine himself to discover why . he have always be averse to self - examination . and as he sit there with his lounge companion in the triumph he be more averse to it than ever . he , and all of they - except old Dover - have many urgent call and task , but that day be to be celebrate in lethargy . 

 " Say , Evelyn ! " Lord Watlington , who have be walk to and fro , suddenly wake from a reverie and break the silence . " what do you hear about the splendide to put you off it ? " 

 Fibs breed fib . the fibber have to improvise again . Evelyn improvise with a very careless disregard for convincingness . Lord Watlington scowl . 

 " let we go down and have some lunch , " whisper father Dennis . 

 issue from the lip of the venerable Chairman of the Orcham International Hotels Company , the suggestion amount to a command . the party rise , some hungry , some welcome the meal as a distraction to pass the time . but Lord Watlington say : 

 " can not   lunch . I have   get to go . " 

 Savott wink at Evelyn . they both guess that his lordship 's refusal to lunch be merely the sign of a vexation which would disappear before the day be out . the peer have take a fancy for the splendide , and Evelyn 's negligent dismissal of the fancy irk his haughty pride as a great creative financier . 

 5 . 

 the other four lunch in a corner , but a prominent corner , of the restaurant , under the most assiduous vigilance of Cappone himself . Evelyn have now become a recognise figure in the public room of the Palace ; and the other three man be current celebrity , the cigarette - king not least . as the restaurant gradually fill , the table of panjandrum grow to be more and more the target of inquisitive eye . visitor nudge one another , lean together , whisper , and in the game of chatter and small - talk he win who have the large supply of secret information , authentic or invent , concern the unexampled success of the flotation of the Merger . the flotation indeed have enliven the sedate restaurant in such a degree that it begin to rival the free conviviality of Ceria 's grill - room . and the observed table , be human , be not ill - pleased by the shameless curiosity which it excite . 

 Evelyn be the first to depart , excuse himself on the plea of multitudinous , press correspondence . the correspondence be a fact , but the excuse be a white fib . he go straight to the bookstall in the entrance - hall . this now openly acknowledge prince of the hotel - world be in a reality a child . he want to see what prominence the early edition of the evening paper give to the flotation of the Merger in their financial column . he buy , and pay for , the three paper which monopolise the nightly allowance of print information for seven million people , and put they under his arm to examine in his office . then he see , well display , a slim volume in a green and yellow jacket cubistically design , with the title : " sensation and idea . " 

 " hello ! " say he to the clerk in charge of the stall . " what be this ? " 

 the clerk murmur confidentially : 

 " there be no name to it , Mr. Orcham . but it be by Sir Henry Savott 's daughter , Mrs. Cheddar . that be why I have   get a few copy . " 

 " oh ! " say Evelyn , with a sardonic inflection . " who tell you it be by Mrs. Cheddar ? " 

 " the publisher 's traveller , sir . he call here on purpose . " 

 " and do you tell everyone ? " 

 " well , not everyone , sir . " 

 " any demand for it ? " 

 " some , sir . Miss Powler buy a copy yesterday . " 

 " do she ! I may as well tell you you can not   sell a copy to I - I have   read it . have you ? " 

 " yes , sir . " 

 " and what do you think of it ? " 

 " well , sir , between ourselves I do not   really believe there be much chance for it . it be rather queer . some people will not   quite like it . I have to be very careful in recommend it . " 

 " that be right , " say Evelyn , and walk away . 

 he feel a desire to possess himself of Gracie 's book , but be mysteriously inhibit from do so . at any rate he would not buy it in the hotel . he have know for several day that it be out , from somewhat sensational newspaper advertisement . but he have think : " I have   read it . I do not   want to buy it . " the last statement be still another of his fib . 

 so Violet have buy a copy ! well , why not ? possibly she have learn at second - hand through gossip of the hotel bookstall - clerk that Gracie have publish a book . and have she not serve in Sir Henry 's house and be acquaint with Gracie as a big girl ? and have she not meet Gracie again in the affair of Tessa ? her purchase of the volume might be a proof only of curiosity . nevertheless Evelyn find pleasure in the alternative theory that Miss Powler have a taste for literature . 

 he enter his office quite gaily , refuse - so eager be he to scan the three newspaper - to be delay by a Miss Cass exuding question about correspondence . he see on his desk a solitary letter , unstamped . at the top of the envelope he read : 

 " private . from Miss Violet Powler . " as regard Miss Violet Powler , two thing have definitely lodge themselves in his mind : father Dennis 's remark that you could not   tell the difference between Violet and a lady . and the cigarette - king 's single word ' Asset . ' Asset , asset , asset , he keep repeat . he have always divide woman into asset and liability , and for he , as for most man , the second category contain many more name than the first . 

 he tear the envelope , think : " it must have cost the excellent Cass something pretty stiff not to open this ! " 

 " DEAR MR . ORCHAM . I feel I should apologise to you for my behaviour in your office last January . I ought to have apologise before . please accept my sincere excuse . your respectfully , V. M. POWLER . " 

 " dash the girl ! " he think . " I do not   want she to apologise ! I hate be apologise to ! who would take any notice of anything say by a woman in a temper ? dash the girl ! and why the devil do she sign ' Yours respectfully ' ? " he be delighted with the letter . 

 content 
 chapter 70 

 the DUNCANNON AFFAIR 

 " be that Malpass ? the Director speak . " Evelyn be in pyjamas and dressing - gown , in his castle . the time be 3 a.m. 

 " yes , sir , " be the answer from Malpass down in the entrance - hall . he be the new night - manager , who have replace Mr. Reyer ; a former reception - clerk , he owe his rise to a suggestion to Mr. Cousin from Adolphe , the reception - manager 

 " have you get the key of the bookstall cupboard ? " 

 " yes , sir . " 

 " just open it . you will see a book with a funny cover call ' Sensations and idea . ' send it up to my room by the liftman , will you ? and be sure to put a check - slip for it in the cupboard . " 

 " certainly , sir . " 

 Evelyn glance at the clock and light a cigarette . in four minute there be a tap on the door of the sitting - room , and he receive a copy of Gracie 's book from the liftman . Proof of the efficiency of the live organism of the hotel , which boast that you could obtain any food , any drink , any flower , any book or magazine in stock , at any hour of the night in the Palace . Evelyn be pleased . his heavy heart lighten somewhat for an instant . 

 he return to his sleepless bed and , scientifically arrange in every detail for perfect comfort , he begin to read Gracie for the second time - a certain chapter which have be recall to his memory by the great sinister event of the early night at the Duncannon . yes , the book be good , well even than he have deem it when he read it in typescript in Gracie 's boulevard flat , with Gracie lie at his foot . the bookstall - clerk - he could not remember the youth 's name - be clearly an unlettered idiot , and could not distinguish between a real book and a bath - bun . 

 but he , Evelyn , might have know what would happen . instead of send he to sleep , Gracie completely wake he up . still , he could not have rest until he have re - read that particular chapter ; so that in fact he be no bad off than before . he shut the book and put the light out ... a terrible chapter , that chapter . 

 at a quarter to five o'clock , when he could detect the first pale tinge of dawn through the blind , he resolutely arise and select a suit from the wardrobe - cubicle , and a shirt , and a pair of shoe , without the aid of Oldham . a surprise for Oldham , it would be ! and Evelyn himself , not for the first time , be rather surprised at the number of trifle necessary thing that Oldham must have to do every morning in order that his employer should be correctly attire . he revel in the huge expanse of leisure that stretch in front of he . no hurry , no haste . each operation of the toilet could be conduct at ease . he shave with meticulous care . he stay rather long than usual in the bath . nevertheless he shirk his physical exercise ; he be too weary , too discourage by life , to perform they . he knot his necktie as conscientiously as a Beau Brummel . he survey himself in the long mirror and see that he be perfect . the day have come ; the planet be punctually revolving . he draw back the curtain , lift the blind , open wide the window , and beheld the early , ghostly , half - leafless St. James 's Park , whose gate have not yet be unlocked . 

 he be die for some tea , but he would not test again the efficiency of the organism . have he do so , the entire Palace would have know that the panjandrum have ring for tea before six o'clock , and there would have be gossip . he write a short letter , and sit reflective for a few minute until he hear Big Ben strike six ; and then , pick up the letter and nerve himself to affront the corridor and the whole world of success , he emerge from his castle . he be too tired to feel tired . he have no purpose as to where he be go or as to what he would do . he feel only that he be in a torment of restlessness , and that if anybody speak to he the top of his head might blow off . he say to himself : 

 " then why be I out here ? I will go back . " 

 but he be too proud or too cowardly to go back . the corridor have all the aspect of night . the two electric lamp , one near either end , burn with their madden , patient endurance ! .. at that season of the year they run through their allotted span of a thousand hour in six week . he could hear a snore ; it penetrate two door . 

 " my God ! " he think . " if that man have a wife ! " 

 no member of the staff astir yet on Seventh . none on the stair . none on Sixth . none on the stair . on Fifth he glimpse the disappear skirt of the night - chambermaid far away . in the service - room on Fourth he see the night - waiter uncomfortably doze , and an orderly row of boot and shoe through the open door of the valet ' lair . everything seem normal , and life be duly suspend accord to schedule . 

 at the end of Third a large screen , remove from some suite , hide the herd of round meal - table which in a couple of hour the day - waiter would be wheel into the room laden with bacon and fish and newly bake roll and coffee and tea . he must get some tea somehow . idly inquisitive , he peep right behind the screen . an easy - chair behind it , no doubt from the same suite as the screen . he give way to the sudden impulse to sit down for a minute in that tempting chair , and watch some sea - gull from the water of St. James 's Park , circle against grey cloud beyond the window which light the corridor of Third . he be safe there for a good hour or more . he know that nothing would send he to sleep . 

 when he awake , alarm , his watch show five minute to seven , and he could hear the movement of worker in the corridor . his head ache now , and he feel very much bad than before . tea . he must have tea . but it seem to he that in an enormous building , where hundred of teapot be marshal to be fill with the sovereign restorer , he could not get a single cup because he could not ask for one without appear ridiculous in the eye of the person ask . he , the Director , abroad on the floor at 7 a.m. and ask like a lost stranger for tea , when he could have ring for it in his own room ! not to be conceive ! well , he be certainly in a strange state . the mass of the personnel might live and die and never suspect what fantastic mood fluster the head of august and unapproachable panjandrum . 

 he put his nose round the edge of the screen - thief in mortal danger ! - choose his opportunity , and get away down the stair unseen . narrow escape ! 

 no activity in the vast lugubrious entrance - hall , where the chandelier be still obstinately struggle against the light of the sun . no boat - train that morning . the gang of blue and brown charwoman have not yet arrive . Malpass be clear up behind his counter , Sam Butcher be apparently not on duty , but a janissary stand at the revolve door . take care not to catch the eye of Malpass , Evelyn descend the step into the empty foyer twilit by one lamp . the lady ' cloakroom be brightly illuminate . then its light be extinguish one after another , and a figure emerge : Violet Powler . she be the last person he wish to see : of course it would be so : but he have be ask for trouble . 

 2 . 

 " good morning , Miss Powler . " 

 " oh , good morning , sir . " she be frighteningly alert , active , spick - and - span . 

 " you be up very early . " 

 " no , sir . this be one of my early morning , and once a week I come and take a look at the ground - floor , before the cleaner arrive - it would be too late afterwards . " 

 " I have a letter for you , " say Evelyn , and give she the letter from his pocket ; at last he be rid of it . 

 " be I to read it now ? " 

 he have not foresee this question . 

 " why not ? " he say , without think , and then add : 

 " any time , " try to save himself . 

 Violet gaze at he for a moment , and open the envelope . the solitary lamp in the foyer give hardly sufficient light for read . she go to the corner where the switch be and turn on two more lamp and gaze at Evelyn again . then she read the letter : 

 " DEAR MISS POWLER . thank you for your note . I appreciate it . sincerely your , evelyn ORCHAM . " 

 Evelyn have the idea of leave she , but he could not move . 

 " thank you so much , " say Violet , with a warm smile . " you be very kind , Mr. Orcham . " and then very quietly : 

 " will you excuse I one second ? " she disappear into the lady ' cloakroom , switch on a light as she enter . now he be bind to stay until she come back . he could see she use the telephone within . when she reappear she no long hold the letter in her hand . 

 " if you can possibly wait a few minute I have   order some tea for you from the grill - room . " 

 " but why ? " he smile ; but behind the smile be resentment at her managingness . as if he could not direct his own bodily affair . still , the prospect of tea be irresistible . and he have not have to ask for tea . do he then look so pale , so ill ? she must have push the letter down the neck of her frock . naturally she have no bag , and her key - girdle be too loose to hold anything . 

 " it strike I you look a little tired , sir , " she say firmly , cease to smile . " and I think some tea - if you have not   have any - " 

 " I be a bit tired , " he admit . he lack the strength to oppose she . he drop on to a wall - sofa . 

 " perhaps you do not   sleep very well , sir ? " 

 there she be , relapse into ' sir ' ! 

 " I do not . I suppose you have   hear the news ? " 

 " no , sir . I have   only just come down . " 

 " Willingford shoot himself last night - or rather early this morning . " 

 " Willingford ? " 

 " Manager of the Duncannon . on the very day of our flotation . " he need not have say the last word ; but he say they ; they disclose his train of thought . where now be the glory of the Merger flotation ? 

 " what a pity ! " Violet murmur , her tone show that she feel deep pity . 

 " yes , " say Evelyn . " of course I be very sorry for he , because he be a very decent fellow , and he would have a lot to put up with . but that he should have be drive to do it just now ... most unfortunate . make a bad impression . it ought not   to , but it will . " 

 " have it anything to do with the new big Company ? " 

 " no . " then Evelyn modify his negative . " well , it have and it have not . you see it be like this . " he could not resist the impulse to confide in she ; he have no real desire to resist it . " Willingford be manager , but he have a pretty big block of share in the old Duncannon Company . his wife be head - housekeeper there . not a satisfactory arrangement . a manager be not   able to control his wife as well as he could someone not connect with he . it can not   be do . still , I believe she use to be rather good . she do not   want the Duncannon to be sell . I daresay Willingford would have give in to she , but he have not   get a control interest , so he could not   have stop the sale anyhow . but I gather from Willingford himself that she always maintain he could . they would have row , great row , at interval all through their married life . she be a terrific talker - I have to listen to she last night - this morning . and ever since the sale be decide upon their quarrel have be very frequent , and the housekeeping have suffer . I know that from Willingford - only the day before yesterday . you see she interfere at every step of the business side of our deal . I hear that from Sir Henry Savott and from Mr. Smiss too . Willingford could not   hide it . I think he look a bit queer in the eye last time I see he , but I have no idea - " 

 " excuse I , here be your tea , Mr. Orcham , " say Violet , see a waiter with a loaded tray come down the step into the foyer . she put a dusty cocktail table into position in front of Evelyn , and she sign the check for the order : tea , toast , and butter . 

 " may I pour out for you ? " 

 " yes , do , please . but you would well bring a chair and sit down . I have   begin to tell you , and I may as well finish . " 

 he look at she as she pour out the tea , watch that benevolent , receptive expression of her , her quick , efficient movement , the faint shadow below the prominence of her cheek , the faint , reassuring smile on her shut lip . interrogatively she hold up the sugar - tong with a piece of sugar between they . her mouth open slightly : the smile increase . 

 " yes , please . this morning . one , " he say , as it be yield himself to her care completely . 

 she stir the tea and pass it across the tray . he sip nectar , tonic . she butter some toast . he feel that never before in all his life have he be softly tend . Gracie have tend he once , and well , but Gracie have be too conscious of the perfect excellence of her ministration . he want to yield more and more to Miss Powler 's care . it be like eiderdown between he and the stony world ; it soothe his positive fatigue into a comfortable negative quiescence . the difference between her care and the care of Gracie be as notable as the difference between that of Gracie and that of the devoted , untidy Oldham . 

 " when do it happen ? " Violet ask . 

 " they get I out of bed at ten minute to one . I go over to the Royal London as quick as I could . " 

 " the Royal London ? " 

 " yes . I must tell you he do not   do it at the Duncannon . he go to the Royal London to do it . all that be very strange . very strange . but I can understand it . it be the poor fellow 's last thought for the Duncannon . he know well enough how bad a suicide be for a hotel . so he go to the Royal London . he always have his knife into the Royal London - I do not   know why . " Evelyn smile sardonically . " of course it be quite bad enough for the Duncannon as it be , but it would have be much bad if he would shot himself there . it will not   do the Royal London any good . that must be why he choose the Royal London . very strange . you never know what be in the mind of a man who have decide to commit suicide . but he mean well by the Duncannon . he do it in the London lounge . nobody be there . the night - porter hear the shot . I see he lie on the carpet . there be a policeman there by that time , and the night - porter and the manager . they would not   let anyone else in . the doctor have not   come . they could not   get hold of one . so I telephone for Constam . but the man be dead all right . blood on his face . he be all crumple up . the most forlorn thing you ever see . it be so pathetic you could hardly bear to look at it . I be awfully glad you could not   hear their orchestra playing , though it be play . I could hear it from the hall plain enough . of course they could not   stop the orchestra . that would not   have do at all . and there he be , lie there . he look very small , all shrunk up . " 

 tear be in Violet 's eye . she say : 

 " it remind you of that piece in Mrs. Cheddar 's book . the motor accident . " 

 " oh ! you have   be read that ? " 

 " I be read it last night in bed . " 

 Gracie have describe how , motor in France , she have see a young woman lie by the side of the road , dead , and blood all over she . terribly injure . the woman have be drive her car too quickly down a hill and must have put the brake on too suddenly , and the car have turn right over and throw she out . 

 " I have   read it too . a pretty good description , be not   it ? " 

 " it be , " Violet agree . " and her thought about it afterwards . " 

 " yes . you like the book then ? " 

 " I do not   think I have   ever read anything as wonderful . it be all so new . but then of course I have not   do a great deal of reading . I only get the book because it be by she . but she be always wonderful , Miss Gracie be - Mrs. Cheddar . " 

 " yes , " say Evelyn sincerely . all his rancour against Gracie have die out . 

 a pause . 

 " when Mrs. Willingford come , not long after I , they try to keep she out of the lounge , but they could not   do it . she make such a noise she would have bring everyone in the hotel down to the lounge to see what be the matter . so they let she in . naturally I be her dear husband 's murderer and so on . but she know well enough who it be have drive he to suicide ; you could see that from the self - conscious look in her face . so I have to be the murderer . she must be about fifty , but she turn on I like a prize - fighter out of his sens , and the policeman and the manager have all they could do to keep she off I . it be a simply awful scene . I will not   go into detail . and he lie there under her foot all the time ! still , I must say I feel sorry for she . you could not   help feel sorry for she . " 

 Violet make a commiserate sound with her tongue against her upper tooth . 

 " it be frightful for you . frightful ! may I give you another cup ? " 

 " it be fairly bad . however , when Constam arrive , and just after he the other doctor they would be try to get , the two of they have she take off to a nursing - home somewhere , and they will see she do not   get out of there in a hurry . anyhow not till she be calm down . she will have to attend the inquest , if she be fit . and I expect I shall too . but she will behave herself at the inquest . they always do , for their own sake . as soon as I could leave I go to the Duncannon and give a few order . I say she be not   on any account to be admit . perhaps you do not   know what sort of a place the Duncannon be . it be not   at all like the Palace , I can tell you that . here they would treat a suicide case as rather interesting and picturesque . they would be shock , some of them , but not too much . but the Duncannon be very English - you know , official , service , lieutenant - governor , and that kind of thing . the waiter be English . it be not   a bit cosmopolitan . and they want quiet decorum before everything . do not   matter so much about the food . curry and thing . it be not   very smart to look at ; but it be dignified . you understand . no band except during dinner . if there be dance they would do the lancer and the polka . anything in the nature of a scandal would horrify they . they will all pretend to themselves that the trouble have something to do with the Royal London , which they think be a bit fast . not that it be , really . there be not   a fast hotel in London outside Jermyn Street , and even there - " 

 a troop of blue and brown charwoman equip with utensil appear from the dusk of the restaurant and pass in a file through the foyer . Violet rise and stop one of they and , point to the lady ' cloakroom , give she a few instruction . all the charwoman turn their head to see the unique spectacle , at that hour of the morning , of a tea serve in the foyer . few of they recognise Evelyn for the panjandrum . Violet sit down . the next moment the foyer be empty again . 

 Evelyn be think : 

 " she be a well judge of a book than that ass of a bookstall clerk . " he say aloud : " I have   decide to put Pozzi in charge of the Duncannon for the present . he be not   English , but he need not   show himself much . I must speak to Mr. Cousin . he will have see it in the paper before I see he . at least I hope he will . I do not   precisely feel like begin the story all over again . that be the bad of it . there be about ten people in this place who will consider themselves entitle to hear the whole story first hand from I . " 

 " perhaps you could put Dr. Constam on to tell they , " Violet suggest . 

 Evelyn think : 

 " she understand my nerve . " 

 " but what about the housekeeping ? " Violet ask . " if Mrs. Willingford be not   there ? and of course everyone will be in a dreadful state and nobody will know quite what they be do . " 

 " yes , " say Evelyn . " what about the housekeeping ? there be only one under - housekeeper . and if I know anything about Mrs. Willingford 's way , that under - housekeeper have never be allow one ounce of responsibility . that be just it : what about the housekeeping ? " 

 " I suppose you would not   care for I to go over ? " say Violet . 

 " what ! and leave we to go to rack and ruin here ! " he frown , hold a last fragment of toast near to his mouth without put it in . but he know that there be nothing he would like more than for Violet to go over to the Duncannon . 

 " I only mean for an hour or two a day until thing settle down a little and you know where you be . " 

 " but you could not   leave here . you could not   do both . " 

 " why not ? " Violet smile sedately . " the Palace can run by itself for a little while . "   Gracie 's notion !   " and besides , Mrs. Oulsnam be very good . and I could be here at any rate in the evening , and a bit in the afternoon . " 

 " but you do not   know anything about the Duncannon ! " 

 " I should know a lot more about it than I know about the Palace when you put I in charge here , " say Violet , drily . 

 " how soon could you go ? " Evelyn demand hesitantly . 

 " I could go now . " 

 " now ? do you mean now ? " 

 " yes . before visitor be up . and if you could get Mr. Pozzi as well . and if you could come with we , just to introduce we . you need not   stay long . I be sure the doctor would say you ought to have a sedative and go to bed , Mr. Orcham . " Violet stand up . 

 " well , " think Evelyn , " this young woman be the good . she be too manage with her sedative , but she be the good . " he say aloud : " d'you know what you be , Miss Powler ? you be the willing horse . you know what happen to the willing horse . you would well look out for yourself . " 

 " that will be all right , " she say , serenely confident . 

 the horrible situation be lose much of its horror for he . he see it in a new light . and their relation be absolutely ideal , far well than they have ever be : complete mutual comprehension . he be still very tired ; but comfortably tired . the casque of steel round his head have be magically loosen . how marvellously right he have be ! what astonish instinctive insight into character he have show   astonish even to himself   in carry she away from the Laundry . he have a conviction , a religious faith ; that nothing serious could happen to the Duncannon while she be there . yet what have she say , what have she offer ? nothing but the obvious . it be her way of exist that affect he , something deep than either word or act . 

 " it be all so awful it seem as if it would go on be awful for ever . but these awful thing be soon forget . I have   often notice it , " say Violet . 

 he think she be reluctant to leave he unprotected . " yes . that be true , " he say musingly . then louder , in a new tone : " and suppose that woman , the widow , manage to get into the Duncannon after all , and she come across you ? " 

 " oh ! I think I could deal with she , " she answer . 

 the quietude of her perfect confidence reassure but to a certain extent daunt he . 

 content 
 chapter 71 

 NIGHT - WORK 

 five day later , and Sunday night . Violet 's sitting - room still lack picture , but it have a large desk , which Violet , exercise her right as head - housekeeper , have choose for herself from store . she be sit at it . she need a large desk , at any rate temporarily , because she have take to do some of the Duncannon work at the Palace . 

 the time be about half - past eleven - near the end of a full day . she have toil for five hour in the Palace - but nothing be toil for she - and after lunch , and a french lesson from the assiduous Perosi , she have pay a visit to Renshaw Street and spend several interminable hour with her parent , who have a parental fore - vision of their daughter as the star housekeeper of the whole european world of hotel . then swiftly by a pre - ordered taxi from Renshaw Street to the Duncannon ; and finally to her boudoir - parlour - office in the Palace . 

 she be perfectly happy , love her work , and aware that she be do it pretty well . she never feel fatigue , nor boredom , nor any of the qualm which trouble those who be not fairly sure of themselves . she go to bed with reluctance , and arise joyous and eager to start the new , long day . she find a grim satisfaction in overwork both the loyal Mrs. Oulsnam and the equally loyal Agatha . she argue with herself that Mrs. Oulsnam 's gaiety of mind and Agatha 's youth could withstand a few week ' overwork without the least harm to their constitution . 

 she have establish relation with Pozzi , the new temporary manager of the Duncannon , have indeed almost enter into a league with the young man for the total reform of the Duncannon organisation on Palace line . she like the Englishness of the Duncannon . she know where she be with the member of the staff , and comprehend their cerebral process ; at the Palace , where nine out of ten of the male with whom she have contact be foreigner , she be still disturb by the thought that while they speak in English they be think in french or italian or Czecho - Slovakian . 

 Mrs. Willingford have attempt no invasion of her former realm , and Mrs. Willingford 's possession have be despatch to a boarding - house in Cornwall . on the day follow the night of the suicide the afternoon paper have intemperately jubilate in an orgy of sensation concern the affair , and the street of Central London have flutter with the white , scarlet , and yellow of their content - bill announce horrid mystery . but the next morning - naught ! not even the short paragraph on the front page ; for a famous and lovely daughter of the peerage have marry her chauffeur and nothing else matter on earth . the inquest have pass off quietly . the jury have view Willingford 's body , cleanse of its red stain , and Willingford have be bury with more secrecy than have hide the honeymoon of the daughter of the peerage ; and Willingford be as though he have never exist , love , suffer . sometimes the planet revolve with incredible rapidity . as for the flotation of the Merger , it continue to be a triumph untarnished . 

 Violet 's evening at the Duncannon have be protract by a very agreeable episode : a personal call from Mr. Cyril Purkin , who be in the fine benevolent mood , benevolent not only to Violet but to himself . he have seek Violet first at the Palace , and then have do she the honour of seek she at the Duncannon . he have greet she with such warmth that the critical Violet have reflect : " be I such a pleasant change from his wife ? " 

 but there be good foundation for Mr. Purkin 's mood . it have be decide that the linen of the Majestic and the Duncannon should go to the Imperial Palace Laundry , and that the Laundry should be enlarge , like the Works Department . soon Mr. Purkin would be unable to boast of the garden of the Laundry in which laundry - girl drink tea al fresco on suitable afternoon . the garden would be build upon . but Mr. Purkin do not in the least regret that . he would have new and well boast than the old one . although the exist Laundry premise have hitherto be the acme of perfection , the additional premise , accord to Mr. Purkin , be in some mysterious way to surpass they , to leave they out of sight as venerable relic of an inefficient age . Mr. Purkin swell with pride and importance , but not offensively - blandly . he have discuss at length with Violet the question of immediately arrange for delivery to and by the Laundry from and to the Majestic and the Duncannon . he be cheerfully convince that , terribly antiquated and inadequate though the old premise be , he could easily cope with the linen of both the Duncannon and the Majestic . Violet have offer he some ginger - ale , have join he in drink ginger - ale , and they have part on more friendly term than have obtain between they at any time since before he kiss she . not a reference to pillow - slip ! 

 2 . 

 Agatha Jixon come into the sitting - room , and see her principal earnestly bent over the large desk cover with paper and book of figure , under the light of a green - shaded lamp which illuminate the desk only , and not even all the desk . the desk and its content look very important , and the head - housekeeper also . 

 Violet turn to the girl in severe reproof . 

 " why be not   you in bed ? you know you ought to be . you know you can not   possibly be in trim for to - morrow - and tomorrow 's Monday too ! " 

 " I be in bed , Miss Powler . but I have to get up again because I have forget to tell you something . Mr. Orcham be ask for you to - night . he come up here , and he tell I to tell you . " 

 " and could not   that have wait till to - morrow morning ? run along back to bed now . " then in her felicity Violet relent , add : " that be rather a nice dressing - gown you have   get . " 

 " be it? ... your fire 's out . do you know ? " 

 " run along ! " 

 " good night , miss . " 

 Violet , feign absorption in her very important work , do not reply . the girl flee . 

 the news of the panjandrum 's call considerably excite the young woman of whom the young stand in affectionate awe . she have be very happy before . she be now happy . she have not set eye on Evelyn for several day . the panjandrum have be busy at the Majestic and elsewhere . and it be the gossip of the Palace on this Sunday that the cigarette - king have insist on take he out for a day 's golf . Evelyn have introduce Violet with mark ceremony into the Duncannon organism ; but after two day he have leave she to do as she choose with the housekeeping department of the place . without guide she , he flatteringly trust she . and he have not conceal his gratitude to she for so zealously relieve he of an anxiety . the spectacle of his fatigue on that morning when she pour out tea for he in the foyer have touch and sadden she ; but the talk with he at the small table have fill she with bliss . ' Bliss ' be the sole proper word for her sensation . she have feel , then , as if his life be in danger and she be save it by her strong maternal care of he . no cloud between they ! 

 and , ever since , an old , extinguished lamp have burn anew in her brain , steadily , brightly , inspiringly : the lamp of loyalty to Evelyn as an individual . she have work for the hotel ; she be devoted to the Palace ; but she have work more for he , and to he she be more devoted . she expect nothing from he in return , except his approbation . he have discover she , and lift she up , and in fact create she ; and that richly suffice . she desire nothing well than to prove her value . as for the deplorable quarrel , the reconciliation , hardly perceive , be worth it . she would have be ready to go through another quarrel for another reconciliation ... be it not marvellous that he respect she , admire her quality , chat with she so freely ? 

 her thought grow quite sentimental . she pretend to be proceed with her very important work . a pretence merely ! how could she check calculation while think endlessly the thought of her calm happiness , under such an employer , in the romantic career of head - housekeeper of the Imperial Palace ? she breathe in a dream of beatitude . she might just as well have go to bed for all the good she be do at the new large desk ; but she hat to go to bed . then , several second after it occur , she realise that there have be a tap on the door . 

 " come in , " she stammer . 

 she know that the intruder could not conceivably be Evelyn ; but she know also that it be Evelyn : hence the hesitant timidity in her voice . and it be Evelyn . Idyll , with no sex in it ! nothing but work and loyalty in it ! 

 the panjandrum be no fit sight for a fashionable hotel on Sunday evening . he wear a thick loose tweed suit , not specially design , but not wholly unsuitable , for the game of golf ; with thick brown boot ; and he have a rural air . Violet rise at once from her busy desk to receive he . she smile to see he so arrayed , think maternally that a day in the country be just what he have need . 

 " so you have   be down to your mother 's and come back late , and now you be work , and it be after half - past eleven and you ought to have be in bed long since . how do you expect to be in form for your work to - morrow morning if you sit up like this ? you know you ought never to work on Sunday night . " he have begin with no sort of greeting , and his tone be very curt , even harsh . 

 Violet laugh . 

 " yes , you laugh , " he go on . " do not   you remember what I say about the willing horse ? I might as well talk to a post . you be all alike . Miss Cass be just the same . and Miss Tilton too - from what Mr. Cousin tell I . why be you laugh ? " 

 " I do not   know , " Violet answer . but she do know . she laugh because she be reduce to the role of Agatha , and the panjandrum have be repeat her own criticism of Agatha in the same dissatisfied querulous tone . not that she be disturb by his tone . she know with the certainty of omniscience from which nothing can be hide that he be use that tone in order to hide constraint arise out of the self - consciousness due to the lateness and the strangeness of the visit . his tone give her pleasure ; she delight in it . she want to seem intimidate by it , and could not . she have never be so happy . the obscurity of the room   except in the region of the sinful desk , the fact of his presence , the informal rusticity of his clothe - all this strike she as exquisitely romantic . 

 she think , puff up : " he be in my room . " and she think : 

 " I can not   help show how pleased I be . well , I do not   care . it be rather dark . perhaps he can not   see . " 

 " well , " say Evelyn , walk uneasily about . " I have   be after you all the evening . I should not   have come in now , but I happen to be up here and I see the light under your door . " 

 " happen to be up here ! " think Violet . " I wonder what it be he want . " 

 " hello ! " exclaim Evelyn ; he have reach the desk and be glance at the paper on it . " but this be Duncannon stuff ! " 

 " yes , sir . " 

 " that be all wrong , bring Duncannon stuff over here . if you can not   attend to it in the time you spend over there , you ought to leave it . now I will not   have it . " 

 " sometimes it be easy to do thing here . I like to be on the spot in case I be ask for . " 

 " oh indeed ! " he be sardonic . then he change his tone suddenly . " Mr. Cousin be suggest you might go to the Duncannon altogether for six month , and get it all absolutely smooth and oil . he say Mrs. Oulsnam and he between they could carry on here . what do you say ? " 

 so this be what he have come for ! her expression alter with the swift candour of a child 's . the suggestion of leave the Palace for six month desolate she . she have be very sympathetic towards the Duncannon . now she hat the place . it would be a place of exile . the Duncannon be dead compare to the Palace . the Palace be her home , far more so than Renshaw Street . no ! the suggestion very seriously alarm she . perhaps her theory in explanation of his tone when he enter the room have be entirely wrong . perhaps ... 

 " of course it be for you to say , sir , " she mutter cautiously , glumly . 

 " it be not   for I to say . it be for you to say , " he snap . 

 " well , if you ask I , I do not   think it be at all necessary for I to live at the Duncannon and leave here . but Mrs. Oulsnam might go . she be very capable . and she be so cheerful . the Duncannon do need cheerfulness . she might quite enjoy it . and it would be a step up for she . " 

 " that be enough ! " say Evelyn . " if you do not   want to go , you do not . as for Mrs. Oulsnam , we will see . " 

 the question be settle . her spirit lighten instantly . she hop he be not vex . no , he could not be . but she feel more puzzled than ever . it surely could not be about the Duncannon that he have come to see she in her room at get on for midnight . he have not trouble to argue ; he have drop the proposal instantly . 

 " look here ! " he say brusquely , almost bullyingly . " if you will kindly sit down I might sit down . I detest stand for long . " 

 " oh , please do ! I be so sorry . " 

 she sit down near the dead fire . this be the second occasion on which he have have to suggest sit down when he come to see she . she be clumsy , no mistake ! he be treat she as an equal , and she be not be equal to the part . he sit down opposite to she . 

 " your fire be out , " he observe . Violet smile again , to herself . " still , with the radiator the room 's quite warm . " 

 " may I give you a cigarette ? " say Violet . 

 Evelyn shake his head . " but please smoke if you want to . " Violet shake her head ; his permission be too perfunctory to encourage she . " I scarcely ever smoke , " she say , inexactly . she feel disappointed . to smoke with he , to offer he a match , to light her cigarette from a match hold by he , would have be delicious . however , she put the notion resolutely aside . what could it matter , really , whether they smoke or not ? 

 " they be determined to arrange a supper for I . the upper staff , I mean , " Evelyn begin . " that be what I have   come to see you about . I must have your opinion . " he be talk now in an ordinary social , friendly tone , man to comprehend woman . 

 " oh yes ? " she say with bright interest . 

 " yes . to - night fortnight it be suppose to be . it be a supper of the hotel , to celebrate the success of the Merger . I do not   know why people want to do these thing , but they do . and I can not   say no . director and head of department - that will be the company . nobody else - except the manager of the Majestic . Mr. Cousin think they could not   decently leave he out . Pozzi will come , not so much as manager of the Duncannon as because he be still in theory assistant - manager here . old Mr. Dover probably will not   come down ; he may , but I shall be surprised if he do . say he feel too old . of course there will be Sir Henry Savot - the supper ought properly to be for he - and Lord Watlington , and Mr. Harbour . and then there will be the Directors of the old Company , Mr. Dacker and Mr. Lingmell and Mr. Smiss - Mr. Smiss be a director of the Merger too . and then the head of department : Mr. Adolphe , Mr. Immerson , Mr. Jones - Wyatt , Mr. Crump , Mr. Cappone , Mr. Ceria , Commendatore Rocco , Mr. Planquet , Mr. Ruffo , Dr. Constam , Major Linklater , Mr. Exshaw , Mr. Ickeringway , Mr. Stairforth , Mr. Semple , Mr. Pipple - BiIls Department , he be really cashier . perhaps that be not   all , but it be nearly all . there be about a couple of dozen there anyhow . I have   agree the list with Mr. Cousin . but do you know what I say ? I say : ' what about lady ? ' Mr. Cousin say it would not   do to ask the wife . he say we know what the man be like , but if we ask one wife we must ask all , and some of them would not   do . you know , people be apt to think the staff of a hotel be all alike . well , of course it be not . class distinction be as sharp in a hotel - staff as they be elsewhere - sharp perhaps . so Mr. Cousin say his idea be to have man only . now I do not   think that be right . if a woman happen to be head of a department she be just as much entitle to be ask to take part in that supper as any other head of a department . woman work as hard as man , and as a rule they be nice to look at , and they have the vote and they sit on jury and even in Parliament , and so why should not   they sit at supper ? I be not a fanatical feminist , but I do believe in play fair . what do you say ? " 

 Violet tremble . she know she be the sole woman head of a department in the hotel . be she to be invite to share in the supper ? and if so be she to be the one girl among twenty or thirty man , include millionaire ? or be she to refuse - refuse to be at a supper give in the honour of the panjandrum ? his masculine logic be put she in a fix . to refuse would be cowardice . and yet - " I think the principle be quite right , " she say nervously . 

 " well , then ! " 

 " let I see , who be the woman head ? " 

 " there be you . " 

 " but who else ? " 

 " there be not   anybody else , " Evelyn smile with humour . 

 " I should love to come , but not by myself , " say the head - housekeeper , whose common sense be after all strong than any masculine logic . 

 " but why not ? would you be afraid to ? " 

 " I could not   come by myself , Mr. Orcham . but be you sure there be not   anybody else ? what about Mrs. Rowbotham ? " 

 " Works ? certainly not . by the way , I be forget the new head at Craven Street . no , Mrs. Rowbotham be not   a head . and what be more , she be not   presentable . we might as well ask Skinner ; he consider himself now the great man in the entire show . no . everyone must be presentable - that 's cast - iron . " 

 " Lady Milligan . she would adore to come . " 

 " I daresay she would . but she do not   happen to be on the staff , " say Evelyn drily . 

 " but for the sake of old time ? no ? " 

 " the old time when her ladyship run off and leave we . no , thank . " 

 there he be again , the panjandrum , with his tone all harden by the mere thought of a disloyalty to the Palace . he be surely the strange man ! 

 " well , Mrs. Oulsnam ? " 

 " she be not   head of a department . if we have she we should either have to ask about twenty more second - in - command or there would be such a flare - up of jealousy as never be see . " 

 " but if you make her head - housekeeper at the Duncannon , and she sort of belong here and Mr. Pozzi be come , could not   you squeeze she in ? " 

 " that be an idea , " the panjandrum admit . and to Violet 's astonishment he add : " and there would be four of you if we rope in Miss Cass and Marian Tilton . both those two be perfectly convinced that they run the hotel . yes , four would not   be so bad , would it ? might even have some dancing . " 

 " Four would be lovely , " say Violet . 

 " I will see Mr. Cousin first thing to - morrow , " say Evelyn ; and stand up . 

 3 . 

 " it be awfully nice of you to come and ask I , " say Violet , scarcely audible . 

 and she too rise . the affair be finish , and he be go . she want he to stay for ever in her room . but also she want he to leave she , because it be urgently necessary for she to indulge in her sensation , and to find answer to certain question . have this man who be not a fanatical feminist come up to she solely from an abstract sense of fairness ? if another than Violet Powler have be head - housekeeper would he have spend the evening in try to get hold of that other , just in order to satisfy his desire to play fair ? it be plain that he be pleased with she , that he think rather well of she , that her work have earn his approval . she return to her theory that the harsh curtness of tone at the beginning of the interview be affect in order to cover his self - consciousness - say his nervousness . he be capable of be very boy - like . she must buy a new frock for the supper ; there be that new place in Shaftesbury Avenue that Mrs. Oulsnam have tell she of . 

 the panjandrum lean against the mantelpiece . 

 " be not   it about time you have some picture here ? " he demand , as it be casually . 

 Violet be ashamed of her bare wall with their oblong mark of vanish picture that have belong to her predecessor . 

 " it be , " say she . " I have   be intend to get some , but I have   be so busy . " 

 " we have some good etching somewhere , " say the panjandrum . " I will give you a few . I mean they be the hotel 's , but that need not   worry we . I will ask Miss Cass where they be . I will have they send up to you . and I think these room of yours ought to be do up . I suppose visitor come in here sometimes to see you , do not   they ? " 

 his tone be still casual ; he have start by grumble at she ; the constitution of the supper be a hotel matter ; the furnishing of her room be another hotel matter . but Violet have not be talk about , nor listen to , any of these subject . she be , without quite know it , in the grove of the isle of Cythera . her eye see the grove of the isle ; her vague shin smile confirm her eye . her sensation frighten she to the point of speechlessness . 

 " thank you , " she say at last , coldly . 

 " do not   mention it , " he say with the most casual negligence of manner . 

 their hand waver , hand approach hand . she feel the pressure of his . she glance shyly up at his funny , kindly face . her hand be limp . but she think : " if he press mine it be only right for I to press his . " and she press it . and by the channel of their hand her whole body seem to she to flow into his . he nod . she smile steadily . not another word . he go . 

 she be alone . she have mean to think clearly as soon as she be alone . but she could not think clearly , or think at all . she be too happy to think , and too profoundly unhappy to think . she obscurely realise that the man who have go be set apart from all other man in her sight . the conception of his existence fill her mind until there be no room for anything else . but he be the panjandrum , the head and heart of the great Merger , the monarch of the hotel world . and she be a daughter of Renshaw Street .   an old story , though she do not identify it as an old story .   still , he have be to see she in her own room . and their relation be , to she , idyllic . 

 she look at the reproachful desk . 

 " not to - night , " she say to the desk . " to - morrow morning , early . I really could not   to - night . shall I even be able to take my thing off and get into bed ? I be do in for ever . and I shall never have a moment 's peace again . " but she be saturate with a hardly tolerable bliss . through the terrifying felicity shoot the thought : " I must find time to go up to Shaftesbury Avenue - to - morrow . something be bind to want altering , and you never know how long they will take over it . " 

 content 
 chapter 72 

 queen anne 

 one morning , nearly a week later , it happen to Evelyn while at breakfast under the care of Oldham , to perceive a small round hole prominently situate in the middle of his waistcoat . Oldham suffer , not because of the hole , which have be make by incandescent tobacco from a cigarette , and which even a more perfect valet than Oldham might have miss , but because Evelyn have sleep ill   have youthfully lain awake thinking about the precise nature of his feeling towards Violet Powler . Oldham , who ought to have suffer in silence , commit the vain error of try to defend himself by quite preposterous excuse . Evelyn have to change his suit , which involve change his necktie , and he go downstairs to his office in a state of mind unworthy of a philosopher and a gentleman . 

 nevertheless he hide his mood , as effectively as he could , from Miss Cass , until Miss Cass , confess that she have omit to obtain an order to view a certain Queen Anne house close to the hotel , give her opinion that there be no hurry and that Mr. Orcham could just as well view the Queen Anne house on Saturday or even Monday . it be perhaps the ' even Monday ' that break the back of Evelyn 's self - control . Miss Cass be icily request to go forth and obtain the order to view from the agent , and not to return without it . 

 Miss Cass , who fear neither God nor Evelyn , answer icily : 

 " yes , Mr. Orcham . I will go at once . by the way , there be some trouble about that staff - supper . " 

 " never mind the staff - supper . run off and get that orderto view . " 

 " certainly , Mr. Orcham , " say the indomitable Miss Cass , continue : " but several secretary , especially Mr. Smiss 's senior secretary , be complain because they have not   be ask to join in , and Mr. Smiss think - " 

 " will you oblige I very much by go instantly for that order to view ? I really can not be bother with all these ridiculous jealousy when I be as busy as I be now . you have   be ask to the supper , and Miss Tilton have be ask , and Mr. Cousin have decide that no other secretary shall be ask . " 

 " yes , Mr. Orcham . I only think you would like to know . " 

 " well , I do not   like to know . it be not I who be give the supper . " 

 " quite , Mr. Orcham . " the frigid and inimical calmness of the woman 's tone be a blight commentary on the panjandrum 's tone . 

 " I be sick to death of all these woman ! " Evelyn exclaim aloud when Miss Cass have triumphantly depart and he be alone with the morning 's document on his great desk . " let them go to the devil! .. that supper be not   begin very auspiciously . " 

 then he dismiss the piffling matter from his thought , and turn to the chart of business at the Palace , which be still from old - establish custom bring daily to his notice , though as head of the Orcham Company he be now suppose to see they only weekly and as part of a more comprehensive tabular conspectus embrace the business of all the Orcham hotel . the fact be that his activity be still in transition . he be Managing Director of the vast Orcham Company , without , somehow , have cease to be Managing Director of the old , small , dissolve Imperial Palace Company . 

 largely if not exclusively as the result of unique indirect advertisement due to the flotation of the Orcham Company , business at the Palace have considerably increase , and business at the Majestic have increase a little also . excellent ! very encouraging ! but something have to be do to define with exactitude the panjandrum 's actual position as between the Orcham group and the unit of the Palace within the group . and Evelyn himself be the only person to do it . and he be determined to do it . after all , be he not the supreme and unchallengeable autocrat ? of course there be the Orcham Board of Directors ; but he be use to impose his will on Boards . hence the idea of the Queen Anne house whose back - garden abut on Birdcage Walk . the Orcham Company must clearly have office of its own . it clearly could not continue for ever to watch over and direct the career of nine important hotel in a scatter makeshift lot of room in the Imperial Palace . the notion be grotesque . 

 only on the previous day have Evelyn hear of the beautiful spacious mansion to let on long lease within a hundred yard or so of the Palace . he have behold its exterior , and have immediately decide , with all the impulsiveness of a creative artist , that that building and no other would suit the purpose of the Orcham Company . damn it ! a company with a capital of more than five million be entitle to be house in dignity . so run his grandiose thought . 

 at this juncture the door of his private room open , and Sir Henry Savott imperiously walk in , unannounced . outrage ! who do the fellow think he be ? what would he have say if Evelyn have stamp into his private office unannounced ? of course the invasion be one consequence of Miss Cass 's absence on a job which she have inexcusably forget to execute yesterday . her subaltern could not arrest the arrogant Sir Henry on his way . but Miss Cass would have arrest he . yes , she would ! 

 " Morning , Evelyn . " 

 " Morning , Henry . " Evelyn deceitfully smooth his forehead and soften his voice . " sit down . glad to see you . what be up ? how be the talkie ? " 

 " talkie be go some , " answer Sir Henry , in a voice to indicate that naturally the talkie be go some and that even to ask about their welfare be to cast a slur . " I say . I have   be see Smiss . he tell I you be think of take new office for Orcham . "   ' Orcham ' be now Sir Henry 's habitual abbreviation of the Orcham International Hotels Company Limited . 

 " the idea have cross my mind , " say Evelyn , an ironical tinge in the colour of his tone . " I expect to submit a proposal at the next Board Meeting . " 

 " do you think it be quite necessary ? " 

 " I certainly would not   dream of do anything without submit it to the Board , " say Evelyn , naughtily misunderstand the Titan . 

 " I mean , to take special office , " Sir Henry explain with impatience . Evelyn tranquillise himself , as always when an opponent begin to show excitement . 

 " how else do you expect Orcham be to carry on business ? " he enquire , in a drawl . 

 " well , in a big place like the Palace I should have think you might have find room - " 

 " just listen to I , my dear Henry . the Palace be big because it be do a big business . and it be not   too big for its business . and a big place be not   any more elastic than a little place . if you can not   pour a quart into a pint pot , it be just as true that you can not   pour fifteen hundred gallon into a thousand - gallon cistern . even as it be , the Palace be be very seriously cramp by Orcham work . why should the Palace be inconvenience for the advantage of all the other hotel in the group ? I do not   know of any other business that be run without office . proper office make for efficiency - or ought to . " 

 " I be think of the expense . someone have to think of it , " say Sir Henry , not without resentment . 

 " quite , my dear chap ! " Evelyn answer soothingly . " and I be much oblige for the hint . but I be do a certain amount of cerebration over the expense myself . that be part of my job . only I feel sure you will agree with my maxim that one can not   have something for nothing . the Orcham staff be not   fully organise yet : the soon it be organise the well , and it can not   be organise until definite office be organise . anyhow the decision will be with the Board . have a cigar , old man . " Evelyn be perfectly at ease , because he be well aware that he have a majority of the working Board in his pocket . 

 " not now , thank , Evelyn . I be in a hurry . I just look in - that be all . " Sir Henry refuse with slight vexation . 

 Evelyn do not know that the Titan have be embroil in intimate dissension with the beautiful and stylish Nancy Penkethman , and be not satisfactorily himself . 

 " well , thank very much . " Evelyn give he God - speed . " I shall bear in mind what you say . Au revoir . " 

 Sir Henry depart . 

 Evelyn reflect : 

 " he be go off with a flick in his ear . if anybody think I be not the real Simon Pure boss of this show , he be wrong . and I do not   care who he be . " 

 the panjandrum force himself to work . after something like half an hour Miss Cass 's assistant - not Miss Cass - come in with the order to view and the key of the Queen Anne house . evidently Miss Cass be indicate to her employer who she be . 

 " oh ! here they be at last ! " say Evelyn mildly to the girl . he put on his hat and pick up his stick and twirl the same in an airy manner . 

 " you would well come over with I , " he say curtly to Miss Cass in her office . 

 Miss Cass be affect to be monstrously busy . she infinitesimally toss her head . but she obey the order . she leave her hat behind , however , and Evelyn have the experience of accompany a hatless girl in Birdcage Walk and in an April wind .   you could never get the well of they .   fortunately the distance be very short . 

 " there surely ought to be a caretaker here , " observe Evelyn , after they have contrive between they to open the front door of the mansion . 

 " it be Crown property , " Miss Cass retort . 

 Evelyn lead the way into the first room . 

 " excuse I , Mr. Orcham . but you tell I that Report on the Escurial must be finish in triplicate by twelve o'clock . " 

 she might have make this unemotional announcement in the office . but she have delay it in order to serve he right . Evelyn have forget . he think with exceed rapidity . 

 " very well , go and get it do . and see you have fresh carbon . send - er - Miss Powler to I , and ask she to bring a tape - measure with she . I must have someone . and she may be more useful than you . " 

 either Miss Cass or the April wind bang the front door . at the end of five minute , when Evelyn have make a complete tour of the mansion and leave one cigarette to expire on the marble staircase , he begin seriously to expect the arrival of his head - housekeeper . at the end of another five minute a new grievance have take possession of he . surely it could not take she nearly a quarter of an hour   his grievance have turn ten minute into nearly a quarter of an hour   to run across from the hotel . nothing have go well with he that morning . first the gross negligence of the ass Oldham . then Miss Cass , in one of her mood of severity . then Henry Savott with his interfere impudence . then Miss Cass in a still severer mood , but of course as usual exasperatingly correct in her stiffness . and now his ideal head - housekeeper dallying ! the mansion , too , have a damp chill in its unoccupied air , and Evelyn be without overcoat . he light a third cigarette . he have peer into every corner of the mansion , and now could only stare through the window of the main drawing - room , and fidget and fume . if the telephone have not be remove he might have pass the time in worry the hotel by captious enquiry . but in the absence of the telephone he must either resign himself to tedium or go back to the Palace and demand caustically whether all the member of the directorial staff think perchance that he have nothing on earth to do but kick his heel in a cold and empty house . such be his philosophic condition . 

 2 . 

 then a taxi drive into Old Queen Street , on which the drawing - room fronted , and his head - housekeeper descend from the taxi . she seem a bit hurried and breathless , and   say Evelyn to himself   well she might be ! he go cautiously down the slippery marble stair to open the door for she . 

 " I be at the Duncannon , " she greet he . 

 that she might be at the Duncannon have not enter his tired , harass head . 

 " can you pay the taxi ? " she ask . " I come away without my bag . " 

 at any rate she be properly dress for the street - not like Miss Cass . 

 " certainly , " he answer , and cross the pavement and pay her taxi . strange that woman never have the price of a taxi - fare . they be all the same . they would forget their bag . it be not as if she would be expect to pay the taxi out of her own money ; she would have charge it to petty cash . but there you be ! he be pay her taxi , just as though he have invite she to lunch or something ! 

 he say in a colourless business voice , as soon as they be secure within the mansion : 

 " I want you to look over this place from the practical point of view and tell I what you think of it . " he might have add that the notion of send for she have only occur to he when Miss Cass become restive and unanswerable . but he refrain from his explanation . to have betray that he have act impulsively would have be unwise . the meeting be to be purely technical , official ; therefore it have be plan . 

 he describe to she the use to which he propose to put the place . she say ' yes ' and ' yes . ' they start their visitation with the basement , for the reason that it be scientific to start with the basement . 

 Violet , although she have waste not a minute in obey the summon , have not hurry herself , nor be she breathless , nor have she forget her bag through any haste . she have forget her bag because the sudden summon have put she into an emotional turmoil . since the Sunday night tete - a - tete she have see Evelyn but once , and for a few moment and by chance . each day she have waken with the hope and with the fear that she would encounter he , and each night   save one   she have go to bed disappointed and relieve that she have not encounter he . each hour of each day she have be happy and she have be unhappy . she have blame herself and she have hold herself innocent . she have interpret his demeanour towards she in a dozen mutually quite contradictory way . the summon to join he at the Queen Anne house be like a thunderclap in her ear at the telephone - receiver . it have the intensity of violent drama . 

 she have hop and she have fear that other would be present in the house in Little Queen Street . nobody else be present , and she be delighted and she be frightened - equally . no ! more delighted than frightened . no ! more frightened than delighted . she study every inflection of his voice as he speak . but he say nothing that be not banal , and she could read no significance whatever in his tone . except that his nerve be in a sensitive state . she divine positively that something have happen to vex he . 

 she think : 

 " I ought to soothe he ; he need soothe . I know I can soothe he , because I have   do it before . " yet how should she soothe he ? to soothe , one must be calm oneself , one must be in full possession of oneself . and she be not calm nor self - possess . 

 their voice utter banality resound and reverberate as the pair ascend the broad , marmoreal stair . their voice hit the hard wall and be fling back . now they be on the first floor . a vast drawing - room at the front , a small but still large drawing - room giving on Birdcage Walk and the Park , with the Palace obstruct a considerable section of the view . large folding - door between the two saloon . 

 " just look at that ceiling ! " say Evelyn enthusiastically in the front room . 

 " yes , " she say . " beautiful . " she be think : " but you could not   always be crane your neck to look at a ceiling , however beautiful it be . " 

 " this would be the Board Room , " say Evelyn . 

 " yes ? " she query . " what about the double door ? anyone in the back room would hear everything you be say at the Board meeting . " 

 " oh no ! " he protest . " besides , we could do away with those thing and continue the wall all across . quite simple . lovely fireplace , be not   they ? " 

 " lovely , " she agree . " but they would never warm these room enough in winter . I do not   know how people manage in these old house in winter . they must have be starve to death sometimes . " 

 " well , " he say impatiently , " we could soon fix that . central heating . of course . or electric radiator . " 

 " there be not   enough switch . you would have to re - wire it all . " 

 she really do desire to soothe he , humour he , yield to he . but what could she say ? she have to be honest . although she try to soften her tone she somehow could not soften it sufficiently . nervousness . self - consciousness . Withal , there be one heavenly advantage . they be all alone together in the immense mansion . wander as they please , they would be in privacy . which be pleasant , even delicious , thrill to she . and if she vex he it would still be thrill . 

 " obviously a lot of re - wiring would have to be do , " say Evelyn stiffly . what the deuce be the matter with the girl , with everybody ? she seem determined not to be please . she be not genuinely pleased even with the marvellous ceiling . she be in a queer mood . he regret have send for she . still , he would have regret not have send for she . so it be as broad as it be long . no luck ! but if she keep on with her carping he would tick she off . he would rather enjoy tick she off , for the fun of see her hot and upset . exciting , to see she upset . something fine come out that you would never see otherwise . and they be all alone together . they be free , beyond the rule of social law and usage . 

 " well , " he say , sinisterly , " we will go a bit high . " and they climb to the next storey . 

 " I think I might live myself on this floor , " he say ; but he feel as he speak that he be very daring . " there be a splendid bathroom . come and see it ... how be that for a bathroom ? " 

 " but the kitchen 's in the basement , " she object , amazed at his scheme . " and the service - stair be frightfully narrow and twisty . " 

 " oh ! " Staccato . yes , he be annoy . he be allow himself to be annoy . " where be your tape - measure ? " 

 " tape - measure ? I have not   get one . " 

 " I tell Miss Cass to tell you to bring one . " 

 " I be sorry . I do not   hear anything about any tape - measure . " 

 a pause . 

 " well , we may as well see the top floor . " tone weary and disgusted . 

 on the top floor be apparently numberless small room . 

 " these would make excellent office , " Evelyn say with brightness . 

 " but you will want a room for Oldham . to say nothing of a caretaker and a cook and a maid . " 

 " now look here ! " he address she harshly , defiantly . " I have   get you here to have your opinion . well , let I have it , straight out . I do not   want all these ' but . ' you have   say nothing but ' but ' up to now . say something positive . you simply do not   like the house . " 

 he would break down her guard . and he do not   give a damn . they would have one row , and if she could not   behave decently , show some sympathy , be less cursedly stiff , she would be let herself in for another row . she be as bad as Miss Cass . he admit that his character have change since the adventure with Gracie . never mind . he be sick of all woman . 

 " yes , I do like the house , " say Violet , in dark despair . wonder how she might have avoid this imminent catastrophe . " but it be not   office . it would be as if you be try to make a thing do - for something else . if I be in your place and I want office I should build office . and fancy the kitchen in the basement and you live up here ! and I do not   think it would be a good thing for you to live where you work . I know you do , at the Palace - but - but - " she give it up . disaster be upon she and she be helpless . there he stand in front of she on the landing in the great bare , empty , echo house - there he stand as hard and stony as Satan . 

 Evelyn be touch by her solicitude for his welfare . which solicitude , however , strike he as rather comical . what could she know about what be good and what be bad for a mature single man ? he be at least fifteen year her senior , and she be treat he as an inexperienced youth without sense . he be touch , too , by the mysterious emergence of the girl in she ; not the protest girl , but the weak , perplexed , defenceless creature , this time . not efficient , not ' commonsensical . ' her embarrassment bring out her beauty and give a strange glistening transparency to her brown eye ... dress primly in black . but the black be romantic ; it suit she and the moment . he feel all his steely armour melting . " what be I go to do next ? " he ask his soul , and then abandon himself . 

 " ' but ' - ' but ' - ' but , ' " he quote she , in a gentle , teasing , yet tremulous , voice . " you be a dear ! " 

 and he advance two step , smile and masterful , smile at her delicious but comical solicitude , and just kiss she . instead of resist he with all her sturdy maidenliness , she begin softly to cry . 

 none could say whether he or she be the more astounded by this remarkable example of emotional instability in the male . 

 content 
 chapter 73 

 the supper 

 on Sunday night both the restaurant and the grill - room close , theoretically , at midnight . the restaurant in fact do close at midnight , because the restaurant have its orchestra , and the orchestra play " God save the king " on the stroke of the hour , and though the National Anthem may mean different thing at different time , people always know exactly what it do mean and they obey it exactly . the patron of the grill - room , have no Nunc Dimittis to scatter they , be send away home only by their conscience and the significant demeanour and activity of the waiter ; and some of they have be know to stay as late as one o'clock . neither Cappone nor Ceria appear in his realm on Sunday night . on this particular Sunday night , however , Ceria in a black tie surprisingly do appear in the grill - room at a quarter to twelve , the reason be that he have arrive too early at the hotel , and have nothing well to do , think it well to give a glance at the directive attitude of his lieutenant , Mr. Fontenay . he come , smile , and vanish . 

 still more surprisingly the panjandrum himself come into the grill - room for a moment , smile diffidently , and vanish . similarly he honour the restaurant for a moment . the reason for this singular performance on the part of the panjandrum be merely that he do not know what he be do . the hand of his watch would not move , and he have to do something . 

 there be three very nervous individual in the Palace at a quarter to twelve : Amadeo Ruffo , the banqueting - manager , who have charge of the great staff - supper and who know that his arrangement would be subject to the criticism , silent but ruthless , of sundry supreme expert ; Violet Marian Powler ; and Evelyn Orcham . 

 Evelyn and Violet share a unique secret , and it really be a secret - by the decision of Violet . Violet simply could not contemplate the announcement of the betrothal in marriage of the Managing Director of the Orcham Company and the head - housekeeper of the Imperial Palace . the event be too enormous , too upheaving . it would have have the effect of an earthquake in the Palace . the staff might have swoon and visitor be shake out of their bed . how could she go about her housekeeping work as the acknowledge fiancée of the panjandrum ? she could not . she would have blush through a quarter of an inch of powder , and all her underling would have behave to she as unnaturally as she to they . the excellent Beatrice Noakes would have be completely intolerable . hence Violet 's decree . 

 Evelyn have smile masculinely at the decree . he have tell she that she be childish , or at good school - girlish . he have tease she to death . he have attack her position with unanswerable argument . but he be glad to fall in take it ; for in reality he think as she do , and share all her trepidation . of course one day the secret must cease to be a secret . when ? how soon ? 

 she have say : 

 " not yet , not yet . we will see . " 

 in other respect Violet show admirable sense and dignity . in her bearing towards Evelyn she be a woman with a man . she do not look up to he , or no more than any woman except a reign princess or a film - star would look up to her betroth . her engagement be not more wonderful to she than any engagement be to the woman engage . she do not regard herself as the favour of heaven , nor Evelyn as a silver Lohengrin disembark from a swan - draw boat . she be just Violet , and Evelyn be just Evelyn   though the perfect man . 

 as for Evelyn , he have admire her deportment intensely during the tremendous nine day . it have convince he , if he need convincing - and every man in his circumstance do - that he be make no mistake . they have see each other only twice in the tremendous nine day . how should they see each other ? could he run upstairs to her room when they have a couple of minute of leisure and kiss she and ask she how she be get on ? they both live in the most transparent glass - house that ever be . true , they write to one another - Evelyn have not the slight difficulty in compose his letter - but surreptitiously and by mean of the post . Evelyn use a disguised hand on his envelope and slip they into the pillar - box at the end of Birdcage Walk in Storey 's Gate . Violet drop her into the letter - shoot flap on Eighth when no one be look . 

 the first occasion of their meeting be in Victoria Street on a dark Sunday evening . a woman in a taxi stop the vehicle at a certain lamp - post . a man who have obviously be wait jump in . a plot , sinister , suspicious ! the driver have his idea about the pair . the driver have never before hear of Renshaw Street , and when he at length discover the street it seem to he precisely the kind of street where anarchistic conspiracy or even burglary and assassination might well be hatch . also he misinterpret the munificence of his tip . it be Evelyn who have suggest the trip to Renshaw Street . Violet do not warn her parent . her father have open the door . Violet have say : " oh , dad , this be Mr. Orcham , " as casually as if Evelyn have be Mr. Smith from next door hut one . her father and mother - but especially her father - have receive the news with a praiseworthy imitation of calm . and in fact they be not minded to be overcome . after all , Violet be Violet , and they have always know that she stand in a class absolutely by herself . witness her rise in the hierarchy of the fabled sumptuous Palace . they give their consent and blessing to the pair . and they be much relieved at the departure of the pair . so be Violet . odious little snob , she have have social qualm about the introduction of the panjandrum to the humility of her home and the lowermiddle - class manner of her parent ! Evelyn have conduct himself like the angel he be . they have refuse supper , but Evelyn have eagerly join the old man in a bottle of beer . 

 on the journey to Shepherds Bush Evelyn have tactfully , and with exaggeration , recount to Violet the simplicity of his own early day . Shepherds Bush do not lie between Renshaw Street and Birdcage Walk ; but such be the route they choose . at Shepherds Bush Evelyn pay off the taxi ; they walk arm - in - arm amid the crowd empty from the big cinema ; and then Evelyn call another taxi . which taxi do not draw up under the marquise of the Imperial Palace ; nor do the twain re - enter the Palace by the same door nor at the same moment . it be all superbly exciting , and have the piquant air of an immoral intrigue . 

 the second occasion of their meeting have be at the Duncannon on the evening of the following Wednesday - Pozzi 's night off . Evelyn , carry a bundle of document , have be at his curtest with the Duncannon hall - porter : " I suppose Miss Powler be not   here , by any chance? .. oh , she be ! well , tell she to come down and see I in Mr. Pozzi 's room at once . and to bring those chart that she be show I this morning at the Palace . she will know which I mean . at once . " the hall - porter have conclude that Miss Powler be in trouble with the panjandrum . Miss Powler do know the chart that the panjandrum mean . the study of they last about an hour and a half and Miss Powler have emerge therefrom in a somewhat nervous and ruffled condition . so much so that she have depart immediately home to the Palace , whereas the panjandrum have remain to work in Pozzi 's room till after midnight . since the second occasion - nothing but a chance public encounter , and exchange of letter . an insufficient diet . 

 and now Evelyn be wait for midnight and the ordeal of the sight of she at the grand staff - supper , and have flutter into the grill - room and out again , and into the restaurant and out again , he decide to walk upstairs , because watch and clock be still moveless . not to walk up to Eighth . no ! it be not for he to wander into Violet 's sitting - room and have a private view of her new frock from Shaftesbury Avenue ! he go no high than Seventh , where he stick totally and foolishly inactive in his castle , and then walk down again , floor by floor , from corridor to dimly light corridor , star at the blank face of the door of uncounted temporary home inhabit by person who probably have their own estimate of the importance and unimportance and bliss and misery of love in human life . 

 he stand in the foyer . guest be now leave in a thin steady stream . he glimpse the restaurant , and see that it be nearly deserted . the orchestra begin to play " God save the king . " Midnight , by God ! he be due at the supper . the hand of watch do move . 

 2 . 

 the Queen Anne room , the large of the private dining - room at the Palace , be panel in unpolished wood in what a celebrated decorative artist state to be the Queen Anne style . its lighting , however , brilliant and yet delicately soft , have none of the characteristic of the antique . indeed the lighting be so modern that , go beyond the present , it foretell the future . the Palace continually rejuvenate its interior ; and the Queen Anne have just be so treat . 

 the magnificently floral supper - table be narrow for its length . and with a purpose . Mr. Cousin , Mr. Ruffo , and Mr. Jones - Wyatt   the head of the restaurant and the grill know well than to poke their nose into any affair of the banquet department   have be confront with one of the most terrible problem that ever puzzle a majordomo : how to distribute four girl among a couple of dozen man without cause a riot of grievance . Mr. Immerson , who be responsible for the illustrate menu - card , ultimately solve the problem and prepare the plan of the table . Mr. Cousin   in the Chair , with Evelyn on his right and Mr. Harbour on his left , sit in the middle of one side of the board . opposite Mr. Cousin sit Mr. Stairforth   Stock Department   and Lord Watlington , flank by Mrs. Oulsnam and Miss Marian Tilton . the graver young woman , Miss Cass and Violet , be each next but one to opposite end of the table , on the same side as the Chair . by this masterpiece of ingenuity , no girl have to waste herself on a girl opposite , and every man be at bad either within one man of a girl on his own side or have a girl opposite or nearly opposite to whom he could talk or listen or on whom he could gaze : the Chair and its supporter have the pick of the chatterer ; but no girl be monopolise by director to the detriment of the staff , each girl have a Director on one hand and a member of the staff on the other . Cappone sit at one end of the table and Ceria at the other , and Amadeo Ruffo next to Cappone face Violet . enough of the arrangement of seating ; the beauty of its skilfulness could not be fully set forth in five page . 

 the man wear dinner - jacket , symbol of informality , and a unique sight be see : Maître Planquet and the Commendatore Rocco , not in white with white cap , but in evening dress . all the girl have new frock . everybody have foresee that the dash Marian Tilton would be the smart and daring of the four ; she be . Mrs. Oulsnam make a radiant close second . Miss Cass and Violet , while smart , be less dashingly effective . 

 Mr. Ruffo be the last to sit down . he lower himself into a chair with the mien of one commit himself to the deep and trust in God . he have do everything possible to ensure for the feast an unparalleled perfection , and he could do no more . he at once begin talk to Violet . Mr. Stairforth and Marian Tilton could utter more word in less time than Ruffo ; but at interval they pause to take breath . Mr. Ruffo , talk slowly , could breathe while he talk , and be never pause , save occasionally from italian politeness . 

 talk , he survey his chef de rang and his waiter : all be in order . Caviare on miniature crumpet , and vodka . abstinence be contrary to the code . all have to drink the vodka . Mr. Ruffo have a calm , sure belief in the virtue of vodka on an empty stomach as an inspirer of gay backchat and broad - minded conviviality . the vodka be the good in London , and have run into money , for Ruffo have not boggle at expense . the bill for a similar supper to mere visitor would have suffice to buy a small hotel in the country . but Ruffo have receive instruction from Mr. Cousin that everything be to be charge at bare cost , so that all the staff , proud girl include , could pay their scot without inconvenience . this generous precaution on the part of the Palace authority prove to be otiose , for the next day Mr. Harbour get hold of Ruffo , and discharge the entire liability out of his privy purse . a final gesture . on the following Wednesday the cigarette - king be to rejoin Mrs. Harbour at Cherbourg . 

 the waiter be watchful and rapid as if for their life ; the sub - chef and low cook in Maître Planquet 's kitchen be even more assiduous than if the master 's eye have be upon they ; and through the partially open slide partition divide the Queen Anne room from the Queen Victoria room next door , a diminutive orchestra send music dreamy and low , accompany and not drown the conversation . all these people , from first violin to dishwasher , labour as joyously as though they be present at the eating itself of the supper . and above , floor after floor of visitor , unaware of the romantic affair below , prosaically and ignorantly sleep . 

 " Monsieur le Directeur , j'ai l'honneur de boire a votre santé . " the gruff booming voice of Commendatore Rocco suddenly dominate the table , silence all conversation . the Commendatore raise his glass of hock , bow and drank ; and Evelyn ceremoniously respond . Trust Rocco to impose himself ! he have get ahead of his rival , Maître Planquet . 

 Evelyn , only a moment ago a nervous wanderer over the carpet furlong of the Palace , be now the super - panjandrum . he hat it ; but he have to be , and he succeed in be , the super - panjandrum , the mighty guest , mighty than three millionaire . he could act , and he be help by the accident that he be not able to catch Violet 's eye , nor she his . have their eye meet the result would have be to humble they both into a bottomless deep of self - consciousness . he tease Mrs. Oulsnam and Marian Tilton . 

 both girl be a shin success . they do in truth grace the feast , which would not have be half so festive without they . see on the table in the midst of the flower the handbag of Mrs. Oulsnam , the handbag of Marian Tilton , the cloisonné cigarette - case of Mrs. Oulsnam , the gold cigarette - case of Marian Tilton ! these matter change the aspect of the board . see Marian Tilton use her lipstick and show her tooth , while dangerously flirt with Lord Watlington   who be a bit jealous of Evelyn 's teasing ! 

 the effect on male spirit be irresistible . Pan and Bacchus be abroad in the Queen Anne room . the cigarette - king emit jolly expletive in the american language . and Evelyn be move to oblivious mirth . he have be count the course : " that be one finish . " " that be two . " " that be three . " in his longing for the end of the ordeal - he miss the passage of one course ; and be the more pleased when he discover this carelessness ... 

 Coffee , cigar , cigarette , liqueur , repletion . Mr. Ruffo give a subtle sign and the staff of waiter fade away . 

 " lady and gentleman , " say Mr. Cousin , rise . " there will be no speech . you ought to applaud that . "   Uncertain laughter .   " but I give you the health of our guest . " the reveller stand up . the health be drunk . the reveller sit down . 

 " lady and gentleman , " say Evelyn , rise to applause whose formidable and prolonged uproar of appreciation frighten he ; many second which be hour elapse before he could continue , his voice shake a little : " I thank you . I be not go to forget this supper . before I sit down I want to propose the health of our Chairman , Mr. Dennis Dover , who would have like to be here , but be not   well enough to join we . the health of Mr. Dennis Dover . " very loud applause , during which Evelyn sit down as relieve as a man who have have an ache tooth out . 

 " c'était chic , ça ! " Mr. Cousin murmur to he . 

 now Mr. Jones - Wyatt have his moment of glory . say not a word to anyone , he have arrange for the appearance of the cabaret performer in new turn - turn not show in the restaurant : a lady - conjurer , and a french imitator who could imitate a crease in a rug or a woman silently wonder what shoe would well match her frock , or anything like that . these turn be more applaud than enjoy . Bacchus and the wraith of Venus divert from they the attention which they merit . then the music resume , and the slide partition be open wide into the Queen Victoria room , which have be clear for dancing . 

 3 . 

 " you will dance , " Mr. Cousin enjoin Evelyn . 

 " oh , hang it ! well , if I must . " he know that he must . " who ought I to dance with first ? " 

 " Miss Powler of course , mon cher . she be the most important . Les autres - ça ne compte pas . " 

 Mr. Cousin be wrong there . the other do count . voice have be hear against the inclusion of secretary . but both secretary , like Mrs. Oulsnam , have indeed definitely triumph ; even Miss Cass - to - night the mirror of sweet softness - have have her triumph . not merely be every man present fully aware of the real importance of these secretarial girl , of their secret influence and power in the politic of the hotel ; but they be girl among a couple of score man , rare , court , flattered , splendid . none of the usual competition of girl for man ! the boot be spectacularly on the other leg this evening . all , girl and man , agree that the evening be simply terrific - and it be not yet by any mean over ! 

 on the parquet of the Queen Victoria room there be only four couple , because there be only four girl in the party . but they fairly well fill the floor . everything have be think of . by a palisade of chair the space for dancing be limit to suit the maximum number of dancer . beyond the palisade be table equip for bridge , and one table label in large letter : " Maniglia " - a compliment to the Commendatore Rocco . Lord Watlington have seize Miss Marian Tilton and be swirl around with she ; Sir Henry Savott be vitalise Miss Cass ; Mrs. Oulsnam be vitalise Mr. Cousin ; and Evelyn hold Violet , it be right , proper , expect , and unavoidable that the panjandrum should open the dancing with the head - housekeeper . 

 those two be alone together in the Queen Victoria room . they speak low , and none could overhear they ; besides , the other three couple be absorb in themselves . 

 " I feel awful while I be on my leg wait for the acclamation to stop , " say Evelyn , who have be profoundly impressed , and be still preoccupy , by the reception of the toast of his health . the furious outburst and din have do more than anything else ever do do to persuade he that after all he be somebody of some importance in the world . and now he want to hear a word or two from Violet on the subject . 

 " you look so sweet I could scarcely bear to look at you . if it have go on any long I should have have to cry , " she say , murmuringly , and not glance at he . the reply , which be could not in the least have predict , entrance he : that be to say , it put he into a trance . his right hand on her back , his left hand in her right , he could feel Violet 's emotion . her sober tone be charge with emotion . he just dance . 

 " fine little orchestra , Evelyn ! " Sir Henry throw at he in pass . he nod and smile in his trance . 

 so that be how he have strike she in his ordeal ! well , her reaction be the ideal reaction . it seem to he to typify their future existence together . she the efficient , resourceful , hard - work housekeeper , so move by the sight of he in his ordeal that she nearly burst into tear ! not that she ever would have burst into tear : he know that : in any circumstance she would be mistress of herself . he have a sense of all the faculty , capability , reserve of strength within that new bright blue frock . and she be his , and the fact that she be his be the most marvellous and incredible thing on earth , past , present or to come . and yet it be not incredible - it be quite natural . he know his worth as well as he know her . he know he could give as richly as he receive . she could rely on he . and she would always be there for he to rely on . and she be so excitingly and so subtly feminine . she radiate femininity , and her femininity be , for he , her most important attribute . she be far more feminine than those terrific flirt , Marian Tilton and Mrs. Oulsnam , who be charmingly exploit what superficial femininity they have the whole time . she be more feminine , and more dangerously feminine , than the siren Gracie . what responsive sensibility and what wise understanding and what mother - wit she would display on the honeymoon ! he would be able to set out on that delicate enterprise with a mind at ease . he recall the trial of his first honeymoon . 

 " tell I what you be think about , my dear , " he whisper under the shelter of the music , slightly squeeze her hand . 

 Violet be think that this protective male who hold she and guide she about the floor be a great man , really great , far great than the assemble millionaire , and that he be a child who need protection , and that she could give the protection and would , and that he be immeasurably her superior in everything except daily commonsense , and that she be intolerably in love with he , intolerably happy , and that thing always do work out right in the end , and that she want to dance with he till she drop , and that she want to leave the publicity of the dance and the noise and the chatter and go upstairs by herself and think and think and think about he and her bliss . she say : 

 " I have an awful thought that all these sharp - eye here be bind to guess there be something between we two . " 

 he pooh - poohe the notion , while admit to himself that it might have some basis . 

 " and what if they do ? there be ! " he say , defiantly . 

 from that moment , however , both of they suffer under the delusion that the entire company be look at they in a rather peculiar way . 

 the music pause . but they might not dance the next dance . no couple on the floor might dance the next dance . justice reign . at least sixteen man have to dance with four girl ; and as regard the panjandrum , have dance with Violet he be compel by the fundamental law which hold society together to dance with Miss Cass , Mrs. Oulsnam , and Miss Tilton . and as regard the two latter , each of they be determine so to manouvre as to be in a position to boast on the morrow and for the rest of her life that she have dance with three millionaire ; but the cigarette - king do not dance . the millionairedom of Sir Henry Savott be doubtful , but not on that night . 

 after a very long period , during which the four girl perform miracle of joyous endurance , the pardonable thirst of the orchestra bring about an interval , and everyone sit down . there be two bridge - table in action , and at another table the Commendatore be play manila with Ceria and a few more . the relation between the Grill - chef and the Grill - manager be now as smooth as a pane of glass . 

 Mr. Harbour , Evelyn , Sir Henry , and Mr. Immerson be discuss , not too seriously , a new project for an office - building with two frontage and two entrance , one for the office of the cigarette - king 's new european headquarter , and the other for the office of the Orcham International Hotels Company Limited . Mr. Harbour have mention his scheme for the complete exploitation of Europe , and Evelyn have suggest a joint building - of which the cigarette - king would take about eighty per cent . of the space . Mr. Harbour talk in fabulous number of dollar . in all his existence he have have one idea - for the treatment of tobacco , and he have never loose it and never have another idea and never would have another idea . his idea have put he second or third in the majestic catalogue of american millionaire . he have swell his idea to the extent of twenty million cigarette a day in the United States , and his ambition be to sell a minimum of ten million cigarette a day in Europe . and his share in Orcham be a trifle to he , and he be calmly prepared to come down with a million dollar for an office building which would make London stare . but otherwise he be an ordinary decent fellow , and never say anything , save in figure , that you could not   forget in five minute . 

 Violet , have quit the whirlwind Stairforth , approach the table vaguely . 

 " do sit here with we , " say Evelyn impulsively . all the man rise . Immerson discreetly depart , and Violet take his place . 

 " it be a lovely party , Miss Powler , " say Mr. Harbour in the way of small - talk . 

 " you must have some champagne , " say Sir Henry . " here , waiter . " 

 the waiter have reappear , and be generously dispense drink . 

 " I really could not , Sir Henry . " 

 " oh , but you must , " he insist . " this evening be an occasion . Champagne will not   do you any harm . as an indulgence it will do you good . it be only when it become a habit that it harm you . " 

 Violet glance at Evelyn for help , receive none , and sip at champagne pour out by Sir Henry himself . 

 " I hear you have   read my daughter 's book , " say Sir Henry . " and like it . I be glad . but I should have leave out bit here and there if I have be consult . only I be not . these modern daughter be very secretive , Miss Powler . however , now she be married and go to have a baby I suppose it do not   matter how modem the book be . " and thus he go on . 

 Lord Watlington come to the table . 

 " good night , Evelyn . good night , everybody . I be off . just have a telephone message . " he grin , and in ten second be go . he be the first to leave . he know how to leave a party . 

 when the orchestra return , Sir Henry ask Violet for another dance . 

 " you be the fine dancer in this room , " say he . " and I be not flatter you . " 

 Violet shake her head . but she probably be the fine dancer in the room , thank to her stage study and experience in connection with the Laundry Amateur Dramatic Society . she would not dance ; say she really must go to bed . the example of Lord Watlington have encourage her resolve . Sir Henry , realise that he would fail to cajole she , instantly resume the subject of the office - building with Mr. Harbour . 

 " I must go , " Violet repeat to Evelyn . 

 " you be very tired , " he agree . and add gallantly : " I will see you to the lift . " 

 Mr. Harbour shake Violet 's hand with warmth , and Sir Henry absent - mindedly . 

 4 . 

 the corridor of the private dining - room be empty and dim and mile long . 

 " who put they on to that office - building idea ? " Violet ask . 

 " well , " say Evelyn . " so far as we be concern , you do - via I . " 

 she smile weakly . 

 " yes ! " say Evelyn positively . 

 " Darling ! " she say as they stroll up the corridor . " this really can not   go on . " 

 " what ? " 

 " our engagement be a secret . it be too try , and it be certain to come out . " 

 " I quite agree . " 

 " but , " Violet continue , " it have not   get to come out while I be here as head - housekeeper . I could not   face it . " 

 " yes , you could , " say Evelyn . " but you need not . why should you ? " 

 " but what shall you do for someone to take my place ? " 

 " I neither know nor care , " Evelyn laugh grandly . " it be Cousin 's affair , all that be . I be not the manager of the Palace . " 

 " then as soon as I can I will go back to Renshaw Street , " say Violet . 

 " I have   get a well plan than that , " say Evelyn the great organiser . 

 he outline his plan . he would disclose the secret to Cousin , who could be trust to keep it , and trust to make the necessary arrangement as to staff - appointment . the Orcham Company have several staff to choose from , and a considerable list of applicant for minor post which would fall vacant when their present occupant go up in the world . in less than a month he would be go to Paris , Rome , Madrid . they could be marry at a registry office on the morning of his departure , and the trip should be their honeymoon . 

 " and , " he say , " you could give I a lot of good advice about those hotel . " 

 " only when we be by ourselves , " Violet say quickly . " I should not   be a housekeeper then , darling . " 

 " no , of course not , " he concur . " of course not . " 

 still , he be just the least bit surprised when he see that she intend her future role to be solely that of wife . then he see that he be a simpleton to have be surprised . even the most earnest of ' they ' throw away their business career for marriage , and without a pang ! but what a career she would make of marriage ! she be serious ; she know what work be . and he too . she be his sort ; he her . Gracie be not his sort and never would have be , because she be not serious and do not know what sustained work be . he have learn one supreme lesson from the brief , violent affair with Gracie : namely , that Gracie be not his sort . yes , Violet be indeed his sort , and as his mind flit back over the history of their relation , he see mystically that from the first he have be destine for she , and she for he . 

 " and when we come back to London ? " she ask . 

 " oh ! we will fix that later . plenty of time . heap of time . " the lift be up above . he ring for it . she suddenly kiss he with the abandonment of exhaustion , clung to he , clutch he , kiss he again . as if she be say : " you be all I have in the world now ! I have not   even myself now ! " 

 he watch she ascend away from he in the lift . marvellous sensation he have , as he return slowly to the party in his honour . heavenly girl ; and so touch in her feminine fatigue ! be it for these ecstasy that he have climb to his particular pinnacle ? be Violet , or the perfecting of luxury hotel throughout Europe , his life - work ? if both , which be the more important ? be luxury hotel sociologically justifiable ? he do not   know . he could not   decide . he know merely that he be go straight on . he say to himself : " there be a lot of thing in this world you will never get the hang of . and only idiot try to . " 

 the END 
