Helen with the high hand 

 Arnold Bennett 

 Chapter 1 

 beginning of the idyll 

 in the five Towns human nature be report to be so hard that you can break stone on it . yet sometimes it soften , and then we have one of our rare idyll of which we be very proud , while pretend not to be . the soft and delicate South would possibly not esteem highly our idyll , as such . nevertheless they be our idyll , idyllic for we , and remind we , by certain symptom , that though we never cry there be conceal somewhere within our body a fount of happy tear . 

 the town park be an idyll in the otherwise prosaic municipal history of the Borough of Bursley , which previously have never get near to romance than a turkish bath . it be once waste ground cover with horrible rubbish - heap , and make dangerous by the imperfectly - protect shaft of disuse coal - pit . now you enter it by emblazon gate ; it be surround by elegant railing ; fountain and cascade babble in it ; wild - fowl from far country roost in it , on tree with long name ; tea be serve in it ; brass band make music on its terrace , and on its high terrace town councillor play bowl on billiard - table green while cast proud glance on the house of thirty thousand people spread out under the sweet influence of the gold angel that top the Town Hall spire . the other four town be apt to ridicule that gold angel , which for exactly fifty year have guard the borough and only be regilde twice . but ask the plumber who last have the fearsome job of regilde it whether it be a gold angel to be despise , and - you will see ! 

 the other four town be also apt to point to their own park when Bursley mention its park   especially Turnhill , small and most conceited of the five ; but let they show a park whose natural situation equal that of Bursley 's park . you may tell I that the terra - cotta construction within it carry ugliness beyond a joke ; you may tell I that in spite of the park 's vaunted situation nothing can be see from it save the chimney and kiln of earthenware manufactory , the scaffolding of pithead , the ample dome of the rate - collector 's office , the railway , minaret of nonconformity , sundry undulate square mile of monotonous house - roof , the long scarf of black smoke which add such interest to the sky of the five Towns - and , of course , the gold angel . but I tell you that before the day of the park lover have no place to walk in but the cemetery ; not the ancient churchyard of St. Luke 's   the rector would like to catch they at it !   - the borough cemetery ! one generation be force to make love over the tomb of another - and such tomb ! - before the day of the park . that be the sufficient answer to any criticism of the park . 

 the high terrace of the park be a splendid expanse of gravel , ornament with flower - bed . at one end be the north bowling - green ; at the other be the south bowling - green ; in the middle be a terra - cotta and glass shelter ; and at interval , against the terra - cotta balustrade , be arrange rustic seat from which the aged , the enamoured , and the sedentary can enjoy the gold angel . 

 between the southernmost seat and the south bowling - green , on that Saturday afternoon , stand Mr. James Ollerenshaw . he be watch a man who earn four - and - sixpence a day by gently toy from time to time with a roller on the polished surface of the green . Mr. James Ollerenshaw 's age be sixty , but he look as if he do not care . his appearance be shabby ; but he do not seem to mind . he carry his hand in the peculiar horizontal pocket of his trouser , and stick out his figure , in a way to indicate that he give permission to all to think of he exactly what they please . those pocket be characteristic of the whole costume ; their very name be unfamiliar to the twentieth century . they divide the garment by a fissure whose side be keep together by many button , and a defection on the part of even a few button be apt to be inconvenient . James Ollerenshaw be one of the last person in Bursley to defy fashion in the matter of pocket . his suit be of a strange hot colour - like a brick which , have become very dirty , have be imperfectly clean and then powder with sand - make in a hard , eternal , resistless cloth , after a pattern which have not survive the apprenticeship of five town ' tailor in London . scarcely anywhere save on the person of James Ollerenshaw would you see nowadays that cloth , that tint , those very short coat - tail , that curved opening of the waistcoat , or those trouser - pocket . the paper turn - down collar , and the black necktie   of which only one square inch be ever visible , and the paper cuff , which finish the tailor - make portion of Mr. Ollerenshaw , still linger in sporadic profusion . his low , flat - top hat be faintly green , as though a delicate fungoid growth be just bud on its black . his small foot be cloister in small , thick boot of glitter brilliance . the colour of his face match that of his suit . he have no moustache and no whisker , but a small , stiff grey beard be root somewhere under his chin . he have keep a good deal of his hair . he be an undersized man , with short arm and leg , and all his feature - mouth , nose , ear , blue eye - be small and sharp ; his head , as an entirety , be small . his thin mouth be always tightly shut , except when he speak . the general expression of his face be one of suppress , sarcastic amusement . 

 he be always refer to as Jimmy Ollerenshaw , and he may strike you as what be know as a " character , " an oddity . his sudden appearance at a Royal Levée would assuredly have excite remark , and even in Bursley he diverge from the ordinary ; nevertheless , I must expressly warn you against imagine Mr. Ollerenshaw as an oddity ; it be the most difficult thing in the world for a man name James not to be refer to as Jimmy . the temptation to the public be almost irresistible . let he have but a wart on his nose , and they will regard it as sufficient excuse for yield . I do not think that Mr. Ollerenshaw be consciously set down as an oddity in his native town . certainly he do not so set down himself . certainly he be incapable of freakishness . by the town he be respect . his view on cottage property , the state of trade , and the finance of the borough be listen to with a respectful absence of comment . he be one of the few who have make cottage property pay . it be say he own a mile of cottage in Bursley and Turnhill . it be say that , after Ephraim Tellwright , he be the rich man in Bursley . there be a slight resemblance of type between Ollerenshaw and Tellwright . but Tellwright have bury two wife , whereas Ollerenshaw have never get within arm 's length of a woman . the town much preferred Ollerenshaw . 

 after have duly survey the majestic activity of the ground - man on the bowling - green , and have glance at his watch , Mr. Ollerenshaw sit down on the near bench ; he be wait for an opponent , the captain of the bowling - club . it be exactly at the instant of his downsitting that the drama about to be unfold properly begin . stroll along from the northern extremity of the terrace to the southern be a young woman . this young woman , as could be judge from her free and independent carriage , be such a creature as , have once resolve to do a thing , be not to be deter from do it by the caprice of other people . she have resolve - a resolution of no importance whatever - to seat herself on precisely the southernmost bench of the terrace . there be not , indeed , any particular reason why she should have choose the southernmost bench ; but she have choose it . she have choose it , afar off , while it be yet empty and Mr. Ollerenshaw be on his foot . when Mr. Ollerenshaw drop into a corner of it the girl 's first instinctive volition be to stop , early than she have intend , at one of the other seat . 

 despite statement to the contrary , man be so little like a sheep that when he have a choice of bench in a park he will always select an empty one . this rule be universal in England and Scotland , though elsewhere exception to it have be know to occur . but the girl , be a girl , and be a girl who earn her own living , and be a girl who bring all convention to the bar of her reason and force they to stand trial there , say to herself , proudly and coldly : " it would be absurd on my part to change my mind . I mean to occupy that bench , and why should I not ? there be amply sufficient space for the man and I too . he have take one corner , and I will take the other . these notion that girl have be silly . " she mean the notion that she herself have have . 

 so she float forward , charmingly and inexorably . she be what in the five town be call " a stylish piece of good . " she wear a black - and - white frock , of a small check pattern , with a black belt and long black glove , and she hold over her serenity a black parasol richly flounce with black lace - a toilet unusual in the district , and as effective as it be unusual . she know how to carry it . she be a tall girl , and generously form , with a complexion between fair and dark ; her age , perhaps , about twenty - five . she have the eye of an empress - and not an empress - consort either , nor an empress who tremble in secret at the rumour of cabal and intrigue . yes , consider as a decoration of the terrace , she be possibly the fine , most dazzling thing that Bursley could have produce ; and Bursley doubtless regret that it could only claim she as a daughter by adoption . 

 Approaching , step by dainty and precise step , the seat invest by Mr. James Ollerenshaw , she arrive at the point whence she could distinguish the feature of her forestaller ; she be somewhat short - sighted . she give no outward sign of fear , irresolution , cowardice . but if she have not be more afraid of her own contempt than of anything else in the world , she would have run away ; she would have cease be an empress and decline suddenly into a scared child . however , her fear of her own contempt keep her spine straight , her face towards the danger , and her foot steadily move . 

 " it be not my fault , " she say to herself . " I mean to occupy that bench , and occupy it I will . what have I to be ashamed of ? " 

 and she do occupy that bench . she contrive to occupy it without see Mr. Ollerenshaw . each separate movement of hers deny absolutely the existence of Mr. Ollerenshaw . she arrange her dress , and her parasol , and her arm , and the exact angle of her chin ; and there gradually fall upon she that stillness which fall upon the figure of a woman when she have definitively adopt an attitude in the public eye . she be gaze at the gold angel , a mile off , which flash in the sun . but what a deceptive stillness be that stillness ! a hammer be hammer away under her breast with what seem to she a reverberate sound . strange that that hammering do not excite attention throughout the park ! then she have the misfortune to think of the act of blushing . she violently will not to blush . but her blood be too much for she . it display itself in the most sanguinary manner first in the centre of each cheek , and it increase its area of conquest until the whole of her visible skin - even the back of her neck and her lobe - have rosily yield . and she be one of your girl who never blush ! the ignominy of it ! to blush because she find herself within thirty inch of a man , an old man , with whom she have never in her life exchange a single word ! 

 content 
 Chapter 2 

 an AFFAIR of the seventy 

 have satisfied her obstinacy by sit down on the seat of her choice , she might surely - one would think - have end a mysteriously difficult situation by rise again and depart , of course with due dignity . but no ! she could not ! she wish to do so , but she could not command her limb . she just sit there , in horrid torture , like a stoical fly on a pin - one of those fly that pretend that nothing hurt . the agony might have be prolong to century have not an extremely startling and dramatic thing happen - the most startling and dramatic thing that ever happen either to James Ollerenshaw or to the young woman . James Ollerenshaw speak , and I imagine that nobody be more surprised than James Ollerenshaw by his brief speech , which slip out of he quite unawares . what he say be : 

 " well , lass , how go it , like ? " 

 if the town could have hear he , the town would have rustle from boundary to boundary with agitated and delicious whispering . 

 the young woman , instead of be justly incense by this monstrous molestation from an aged villain who have not be introduce to she , give a little jump   as though relieve from the spell of an enchantment , and then deliberately turn and face Mr. Ollerenshaw . she also smile , amid her rose . 

 " very well indeed , thank you , " she reply , primly , but nicely . 

 upon this , they both of they seek to recover - from an affair that have occur in the late seventy . 

 in the late seventy James Ollerenshaw have be a young - old man of nearly thirty . he have have a stepbrother , much old and much poor than himself , and the stepbrother have die , leave a daughter , name Susan , almost , but not quite , in a state of indigence . the stepbrother and James have not be on term of effusive cordiality . but James be perfectly ready to look after Susan , his stepniece . Susan , aged seventeen year , be , however , not perfectly ready to be look after . she have a little money , and she earn a little   by paint aster on toilet ware , and the chit be very rude to her stepuncle . in less than a year she have marry a youth of twenty , who apparently have not in he even the rudiment of worldly successfulness . James Ollerenshaw do his avuncular duty by formally and grimly protest against the marriage . but what authority have a stepuncle ? Susan defy he , with a maximum of unforgettable impoliteness ; and she go to live with her husband at Longshaw , which be at the other end of the five town . the fact become public that a solemn quarrel exist between James and Susan , and that each of they have swear not to speak until the other speak . James would have forgive , if she have hint at reconciliation . and , hard as it be for youth to be in the wrong , Susan would have hint at reconciliation if James have not be so rich . the rich of James offend Susan 's independence . not for million would she have expose herself to the suspicion that she have break her oath because her stepuncle be a wealthy and childless man . she be , of course , wrong . nor be this her only indiscretion . she be so ridiculously indiscreet as to influence her husband in such a way that he actually succeed in life . have James perceive they to be struggle in poverty , he might conceivably have go over to they and help they , in an orgy of forgiving charity . but the success of young Rathbone falsify his prediction utterly , and be , far , an affront to he . thus the quarrel slowly crystallise into a permanent estrangement , a passive feud . everybody get thoroughly accustomed to it , and think nothing of it , it be a social phenomenon not at all unique of its kind in the five town . when , fifteen year later , Rathbone die in mid - career , people think that the feud would end . but it do not . James write a letter of condolence to his niece , and even send it to Longshaw by special messenger in the tramcar ; but he have not hear of the death until the day of the funeral , and Mrs. Rathbone do not reply to his letter . her independence and sensitiveness be again in the wrong . James do no more . you could not expect he to have do more . Mrs. Rathbone , like many widow of successful man , be " leave poorly off . " but she " manage . " once , five year before the scene on the park terrace , Mrs. Rathbone and James have encounter one another by hazard on the platform of Knype Railway Station . destiny hesitate while Susan wait for James 's recognition and James wait for Susan 's recognition . both of they wait too long . destiny avert its head and draw back , and the relative pass on their way without speak . James observe with interest a girl of twenty by Susan 's side - her daughter . this daughter of Susan 's be now share the park bench with he . hence the hidden drama of their meeting , of his speech , of her reply . 

 " and what be your name , lass ? " 

 " Helen . " 

 " Helen what ? " 

 " Helen , great - stepuncle , " say she . he laugh ; and she laugh also . the fact be that he have be aware of her name , vaguely . it have come to he , on the wind , or by some bird 's wing , although none of his acquaintance have be courageous enough to speak to he about the affair of Susan for quite twenty year past . Longshaw be as far from Bursley , in some way , as San Francisco from New York . there be people in Bursley who do not know the name of the Mayor of Longshaw - who make a point of not know it . yet news travel even from Longshaw to Bursley , by mysterious channel ; and Helen Rathbone 's name have so travel . James Ollerenshaw be glad that she be just Helen . he have be afraid that there might be something fancy between Helen and Rathbone - something expensive and aristocratic that go with her dress and her parasol . he illogically like she for be call merely Helen - as if the credit be her ! Helen be an old Ollerenshaw name - his grandmother 's   who have be attach to the household of Josiah Wedgwood , and his aunt 's . Helen be historic in his mind . and , far , it could not be deny that Rathbone be a fine old five town name too . 

 he be very illogical that afternoon ; he throw over the principle of a lifetime , argue from particular to general exactly like a girl . he have object , always , to the expensive and the aristocratic . he be proud of his pure plebeian blood , as many plebeian be ; he glory in it . he dislike show , with a calm and deep aversion . he be a plain man with a simple , unostentatious taste for money . the difference between Helen 's name and her ornamental raiment give he pleasure in the name . but he have not be examine she for more than half a minute when he begin to find pleasure in her rich clothe   rich , that is , to he ! . quite suddenly he , at the age of sixty , abandon without an effort his dear prejudice against fine feather , and begin , for the first time , to take joy in sit next to a pretty and well - dress woman . and all this , not from any broad , philosophic perception that fine feather have their proper part in the great scheme of cosmic evolution ; but because the check dress suit she , and the heavy , voluptuous parasol suit she , and the long black glove be inexplicably effective . woman grow old ; woman cease to learn ; but man , never . 

 as for Helen , she like he . she have like he for five year , ever since her mother have point he out on the platform of Knype Railway Station . she see he close now . he be old than she have be picture he ; indeed , the line on his little , rather wizened face , and the minute sprouting of grey - white hair in certain spot on his reddish chin , where he have shave himself badly , cause she somehow to feel quite sad . she think of he as " a dear old thing , " and then as " a dear old darling . " yes , old , very old ! nevertheless , she feel maternal towards he . she feel that she be much wise than he be , and that she could teach he a great deal . she see very clearly how wrong he and her mother have be , with their stupidly terrific quarrel ; and the notion of all the happiness which he have miss , in his solitary , unfeminised , bachelor existence , nearly bring into her eye tear of a quick and generous sympathy . 

 he , blind and shabby ancient , have no suspicion that his melancholy state and the notion of all the happiness he have miss have ting with sorrow the heart within the frock , and add a dangerous humidity to the glance under the sunshade . it do not occur to he that he be an object of pity , nor that a vast store of knowledge be wait to be pour into he . the aged , self - satisfy wag - beard imagine that he have conduct his career fairly well . he know no one with whom he would have change place . he regard Helen as an extremely agreeable little thing , with her absurd air of be grow - up . decidedly in five year she have tremendously alter . five year ago she have be gawky . now . . . well , he be proud of she . she have call he great - stepuncle , thus confer on he a sort of part - proprietorship in she ; and he be proud of she . the captain of the bowling - club come along , and James Ollerenshaw give he just such a casual nod as he might have give to a person of no account . the nod seem to say : " match this , if you can . it be mine , and there be nothing in the town to beat it . Mrs. Prockter herself have not   get more style than this . "   of this Mrs. Prockter , more later . 

 Helen soon settle down into a condition of ease , which put an end to blushing . she know she be admire . 

 " what be you do I ' bosley ? " James demand . 

 " I be live I ' bosley , " she retort , smartly . 

 " live here ! " he stop , and his hard old heart almost stop too . if not in mourning , she be in semi - mourning . surely Susan have not have the effrontery to die , away in Longshaw , without tell he ! 

 " Mother have marry again , " say Helen , lightly . 

 " marry ! " he be stagger . the wind be knock out of he . 

 " yes . and go to Canada ! " Helen add . 

 you pick up your paper in the morning , and idly and slowly peruse the advertisement on the first page , forget it , eat some bacon , grumble at the young boy , open the paper , read the breach of promise case on page three , drop it , and ask your wife for more coffee - hot - glance at your letter again , then reopen the paper at the news page , and find that the Tsar of Russia have be murder , and a few american city tumble to fragment by an earthquake - you know how you feel then . James Ollerenshaw feel like that . the captain of the bowling - club , however , poise a bowl in his right hand , and wait for James Ollerenshaw to leave his silken dalliance , see nothing but an old man and a young woman sit on a Corporation seat . 

 content 
 chapter 3 

 marry OFF a mother 

 " yes , " say Helen Rathbone , " mother fall in love . do not   you think it be funny ? " 

 " that be as may be , " James Ollerenshaw reply , in his quality of the wiseacre who be accustomed to be sagacious on the least possible expenditure of word . 

 " we both think it be awfully funny , " Helen say . 

 " Both ? who else be there ? " 

 " why , mother and I , of course ! we use to laugh over it . you see , mother be a very simple creature . and she be only forty - four . " 

 " she be above forty - four , " James correct . 

 " she tell I she be thirty - nine five year ago , " Helen protest . 

 " do she tell ye she be forty , four year ago ? " 

 " no . at least , I do not   remember . " 

 " do she ever tell ye she be forty ? " 

 " no . " 

 " Happen she be not such a simple creature as ye think for , my lass , " observe James Ollerenshaw . 

 " you do not   mean to infer , " say Helen , with cold dignity , " that my mother would tell I a lie ? 

 " all as I mean be that Susan be above thirty - nine five year ago , and I can prove it . I have to get her birth certificate when her father die , and I fancy I have   get it by I yet . " and his eye add : " so much for that point . one to I . " 

 Helen blush and frowned , and look up into the darkle heaven of her parasol ; and then it occur to she that her wise plan would be to laugh . so she laugh . she laugh in almost precisely the same manner as James have hear Susan laugh thirty year previously , before love have come into Susan 's life like a shell into a fortress , and finally blow their fragile relation all to piece . a few minute early the sight of great - stepuncle James have fill Helen with sadness , and he have not suspect it . now her laugh fill James with sadness , and she do not suspect it . in his sadness , however , he be glad that she laugh so naturally , and that the sombre magnificence of her dress and her glove and parasol do not prevent she from open she rather large mouth and show her tooth . 

 " it be just like mother to tell I fib about her age , " say Helen , generously   it be always interesting to observe the transformation of a lie into a fib . " and I shall write and tell she she be a horrid mean thing . I shall write to she this very night . " 

 " so Susan 's go and marry again ! " James murmur , reflectively . 

 Helen now definitely turn the whole of her mortal part towards James , so that she front he , and her foot be near his . he also turn , in response to this diplomatic advance , and leant his right elbow on the back of the seat , and his chin on his right palm . he put his left leg over his right leg , and thus his left foot sway like a bird on a twig within an inch of Helen 's flounce . the parasol cover the face of the just and the unjust impartially . 

 " I suppose you do not   know a farmer name Bratt that use to have a farm near Sneyd ? " say Helen . 

 " I can not   say as I do , " say James . 

 " well , that be the man ! " say Helen . " he use to come to Longshaw cattle - market with sheep and thing . " 

 " Sheep and thing ! " echo James . " what thing ? " 

 " oh ! I do not   know , " say Helen , sharply . " Sheep and thing . " 

 " and what do your mother take to Longshaw cattle - market ? " James inquire . " I understand as she let lodging . " 

 " not since I have   be a teacher , " say Helen , rather more sharply . " Mother do not   take anything to the cattle - market . but you know our house be just close to the cattle - market . " 

 " no , I do not , " say James , stoutly . " I think as it be in Aynsley - street . " 

 " oh ! that be year ago ! " say Helen , shock by his ignorance . " we have   live in Sneyd - road for year - year . " 

 " I will not deny it , " say James . 

 " the great fault of our house , " Helen proceed , " be that mother dare not   stir out of it on cattle - market day . " 

 " why not ? " 

 " cow ! " say Helen . " mother simply can not   look at a cow , and they be pass all the time . " 

 " she should ha ' be thankful as it be not   bull , " James put in . 

 " but I mean bull too ! " exclaim Helen . " in fact , it be a bull that lead to it . " 

 " what ! Th ' farmer save she from a mad bull , and she fall in love with he ? he be young than she , I lay ! " 

 " how do you know that ? " Helen question . " besides , he be not . they be just the same age . " 

 " forty - four ? " perceive delicious danger in the virgin 's face , James continue before she could retort , " I hope Susan be not   gore ? " 

 " you be quite wrong . you be jump to conclusion , " say Helen , with an air of indulgence that would have be exasperate have it not be enchant . " thing do not   happen like that except in novel . " 

 " I have   never read a novel in my life , " James defend himself . 

 " have not   you ? how interesting ! " 

 " but I have   know a woman knock down by a bull . " 

 " well , anyhow , mother be not   knock down by a bull . but there be a mad bull run down the street ; it have escape from the market . and Mr. Bratt be walk home , and the bull be after he like a shot . mother be look out of the window , and she see what be go on . so she rush to the front door and open it , and call to Mr. Bratt to run in and take shelter . and they only just get the door shut in time . " 

 " bless we ! " mutter James . " and what next ? " 

 " why , I come home from school and find they have tea together . " 

 " and ninety year between they ! " James reflect . 

 " then Mr. Bratt call every week . he be a widower , with no child . " 

 " it could not   ha ' be well , " say James . 

 " oh yes , it could , " say Helen . " because I have the great difficulty in marry they ; in fact , at one time I think I should never do it . I be always in the right , and mother be always in the wrong . she be admit that for year . she be have to admit it . yet she would go her own way . nothing would ever cure mother . " 

 " she use to talk just like that of your grandfather , " say James . " Susan always reckon as she would get more than her fair share of sense . " 

 " I do not   think she think that now , " say Helen , calmly , as if to say : " at any rate I have   cure she of that . " then she go on : " you see , Mr. Bratt have sell his farm - could not   make it pay - and he be go out to Manitoba . he say he would stop in England . Mother say she would not   let he stop in England where he could not   make a farm pay . she be quite right there , " Helen admit , with careful justice . " but then she say she would not   marry he and go out to Manitoba , because of leave I alone here to look after myself ! can you imagine such a reason ? 

 James merely raise his head quickly several time . the gesture mean whatever Helen prefer that it should mean . 

 " the idea ! " she continue . " as if I have not   look after mother and keep she in order , and myself , too , for several year ! no . she would not   marry he and go out there ! and she would not   marry he and stay here ! she actually begin to talk all the usual conventional sort of stuff , you know - about how she have no right to marry again , and she do not   believe in second marriage , and about her duty to I . and so on . you know . I reason with she - I explain to she that probably she have another thirty year to live . I tell she she be quite young . she be . and why should she make herself permanently miserable , and Mr. Bratt , and I , merely out of a quite mistaken sense of duty ? no use ! I try everything I could . no use ! " 

 " she be too much for ye ? " 

 " oh , no ! " say Helen , condescendingly . " I would make up my mind . I arrange thing with Mr. Bratt . he quite agree with I . he take out a licence at the registrar 's , and one Saturday morning - it have to be a Saturday , because I be busy all the other day - I go out with mother to buy the meat and thing for Sunday 's dinner , and I get she into the registrar 's office - and , well , there she be ! now , what do you think ? " 

 " what ? " 

 " her last excuse be that she could not   be marry because she be wear her third - good hat . do not   you think it be awfully funny ? " 

 " that be as may be , " say James . " when be all this ? " 

 " just recently , " Helen answer . " they sail from Glasgow last Thursday but two . and I be expect a letter by every post to say that they have   arrive safely . " 

 " and Susan 's leave you to take care of yourself ! " 

 " now , please do not   begin talk like mother , " Helen say , frigidly . " I have   certainly get less to take care of now than I have . Mother quite see that . but what difficulty I have in get she off , even after I would safely marry she ! I have to promise that if I feel lonely I would go and join they . but I shall not . " 

 " you will not ? " 

 " no . I do not   see myself on a farm in Manitoba . do you ? " 

 " I do not   know as I do , " say James , examine her appearance , with a constant increase of his pride in it . " so ye see them off at Glasgow . I reckon she make a great fuss ? " 

 " Fuss ? " 

 " cry . " 

 " oh yes , of course . " 

 " do you cry , miss ? " 

 " of course I cry , " say Helen , passionately , sit up straight . " why do you ask such question ? " 

 " and us'll never see Susan again ? " 

 " of course I shall go over and see they , " say Helen . " I only mean that I should not   go to stop . I daresay I shall go next year , in the holiday . " 

 content 
 chapter 4 

 invitation to TEA 

 they be most foolishly happy as they sit there on the bench , this man whose dim eye ought to have be wait placidly for the ship of death to appear above the horizon , and this young girl who imagine that she know all about life and the world . when I say that they be foolishly happy , I of course mean that they be most wisely happy . each of they , be gift with common sense , and with a certain imperviousness to sentimentality which invariably accompany common sense , they do not mar the present by regret the tragic stupidity of a long estrangement ; they do not mourn over waste year that could not be recall . it must be admit , in favour of the five town , that when its inhabitant spill milk they do not usually sit down on the pavement and adulterate the milk with their tear . they pass on . such pass on be term callous and cold - hearted in the rest of England , which love to sit down on pavement and weep into irretrievable milk . 

 nor do Helen and her great - stepuncle mar the present by worry about the future ; it never occur to they to be disturb by the possibility that milk not already spill might yet be spill . 

 Helen have be momentarily sadden by private reflection upon what James Ollerenshaw have miss in his career ; and James have be sadden , somewhat less , by reminiscence which have spring out of Helen 's laugh . but their melancholy have rapidly evaporate in the warmth of the unexpected encounter . they like one another . she like he because he be old and dry ; and because he have a short laugh , and a cynical and even wicked gleam of the eye that please she ; and because there be an occasional tone in his voice that strike she as deliciously masculine , ancient , and indulgent ; and because he have speak to her first ; and because his gaze wander with an admire interest over her dress and up into the dome of her sunshade ; and because he put his chin in his palm and leant his head towards she ; and because the skin of his hand be so crinkle and glossy . and he like she because she be so exquisitely fresh and candid , so elegant , so violent and complete a contrast to James Ollerenshaw ; so absurdly sagacious and sure of herself , and perhaps because of a curve in her cheek , and a mysterious suggestion of eternal enigma in her large and liquid eye . when she look right away from he , as she sometimes do in the conversation , the outline of her soft cheek , which draw in at the eye and swell out again to the temple , resemble a map of the coast of some smooth , romantic country not mention in geography . when she look at he - well , the effect on he astonish he ; but it enchant he . he be discover for the first time the soul of a girl . if he be a little take aback he be to be excuse . young man than he have be take aback by that discovery . but James Ollerenshaw do not behave as a young man would have behave . he be more like some one who , have hear tell of the rose for sixty year , and have pay no attention to rumour , suddenly see a rose in early bloom . at his age one know how to treat a flower ; one know what flower be for . 

 it be no doubt this knowledge of what flower be for that almost lead to the spilling of milk at the very moment when milk - spilling seem in a high degree improbable . 

 the conversation have leave Susan and her caprice , and have reach Helen and her solid wisdom . 

 " but you have not   tell I what you be do I ' bosley , " say the old man . 

 " I have   tell you I be live here , " say Helen . " I have   now be live here for one week and one day . I be teach at the Park Road Board School . I get transfer from Longshaw . I never like Longshaw , and I always like a change . " 

 " yes , " say Ollerenshaw , judiciously , " of the two I reckon as Bosley be the frying - pan . so you be teach up yonder ? " he jerk his elbow in the direction of the spacious and impose terra - cotta Board School , whose front look on the eastern gate of the park . " what dost teach ? " 

 " oh , everything , " Helen reply . 

 " you must be very useful to them , " say James . " what do they pay you for teach everything ? " 

 " seventy - two pound , " say Helen . 

 " a month ? it ' ud be cheap at a hundred , lass ; unless there be a whole crowd on ye as can teach everything . can you sew ? " 

 " Sew ! " she exclaim . " I have   give lesson in sewing for year . and cookery . and mathematic . I use to give evening lesson in mathematic at Longshaw secondary school . " 

 great - stepuncle James gaze at she . it be useless for he to try to pretend to himself that he be not , secretly , strike all of a heap by the wonder of the live organism in front of he . he be . and this show , though he be a wise man and an experienced , how ignorant he be of the world . but I do not think he be more ignorant of the world than most wise and experienced man be . he conceive Helen Rathbone as an extraordinary , an amazing creature . nothing of the kind . there be simply thousand of agreeable and good girl who can accomplish herring - bone , omelette , and simultaneous equation in a breath , as it be . they be all over the kingdom , and may be see in the street and lane thereof about half - past eight in the morning and again about five o'clock in the evening . but the fact be not generally know . only the stern and blasé member of School Boards or Education Committees know it . and they be so used to marvel that they make nothing of they . 

 however , James Ollerenshaw have no intention of strike his flag . 

 " Mathematics ! " he murmur . " I lay you can not   tell I the interest on eighty - nine pound for six month at four and a half per cent . " 

 Consols happen to be at eighty - nine that day . 

 her lip curl . " I be really quite surprised you should encourage I to gamble , " say she . " but I will bet you a shilling I can . and I will bet you one shill against half - a - crown that I do it in my head , if you like . and if I lose I will pay . " 

 she make a slight movement , and he notice for the first time that she be carry a small purse as black as her glove . 

 he hesitate , and then he prove what a wise and experienced man he be . 

 " no , " he say , " I will none bet ye , lass . " 

 he have strike his flag . 

 it be painful to be compel to reinforce the old masculine statement that woman have no sense of honour . but have they ? Helen clearly see that he have haul down his flag . yet do she cease fire ? not a bit . she give he a shatter broadside , well know that he have surrender . her disregard of the ethic of warfare be deplorable . 

 " two pound and one half - penny - to the near farthing , " say she , a faint blush crimson her cheek . 

 Mr. Ollerenshaw glance round at the bowling - green , where the captain in vain try to catch his eye , and then at the group of child play on the low terrace . 

 " I make no doubt ye can play the piano ? " he remark , when he have recover . 

 " certainly , " she reply . " not that we have to teach the piano . no ! but it be understand , all the same , that one or another of we can play march for the child to walk and drill to . in fact , " she add , " for something less than thirty shilling a week we do pretty nearly everything , except build the school . and soon they will be expect we to build the new school in our spare time . " she speak bitterly , as a native of the Congo Free State might refer to the late king of the Belgians . 

 " thirty shilling a wik ! " say James , act with fine histrionic skill . " I think as you say seventy - two pound a month ! " 

 " oh no , you do not ! " she protest , firmly . " so do not   try to tease I . I never joke about money . money be a very serious thing . " 

  " she be a chip o ' th ' owd block , " he tell himself , delight . when he explain matter to himself , and when he grow angry , he always employ the five town dialect in its pure form . 

 " you must be same as they hospital nurse , " he say , aloud . " you do it because ye like it - for love on it , as they say . " 

 " like it ! I hate it . I hate any sort of work . what fun do you suppose there be in teach endless stupid child , and stuff in classroom all day , and correct exercise and prepare sewing all night ? of course , they can not   help be stupid . it be that that be so amazing . you can not   help be kind to they - they be so stupid . " 

 " if ye do not   do that , what should ye do ? " James inquire . 

 " I should not   do anything unless I be force , " say she . " I do not   want to do anything , except enjoy myself - read , play the piano , pay visit , and have plenty of really nice clothe . why should I want to do anything ? I can tell you this - if I do not   need the money I would never go inside that school again , or any other ! " 

 she be heat . 

 " Dun ye mean to say , " he ask , with an ineffable intonation , " that Susan and that there young farmer have go gad off to Canada and leave you all alone with nothing ? " 

 " of course they have not , " say Helen . " why , mother be the most generous old thing you can possibly imagine . she be leave all her own income to I . " 

 " how much ? " 

 " well , it come to rather over thirty shilling a week . " 

 " and can not   a single woman live on thirty shilling a wik ? bless we ! I do not   spend thirty shilling a wik myself . " 

 Helen raise her chin . " a single woman can live on thirty shilling a week , " she say . " but what about her frock ? " 

 " well , what about her frock ? " he repeat . 

 " well , " she say , " I like frock . it just happen that I can not   do without frock . it be just frock that I work for ; I spend nearly all I earn on they . " and her eye , descend , seem to say : " look at the present example . " 

 " seventy pound a year on ye clothe ! Ye're not serious , lass ? " 

 she look at he coldly . " I be serious , " she say . 

 experience as he be , he have never come across a fact so incredible as this fact . and the compulsion of believe it occupy his force to such an extent that he have no force leave to be wise . he do not observe the icy , dart challenge in her eye , and he ignore the danger in her voice . 

 " all as I can say be you ought to be ashamed o ' yourself , lass ! " he say , sharply . the reflection be blow out of he by the expansion of his feeling . seventy pound a year on clothe ! . . . he too be serious . 

 now , James Ollerenshaw be not the first person whom Helen 's passion for clothe have drive into indiscretion . her mother , for example , have do battle with that passion , and have be defeat with heavy loss . a headmistress and a chairman of a School Board   a pompous coward   have also suffer severely . and though Helen have be the victor , she have not win without some injury to her nerve . her campaign and conquest have leave she , on this matter , " touchy " - as the word be use in the five town . 

 " I shall be very much oblige if you will not speak to I in that tone , " say she . " because I can not permit it either from you or any other man . when I venture to criticise your private life I shall expect you to criticise mine - and not before . I do not   want to be rude , but I hope you understand , great - stepuncle . " 

 the milk be within the twentieth of an inch of the brim . James Ollerenshaw blush as red as Helen herself have blush at the beginning of their acquaintance . a girl , the daughter of the chit Susan , to address he so ! she have the incomparable insolence of her mother . yes , thirty year ago Susan have be just as rude to he . but he be thirty year young then ; he be not a sage of sixty then . he continue to blush . he be rag . indeed , it would be no exaggeration to assert that his health be momentarily in peril . he glance for an instant at Helen , and see that her nostril be twitch . then he look hurriedly away , and rise . the captain of the bowling club excusably assume that James be at length go to attack the serious business of the day . 

 " now , Mr. Ollerenshaw ! " the captain call out ; and his tone imply , gently : " do not   you think you have   keep I wait long enough ? woman be woman ; but a bowling - match be a bowling - match . " 

 James turn his back on the captain , move off , and then - how can one explain it ? he realise that in the last six word of Helen 's speech there have be a note , a hint , a mere nothing , of softness , of regret for pain cause . he realise , far , the great universal natural law that under any circumstance - no matter what they may be - when any man - no matter who he may be - differ from any pretty and well - dress woman - no matter who she may be - he be in the wrong . he see that it be useless for serious , logical , high - minded person to inveigh against the absurdity of this law , and to call it bad name . the law of gravity be absurd and indefensible when you fall downstairs ; but you obey it . 

 he return to Helen , who bravely meet his eye . " I be off home , " he say , hoarsely . " it be my tea - time . " 

 " good - afternoon , " she reply , with amiability . 

 " happen you will come along with I , like ? " 

 the use of that word " like " at the end of an interrogative sentence , in the five town , be a subject upon which a book ought to be write ; but not this history . the essential point to observe be that Helen get up from the bench and say , with adorable sweetness : 

 " why , I shall be charm to come ! " 

  " what aperfect old darling he be ! " she say to herself . 

 content 
 chapter 5 

 a salutation 

 as they walk down Moorthorne - road towards the town they certainly make a couple piquant enough , by reason of the excessive violence of the contrast between they , to amuse the eye of the beholder . a young and pretty woman who spend seventy pound a year on her ornamentation , walk by the side of a little old man   she have the well of he by an inch   who have probably not spend seventy pound on clothe in sixty year - such a spectacle must have draw attention even in the least attentive of town . and Bursley be far from the least attentive of town . James and his great - stepniece have not get as far as the new Independent Chapel when it be know in St. Luke's - square , a long way far on , that they be together ; a tramcar have fly forward with the interesting fact . from that moment , of course , the news , which really be great news , spread itself over the town with the rapidity of a perfume ; no corner could escape it . all James 's innumerable tenant seem to sniff it simultaneously . and that evening in the mouth of the entire town   I be license myself to a little poetical exaggeration   there be no word but the word " Jimmy . " 

 their converse , as they descend into the town , be not effective . it be , indeed , feeble . they have fight a brief but bitter duel , and James Ollerenshaw have be severely wound . his dignity bleed freely ; he make , strange to say , scarcely any attempt to staunch the blood , which might have continue to flow for a considerable time have not a diversion occur .   it be well know that the dignity will only bleed while you watch it . avert your eye , and it instantly dry up .   the diversion , apparently of a trifling character , have , in truth , an enormous importance , though the party concern do not perceive this till later . it consist in the passing of Mrs. Prockter and her stepson , Emanuel Prockter , up Duck Bank as James and Helen be pass down Duck Bank . 

 Mrs. Prockter   who by reason of the rare " k " in her name regard herself as the sole genuine in a district full of Proctors   may be describe as the dowager of Bursley , the custodian of its respectability , and the summit of its social ladder . you could not climb high than Mrs. Prockter . she live at Hillport , and even in that haughty suburb there be none who dare palter with an invitation from Mrs. Prockter . she be stout and deliberate . she have wave flower in her bonnet and picture of flower on her silken gown , and a grey mantle . much of her figure precede she as she walk . her stepson have a tenor voice and a good tailor ; his age be thirty . 

 now , Mrs. Prockter be simply nothing to James Ollerenshaw . they know each other by sight , but their orbit do not touch . James would have go by Mrs. Prockter as indifferently as he would have go by a policeman or a lamppost . as for Emanuel , James hold he in mild , benignant contempt . but when , as the two pair approach one another , James perceive Emanuel furtively shift his gold - head cane from his right hand to his left , and then actually raise his hat to Helen , James swiftly lose his indifference . he also nearly lose his presence of mind . he be utterly unaccustomed to such crisis . despite his wealthy indifference to Mrs. Prockter , despite his distinguished scorn of Emanuel , despite the richness of Helen 's attire , he be astounded , and deeply impressed , to learn that Helen have the acquaintance of people like the prockter . far , except at grave - side , James Ollerenshaw have never in his life raise his hat . hat - raising form no part of his code of manner . in his soul he look upon hat - raising as affect . he believe that all people who raise hat do so from a snobbish desire to put on air . hat - raising be rather like say " please , " only bad . 

 happily , his be one of those strong , self - reliant nature that can , when there be no alternative , face the most frightful situation with un - thumping heart . he keep his presence of mind , and decide in the fraction of a second what he must do . the faculty of instant decision be indispensable to safety in these swift - rise crisis . 

 he raise his hat , pray that Helen would not stop to speak . not gracefully , not with the beauteous curve of an Emanuel do he raise his hat - but he raise it . his prayer be answer . 

 " there ! " his chest say to Helen . " if you think I do not   know how to behave to your conceited acquaintance , you be mistaken . " 

 and his casual , rove eye pretend that hat - raising be simply the most ordinary thing on earth . 

 such be the disturbing incident which end the bleeding of his dignity . in order to keep up the pretence that hat - raising be a normal function of his daily life he be oblige to talk freely ; and he do talk freely . but neither he nor Helen say a word as to the Prockters . 

 content 
 Chapter 6 

 MRS BUTT 's DEPARTURE 

 James Ollerenshaw 's house be within a few hundred yard of the top of trafalgar - road , on the way from Bursley to Hanbridge . I may not indicate the exact house , but I can scarcely conceal that it lie between Nos . 160 and 180 , on the left as you go up . it be one of the old house in the street , and though bully into insignificance by sundry detach and semi - detached villa opposite - palace occupy by reckless person who think nothing of pay sixty or even sixty - five pound a year for rent alone - it keep a certain individuality and distinction because it have be conscientiously build of good brick before english domestic architecture have lose trace of the georgian style . first you go up two white step   white in theory , through a little gate in a wrought - iron railing paint the colour of pea after they have be cook in a bad restaurant . you then find yourself in a little front yard , twelve foot in width   the whole width of the house   by six foot in depth . the yard be pave with large square indian - red tile , except a tiny circle in the midst border with black - currant - colour tile set endwise with a scolloped edge . this magical circle contain earth , and in the centre of it be a rhododendron bush which , have fall into lazy habit , have forget the art of flowering . its leaf be a most pessimistic version of the tint of the railing . 

 the façade of the house comprise three window and a door - that be to say , a window and a door on the ground floor and two window above . the brickwork be assuredly admirable ; James have it " point " every few year . over the window the brick , of special shape , be arrange as in a flat arch , with a keystone that jut slightly . the pane of the window be numerous and small ; inside , on the sash , lie long thin scarlet sausage of red cloth and sawdust , to keep out the draught . the door be divide into eight small panel with elaborate beading , and over it be a delicate fanlight - one of about a score in Bursley - to remind the observer of a lost elegance . between the fanlight and the upstairs window exactly above it be a rusty iron plaque , with vestige in gilt of the word " Phonix . " it have be put there when fire insurance have still the fancied charm of novelty . at the extremity of the façade farth from the door a spout come down from the blue slate roof . this spout begin with a bold curve from the project horizontal spout under the eave , and make another curve at the ground into a hollow earthenware grid with very tiny hole . 

 Helen look delicious in the yard , gaze pensively at the slothful rhododendron while James Ollerenshaw open his door . she be see by two electric car - full of people , for although James 's latchkey be very highly polished and the lock well oil , he never succeed in open his door at the first attempt . it be a capricious door . you could not be sure of open it any more than Beau Brummel could be sure of tie his cravat . it be a muse that have to be woo . 

 but when it do open you perceive that there be no half measure about that door , for it let you straight into the house . to open it be like take down part of the wall . no lobby , hall , or vestibule behind that door ! one instant you be in the yard , the next you be in the middle of the sitting - room , and through a doorway at the back of the sitting - room you could see the kitchen , and beyond that the scullery , and beyond that a back yard with a whitewash wall . 

 James Ollerenshaw go in first , leave Helen to follow . he have learn much in the previous hour , but there be still one or two odd thing leave for he to learn . 

 " ah ! " he breathe , shut the door , and hang up his hard hat on the inner face of it . " sit ye down , lass . " 

 so she sit she down . it must be say that she look as it she have make a mistake and get on to the wrong side of trafalgar - road . the sitting - room be a crowded and shabby little apartment   though clean . there be a list carpet over the middle of the floor , which be tile , and in the middle of the carpet a small square table with flap - side . on this table be a full - rig ship on a stormy sea in a glass box , some resin , a large stone bottle of ink , a ready reckoner , Whitaker 's Almanack   paper edition , a foot - rule , and a bright brass candlestick . above the table there hang from the ceiling a string with a ball of fringed paper , design for the amusement of fly . at the window be a flat desk , on which be transact the affair of Mr. Ollerenshaw . when he station himself at it in the seat of custom and of judgment , default tenant , twirl cap or twist apron , have a fine view of the left side of his face . he usually talk to they while star out of the window . before this desk be a Windsor chair . there be eight other Windsor chair in the room - Helen be sit on one that have not be sit upon for year and year - a teem but idle population of chair . a horsehair arm - chair seem to be the sultan of the seraglio of chair . opposite the window a modern sideboard , which might have cost two - nineteen - six when new , complete the tale of furniture . the general impression be one of fulness ; the low ceiling , and the immense harvest of overblown blue rose which climb luxuriantly up the wall , intensify this effect . the mantelpiece be cram with brass ornament , and there be two complete set of brass fire - iron in the brass fender . above the mantelpiece a look - glass , in a wan frame of bird's - eye maple , with rounded corner , reflect Helen 's hat . 

 Helen abandon the Windsor chair and try the arm - chair , and then stand up . 

 " which chair do you recommend ? " she ask , nicely . 

 " bless ye , child ! I never sit here , except at th ' desk . I sit in the kitchen . " 

 a peculiarity of house in the five town be that room be seldom call by their right name . it be a point of honour , among the self - respect and industrious class , to prepare a room elaborately for a certain purpose , and then not to use it for that purpose . thus James Ollerenshaw 's sitting - room , though surely few apartment could show more facility than it show for sitting , be not use as a sitting - room , but as an office . the kitchen , though it contain a range , be not use as a kitchen , but as a sitting - room . the scullery , though it have no range , be fill with a gas cooking - stove and use as a kitchen . and the back yard be use as a scullery . this arrangement never strike anybody as singular ; it do not strike even Helen as singular . her mother 's house have exhibit the same oddness until she reorganise it . if James Ollerenshaw have not need an office , his sitting - room would have languish in desuetude . the fact be that the thrifty inhabitant of the five town save a room as they save money . if they have an income of six room they will live on five , or rather in five , and thereby take pride to themselves . 

 somewhat nervous , James feign to glance at the rent book on the desk . Helen 's eye sweep the room . 

 " I suppose you have a good servant ? " she say . 

 " I have a woman as come in , " say James . " but she be not   in th ' house at the moment . " 

 this latter statement be a wilful untruth on James 's part . he have distinctly catch a glimpse of Mrs. Butt 's figure as he enter . 

 " well , " say Helen , kindly , " it be quite nice , I be sure . you must be very comfortable - for a man . but , of course , one can see at once that no woman live here . " 

 " how ? " he demand , naively . 

 " oh , " she answer , " I do not   know . but one can . " 

 " dost mean to say as it be not   clean , lass ? " 

 " the brass be very clean , " say Helen . 

 such astonishing virtuosity in the art of innuendo be the privilege of one sex only . 

 " come into th ' kitchen , lass , " say James , after he have smile into a corner of the room , " and take off they glove and thing .. " 

 " but , great - stepuncle , I can not   stay . " 

 " you will stop for tea , " say he , firmly , " or my name be not   James Ollerenshaw . " 

 he precede she into the kitchen . the door between the kitchen and the scullery be half - closed ; in the aperture he again have a momentary , but distinct , glimpse of the eye of Mrs. Butt . 

 " I do like this room , " say Helen , enthusiastically . 

 " uninterrupted view o ' th ' back yard , " say Ollerenshaw . " sit ye down , lass . " 

 he indicate an article of furniture which stand in front of the range , at a distance of perhaps six foot from it , cut the room in half . this contrivance may be call a sofa , or it may be call a couch ; but it can only be properly describe by the Midland word for it - squab . no other term be sufficiently expressive . its seat - five foot by two - be very broad and very low , and it have a steep , high back and side . all its angle be right angle . it be everywhere comfortably pad ; it yield everywhere to firm pressure ; and it be cover with a grey and green striped stuff . you could not sit on that squab and be in a draught ; yet behind it , lest the impossible should arrive , be a heavy curtain , hang on an iron rod which cross the room from wall to wall . not much imagination be need to realise the joy and ecstasy of lose yourself on that squab on a winter afternoon , with the range fire roaring in your face , and the curtain draw abaft . 

 Helen assume the mathematical centre of the squab , and begin to arrange her skirt in cascade fold ; she have pose her parasol in a corner of it , as though the squab have be a railway carriage , which , indeed , it do somewhat resemble . 

 " by the way , lass , what be that as swish ? " James demand . 

 " what be what ? " 

 " what be that as swish ? " 

 she look puzzled for an instant , then laugh - a frank , gay laugh , light and bright as aluminium , such as the kitchen have never before hear . 

 " oh ! " she say . " it be my new silk petticoat , I suppose . you mean that ? " she brusquely move her limb , reproduce the unique and delicious rustle of conceal silk . 

 " ay ! " ejaculate the old man , " I mean that . " 

 " yes . it be my silk petticoat . do you like it ? " 

 " I havena ' see it , lass . " 

 she bent down , and lift the hem of her dress just two inch - the discreet , the modest gesture . he have a transient vision of something fair - it be go again . 

 " I do not   know as I dislike it , " say he . 

 he be stand face she , his back to the range , and his head on a level with the high narrow mantelpiece , upon which glitter a row of small tin canister . suddenly he turn to the corner to the right of the range , where , next to an oak cupboard , a velvet turkish smoking cap depend from a nail . he put on the cap , of which the long tassel curve down to his ear . then he face she again , put his hand behind he , and raise himself at interval on his small , well - polish toe . she lift she two hand simultaneously to her head , and begin to draw pin from her hat , which pin she place one after another between her lip . then she lower the hat carefully from her head , and transfix it anew with the pin . 

 " will you mind hang it on that nail ? " she request . 

 he take it , as though it have be of glass , and hang it on the nail . 

 without her hat she look as if she live there , a jewel in a pipe - case . she appear to be just as much at home as he be . and they be so at home together that there be no further necessity to strain after a continuous conversation . with a vague smile she gaze round and about , at the warm , crack , smooth red tile of the floor ; at the paint green wall , at a Windsor chair near the cupboard - a solitary chair that have evidently be misunderstood by the large family of relative in the other room and send into exile ; at the pair of bellow that hang on the wall above the chair , and the rich gaudiness of the grocer 's almanac above the bellow ; at the tea - table , with its coarse grey cloth and thick crockery spread beneath the window . 

 " so you have all your meal here ? " she venture . 

 " ay , " he say . " I have what I call my meal here . " 

 " why , " she cry , " do not   you enjoy they ? " 

 " I eat them , " he say . 

 " what time do you have tea ? " she inquire . 

 " four o'clock , " say he . " sharp ! " 

 " but it be a quarter to , now ! " she exclaim , point to a clock with weight at the end of brass chain and a long pendulum . " and do not   you say your servant be out ? " 

 " ay , " he mysteriously lie . " she be out . but her'll come back . happen she be go to get a bit o ' fish or something . " 

 " Fish ! do you always have fish for tea ? " 

 " I have what I be give , " he reply . " I fancy a snack for my tea . something tasty , ye know . " 

 " why , " she say , " you be just like I . I adore tea . I would soon have tea than any other meal of the day . but I never yet know a servant who could get something tasty every day . of course , it be quite easy if you know how to do it ; but servant do not   - that be to say , as a rule - but I expect you have   get a very good one . " 

 " so - so ! " James murmur . 

 " the trouble with servant be that they always think that if you like a thing one day you will like the same thing every day for the next three year . " 

 " ay , " he say , drily . " I use to like a kidney , but it be more than three year ago . " he stick his lip out , and raise himself high than ever on his toe . 

 he do not laugh . but she laugh , almost boisterously . 

 " I can not   help tell you , " she say , " you be perfectly lovely , great - stepuncle . be we both go to drink out of the same cup ? " in such manner do the current of her talk gyrate and turn corner . 

 he approach the cupboard . 

 " no , no ! " she spring up . " let I . I will do that , as the servant be so long . " 

 and she open the cupboard . among a miscellany of crock therein be a blue - and - white cup and saucer , and a plate to match underneath it , that seem out of place there . she lift down the pile . 

 " Steady on ! " he counsel she . " why dun you choose that ? " 

 " because I like it , " she reply , simply . 

 he be silence . " that be a bit o ' real Spode , " he say , as she put it on the table and dust the several piece with a corner of the tablecloth . 

 " it will not   be in any danger , " she retort , " until it come to be wash up . so I will stop afterwards and wash it up myself . there ! " 

 " now you can not   find the teaspoon , miss ! " he challenge she . 

 " I think I can , " she say . 

 she raise the tablecloth at the end , discover the knob of a drawer , and open it . and , surely , there be teaspoon . 

 " can not   I just take a peep into the scullery ? " she beg , with a bewitching supplication . " I will not   stop . it be nearly time your servant be back , if she be always so dreadfully prompt as you say . I will not   touch anything . servant be so silly . they always think one want to interfere with they . " 

 without wait for James 's permission , she burst youthfully into the scullery . 

 " oh , " she exclaim , " there be some one here ! " 

 of course there be . there be Mrs. Butt . 

 although the part play by Mrs. Butt in the drama be vehement and momentous , it be nevertheless so brief that a description of Mrs. Butt be hardly call for . suffice it to say that she have so much waist as to have no waist , and that she possess both a beard and a moustache . this curt catalogue of her charm be unfair to she ; but Mrs. Butt be ever the victim of unfairness . 

 James Ollerenshaw look audaciously in at the door . " it be Mrs. Butt , " say he . " we think as ye be out . " 

 " good - afternoon , Mrs. Butt , " Helen begin , with candid pleasantness . 

 a pause . 

 " good - afternoon , miss . " 

 " and what have you get for uncle 's tea to - day ? something tasty ? " 

 " I have   get this , " say Mrs. Butt , with candid unpleasantness . and she point to an oblate spheroid , the colour of brick , but smoother , which lie on a plate near the gas - stove . it be a kidney . 

 " H'm ! " - from James . 

 " it be not cook yet , I see , " Helen observe . " and - " 

 the clock finish her remark . 

 " no , miss , it be not cook , " say Mrs. Butt . " to tell ye the honest truth , miss , I have   be learn , ' stead o ' cook this ' ere kidney . " she pick up the kidney in her pudding - like hand and gaze at it . " I be glad the brass be clean , miss , at any rate , though the house do look as though there be no woman about the place , and servant be silly . I be thankful to Heaven as the brass be clean . come into my scullery , and welcome . " 

 she cease , still hold up the kidney . " H'm ! " - from Uncle . James . this repeat remark of his seem to rouse the fury in she . " you may ' h'm , ' Mester Ollerenshaw , " she glare at he . " you may ' h'm ' as much as yo'n a mind . " then to Helen : " come in , miss ; come in . do not   be afraid of servant . " and finally , with a striking instinct for theatrical effect : " but I go out ! " 

 she fling the innocent and yield kidney to the floor , snatch up a bonnet , cast off her apron , and depart . 

 " there ! " say James Ollerenshaw . " you have   do it ! " " 

 content 
 Chapter 7 

 the new COOK 

 ten minute later Mr. James Ollerenshaw stand alone in his kitchen - sit - room . and he gaze at the door between the kitchen - sit - room and the scullery . this door be shut ; that be to say , it be nearly shut . he have be turn out of the scullery ; not with violence - or , rather , with a sort of sweet violence that he like , and that have never before be administer to he by any human soul . an afternoon highly adventurous - an afternoon on which he have permit himself to be insult , with bad than impunity to the insulter , by the childish daughter of that chit Susan - an afternoon on which he have raise his hat to Mrs. Prockter - a Saturday afternoon on which he have foregone , on account of a woman , his customary match at bowl - this afternoon be draw to a close in a manner which pile thrilling event on thrill event . 

 Mrs. Butt have depart . for unnumbered year Mrs. Butt have miscooke his meal . the little house be almost inconceivable without Mrs. Butt . and Mrs. Butt have depart . already he miss she as one miss an ancient and supersensitive corn - if the simile may be permit to one ; it be a simile not quite nice , but , then , Mrs. Butt be not quite nice either . the fault be not her ; she be bear so . 

 the dropping of the kidney with a plop , by Mrs. Butt , on the hard , unsympathetic floor of the scullery , have constitute an extremely dramatic moment in three life . certainly Mrs. Butt possess a wondrous instinct for theatrical effect . Helen , on the contrary , seem to possess none . she have advance nonchalantly towards the kidney , and delicately pick it up between finger and thumb , and turn it over , and then put it on a plate . 

 " that be a veal kidney , " she have observe . 

 " art sure it be not   a sheep 's kidney , lass ? " James have ask , carefully imitate Helen 's nonchalance . 

 " yes , " she have say . " I gather you be not passionately fond of kidney , great - stepuncle?'she have ask . 

 " I be once . what art go to do , lass ? " 

 " I be go to get our tea , " she have say . 

 at the word , our tea , the antique James Ollerenshaw , who have never think to have such a sensation again , be most distinctly conscious of an agreeable , somewhat disturbing sensation of be tickle in the small of his back . 

 " well , " he have ask she , " what can I do ? " 

 " you can go out , " she have reply . " would not   it be a good thing for you to go out for a walk ? tea will be ready at half - past four . " 

 " I go for no walk , " he say , positively . 

 " yes , that be all right , " she have murmur , but not in response to his flat refusal to obey she . she have be open the double cupboard and the five drawer which constitute the receptacle of the scullery - larder ; she have be spy out the rich and the poverty of the establishment . then she have turn to he , and , instead of engage he in battle , she have just smile at he , and say : " very well . as you wish . but do go into the front room , at any rate . " 

 and there he be in the middle room , the kitchen , listen to her movement behind the door . he hear the running of water , and then the mild explosion of light the second ring of the gas - stove ; the first have be light by Mrs. Butt . then he hear nothing whatever for year , and when he look at the clock it be fourteen minute past four . in the act of look at the clock , his eye have to traverse the region of the sofa . on the sofa be one parasol and two glove . astonishing , singuiar , disconcerting , how those article - which , after all , bear no kind of resemblance to any style of furniture or hanging - seem , nevertheless , to refurnish the room , to give the room an air of be thickly inhabit which it never have before ! 

 then she burst into the kitchen unexpectedly , with a swish of silk that be like the retreat of wave down the shingle of some Atlantic shore . 

 " my dear uncle , " she protest , " please do make yourself scarce . you be in my way , and I be very busy . " 

 she go to the cupboard and snatch at some plate , two of which she drop on the table , and three of which she take into the kitchen . 

 " have ye get all as ye want ? " he question she politely , anxious to be of assistance . 

 " everything ! " she answer , positively , and with just the least hint of an intention to crush he . 

 " have ye indeed ! " 

 he do not utter this exclamation aloud ; but with it he apply balm to his secret breast , for he still remember , be an old man , she crush he in the park , and the peril of another crushing rouse the male in he . and it be with a sardonic and cruel satisfaction that he apply such balm to his secret breast . the truth be , he know that she have not get all she want . he know that , despite her extraordinary capableness   of which she be rather vain , despite her ability to calculate mentally the interest on eighty - nine pound for six month at four - and - a - half per cent . , she could not possibly prepare the tea without come to he and confess to he that she have be mistake , and that she have not get everything she want . she would be compel to humble herself before he - be it ever so little . he be a hard old man , and the prospect of this humbling give he pleasure   I regret to say . 

 you can not have tea without tea - leaf ; and James Ollerenshaw keep the tea - leaf in a tea - caddy , locked , in his front room . he have an extravagant taste in tea . he fancy China tea ; and he fancy China tea that cost five shilling a pound . he be the last person to leave China tea at five shilling a pound to the economic prudence of a Mrs. Butt . every day Mrs. Butt bring to he the teapot   warm   and a teaspoon , and he unlock the tea - caddy , dispense the right quantity of tea , and relocke the tea - caddy . 

 there be no other tea in the house . so with a merry heart the callous fellow   shamefully delight in the imminent downfall of a fellow - creature - and that a woman !   go into the front room as he have be bid . on one of the family of chair , in a corner , be a black octagonal case . he open this case , which be not lock , and draw from it a concertina , all inlay with mother - of - pearl . then he go to the desk , and from under a pile of rent book he extract several piece of music , and select one . this select piece he rear up on the mantelpiece against two brass candlestick . it be obvious , from the certainty and ease of his movement , that he have the habit of lodge piece of music against those two brass candlestick . the music bear the illustrious name of George Frederick Handel . 

 then he put on a pair of spectacle which be lie on the mantelpiece , and balance they on the end of his nose . finally he adjust his little hand to the strap of the concertina . you might imagine that be would instantly dissolve into melody . not at all . he glance at the page of music first through his spectacle , and then , bend forward his head , over his spectacle . then he put down the concertina , gingerly , on a chair , and move the music half - an - inch   perhaps five - eighth   to the left . he resume the concertina , and be on the very point of song , when he put down the concertina for the second time , and move the tassel of his turkish cap from the neighbourhood of his left ear to the neighbourhood of his right ear . then , with a cough , he resume the concertina once more , and embark upon the interpretation of Handel . 

 it be the Hallelujah Chorus . 

 any surprise which the musical reader may feel on hear that James Ollerenshaw be equal to perform the Hallelujah Chorus on a concertina   even one inlay with mother - of - pearl   argue on the part of that reader an imperfect acquaintance with the five town . in the five town there be   among piano scorner   two musical instrument , the concertina and the cornet . and the five town would like to see the composer clever enough to compose a piece of music that can not be arrange for either of these instrument . it be conceivable that Beethoven imagine , when he write the last movement of the C Minor Symphony , that he have produce a work which it would be impossible to arrange for cornet solo . but if he do he imagine a vain thing . in the five town , where the taste for classical music be highly developed , the C Minor Symphony on a single cornet be as common as " Robin Adair " on a full brass band . 

 James Ollerenshaw play the Hallelujah Chorus with much feeling and expression . he . understand the Hallelujah Chorus to its profound depth ; which be not surprising in view of the fact that he have be play it regularly since before Helen be bear .   the unfading charm of classical music be , that you never tire of it . 

 nevertheless , the grandeur of his interpretation of the Hallelujah Chorus appear to produce no effect whatever in the scullery ; neither alarm nor ecstasy ! and presently , in the midst of a brief pianissimo passage , James 's sensitive ear catch the distant sound of chopping , which quite mar the soft tenderness at which he have be aim . he stop abruptly . the sound of chop intrigue his curiosity . what could she be chop ? he advance cautiously to the doorway ; he have leave the door open . the other door - between the kitchen and the scullery - which have previously be close , be now open , so that he could see from the front room into the scullery . his eager , inquisitive glance note a plate of beautiful bread and butter on the tea - table in the kitchen . 

 she be chop the kidney . utterly absorb in her task , she have no suspicion that she be be overlook . after the chopping of the kidney , James witness a series of operation the key to whose significance he could not find . 

 she put a flat pan over the gas , and then take it off again . then she pick up an egg , break it into a coffee - cup , and instantly pour it out of the coffee - cup into a basin . she do the same to another egg , and yet another . four egg ! the entire household stock of egg ! it be terrible ! four egg and a kidney among two people ! he could not divine what she be at . 

 then she get some butter on the end of a knife and drop it into the saucepan , and put the saucepan over the gas ; and then pour the plateful of kidney - shred into the saucepan . then she begin furiously to beat the four egg with a fork , glance into the saucepan frequently , and coax it with little touch . then the kidney - shreds raise a sound of frizzling , and bang into the saucepan go the content of the basin . all the time she have hold her hand and her implement and utensil away from she as much as possible , doubtless out of consideration for her frock ; not an inch of apron be she wear . now she leant over the gas - stove , fork in hand , and make baffle motion inside the saucepan with the fork ; and while do so she stretch forth her left hand , obtain some salt , and sprinkle the saucepan therewith . the business seem to be exquisitely delicate and breathless . her face be sternly set , as though the fate of continent depend on her nerve and audacity in this tremendous crisis . but what she be do to the interior of the saucepan James Ollerenshaw could not comprehend . she stroke it with a long gesture ; she tickle it , she stroke it in a different direction ; she lift it and fold it on itself . 

 anyhow , he know it be not scramble egg , because you have to stir scrambled egg without cease . 

 then she stop and stand quite still , regard the saucepan . 

 " you have   watch I quite long enough , " she say , without move her head . she must have know all the time that he be there . 

 so he shuffle away , and glance out of the window at the stir and traffic of trafalgar - road . 

 " Tea 's ready , " she say . 

 he go into the kitchen , smile , enchant , but disturb . she have not come to he and confess that she could not make tea without tea - leaf . yet there be the tea - pot steaming and puff on the table ! 

 content 
 chapter 8 

 OMELETTE 

 the mystery lie on a plate in the middle of the table . in colour it resemble scrambled egg , except that it be tint a more brownish , or coppery , gold - rather like a first - class Yorkshire pudding . he suspect for an instant that it might be a Yorkshire pudding accord to the new - fangle recipe of Board Schools . but four egg ! no ! he be sure that so small a quantity of Yorkshire pudding could not possibly have require four egg . 

 he pick up the teapot , after his manner , and be in the act of pour , when she strike he into immobility with a loud cry : 

 " milk first ! " 

 he understand that she have a caprice for pour the tea on the top of the milk instead of the milk on the top of the tea . 

 " what difference do it make ? " he demand defiantly . 

 " what ! " she cry again . " you think yourself a great authority on China tea , and yet you do not   know that milk ought to be pour in first ! why , it make quite a different taste ! " 

 how in the name of Confucius do she know that he think himself a great authority on China tea ? 

 " here ! " she say . " if you do not   mind , I will pour out the tea . thank you . help yourself to this . " she point to the mystery . " it must be eat while it be hot , or it be bad than useless . " 

 what be it ? " he ask , with false calm . 

 " it be a kidney omelette , " she reply . 

 " Omelette ! " he repeat , rather at a loss . he have never taste an omelette ; he have never see an omelette . omelette form no part of the domestic cuisine of England . " Omelette ! " he repeat . how be he familiar with the word - the word which convey nothing to his mind ? then he remember : " you can not   make an omelette without break egg . " of course she have break egg . she have break four egg - she have break the entire household stock of egg . and he have employ that proverb score , hundred of time ! it be one of half - a - dozen favourite proverb which he fling at the less sagacious and prudent of his tenant . and yet it have never occur to he to wonder what an omelette be ! now he know . at any rate , he know what it look like ; and he be shortly to know what it taste like . 

 " yes , " she say . " cut it with a knife . do not   be frightened of it . you will eat it ; it will not   eat you . and please give I very little . I eat a quarter of a pound of chocolate after dinner . " 

 he convey one - third of the confection to his plate , and about a sixth to her . 

 and he taste - just a morsel , with a dash of kidney in the centre of it , on the end of his fork . he be not aware of the fact , but that be the decisive moment of his life - sixty though he be ! 

 have she really make this marvel , this dream , this idyll , this indescribable bliss , out of four common fresh egg and a veal kidney that Mrs. Butt have drop on the floor ? he have come to loathe kidney . he have almost come to swear that no manifestation or incarnation of kidney should ever again pass between his excellent tooth . and now he be ravish , rapt away on the wing of paradisaical ecstasy by a something that consist of kidney and a few egg . this omelette have all the fine and nobler quality of Yorkshire pudding and scramble egg combine , together with other beyond the ken of his greedy fancy . yes , he be a greedy man . he know he be greedy . he be a greedy man whose evil passion have providentially be keep in check for over a quarter of a century by the gross unskilfulness , the appalling monotony , of a Mrs. Butt . could it be that there exist woman , light and light - handed creature , creature of originality and resource , who be capable of produce prodigy like this kidney omelette on the spur of the moment ? evidently ! Helen exist . and the whole omelette , from the melting of the butter to the final steady glance into the saucepan , have not occupy she more than six minute - at most . she have toss it off as he might have toss off a receipt for a week 's rent . and the exquisite thought in his mind , the thought of penetrate sweetness , be that whence this delicacy have come , other and even rare delicacy might have come . all his past life seem to he to be a miserable waste of gloomy and joyless year . 

 " do you like it ? " she inquire . 

 he pause , as though reflect whether he like it or not . " ay , " he say , judicially , " it be none so bad . I could do a bit more o ' that . " 

 " well , " she urge he , " do help yourself . take it all . I shall not   eat any more . " 

 " sure ? " he say , tremble lest she might change her mind . 

 then he eat the remain half of the omelette , make five - sixth in all . he glance at she surreptitiously , in her fine dress , on which be not a single splash or stain . he might have know that so extraordinary and exotic a female person would not concoct anything so trite as a Yorkshire pudding or scrambled egg . 

 not till the omelette be an affair of the past   so far as his plate be concern   do he begin to attend to his tea - his tea which sustain a mystery as curious as , and decidedly more sinister than , the mystery of the omelette . 

 he star into the cup ; then , to use the five town phrase , he sup it up . 

 there could be no doubt ; it be his special China tea . it have a peculiar flavour   owing , perhaps , to the precedence give to milk , but it be incontestably his guarded and lock tea . how have she get it ? 

 " where didst find this tea , lass ? " he ask . 

 " in the little corner cupboard in the scullery , " she say . " I have no idea that people drink such good China tea in Bursley . " 

 " ah ! " he observe , conceal his concern under a mask of irony , " China tea be drunk I ' Bursley afore your time . " 

 " mother would only drink Ceylon , " say she . 

 " that doesna ' surprise I , " say he , as if to imply that no vagary on the part of Susan could surprise he . and he proceed , reflectively : " in th ' corner cupboard , sayst tha ? " 

 " yes , in a large tin box . " 

 a large tin box . this news be overwhelming . he rise abruptly and go into the scullery . indubitably there be a large tin box , pretty nearly half full of his guard tea , in the corner cupboard . 

 he return , the illusion of half a lifetime shatter . " that there woman be a thief ! " he announce . 

 " what woman ? " 

 " Mrs. Butt . " 

 and he explain to Helen all his elaborate precaution for the preservation of his China tea1 Helen be wholly sympathetic . the utter correctness of her attitude towards Mrs. Butt be balm to he . only one theory be conceivable . the wretched woman must have have a key to his caddy . during his absence from the house she must have calmly help herself to tea at five shilling a pound - a spoonful or so at a time . Doubtless she make tea for her private consumption exactly when she choose . it be even possible that she walk off from time to time with quantity of tea to her own home . and he who think himself so clever , so much cleverer than a servant ! 

 " you can not   have she back , as she be not   honest , even if she come back , " say Helen . 

 " oh , she will not   come back , " say James . " fact be , I have   have difficulty with she for a long time now . " 

 " then what shall you do , my poor dear uncle ? " 

 " Nay , " say he , " I mun ask you that . it be you as be th ' cause of she go . " 

 " oh , uncle ! " she exclaim , laugh . " how can you say such a thing ? " and she add , seriously : " you can not   be expect to cook for yourself , can you ? and as for get a new one - " 

 he notice with satisfaction that she have take to call he simply uncle , instead of great - stepuncle . 

 " a new ' un ! " he mutter , grimly , and sigh in despair . 

 " I shall stay and look after your supper , " she say , brightly . 

 " yes , and what about to - morrow ? " he grow gloomy . 

 " to - morrow 's Sunday . I will come to - morrow , for breakfast . " 

 " yes , and what about Monday ? " his gloom be not easily to be disperse . 

 " I will come on Monday , " she reply , with increase cheerfulness . 

 " but your school , where ye teach everything , lass ? " 

 " of course , I shall give up school , " say she , " at once . they must do without I . it will mean promotion for some one . I can not   bother about give proper notice . suppose you have be dangerously ill , I should have come , and they would have manage without I . therefore , they can manage without I . therefore , they must . " 

 he keep up a magnificent gloom until she leave for the night . and then he dance a hornpipe of glee - not with his leg , but in his heart . he have deliberately scheme to get rid of Mrs. Butt by mean of Helen Rathbone . the idea have occur to he as he enter the house . that be why he have encourage she to talk freely about servant by assure she that Mrs. Butt be not in the scullery , be well aware that Mrs. Butt be in the scullery . he have make a tool of the unsuspecting , good - natured Helen , smart though she be ! he have transitory qualm of fear about the possible expensiveness of Helen . he have decidedly not mean that she should give up school and nearly thirty shilling a week . but , still , he have manage she so far , and he reckon that he could continue to manage she . 

 he regret that she have not praise his music . and Helen write the same evening to her mother . from a very long and very exciting letter the follow excerpt may be cull : 

 " I see the fat old servant in the scullery at once . but uncle think she be not   there . he be a funny old man - rather silly , like most old man - but I like he , and you can say what you please . he be not   silly really . I instantly decide that I would get rid of that servant . and I do do , and poor uncle never suspect . in a few day I shall come to live here . it be much safe . suppose he be take ill and die , and leave all his money to hospital and thing , how awfully stupid that would be ! I tell he I should leave the school , and he do not   turn a hair . he be a dear , and I do not   care a fig for his money - except to spend it for he . his tiny house be simply lovely , terrifically clean , and in the lovely order . but I have   no intention that we shall stay here . I think I shall take a large house up at Hillport . Uncle be only old in some way ; in many way he be quite young . so I hope he will not   mind a change . by the way , he tell I about your age . my dear mother , how could you - " etc . 

 in such manner come Helen Rathbone to keep house for her great - stepuncle . 

 content 
 chapter 9 

 a great change 

 " Helen Rathbone , " say Uncle James one Tuesday afternoon , " have ye be meddle in my cashbox ? " 

 they be sit in the front room , Helen in a light - grey costume that cascade over her chair and half the next chair , and James Ollerenshaw in the deshabille of his turkish cap . James be at his desk . it be customary in the five town , when you feel combative , astonished , or ironic towards another person , to address that other person by his full name . 

 " you leave the key in your cashbox this morning , uncle , " say Helen , glance up from a book , " while you be fiddle with your safe in your bedroom . " 

 he do not like the word " fiddle . " it do not suit either his dignity or the dignity of his huge milner safe . 

 " well , " he say , " and if I do ! I be not   upstairs more nor five minute , and th ' new servant have na ' come ! there be but you and I in th ' house . " 

 " yes . but , you see , I be in a hurry to go out marketing , and I could not   wait for you to come down . " 

 he ignore this remark . " there be a tenpun ' note miss , " say he . " do not   play they trick on I , lass ; I be get an oldish man . where hast hide it ? I mun go to th ' bank . " he speak plaintively . 

 " my dear uncle , " she reply , " I have   not hide your ten - pound note . I want some money in a hurry , so I take it . I have   spend some of it . " 

 " spend some of it ! " he exclaim . " how much hast spend ? " 

 " oh , I do not   know . but I make up my account every night . " 

 " lass , " say he , star firmly out of the window , " this will not   do . I let ye know at once . this wunna ' do . " he be determined to be master in his own house . she also be determined to be master in his own house . conflict be imminent . 

 " may I ask what you mean , uncle ? " 

 he hesitate . he be not afraid of she . but he be afraid of her dress - not of the material , but of the cut of it . if she have be Susan in Susan 's dowdy and wrinkle alpaca , he would have translate his just emotion into what critic call ' simple , nervous English " - that be to say , shakespearean prose . but the aristocratic , insolent perfection of Helen 's gown give he pause . 

 " why do not   you tell I ? " he demand . 

 " I merely do not   think of it , " she say . " I have   be very busy . " 

 " if you want money , why do not   you ask I for it ? " he demand . 

 " I have   be here over a week , " say she , " and you have   give I a pound and a postal order for ten shilling , which I have to ask for . surely you must have guess , uncle , that even if I would put the thirty shilling in the saving bank we could not   live on the interest of it , and that I be bind to want more . something like seventy meal have be serve in this house since I enter it . " 

 " I give Mrs. Butt a pound a wik , " he observe . 

 " but think what a good manager Mrs. Butt be ! " she say , with the sweetness of a saint . 

 he be accustom to distribute satire , but not to receive it . and , receive this snowball full in the mouth , he do not quite know what to do with it ; whether to pretend that he have receive nothing , or to call a policeman . he end by splutter . 

 " it be easy enough to ask for money when you want it , " he say . 

 " I hate ask for money , " she say . " all woman do . " 

 " then be I to be inquire every morning whether you want money ? " he question , sarcastically . 

 " certainly , uncle , " she answer . " how else be you to know ? " 

 difficult to credit that that girl have be an angel of light all the week , exist in a paradise which she have create for herself , and for he ! and now , to defend an action utterly indefensible , she be employ a tone that might be compare to some fiendish instrumental device of a dentist . 

 but James Ollerenshaw do not wish his tooth stop , nor yet extract . he have excellent tooth . and , in common with all man who have never take thirty consecutive repast alone with the same woman , he know how to treat woman , how to handle they - the trout ! 

 he stand up . he raise all his body . Helen raise only her eyebrow . 

 " Helen Rathbone ! " such be the exordium . as an exordium , it be faultless . but it be destine to remain a fragment . it go down to history as a perfect fragment , like the beginning of a pagan temple that the death of god have render superfluous . 

 for a dog - cart stop in front of the house at that precise second , deposit a lady of command mien , and dash off again . the lady open James 's gate and knock at James 's front door . she could not be a relative of a tenant . James be closely acquaint with all his tenant , and he have none of that caliber . moreover , Helen have cause a small board to be affix to the gate : " tenant will please go round to the back . " 

 " bless we ! " he murmur , angrily . and , by force of habit , he go and open the door . then he recognise the lady . it be Sarah Swetnam , eld child of the large and tumultuously intellectual Swetnam family that live in a largish house in a largish way high up the road , and as to whose financial stability rumour always have something interesting to say . 

 " be Miss Rathbone here ? " 

 before he could reply , there be an ecstatic cry behind he : " Sally ! " and another in front of he : " Nell ! " 

 in the very nick of time he slip aside , and thus avoid the inconvenience of be crush to pulp between two locomotive under full steam . it appear that they have not meet for some year , Sally have be in London . the reunion be an affect sight , and such a sight as have never before be witness in James 's house . the little room seem to be full of fashionable woman , to be all glove , frill , hat , parasol , veil , and whirl flower ; also scent . they kiss , through Sally 's veil first , and then she lift the veil , and four vermilion lip clung together . Sally be even tall than Helen , with a solid waist ; and old , more brazen . they both sit down . fashionable woman have a manner of sit down quite different from that of ordinary woman , such as the wife of James 's tenant . they only touch the back of the chair at the top . they do not   loll , but they only escape loll by dint of gracefulness . it be an affair of curve , slant , descent , nicely calculate . they elaborately lead your eye downwards over gradually increase expanse , and naturally you expect to see their foot - and you do not   see their foot . the thing be apt to be disturbing to unhabituated beholder . 

 then fashionable woman always begin their conversation right off . there be no modest or shy or decently awkward silence at the start . they slip into a conversation as a duck into water . in three minute Helen have tell Sarah Swetnam everything about she leave the school , and about her establishment with her great - stepuncle . and Sarah seem delighted , and tap the tile of the floor with the tip of her sunshade , and gaze splendidly over the room . 

 " and there be your book there , I see ! " she say , in her positive , calm voice , point to a few hundred book that be stack in a corner . " how lovely ! you remember you promise to lend I that book of Thoreau 's - what do you call it ? - and you never do ! " 

 " next time you come I will find it for you , " say Helen . 

 next time she come ! this kind of visit would occur frequently , then ! they be talk just as if James Ollerenshaw have be in timbuctoo , instead of by the mantelpiece , when Sally suddenly turn on he . 

 " it must be very nice for you to have Nell like this ! " she address he with a glowing smile . 

 they have never be introduce ! a week ago they have pass each other in St. luke's - square without a sign . of the Swetnam family , James " know " the father alone , and he slightly . what chiefly impress he in Sarah be her nerve . he say nothing ; he be tongue - tie . 

 " it be a great change for you , " proceed Sarah . 

 " ay , " he agree ; " it be that . " 

 content 
 chapter 10 

 a call 

 the next moment the two fluffy woman have decide , without in the least consult James , that they would ascend to Helen 's bedroom to look at a hat which , James be surprised to learn , Helen have see in Brunt 's window that morning and have buy on the spot . no wonder she have be in a hurry to go marketing ; no wonder she have spend ' some " of his ten - pound note ! he have see hat in Brunt 's mark as high as two guineas but he have not dream that such hat would ever enter his house . while he have be labour , collect his rent and arrange for repair , throughout the length and the breadth of Bursley and Turnhill , she , under pretence of marketing , have be fling away ten - pound note at Brunt 's . the whole business be fantastic , simply and madly fantastic ; so fantastic that he have not yet quite grasp the reality of it ! the whole business be unheard of . he see , with all the clearness of his masculine intellect , that it must cease . the force with which he decide within himself that it must cease - and instanter ! - border upon the hysterical . as he have say , plaintively , he be an oldish man . his habit , his manner , and his notion , especially his notion about money , be fix and set like plaster of Paris in a mould . Helen 's conduct be nothing less than dangerous . it might bring he to a sudden death from heart disease . happily , he have have a very good week indeed with his rent . he trot about all day on Mondays and on Tuesday morning , gather his rent , and on Tuesday afternoon he usually experience the assuaged content of an alligator after the weekly meal . otherwise there be no knowing what might not have be the disastrous consequence of Helen 's bareface robbery and of her unscrupulous , unrepentant defence of that robbery . for day and day he have imagine himself in heaven with a seraph who be also a good cook . he have forty time congratulate himself on catch Helen . and now ! 

 but it must stop . 

 then he think of the cooking . his mouth remember its first taste of the incomparable kidney omelette . what an ecstasy ! still , a ten - pound note for even a kidney omelette jar on the fineness of his sense of value . 

 a feminine laugh - Helen 's - come down the narrow stair and through the kitchen . . . no , the whole house be alter , with well - breed , distinguished woman 's laughter float about the stair like that . 

 he call upon his lifelong friend and comforter - the concertina . that senseless thing of rosewood , ivory , ebony , mother - of - pearl , and leather be to he what a brother , a pipe , a bull terrier , a trust confidant , might have be to another James . and now , in the accent of the Hallelujah Chorus , it yield to his squeezing the secret and sublime solace which man term poetry . 

 then there be a second , and equally imperious , knock at the door . 

 he loose his finger from his friend , and open the door . 

 Mr. Emanuel Prockter stand on the doorstep . Mr. Emanuel Prockter wear a beautiful blue suit , with a white waistcoat and pale gold tie ; yellow glove , boot with pointed toe , a glossy bowler hat , a cane , and an eyeglass . he be an impeccable young man , and the avow delight of his tailor , whose bill be pay by Mrs. Prockter . 

 " be Miss Rathbone at home ? " ask Emanuel , after a cough . 

 " Helen ? " 

 " ye - es . " 

 " ay , " say James , grimly . " she be quite at home . " 

 " can I see she ? " 

 James open more widely the door . " happen you would well step inside , " say he . 

 " thank , Mr. Ollerenshaw . what - er - fine weather we be have ! " 

 James ignore this quite courteous and truthful remark . he shut the door , go into the kitchen , and call up the stair : " Helen , a young man to see ye . " 

 in the bedroom , Helen and Sarah Swetnam have exhaust the Brunt hat , and be spaciously at sea in an enchanted ocean of miscellaneous gossip such as be only possible between two highly - educate woman who scorn tittle - tattle . Helen have the back bedroom ; partly because the front bedroom be her uncle 's , but partly also because the back bedroom be just as large as and much quieter than the other , and because she prefer it . there have be no difficulty about furniture . even so good a landlord as James Ollerenshaw be oblige now and then to go to extreme in the pursuit of arrear of rent , and the upper part of the house be crowd with choice specimen of furniture which have once belong to the more magnificent of his default tenant . Helen 's bedroom be not " finish " ; nor , since she regard it as a temporary lodging rather than a permanent habitation , be she in a mind to finish it . still , with her frock dot about , the hat on the four - post bed , and her silver - mount brush and manicure tool on the dressing - table , it have a certain stylishness . Sarah share the bed with the hat . Helen kneel at a trunk . 

 " whatever make you think of come to Bursley ? " Sarah question . 

 " do not   you think it be well than Longshaw ? " say Helen . 

 " yes , my darling child . but that be not why you come . if you ask I , I believe it be your deliberate intention to capture your great - uncle . anyhow , I congratulate you on your success . " 

 " ah ! " Helen murmur , smile to herself , " I be not out of the wood yet . " 

 " what do you mean ? " 

 " well , you see , uncle and I have not   quite decide whether he be to have his way or I be to have mine ; we be both think about it when you happen to call . " and then , as there be a little pause : " be people talk about we much ? " 

 she do not care whether people be talk much or little , but she have an obscure desire to shift ever so slightly the direction of the conversation . 

 " I have   only be here a day or two , so I can scarcely judge , " say Sarah . " but Lilian come in from the art school this morning with an armful of chatter . " 

 " let I see , I forget , " Helen say . " be lilian the young , or the next to the young ? " 

 " my dear child , Lilian be the young but one , of course ; but she be grow up now - naturally . " 

 " what ! when I see she last , that day when she be with you at Knype , she have a ribbon in her hair , and she look ten . " 

 " she be eighteen . and have not   you hear ? " 

 " heard what ? " 

 " do you mean to say you have   be in Bursley a week and more , and have not   hear ? surely you know Andrew Dean ? " 

 " I know Andrew Dean , " say Helen ; and she say nothing else . 

 " when do you last see he ? " 

 " oh , about a fortnight ago . " 

 " it be before that . he do not   tell you ? well , it be just like he , that be ; that be Andrew all over ! " 

 " what be ? " 

 " he be engaged to Lilian . it be the first engagement in the family , and she be the young but one , " 

 Helen shut the trunk with a snap , then open it and shut it again . and then she rise , smooth her hair . 

 " I scarcely know Lilian , " she say , coldly . " and I do not   know your mother at all . but I must call and congratulate the child . no , Andrew Dean do not   breathe a word . " 

 " I may tell you as a dreadful secret , Nell , that we be not   any of we in the seventh heaven about it . Aunt Annie say yesterday : ' I do not   know that I be so set up with it as all that , Jane '   mean mother . we be not   so set up with it as all that . " 

 " why not ? " 

 " oh , we be not . I do not   know why . I pretend to be , lest Lilian should imagine I be jealous . " 

 it be at this point that the voice of James Ollerenshaw announce a young man . 

 the remainder of that afternoon be like a bewildering dream to James Ollerenshaw . his front room seem to be crowd with a multitude of peacock , that would have be more at home under the sun of Mrs. Prockter 's lawn up at Hillport . yet there be only three person present besides himself . but decidedly they be not of his world ; they be of the world that refer to he as " old Jimmy Ollerenshaw , " or briefly as " Jimmy . " and he have to sit and listen to they , and even to answer coherently when speak to . Emanuel Prockter be brilliant . he have put his hat on one chair and his cane across another , and he converse with ducal facility . the two thing about he that puzzle the master of the house be - first , why he be not , at such an hour , engage in at any rate the pretence of earn his living ; and , second , why he do not take his glove off . no notion of work seem to exist in the mind of the three . they chatter of tennis , novel , music , and particularly of amateur operatic society . James acquire the information that Emanuel be famous as a singer of song . the topic lead then naturally to James 's concertina ; the talk lightly caress James 's concertina , and then Emanuel sweep it off to the afternoon tea - room of the new Midland Grand Hotel at Manchester , where Emanuel have lately be . and that lead to the Old Oak Tree tea - house in Bond - street , where , not to be beat by Emanuel , Sarah Swetnam have lately be . 

 " suppose we have tea , " say Helen . 

 and she pick up a little brass bell which stand on the central table and tinkle it . James have not notice the bell . it be one of the many little change that Helen have introduce . each change by itself be a nothing - what be one small bell in a house ? - yet in the mass they amount to much . the bell be obviously new . she must have buy it ; but she have not mention it to he . and how cou1d they all sit at the tiny table in the kitchen ? moreover , he have no fancy for entertain the whole town of Bursley to meal . however , the immediate prospect of tea produce in James a feeling of satisfaction , even though he remain in perfect ignorance of the method by which Helen mean to achieve the tea . she have ring the bell , and go on talk , as if the tea would cook itself and walk in on its hind leg and ask to be eat . 

 then the new servant enter with a large tray . James have never see such a servant , a servant so entirely new . she be wear a black frock and various part of the frock , and the top of her head , be cover with stiffly - starch white linen - or be it cotton ? her apron , which have two pocket , be more elaborate than an antimacassar . Helen coolly instruct she to place the tray on his desk ; which she do , brush irreverently aside a number of rent book . 

 on the tray there be nothing whatever to eat but a dozen slice of the thinnest conceivable bread and butter . 

 Helen rise . Emanuel also rise . 

 Helen pour out the tea . Emanuel take a cup and saucer in one hand and the plate of bread and butter in the other , and ceremoniously approach Sarah Swetnam . Sarah accept the cup and saucer , delicately choose a piece of bread and butter , and lodge it on her saucer , and go on talk . 

 Emanuel return to the table , and , reladen , approach old Jimmy , and old Jimmy have to lodge a piece of bread and butter on his saucer . then Emanuel remove his glove , and in a moment they be all drink tea and nibble bread and butter . 

 what a fall be this from kidney omelette ! and four have strike ! do Helen expect her uncle to make his tea off a slice of bread and butter that weigh about two drachm ? 

 when the allege tea be over James get on his foot , and silently slide into the kitchen . the fact be that Emanuel Prockter and the manikin air of Emanuel Prockter make he positively sick . he have not be in the kitchen more than a minute before he be aware of amazing matter in the conversation . 

 " yes , " say Helen ; " it be small . " 

 " but , my child , you have   always be use to a small house , surely . I think it be just as quaint 

 and pretty as a little museum . " 

 " would you like to live in a little museum ? " 

 a laugh from Emanuel , and the voice of Helen proceeding : 

 " I have   always live in a small house , just as I have   teach six hour a day in a school . but not because I want to . I like room . I daresay that uncle and I may find another house one of these day . " 

 " up at Hillport , I hope , " Emanuel put in . 

 James could see his mince imbecile smile through the kitchen wall . 

 " who know ? " say Helen . 

 James return to the front room . " what be that ye're say ? " he question the company . 

 " I be just say how quaint and pretty your house be , " say Sarah , and she rise to depart . More kissing , fluttering , swishing ! Emanuel bow . 

 Emanuel follow Miss Swetnam in a few minute . Helen accompany he to the gate , where she stay a little while talk to he . James be in the black gloom . 

 " and now , you dear old thing , " say Helen , vivaciously bustle into the house , " you shall have your tea . you have   behave like a perfect angel . " 

 and she kiss he on the cheek , very excitedly , as he think . 

 she give he another kidney omelette for his tea . it be even more adorable than the former one . with the taste of it in his mouth , he could not recur to the question of the ten - pound note all at once . when tea be over she retire upstairs , and remain in retirement for age . she descend at a quarter to eight , with her hat and glove on . it appear to he that her eye be inflame . 

 " I be go out , " she say , with no further explanation . 

 and out she go , leave the old man , stricken daft by too many sensation , to collect his wit . 

 he have not even be to the bank ! 

 and the great sensation of all the nightmarish day be still in reserve for he . at a quarter - past eight some one knock at the door . he open it , be handy than the new servant . he imagine himself ready for anything ; but he be not ready for the apparition which meet he on the threshold . 

 Mrs. Prockter , of Hillport , ask to be admit ! 

 content 
 chapter 11 

 another CALL 

 Mrs. Prockter be compel to ask for admission , because James , strike moveless and speechless by the extraordinary sight of she , offer no invitation to enter . he merely stand in front of the half - open door . 

 " may I come in , Mr. Ollerenshaw ? " she say , very urbanely . " I hope you will excuse this very informal call . I have   alter my dinner hour in order to pay it . " 

 and she smile . the smile seem to rouse he from a spell . 

 " come in , missis , do ! " he conjure she , warmly . 

 he be James ; he be even Jimmy ; but he be also a man , very much a man , though the fact have only recently begin to impress itself on he . Mrs. Prockter , while a dowager - portly , possibly fussy , perhaps slightly comic to a young generation - be still considerably young than James . with her rich figure , her excellent complexion , her carefully - cherish hair , and her apparel , she be a woman to captivate a man of sixty , whose practical experience of thesex extend over nine day . 

 " thank you , " say she , gratefully . 

 he shut the front door , as if he be shut a bird in a cage ; and he also shut the door lead to the kitchen - a door which have not be shut since the kitchen fire smoke in the celebrated winter of 1897 . she sit down at once in the easy - chair . 

 " ah ! " she exclaim , in relief . and then she begin to fan herself with a fan which be fasten to her person by a chain that might have moor a steamer . 

 James , search about for something else to do while he be collect his force , draw the blind and light the gas . but it be not yet dark . 

 " I wonder what you will think of I , call like this ? " she say , with a sardonic smile . 

 it be apparent that , whatever he think of she , she would not be disturb or abash . she be utterly at her ease . she could not , indeed , have recall the moment when she have not be at her ease . she sit in the front room with all the external symptom of be at home . this be what chiefly surprise James Ollerenshaw in his grand guest - they all take his front room for grant . they betray no emotion at its smallness or its plainness , or its eccentricity . he would somehow have expect they to signify , overtly or covertly , that that kind of room be not the kind of room to which they be accustom . 

 " anyhow , I be glad to see ye , Mrs. Prockter , " James return . 

 a speech which do not in the least startle Mrs. Prockter , who be thoroughly use to people be glad to see she . but it startle James . he have utter it instinctively ; it be the expression of an instinctive gladness which take hold of he and employ his tongue on its own account , and which rise superior even to his extreme astonishment at the visit . he be glad to see she . she be stout and magnificent , in her silk and her ribbon . he feel that he prefer stout woman to thin ; and that , without be aware of it , he have always prefer stout woman to thin . it be a question of taste . he certainly prefer Mrs. Prockter to Sarah Swetnam . Mrs. Prockter 's smile be the smile of a benevolently cynical creature whose study in human nature have reach the advanced stage . James be reassure by this , for it avoid the necessity for " nonsense . " . . . yes , she be decidedly well under a roof and a gas - jet than inthe street . 

 " may I ask if your niece be in ? " she say , in a low voice . 

 " she be not . " 

 he have be sure that she have call about Helen , if not to see Helen . but there be a conspiratorial accent in her question for which he be unprepared . so he sit down at last . 

 " well , " say Mrs. Prockter , " I be not sorry she be not . but if she have be I should have speak just the same - not to she , but to you . now , Mr. Ollerenshaw , I think you and I be rather alike in some thing . I hate beat about the bush , and I imagine that you do . " 

 he be flatter . and he be perfectly ease by her tone . she be a woman to whom you could talk sense . and he perceive that , though a casual observer might fail to find the point of resemblance between they , they be rather alike . 

 " I expect , " say he , " it be pretty well known I ' this town as I be not one that beat about the bush . " 

 " good ! " say she . " you know my stepson , Emanuel ? " 

 " he be here a bit since , " James reply . 

 " what do you think of he ? " 

 " how ? " 

 " as a man ? " 

 " well , missis , as we be na ' beat about the bush , I think he be a foo ' . " 

 " now that be what I like ! " she exclaim , quite ravished . " he be a fool , Mr. Ollerenshaw - between ourselves . I can see that you and I will get on together splendidly ! Emanuel be a fool . I can not   help it . I take he along with my second husband , and I do my good for he . but I be not responsible for his character . as far as that go , he be not   responsible for it , either . not only be he a fool , but he be a conceited fool , and an idle fool ; and he can not   see a joke . at the same time he be quite honest , and I think he be a gentleman . but be a gentleman be no excuse for be a fool ; indeed , I think it make it bad . " 

 " nothing can make it bad , " James put in . 

 she draw down the corner of her lip and stroke her fine grey hair . 

 " you say Emanuel have be here to - day ? " 

 " ay ! " say James . " he come in an ' have a sup o ' tea . " 

 " do you know why he come ? " 

 " maybe he feel faintlike , and slip in here as there be no public near than the Queen Adelaide . or maybe he think as I be get on in year , and he want for to make my acquaintance afore I die . I didna ' ask he . " 

 " I see you understand , " say Mrs. Prockter . " Mr. Ollerenshaw , my stepson be court your niece . " 

 " great - stepniece , " James correct ; and add : " be he now ? to tell ye th ' truth I do not   know till th ' other day as they be acquaint . " 

 " they have not   be acquaint long , " Mrs. Prockter inform he . " you may have hear that Emanuel be think of go into partnership with Mr. Andrew Dean - a new glaze that Mr. Dean have invent . the matter may turn out well , because all that Mr. Dean really want be a sleeping partner with money . Emanuel have the money , and I think he can be guarantee to sleep . your stepniece meet Emanuel by accident through Mr. Dean some week ago , over at Longshaw . they must have take to each other at once . and I must tell you that not merely be my stepson court your niece , but your niece be court my stepson . " 

 " you surprise I , missis ! " 

 " I daresay I do . but , it be the fact . she be not   a Churchwoman ; at least , she be not   a Churchwoman at Longshaw ; she be congregational , and not very much at that . you be not   a Churchman , either ; but your niece now go to St. Luke 's every Sunday . so do my stepson . your niece be out to - night . so be my stepson . and if they be not together somewhere I shall be very much astonish . of course , the new generation do as it like . " 

 " and what next ? " James inquire . 

 " I will tell you what next , " cry the mature lady , with the most charming vivacity . " I like your niece . I have   meet she twice at the St. Luke 's Guild , and I like she . I should have ask she to come and see I , only I be determined not to encourage she with Emanuel . Mr. Ollerenshaw , I be not go to have she marry Emanuel , and that be why I have   come to see you . " 

 the horror of his complicated situation display itself suddenly to James . he who have always lead a calm , unworried life , be about to be shove into the very midst of a hullabaloo of woman and fool . 

 his wizened body shrank ; and he be not sure that his pride be quite unhurt . Mrs. Prockter notice this . 

 " oh ! " she resume , with undiminished vivacity , " it be not because I think your niece be not   good enough for Emanuel ; it be because I think she be a great deal too good ! and yet it be not   that , either . the truth be , Mr Ollerenshaw , I be a purely selfish woman . I be the last person in the world to stand in the way of my poor stepson get a well wife than he deserve . and if the woman choose to throw herself away on he , that be not my affair . what I scent danger in be that your stepniece would find my stepson out . at present she be smite by his fancy waistcoat . but she would soon see through the fancy waistcoat - and then there would be a scandal . if I have not misjudge your stepniece , there would be a scandal , and I do not think that I have misjudge she . she be exactly the sort of young woman who , when she have discover she have make a mistake , would walk straight out of the house . " 

 " she be ! " James agree with simple heartiness of conviction . 

 " and Emanuel , have no sense of humour , would leave nothing undo to force she back again . imagine the scandal , Mr. Ollerenshaw ! imagine my position ; imagine your ! I , in an affair like that ! I will not   have it - that be to say , I will not   have it if I can stop it . now , what can we do ? " 

 despite the horror of the situation , he have sufficient loose , unemployed sentiment   leave over from pity himself   to be rather pleased by her manner of put it : what can we do ? 

 but he keep this pleasure to himself . 

 " nowt ! " he say , drily . 

 he speak to she as one sensible person speak to another sensible person in the five town . assuredly she be a very sensible person . he have in past year credit , or discredit , she with " air . " but here she be declare that Helen be too good for her stepson . if his pride have momentarily suffer , through a misconception , it be now in the full vigour of its strength . 

 " you think we can do nothing ? " she say , reflectively , and leant forward on her chair , towards he , as if strike by his oracular wisdom . 

 " what can we do ? " 

 " you might praise Emanuel to she - urge she on . " she fix he with her eye . 

 Sensible ? she be prodigious . she be the serpent of serpent . 

 he take her gaze twinkling . " ay ! " he say . " I might . but if I be to urge she on , why didna ' ye ask she to your house like , and chuck them at each other ? " 

 she nod several time , impress by this argument . " you be quite right , Mr. Ollerenshaw , " she admit . 

 " it be a dangerous game , " he warn she . 

 she put her lip together in meditation , and star into a corner . 

 " I must think it over " - she emerge from her reflection . " I feel much easy now I have   tell you all about it . and common - sense , middle - aged people like you and I can manage to do what we want . dear I ! how annoying stepson be ! obviously , Emanuel ought to marry another fool . and goodness know there be plenty to choose from . and yet he must need go and fall in love with almost the only sensible girl in the town ! there be no end to that boy 's foolishness . he actually want I to buy Wilbraham Hall , furniture , and everything ! what do you think it be worth , Mr. Ollerenshaw ? " 

 " worth ? it be worth what it will fetch . " 

 " eight thousand ? " 

 " the land 's worth that , " say James . 

 " it be a silly idea . but he put it into my head . now will you drop in one day and see I ? " 

 " no , " say James . " I be not much for teapartie , thank ye . " 

 " I mean when I be alone , " she plead , delightfully ; ' so that we can talk over thing , and you can tell I what be go on . " 

 he see clearly all the peril of such a course , but his instinct seize he again . 

 " Happen I may look in some morning when I be round yonder . " 

 " that will be very nice of you , " she flatter he , and rise . 

 Helen come home about ten o'clock , and go direct to bed . never before have James Ollerenshaw feel like a criminal , but as Helen 's eye dwelt for a moment on his in bid he goodnight , he could scarcely restrain the blush of the evildoer . and he sixty ! turn which way he would he see nothing but worry . what an incredible day he have live through ! and how astounding be human existence ! 

 content 
 chapter 12 

 BREAKFAST 

 he have an unsatisfactory night - that be to say , in the matter of sleep . in respect of sagacity he rise rich than he have lain down . he have daily perceive , about three a.m. , that he be move too much in circle which be foreign to he , and which call he " Jimmy . " and at five a.m. , when the first workman 's car wake bumpily the echo of the morn , he have perceive that Mrs. Prockter 's plan for separate Emanuel and Helen by bring they together be not a wise plan . of course , Helen must not marry Emanuel Prockter . the notion of such a union be ludicrous .   in spite of all the worry she be heap upon he , he do not see any urgent reason why she should marry anybody .   but the proper method of nip the orange - blossom in the bud be certainly to have a plain chat with Helen , one of those plain chat which can only occur , successfully , between plain , common - sense person . he be convince that , notwithstanding Mrs. Prockter 's fear , Helen have not for an instant thought of Emanuel as a husband . it be inconceivable that she , a girl so utterly sensible , should have do so . and yet - girl ! and Mrs. Prockter be no fool , come to think of it . a sterling creature . not of his world , but nevertheless - at this point he uneasily doze . 

 however , he determine to talk with Helen that morning at breakfast . he descend at half - past seven , as usual , full of a diplomatic intention to talk to Helen . she be wholly sensible ; she be a person to whom you could talk . still , tact would be need . lack of sleep have render his nervous system such that he would have prefer to receive tact rather than to give it . but , happily , he be a self - control man . 

 his post , which lie scatter on the tile at the foot of the front door , do not interest he . he put it aside , in its basket . nor could he work , accord to his custom , at his account . even the sight of the unfille - in credit - slip for the bank do not spur he to industry . there can be no doubt that he be upset . 

 he walk across the room to the pile of Helen 's book against the wall , and in sheer absence of mind pick one up , and sit on a chair , on which he have never before sit , and begin to read the volume . 

 then the hurried , pretentious striking of the kitchen clock startle he . half - an - hour have pass in a moment . he peep into the kitchen . not a sign of breakfast ! not a sign of the new servant , with her starched frill ! and for thirty year he have breakfast at eight o'clock precisely . 

 and no Helen ! be Helen laugh at he ? be Helen treat he as an individual of no importance ? it be unimaginable that his breakfast should be late . if anybody think that he be go to - no ! he must not give way to righteous resentment . diplomacy ! Tact ! Forbearance ! 

 but he would just go up to Helen 's room and rap , and tell she of the amazing and awful state of thing on the ground - floor . as a fact , she herself be late . at that moment she appear . 

 " good - morning , uncle . " 

 she be cold , prim , cut off like China from human intercourse by a wall . 

 " Th ' servant have na ' come , " say he , strain to be tolerant and amicable . he do his good to keep a grieve astonishment out of his voice ; but he could not . 

 " oh ! " she murmur , calmly . it be nothing to she , then , that James 's life should be turn upside down ! and she add , with icy detachment : " I be not surprised . you will never get servant to be prompt in the morning when they do not   sleep in the house . and there be no room for Georgiana to sleep in the house . " 

 Georgiana ! preposterous name ! 

 " Mrs. Butt be always prompt . I will say that for she , " he reply . 

 this , as he immediately recognise , be a failure in tact on his part . so when she say quickly : " I be sure Mrs. Butt would be delighted to come back if you ask she , " he say nothing . 

 what stagger his intellect and his knowledge of human nature be that she remain absolutely unmove by this appalling , unprecedented , and complete absence of any sign of breakfast at after eight o'clock . 

 just then Georgiana come . she have a key to the back door , and enter the house by way of the scullery . 

 " good - morning , Georgiana , " Helen greet she , go into the scullery - much more kindly than she have greet her uncle . instead of fall on Georgiana and slay she , she practically embrace she . 

 a gas cooking - stove be a wondrous gift of Heaven . you do not have to light it with yesterday 's paper , damp wood , and the remain of last night 's fire . in twelve minute not merely be the breakfast ready , but the kitchen be dust , and there be a rose in a glass next to the bacon . James have calm himself by read the book , and the period of waiting have really be very short . as he front the bacon and the flower , Helen carefully shut the scullery door . the Manchester Guardian lie to the left of his plate . thoughtful ! altogether it be not so bad . 

 far , she smile in hand he his tea . she , too , he observe , must have sleep ill . her agreeable face be draw . but her blue - and - white - strip dress be impeccably put on . it be severe , and yet very smooth . it suit her mood . it also suit his . they face each other , as self - control people do face each other at breakfast after white night , disillusioned , tremendously sensible , wise , gently cynical , see the world with steady and just orb . 

 " I have   be read one o ' your book , lass , " he begin , with superb amiability . " it be pretty near as good as a newspaper . there be summat about a law case as go on for ever . it isna ' true , I suppose , but it might be . the man as write that know what he be talk about for once in a way . it be rare and good . " 

 " you mean Jarndyce v. Jarndyce ? " she say , with a smile - not one of her condescending smile . 

 " ay , " he say , " I believe that be the name . how didst know , lass ? " 

 " I just guess , " she answer . " I suppose you do not   have much time for reading , uncle ? " 

 " not I ! " say he . " I be one o ' th ' busy man in Bosley . and if ye do not   know it now , you will afore long . " 

 " oh ! " she cry , " I have   notice that . but what can you expect ? with all those rent to collect yourself ! of course , I think you be quite right to collect they yourself . rent - collector can soon ruin a property . " her tone be exceedingly sympathetic and comprehending . he be both surprised and pleased by it . he have misjudge her mood . it be certainly comfortable to have a young woman in the house who understand thing as she do . 

 " ye're right , lass , " he say . " it be small house as mean trouble . you be never do - wi ' cottage property . always summat ! " 

 " it be all small , be not   it ? " she go on . " about how much do the rent average ? three - and - six a week ? " 

 " about that , " he say . she be a shrewd guesser . 

 " I can not   imagine how you carry the money about , " she exclaim . " it must be very heavy for you . " 

 " I will tell you , " he explain . " I have   get my own system o ' collecting . if I have not , I couldna ' get through . in each street I have   one tenant as I trust . and the other tenant can leave their rent and their rent book there . when they do that regular for a month , I give them twopence apiece for their child . if they do it regular for a year , I mak ' them a present of a wik 's rent at Christmas . it be cheap nor rent - collector . " 

 " what a good idea " she say , impressed . " but how do you carry the money about ? " 

 " I bank I ' Bosley , and I bank I ' turnhill , too . and I bank once I ' Bosley and twice I ' Turnhill o ' Mondays , and twice I ' bosley o ' tuesday . only yesterday I be behind . I reckon as I can do all my collecting between nine o'clock Monday and noon Tuesday . I go to th ' bad tenant first - be sure o ' that . there be some o ' them , if you do not   catch them early o ' Monday , you do not   catch them at all . " 

 " it be incredible to I how you can do it all in a day and a half , " she pursue . " why , how many house be there ? " 

 " Near two hundred and forty I ' bosley , " he respond . " Hast forget th ' sugar this time , lass ? " 

 " and in Turnhill ? " she say , pass the sugar . " I think I will have that piece of bacon if you do not   want it . " 

 " over a hundred , " say he . " a hundred and twenty . " 

 " so that , first and last , you have to handle about sixty pound each week , and all in silver and copper . fancy ! what a weight it must be ! " 

 " ay ! " he say , but with less enthusiasm . 

 " that be three thousand a - year , " she continue . 

 her tone be still innocuously sympathetic . she seem to be talk of money as she might have talk of counter . nevertheless , he feel that he have be entrap . 

 " I expect you must have save at the very least thirty thousand pound by this time , " she reflect , judicially , disinterestedly - speak as a lawyer might have speak . 

 he offer no remark . 

 " that mean another thirty pound a week , " she resume . decidedly she be marvellous at sum of interest . 

 he persist in offer no remark . 

 " by the way , " she say , " I must look into my household account . how much do you tell I you allow Mrs. Butt a week for expense ? " 

 " a pound , " he reply , shortly . 

 she make no comment . " you do not   own the house , do you ? " she inquire . 

 " no , " he say . 

 " what be the rent ? " 

 " eighteen pound , " he say . Reluctant be a word that inadequately describe his attitude . 

 " the bad of this house be that it have no bathroom , " she remark . " still , eighteen pound a year be eighteen pound a year . " 

 her tone be faultless , in its innocent , sympathetic common - sense . the truth be , it be too faultless ; it render James furious with a fury that be dangerous , because it have to be suppress . 

 then suddenly she leave the table . 

 " the Kiel butter at a shilling a pound be quite good enough , Georgiana , " he hear she exhort the servant in the scullery . 

 ten minute later , she put ten sovereign in front of he . 

 " there be that ten - pound note , " she say , politely   but not quite accurately . " I have   get enough of my own to get on with . " 

 she flee ere he could reply . 

 and not a word have be contrive to say to she concern Emanuel . 

 content 
 chapter 13 

 the world 

 a few day later James Ollerenshaw be alone in the front room , check various account for repair of property in Turnhill , when twin letter fall into the quietude of the apartment . the postman - the famous old postman of Bursley , who on fine summer day surmount the acute difficulty of tender foot by deliver mail in worst slipper - have swiftly push the letter , as usual , through the slit in the door ; but , nevertheless , their advent have somehow the air of magic , as , indeed , the advent of letter always have . Mr. Ollerenshaw glance curiously from his chair , over his spectacle , at the letter as they lay dead on the floor . their singular appearance cause he to rise at once and pick they up . they be seal with a green seal , and address in a large and haughty hand - one to Helen and the other to himself . obviously they come from the world which refer to he as " Jimmy . " he be not use to be thrill by mere envelope , but now he become conscious of a slight quickening of pulsation . he open his own envelope - the paper be more like a blanket than paper , and might have be make from the material of a child 's untearable picture - book . he have to use a stout paper - knife , and when he do get into the envelope he feel like a burglar . 

 the discerning and shrewd ancient have guess the content . he have fear , and he have also hop , that the content would comprise an invitation to Mrs. Prockter 's house at Hillport . they do ; and more than that . the signature be Mrs. Prockter 's , and she have write he a four - page letter . " my dear Mr. Ollerenshaw . " " believe I , your most cordially and sincerely , Flora Prockter . " 

 Flora ! 

 the strange thing , perhaps , in all this strange history be that he think the name suit she . 

 he have no intention of accept the invitation . not exactly ! but he enjoy receive it . it constitute a unique event in his career . and the wording of it be very agreeable . Mrs. Prockter proceed thus : " in pursuance of our plan " - our plan ! - " I be also invite your niece . indeed , I have gather from Emanuel that he consider she as the prime justification of the party . we will throw they together . she will hear he sing . she have never hear he sing . if this do not cure she , nothing will , though he have a nice voice . I hope it will be a fine night , so that we may take the garden . I do not thank you half enough for the exceedingly kind way in which you receive my really unpardonable visit the other evening , " etc . 

 James have once hear Emanuel Prockter sing , at a concert give in aid of something which deserve every discouragement , and he agree with Mrs. Prockter ; not that he pretend to know anything about sing . 

 he sit down again , to compose a refusal to the invitation ; but before he have write more than a few word it have transform itself into an acceptance . he be aware of the entire ridiculousness of his go to ' an evening party at ' Mrs. Prockter 's ; still an instinct , powerful but obscure   it be the will - to - live and naught else , persuade he by force to say that he would go . 

 " have you have an invitation from Mrs. Prockter ? " Helen ask he at tea . 

 " yes , " say he . " have you ? " 

 " yes , " say she . " shall you go ? " 

 " ay , lass , I shall go . " 

 she seem greatly surprised . 

 " Us'll go together , " he say . 

 " I do not   think that I shall go , " say she , hesitatingly . 

 " have ye write to refuse ? " 

 " no . " 

 " then I should advise ye to go , my lass . " 

 " why ? " 

 " unless ye want to have trouble with I , " say he , grimly . 

 " but , uncle - " 

 " it be no good butting uncle , ' he reply " if ye didna ' mean to go , why do ye give young Prockter to understand as ye would go ? I will tell ye why ye change your mind , lass . it be because you be ashamed o ' be see there with yer old uncle , and I be sorry for it . " 

 " Uncle ! " she protest . " how can you say such a thing ? you ought to know that no such idea ever enter my head . " 

 he do know that no such idea have ever enter her head , and he be secretly puzzle for the real reason of her project refusal . but , be determined that she should go , he have employ the sure and the least scrupulous mean of achieve his end . 

 he tap nervously on the table , and maintain the silence of the wounded and the proud . 

 " of course , if you take it in that way , " she say , after a pause , " I will go . " 

 and he go through the comedy of gradually recover from a wound . 

 his boldness in accept the invitation and in compelling Helen to accompany he be the audacity of sheer ignorance . he have not surmise the experience which lie before he . she tell he to order a cab . she do not suggest the advisability of a cab . she state , as a platitude , the absolute indispensability of a cab . he have mean to ride to Hillport in the tramcar , which run past Mrs. Prockter 's gate . however , he reluctantly agree to order a cab , be fearful lest she might , after all , refuse to go . it be remarkable that , after have be oppose to the policy of throw Helen and Emanuel together , he be now in favour of it . 

 on the evening , when at five minute past nine she come into the front room clothe for Mrs. Prockter 's party , he perceive that the tramcar would have be unsuitable . a cab might hold she . a hansom would certainly not have hold she . she be all in white , and very complicated . no hat ; simply a white , silver - spangle bandage round her head , neck , and shoulder ! 

 she glance at he . he wear his good black clothe . " you look very well , " say she , surprisingly . " that old - fashioned black necktie be splendid . " 

 so they go . James have the peculiar illusion that he be go to a belated funeral , for except at funeral be have never in his life ride in a cab . 

 when he descend with his fragile charge in Mrs. Prockter 's illuminated porch , another cab be just plough up the gravel of the drive in departure , and nearly the whole tribe of Swetnams be on the doorstep ; some have walk , and be boast of speed . there be Sarah Swetnam , her brother Ted , the lawyer , her brother Ronald , the borough surveyor , her brother Adams , the bank cashier , and her sister Enid , aged seventeen . this child be always call " Jos " by the family , because they hat the name " Enid , " which they consider to be silly . " Lilian , the newly - affiance one , be not in the crowd . 

 " where be Lilian ? " Helen ask , abruptly . 

 " oh , she come early with the powerful Andrew , " reply the youthful and rather jealous Jos . " she be not   an ordinary girl now . " 

 Sarah rapidly introduce her brother and sister to James . they be all very respectful and agreeable and Adams Swetnam press his hand quite sympathetically , and Jos 's frank smile be delicious . what surprise he be that nobody seem surprised at his be there . none of the girl wear hat , he notice , and he also notice that the three man   all about thirty in year   wear silk hat , white muffler , and blue overcoat . 

 a servant - a sort of special edition of James 's Georgiana - appear , and rob everybody of every garment that would yield easily to pull . and then those lovely creature stand reveal . yes , Sarah herself be lovely under the rosy shade . the young man be elegantly slim , and look very much alike , except that Adams have a beard - a feeble beard , but a beard . it be true that in their exact correctness they might have be mistake for toast - master , or , with the slight addition of silver neck - chain , for high official in a costly restaurant . but great - stepuncle James could never have be mistake for anything but a chip of the early nineteenth century flick by the hammer of fate into the twentieth . his wide black necktie be the secret envy of the Swetnam boy . 

 the Swetnam boy have the air of do now what they do every night of their life . with facile ease , they lead the way through the long hall to the drawing - room . James follow , and en route he observe at the extremity of a side - hall two young people sit with their hand together in a dusky corner . " male and female create he they ! " reflect James , with all the tolerant , disdainful wisdom of his year and situation . 

 a piano be then hear , and as Ronald Swetnam push open the drawing - room door for the woman to enter , there come the sound of a shocked " S - sh ! " 

 Whereupon the invader take to the tip of their toe and creep in as sinner . at the farth end a girl be sit at a grand piano , and in front of the piano , glorious , effulgent , monarchical , stand Emanuel Prockter , hold a piece of music horizontally at the level of his waist . he have a white flower in his buttonhole , and , adhere to a quaint old custom which still linger in the five town , and possibly elsewhere , he show a crimson silk handkerchief tuck in between his shirt - front and his white waistcoat . he have broad band down the side of his trouser . not a hair of his head have be touch by the accidental wind of circumstance . he survey the couple of dozen people in the large , glow room with a fix smile and gesture of benevolent congratulation . 

 Mrs. Prockter be close to the door . " Emanuel be just go to sing , " she whisper , and shake hand silently with James Ollerenshaw first . 

 content 
 chapter 14 

 SONG , SCENE and DANCE 

 every head be turn . Emanuel cough , frowned , and put his left hand between his collar and his neck , as though he have conceal something there . the new arrival slip cautiously into chair . James be between Helen and Jos . and he distinctly see Jos wink at Helen , and Helen wink back . the wink be without doubt an expression of sentiment arouse by the solemnity of Emanuel 's frown . 

 the piano tinkle on , and then Emanuel 's face be observe to change . the frown vanish and a smile of heavenly rapture take its place . his mouth gradually open till its resemblance to the penultimate vowel be quite realistic , and simultaneously , by a curious muscular co - ordination , he rise on his toe to a considerable height in the air . 

 the strain be terrible - like wait for a gun to go off . James be conscious of a strange vibration by his side , and see that Jos Swetman have get the whole of a lace handkerchief into her mouth . 

 the gun go off - not with a loud report , but with a gentle and lofty tenor piping , somewhere in the neighbourhood of F , or it might have be only e   though , indeed , a. photograph would have suggest that Emanuel be sing at low the upper c , and the performer slowly resume his normal stature . 

 " O love ! " he have exclaim , adagio and sostenuto . 

 then the piano , in its fashion , also say : " o love ! " 

 " o love ! " Emanuel exclaim again , with slight trace of excitement , and rise to height of stature hitherto undreamt of . 

 and the piano once more , in turn , call plaintively on love . 

 it would be too easy to mock Emanuel 's gift of song . I leave that to people name Swetnam . there can be no doubt Emanuel have a very take voice , if thin , and that his singing give pleasure to the majority of his hearer . More than any one else , it please himself . when he sing he seem to be inspire by the fact , to he patent , that he be confer on mankind a boon inconceivably precious . if he look a fool , his look seriously misinterpret his feeling . he do not spare himself on that evening . he tell his stepmother 's guest all about love and all about his own yearning . he hide nothing from they . he make no secret of the fact that he live for love alone , that he have know innumerable love , but none like one particular variety , which he describe in full detail . as a confession , and especially as a confession utter before many maiden , it do not err on the side of reticence . presently , have describe a kind of amorous circle , he come again to : " o love ! " 

 but this time his voice crack : which make he angry , with a stern and controlled anger . still sing , he turn slowly to the pianist , and fiercely glare at the pianist 's unconscious back . the obvious inference be that if his voice have crack the fault be the pianist 's . the pianist , poor thing , utterly unaware of the castigation she be receive , stick to her business . Less than a minute later , Emanuel 's voice crack again . this time he turn even more deliberately to the pianist . he be pain . he star during five complete bar at the back of the pianist , still continue his confession . he wish the audience to understand clearly where the blame lay . finally , when he think the pianist 's back be sufficiently cook , he face the audience . 

 " I hope the pianist will not be so atrociously clumsy as to let my voice crack again , " he seem to be say . 

 evidently his reproof to the pianist 's back be effectual , for his voice do not crack again . 

 and at length , when Jos have communicate her vibration to all her family , and every one have cease to believe that the confession would ever end , the confession do end . it end as it have begin , in an even , agreeable tenor piping . Emanuel be much too great an artist to allow himself to be carry away by his emotion . the concluding word be , " oh , rapture ! " and Emanuel sing they just as if he have be sing " one - and - eleven - pence three - farthing . " 

 " oh , rat ! " say Jos , under cover of the impassione applause . 

 " it be nearly as long as Jarndyce v. Jarndyce , " observe Adams , under the same cover . 

 " what ! " cry James , enchant . " have you be read that too ? " 

 Adams Swetnam and great - stepuncle James have quite a little chat on the subject of Jarndyce v. Jarndyce . several other people , include the hostess , join in the conversation , and James be surprised at the renown which Jarndyce v. Jarndyce seem to enjoy ; he be glad to find his view share on every hand . he be also glad , and startle , to discover himself a personality in the region of Hillport . he go through more formal introduction in ten minute than he have be through during the whole of his previous life . it be a hot evening ; he wipe his brow . then iced champagne be serve to he . have flutter round he , in her ample way , and charmingly flatter he , Mrs. Prockter leave he , encircle chiefly by young woman , in order to convey to late arrival that they , and they alone , be the authentic object of her solicitude . Emanuel Prockter , clothe in triumph , approach , and question James , as one shrewd man of business may question another , concern the value in the market of Wilbraham Hall . 

 shortly afterwards a remarkable occurrence add zest to the party . Helen have wander away with Sarah and Jos Swetnam . she re - enter the drawing - room while James and Emanuel be in discussion , and her attitude towards Emanuel be decidedly not sympathetic . then Sarah Swetnam come in alone . and then Andrew Dean come in alone . 

 " oh , here 's Andrew , Helen ! " Sarah exclaim . 

 Andrew Dean have the air of a formidable personage . he be a tall , heavy , dark young man , with immense slop shoulder , a black moustache , and incandescent eye , which he use as though he be somewhat suspicious of the world in general . if his dress have be less untidy , he would have make a perfect villain of melodrama . he smile the unsure smile of a villain as he awkwardly advance , with outstretched hand , to Helen . 

 Helen put her lip together , keep her hand well out of view , and offer he a bow that could only have be properly appreciate under a microscope . 

 the episode be quite negative ; but it amount to a scene - a scene at one of Mrs. Prockter 's party ! a scene , moreover , that mystify everybody ; a scene that imply war and the wound ! 

 some discreetly withdraw . of these be Emanuel , who have the sensitiveness of an artist . 

 Andrew Dean presently perceive , after stand for some second like an imbecile stork on one leg , that the discretion of the other be worthy to be imitate . at the door he meet Lilian , and they disappear together arm in arm , as betroth lover should . three people remain in that quarter of the drawing - room - Helen , her uncle , and Sarah Swetnam . 

 " why , Nell , " say Sarah , aghast , " what be the matter ? " 

 " nothing , " say Helen , calmly . 

 " but surely you shake hand with Andrew when you meet he , do not   you ? " 

 " that depend how I feel , my dear , " say Helen . 

 " then something be the matter ? " 

 " if you want to know , " say Helen , with haughtiness , " in the hall , just now - that be - I - I overhear Mr. Dean say something about Emanuel Prockter 's singing which I consider very improper " 

 " but we all - " 

 " I be go out into the garden , " say Helen . 

 " a pretty how - d'ye - do ! " James mutter inaudibly to himself as he meander to and fro in the hall , observe the manner and custom of Hillport society . another couple be now occupy the privacy of the seat at the end of the side - hall , and James notice that the head of this couple have precisely the same relative position as the head of the previous couple . 

 " bless we ! " he murmur , apropos of the couple , who , see in he a spy , rise and flee . then he resume his silent soliloquy " a pretty how - d'ye - do ! the chit 's as fix on that there Emanuel Prockter as ever a chit could be ! " and yet James have catch the winking with Jos Swetnam during the song ! as an enigma , Helen grow dark and dark to he . he be almost ready to forswear his former belief , and to assert positively that Helen have no sense whatever . 

 Mrs. Prockter loom up , disengage . " ah , Mr. Ollerenshaw , " she say , " everybody seem to be choose the garden . shall we go there ? this way . " 

 she lead he down the side - hall . " by the bye , " she murmur , with a smile , " I think our plan be succeed . " 

 and , without warn he , she sit down in the seat , and of course he join she , and she put her head close to his , evidently in a confidential mood . 

 " bless we ! " he say to himself , apropos of himself and Mrs. Prockter , glance about for spy . 

 " it be horrid of I to make fun of poor dear Emanuel 's singing , " pursue Mrs. Prockter . " but how do she take it ? if I be not mistaken , she wink . " 

 " she wink , " say James ; " yes , she wink . " 

 " then everything be all right . " 

 " Missis , " say he , " if you do not   mind what ye're about , you will have a daughter - in - law afore you can say ' knife ' ! " 

 " not Helen ? " 

 " ay , Helen . " 

 " but , Mr. Ollerenshaw - " 

 here happen an interruption - a servant with a tray of sustenance , comprise more champagne . James , prudent , would have refuse , but under the hospitable urgency of Mrs. Prockter he compromise - and yield . 

 " I will join ye . " 

 so she join he . then a string of young people pass the end of the side - hall , and among they be Jos Swetnam , who caper up to the old couple on her long leg . 

 " oh , Mrs. Prockter , " she cry , " what a pity we can not   dance on the lawn ! " 

 " I wish you could , my dear , " say Mrs. Prockter . 

 " and why can not   ye ? " demand James . 

 " no music ! " say Joe . 

 " you see , " Mrs. Prockter explain , " the lawn be at the far end of the garden , and it be impossible to hear the piano so far off . if it be only a little piano we could move it about , but it be a grand piano . " 

 in James 's next speech be to be feel the influence of champagne . " look here , " he say , " it be nobbut a step from here to the Green Man , be it ? " 

 " the Green Man ! " echo Mrs. Prockter , not comprehend . 

 " ay , the pub ! " 

 " I believe there be an inn at the bend , " say Mrs. Prockter ; " but I do not   think I have   ever notice the sign . " 

 " it be the Green Man , " say James " if you will send some one round there , and the respex of Mr. Ollerenshaw to Mr. Benskin - that be the landlord - and will he lend I the concertina as I sell he last Martinmas ? " 

 " oh , Mr. Ollerenshaw ! " shriek Jos . " can you play for dancing ? how perfectly lovely it would be ! " 

 " I fancy as I can keep your trotter move , child , " say he , gaily . 

 upon this , two spinster , the Misses Webber , wear duplicate of one anxious visage , supervene , and , with strange magic gesture , beckon Mrs. Prockter away . news of the episode between Andrew Dean and Helen have at length reach they , and they have deem it a sacred duty to inform the hostess of the sad event . they be of the specie of woman that spar neither herself nor other . their fault be , that they be too compassionate for this world . promise to send the message to Mr. Benskin , Mrs. Prockter vanish to her doom . 

 within a quarter of an hour a fete unique in the annal of Hillport have organise itself on the lawn in the dim , verdurous retreat behind Mrs. Prockter 's house . the lawn be large enough to be just too small for a tennis - court . it be also of a pretty mid - victorian irregularity as regard shape , and guard from the grim horizon of the five town by a ring of superb elm . a dozen couple , mainly youngish , promenade upon its impeccable surface in obvious expectation ; while on the border , in rustic chair , odd remnant of humanity , mainly oldish , gaze in ecstasy at the picturesque ensemble . in the midst of the lawn be Mrs. Prockter 's famous weeping willow , on whose branch chinese lantern have be hang by a reluctant gardener , who hold to the proper gardener 's axiom that lawn be make to be see and not hurt . the moon aid these lantern to the good of her power . under the tree be a cane chair , and on the cane chair sit an age man with a concertina .between his hand . he put his head on one side and play a few bar , and the couple pose themselves expectantly . 

 " hold on a bit ! " the virtuoso call out . " it be a tidy bit draughty here . " 

 he put the concertina on his knee , fumble in his tail - pocket , and draw forth a tasseled turkish cap , which majestically he assume ; the tassel fall over his forehead . he own several turkish cap , and never go abroad without one . 

 then be strike up definitely , and Mrs. Prockter 's party have resolve itself , as party often do , into a dance . in the blissful excitation cause by the ancient and jiggy tune which " Jimmy " play , the sad episode of Helen Rathbone and Andrew Dean appear to be forget . Helen dance with every man except Andrew , and Andrew dance with every woman except Helen . but Mrs. Prockter have not forget the episode ; nor have the Misses Webber . the reputation of Mrs. Prockter 's entertainment for utter correctness , and her own enormous reputation for fine tact , be impaired , and Mrs. Prockter be determined that that which ought to happen should happen . 

 she have a brief and exceedingly banal interview with Helen , and another with Andrew . and an interval have elapse , Andrew be observe to approach Helen and ask she for a polka . Helen punctiliously accept . and he lead she out . the outraged god of social decorum be appease , and the reputation of Mrs. Prockter and her party stand as high as ever . it be well and diplomatically do . 

 nevertheless , the unforeseen come to pass . for at the end of the polka Helen faint on the grass ; and not Andrew but Emanuel be first to succour she . it be a highly disconcerting climax . of course , Helen , be Helen , recover with singular rapidity . but that do not lighten the mystery . 

 in the cab , go home , she weep . James could scarcely have believe it of she . 

 " oh , uncle , " she half whisper , in a voice of grief , " you fiddle while Rome be burn ! " 

 this obscure saying baffle he , the more so that he have be play a concertina and not a fiddle at all . his feeling be vague , and in some respect contradictory ; but he be convince that Mrs. Prockter 's scheme for separate Helen and the Apollo Emanuel be not precisely succeed . 

 content 
 chapter 15 

 the gift 

 after that night great - stepuncle James become more than a celebrity - he become a notoriety in Bursley . have it not be for the personal influence of Mrs. Prockter with the editor of the Signal , James 's exploit upon the concertina under weep willow at midnight would have receive facetious comment in the weekly column of gossip that appear in the great daily organ of the five town on Saturdays . James , aid by nothing but a glass or two of champagne , have suddenly step into the forefront of the town 's life . he be a card . he rather like be a card . 

 but within his own heart the triumph and glory of James Ollerenshaw be less splendid than outside it . Helen , apparently ashamed of have weep into his waistcoat , keep he off with a kind of a rod of stiff politeness . he could not get near she , and for at least two reason he be anxious to get near she . he want to have that frank , confidential talk with she about the general imbecility of her adorer , Emanuel Prockter , that talk which he have fail to begin on the morning when she have be so sympathetic concern his difficulty in collect a large income . her movement from day to day be mysterious . fact point to the probability that she and Emanuel be see each other with no undue publicity . and yet , despite fact , despite her behaviour at the party , he could scarcely believe that shrewd Helen have not pierce the skin of Emanuel and perceive the emptiness therein . at any rate , Emanuel have not repeat his visit to the house . the only visitor have be Sarah Swetnam and her sister Lilian , the fiancée of Andrew Dean . the chatter of the three girl have strike James as be almost hysterically gay . but in the evening Helen be very gloomy , and he fancy a certain redness in her eye . though Helen be assuredly the last woman in the world to cry , she have , beyond doubt , cry once , and he now suspect she of another weeping . 

 even more detrimental to his triumph in his own heart be the affair of the ten - pound note , which she have steal   or abstract if you will   and then restore to he with such dramatic haughtiness . that ten pound be an awful trial to he . it rankle , not only with he , but   he feel sure   with she . still , if she have her pride , he also have his . he reckon that she have not rightly behave in take the note without his permission , and that in return the full sum , and pretend that he have make it necessary for she to run the house on her own money , she have treat he meanly . the truth be , she have wound he - again . instinct of astounding generosity be bud in he , but he be determined to await an advance from she . he give her money for housekeeping , within moderation , and nothing more . 

 then one evening she announce that the morrow would be her birthday . James feel uneasy . he have never give birthday present , but he well know that present be the correct thing on birthday . he go to bed in a state of the most absurd and causeless mental disturbance . he do not know what to do . whereas it be enormously obvious what to do . 

 he wake up about one o'clock , and reflect , with an air of discovery : " her tone be extremely friendly when she tell I it be her birthday to - morrow . she mean it as an advance . I shall take it as an advance . " 

 about half - past one he say to himself : " I will give she a guinea to spend as she like . " it do genuinely seem to he a vast sum . a guinea to fritter away ! 

 however , towards three o'clock its vastness have shrink . 

 " dashed if I do not   give the wench a fiver ! " he exclaim . it be madness , but he have an obscure feeling that he might have have more amusement if he have begin be mad rather early in life . 

 upon this he sleep soundly till six o'clock . 

 his mind then unfortunately get entangle in the painful episode of the ten - pound note . he and Helen have the same blood in their vein . they be alike in some essential trait . he know that neither of they could ever persuade himself , or herself , to mention that miserable ten - pound note again . 

 " if I give she a tenner , " he say , " that would make she see as I would settle to forget that business , and let bygone be bygone . I will give she a tenner . " 

 it be preposterous . she could not , of course , spend it . she would put it away . so it would not be waste . 

 upon this he rise . 

 poor simpleton ! ever since the commencement of his relation with Helen , surprise have follow surprise for he . and the series be not end . 

 the idea of give a gift make he quite nervous . he fumble in his cashbox for quite 

 a long time , and then be call , nervously : 

 " Helen ! " 

 she come out of the kitchen into the front room .   dress : White muslin - unspeakable extravagance in a town of smut . 

 " it be thy birthday , lass ? " 

 she nod , smile . 

 " well , tak ' this . " 

 he hand she a ten - pound note . 

 " oh , thank you , uncle ! " she cry , just on the calm side of effusiveness . 

 at this point the surprise occur . 

 there be another ten - pound note in the cashbox . his finger go for a stroll on their own account and return with that note . 

 " hold on ! " he admonish she for jump to conclusion . " and this ! " and he give she a second note . he be much more startled than she be . 

 " oh , thank you , uncle ! " and then , laugh : " why , it be nearly a sovereign for every year of my life ! " 

 " how old art ? " 

 " twenty - six . " 

 " I be go dotty ! " he say to his soul . " I be go dotty ! " and his eye watch his finger take six sovereign out of the box , and count they into her small white hand . and his cheek feel her kiss . 

 she go off with twenty - six pound - twenty - six pound ! the episode be entirely incredible . 

 Breakfast be a most pleasing meal . though acknowledge himself an imbecile , he be oblige to acknowledge also that a certain pleasure spring from a certain sort of imbecility . Helen be adorable . 

 now that same morning he have receive from Mrs. Prockter a flattering note , ask he , if he cou1d spare the time , to go up to Hillport and examine Wilbraham Hall with she , and give she his expert advice as to its value , etc . he inform Helen of the plan . 

 " I will go with you , " she say at once . 

 " what be in the wind ? " he ask himself . he see in the suggestion a device for see Emanuel . 

 " the fact be , " she add , " I want to show you a house up at Hillport that might do for we . ' 

 he wince . she have say nothing about a removal for quite some time . he hat the notion of removal .   " flitting , " he call it .   it would mean extra expense , too . as for Hillport , he be sure that nothing , except cottage , could be get in Hillport for less than fifty pound a year . if she think he be go to increase his rent by thirty - two pound a year , besides rate , she be in error . the breakfast finish in a slight mist . he harden . the idea of her indicate house to he ! the idea of she assume that - well , no use in meet trouble half - way ! 

 content 
 chapter 16 

 the hall and its result 

 " yes , " say Mrs. Prockter , gaze about she , to James Ollerenshaw , " it certainly be rather spacious . " 

 " rather spacious ! " James repeat in the secret hollow of his mind . it be not spacious ; it be simply fantastic . they stand , those two - Mrs. Prockter in her usual flower silk , and James in his usual hard , rent - collect clothe - at the foot of the double staircase , which spring with the light of elegance of wing from the floor of the entrance - hall of Wilbraham Hall . in front of they , over the great door , be a musician ' gallery , and over that a huge window . on either side of the great door be narrow window which look over stretch of green country far away from the five town . for Wilbraham Hall be on the supreme ridge of Hillport , and present only its back yard , so to speak , to the five town . and though the carpet be roll up and tie with string , and though there be dark rectangular space on the wall show where picture have be , the effect of the hall be quite a furnished effect . polished oak and tassel hanging , and monstrous vas and couch and chair preserve in it the appearance of a home , if a home of giant . 

 decidedly it be worthy of the mighty reputation of the extinct Wilbrahams . the Wilbrahams have gradually rise in North Staffordshire for two century . about the Sunday of the Battle of Waterloo they be at their apogee . then for a century they have gradually fall . and at last they have extinguish themselves in the person of a young - old fool who be in prison for have cheat a pawnbroker . this young - old fool have nothing but the name of Wilbraham to his back . the wealth of the Wilbrahams , or what remain of it after eight decade of declension , have , during the course of a famous twenty year ' law - suit between the father of the say young - old fool and a farming cousin in California , slowly settle like golden dust in the office of lawyer in Carey - street , London . and the house , ground , lake , and furniture   save certain portrait   be now on sale by order of the distant winner of the law - suit . and both Mrs. Prockter and James could remember the time when the twin - horse equipage of the Wilbrahams use to dash about the five town like the chariot of the sun . the recollection make Mrs. Prockter sad , but in James it produce no such feeling . to Mrs. Prockter , Wilbraham Hall be the last of the stylish port - wine estate that in old day dot the height around the five town . to she it be the symbol of the death of tone and the triumph of industrialism . whereas James merely see it as so much building land upon which street of profitable and inexpensive semi - detached villa would one day rise at the wand 's touch of the man who have sufficient audacity for a prodigious speculation . 

 " it ' ud be like live in th ' covered market , live here , " James observe . 

 the St. Luke 's market be the large roof in Bursley . and old inhabitant , incapable of recover from the surprise of marketing under cover instead of in an open square , still , after thirty year , refer to it as the cover market . 

 Mrs. Prockter smile . 

 " by the way , " say James , " where be they childer ? " 

 the old people look around . Emanuel and Helen , who have enter the proud precinct with they , have vanish . 

 " I believe they be upstairs , ma'am , " say the fat caretaker , pleat her respectable white apron . 

 " you can go , " say Mrs. Prockter , curtly , to this vestige of grandeur . " I will see you before I leave . " 

 the apron resent the dismissal , and perhaps would have take it from none but Mrs. Prockter . but Mrs. Prockter have a mien , and a flower silk , before which even an apron of the Wilbrahams must quail . 

 " I may tell you , Mr. Ollerenshaw , " she remark , confidentially , when they be alone , " that I have not the slight intention of buy this place . Emanuel take advantage of my good nature . you have   no idea how persistent he be . so all you have to do be to advise I firmly not to buy it . that be why I have   ask you to come up . he acknowledge that you be an authority , and he will be force to accept your judgment . " 

 " why do not   ye say that afore , missis ? " ask James bluntly . 

 " before when ? " 

 " before that kick - up   party   o ' your . he get out of I then as I think it be dirt cheap at eight thousand . " 

 " but I do not   want to move , " plead Mrs. Prockter . 

 " I be ask ye why ye do not   tell I afore ? " James repeat . 

 Mrs. Prockter look at he . " man be try creature ! " she say . " so it seem you can not   tell a tarradiddle for I ? " and she sigh . 

 " I do not   know as I object to that . what I object to be contradict mysen . " 

 " why do you bring Helen ? " Mrs. Prockter demand . 

 " I didna ' . she come hersen . " 

 they exchange glance . 

 " and now she and Emanuel have run off . " 

 " it look to I , " say James , " as if your plan for knock their two head together wasna ' turn out as you mean it , missis . " 

 " and what be more , " say she , " I do believe that Emanuel want I to buy this place so that when I be go he can make a big splash here with your niece and your money , Mr. Ollerenshaw ! what do you think of that ? " 

 " he may make as much splash as he be a mind to , wi ' my niece , " James answer . " but he will not   make much of a splash with my money , I can promise ye . " his orb twinkle . " I can promise ye , " he repeat . 

 " to whom do you mean to leave it , then ? " 

 " not to his wife . " 

 " H'm ! well , as we be here , I suppose we may as well see what there be to be see . and those two dreadful young people must be find . " 

 they mount the stair . 

 " will you give I your arm , Mr. Ollerenshaw ? " to such gift he be not use . already he have give twenty - six pound that day . the spectacle of Jimmy ascend the state staircase of Wilbraham Hall with all the abound figure of Mrs. Prockter on his arm would have draw crowd have it be offer to the public at sixpence a head . 

 they inspect the great drawing - room , the great dining - room , the great bedroom , and all the less room ; the gallery , the balcony , the panelling , the embrasure , the suite and suite and suite of georgian and victorian decaying furniture ; the ceiling and the cornice ; the picture and engraving   of which some hundred remain ; the ornament , the clock , the screen , and the microscopic knick - knack . both of they lose count of everything , except that before they reach the attic they have pass through forty - five separate apartment , not include linen closet . it be in one of the attic , as empty as Emanuel 's head , that they discover Emanuel and Helen , gaze at a magnificent prospect over the moorland , with the garden , the paddock , and Wilbraham Water immediately beneath . 

 " we have   be look for you everywhere , " Helen burst out . " oh , Mrs. Prockter , do come with I to the end of the corridor , and look at three old distaff that I have   find in a cupboard ! " 

 during the absence of the woman , James Ollerenshaw contradict himself to Emanuel for the sweet sake of Emanuel 's stepmother . little by little they descend to the earth , with continual detour and halt by Helen , who be several time lose and find . 

 " I have   tell he , " say James , quietly andproudly . " I have   tell he it be no use to you unless you want to turn it into a building estate . " 

 they separate into two couple at the gate , with elaborate formality on the part of Emanuel , which Uncle James more or less try to imitate . 

 " well ? " murmur James , sigh relief , as they wait for the electric tram in that umbrageous and aristocratic portion of the Oldcastle - road which lie near to the portal of Wilbraham Hall . he be very pleased with himself , because , at the cost of his own respect , he have please Mrs. Prockter . 

 " well ? " murmur Helen , in response , tap on the edge of the pavement the very same sunshade in whose company James have first make her acquaintance . she seem nervous , hesitating , apprehensive . 

 " what about that house as ye've   so kindly choose for I ? " he ask , genially . he want to humour she . 

 she look he straight in the eye . " you have   see it , " say she . 

 " what ! " he snort . " when han I see it ? " 

 " just now , " she reply . " it be Wilbraham Hall . I know that Mrs. Prockter would not   have it . and , besides , I have   make Emanuel give up all idea of it . " 

 he laugh , but with a strange and awful sensation in his stomach . 

 " a poor joke , lass ! " he observe , with the laugh dead in his throat . 

 " it be not   a poor joke , " say she . " it be not   a joke at all . " 

 " didst thou seriously think as I should buy that there barrack to please thee ? " 

 " certainly , " she say , courageously . " just that - to please I . " 

 " I be right enough where I be , " he assert grimly . " what for should I buy Wilbraham 

 Hall ? what should I do in it ? " 

 " live in it . " 

 " trafalgar - road 's good enough for I . " 

 " but it be not   good enough for I , " say she . 

 " I wouldna ' ha ' minded , " he say , savagely - " I wouldna ' ha ' minded go into a house a bit big , but - " 

 " nothing be big enough for I except Wilbraham Hall , " she say . 

 he say nothing . he be furious . it be her birthday , and he have give she six - and - twenty pound - ten shilling a week for a year - and she have barely kiss he . and now , instantly after that amazing and mad generosity , she have the face to look cross because he would not buy Wilbraham Hall ! it be inconceivable ; it be unutterable . so he say nothing . 

 " why should not   you , after all ? " she resume . " you have   get an income of nearly five thousand a year . "   now he hat she for the mean manner in which she have worm out of he secret that previously he have share with no one .   " you do not   spend the twentieth part of it . what be you go to do with it ? what be you go to do with it ? you be get an old man . "   cold horror !   " you can not   take it with you when you leave the five town , you know . whom shall you leave your money to ? you will probably die worth a hundred thousand pound , at this rate . you will leave it to I , of course . because there be nobody else for you to leave it to . why can not   you use it now , instead of waste it in old stocking ? " 

 " I bank my money , wench , " he hissingly put in . 

 " old stocking ! " she repeat , loudly . " we could live splendidly at Wilbraham Hall on two thousand a year , and you would still be save nearly three thousand a year . " 

 he say nothing . 

 " do you suppose I give up my position at school in order to live in a poky little hole at eighteen pound a year ? what do you think I can do with myself all day in Trafalgar - road ? why , nothing there be no room even for a piano , and so my finger be stiffen every day . it be not life at all . naturally , it be a great privilege , " she pursue , with a vicious inflection that remind he perfectly of Susan , " for a girl like I to live with an old man like you , all alone , with one servant and no sit - room . but some privilege cost too dear . the fact be , you never think of I at all . "   and he have but just give she six - and - twenty pound .   " you think you have   get a cheap housekeeper in I - but you have not . I be a very good housekeeper - especially in a very large house - but I be not cheap . " 

 she speak as if she have all her life be accustom to live in vast mansion but James know that , despite her fine friend , she have never live in anything appreciably large than his own dwelling . he know there be not a house in Sneyd - road , Longshaw , worth more than twenty - five pound a year . the whole outbreak be shocking and disgraceful . he scarcely recognise she . 

 he say nothing . and then suddenly he say : " I shall buy no Wilbraham Hall , lass . " his voice be final . 

 " you could sell it again at a profit , " say she . " you could turn it into a building estate "   parrot - cry catch from himself or from Emanuel , " and later on we could go and live somewhere else . " 

 " yes , " say he ; " Buckingham Palace , likely ! " 

 " I do not   - " she begin . 

 " I shall buy no Wilbraham Hall , " he reiterate . 

 Greek have meet Greek . 

 the tram surge along and swallow up the two Greeks . they be alone in the tram , and they sit down opposite each other . the conductor come and take James 's money , and the conductor have hardly turn his back when Helen snap , with nostril twitch : 

 " you be a miser , that be what you , be ! a regular old miser ! every one know that . every one call you a miser . if you be not   a miser , I should like you to tell I why you live on about three pound a week when your income be ninety pound a week . I think I might do you some good . I think I might get you out of it . but it seem I can not . " 

 " ah ! " he snort . it be a painful sight . other person board the car . 

 at tea she behave precisely like an angel . not the least hint of her demeanour of the ineffable affray of the afternoon . she be so sweet that he might have give she twenty - six Wilbraham Halls instead of twenty - six pound . he speak not . he be , in a very deep sense , upset . 

 she spend the evening in her room . 

 " good - bye , " she say the next morning , most amiably . it be after breakfast . she be hat , gloved and sunshade . 

 " what ? " he exclaim . 

 " Au revoir , " she say . " all my thing be pack up . I shall send for they . I think I can go back to the school . if I can not , I shall go to mother in Canada . thank you very much for all your kindness . if I go to Canada , of course I shall come and see you before I leave . " 

 he let she shake his hand . 

 for two day he be haunt by memory of kidney omelette and by the word " miser . " 

 Miser , eh ? he a miser ! he ! Ephraim Tellwright be a miser - but he ! 

 then the natty servant give notice , and Mrs. Butt call and suggest that she should resume her sway over he . but she do not employ exactly that phrase . 

 he long for one of Helen 's meal as a drunkard long for alcohol . 

 then Helen call , with the casual information that she be off to Canada . she be particularly sweet . she have the tact to make the interview short . the one blot on her conduct of the interview be that she congratulate he on the possible return of Mrs. Butt , of which she have hear from the natty servant . 

 " good - bye , uncle , " she say . 

 " good - bye . " 

 she have get as far as the door , when be whisper , brokenly : " lass - " 

 Helen turn quickly towards he . 

 content 
 chapter 17 

 descendant of machiavelli 

 yes , she turn towards he with a rapid , impulsive movement , which express partly her sympathy for her old uncle , and partly a feeling of joy cause by the sudden hope that he have decide to give way and buy Wilbraham Hall after all . and the fact be that , in his secret soul , he have decide to give way ; he have decide that Helen , together with Helen 's cooking , be worth to he the price of Wilbraham Hall . but when he see her brusque , eager gesture , he begin to reflect . his be a wily and profound nature ; he reckon that he could read the human soul , and he say to himself : 

 " the wench be not   so set on leave I as I think she be . " 

 and instead of say to she : " Helen , lass , if you will stop you shall have your Wilbraham 

 Hall , " in tone of affect , sad surrender , he say : 

 " I be sorry to lose thee , my girl ; but must be must . " 

 and when he catch the look in her eye , he be more than ever convince that he would be able to keep Helen without satisfy she extremely expensive whim . 

 Helen , for her part , begin to suspect that if she play the fish with sufficient skill , she would capture it . thus they both , in a manner of speaking , get out their landing - net . 

 " I do not   say , " James Ollerenshaw proceed , in accent calculate to prove to she that he have just as great a horror of sentimentality as she have - " I do not   say as you would not   make a rare good mistress o ' Wilbraham Hall . I do not   say as I would not   like to see you in it . but when a man reach my age , he be fix in his habit like . and , what be more , suppose I be save a bit o ' money , who be I save it for , if it be not   for you and your mother ? you say as much yourself . I might pop off any minute - " 

 " Uncle ! " Helen protest . 

 " ay , any minute ! " he repeat , firmly . " I have   know strong man nor I pop off as quick as a bottle o ' ginger - beer near the fire . " here he gaze at she , and .his gaze say : " if I pop off here and now , would not   you feel ashamed o ' yerself for be so hard on your old uncle ? " 

 " you will live many and many a year yet , " Helen smile . 

 he shake his head pessimistically . " I have   set my heart , " he continue , " on leave a certain sum for you and yer mother . I have   have it in mind since I do not   know when . it be a fancy o ' mine . and I canna ' do it if I be to go all around th ' five town buy barrack . " 

 Helen laugh . " what a man you be for exaggerate ! " she flatter he . then she sit down . 

 he consider that he be gradually wind in his line with immense skill . " ay , " he ejaculate , with an absent air , " it be a fancy o ' mine . " 

 " how much do you want to leave ? " Helen question , faintly smile . 

 " do not   you bother your head about that , " say he . " you may take it from I as it be a tidy sum . and when I be dead and go , and you have   get it all , then ye can do as ye feel inclined . " 

 " I shall beat she , as sure as egg ! " he tell himself . 

 " all this mean that he will give in when it come to the point , " she tell herself . 

 and aloud she say : " have you have supper , uncle ? " 

 " no , " he reply . 

 the next development be that , without another word , she remove her glove , lift her pale hand to her head , and slowly draw hatpin from her hat . then she remove her hat , and plunge the pin into it again . he could scarcely refrain from snatch off his own tassel turkish cap and pitch it in the air . he feel as if he have win the Battle of Hastings , or defeat the captain of the bowling club in a single - handed match . 

 " and to think , " he reflect , " that I should ha ' give in to she by this time if I have not   get more sense in my little finger than - " etc . 

 " I think I will stay and cook you a bit of supper , " say Helen . " I suppose Georgiana be in the kitchen ? " 

 " if she be not , she be in the back entry , " say Jimmy . 

 " what be she do in the back entry ? " 

 " count the star , " say Jimmy ; " and that young man as come with the bread help she , most like . " 

 " I must talk to that girl . " Helen rise . 

 " Ye may , " say Jimmy ; " but th ' baker 's man'll have th ' last word , or time be change . " 

 he be gay . he could not conceal his gaiety . he see himself free from the menace of the thraldom of Mrs. Butt . he see himself gourmandise over the meal that Helen alone could cook . he see himself trot up and down the street of Bursley with the fine , smart lass in the five town by his side . and scarcely a penny of extra expenditure ! and all this happy issue due to his diplomatic and histrionic skill ! the fact be , Helen really like he . there could be no doubt about that she like he , and she would not leave he also , she be a young woman of exceptional common sense , and , be such , she would not risk the loss of a large fortune merely for the sake of indulge pique engender by his refusal to gratify a ridiculous caprice . 

 before she have well quit the room he see with clearness that he be quite the astute man in the world , and that Helen be clay in his hand . 

 the sound of crockery in the scullery , and the cheerful little explosion when the gas - ring be ignite , and the low mutter of conversation that ensue between Helen and Georgiana - these phenomenon be music to the artist in he . he extract the concertina from its case and begin to play " the dead March in Saul . " not because his sentiment have a foundation in the slight degree funereal , but because he could perform " the dead March in Saul " with more virtuosity than any other piece except " the Hallelujah Chorus . " and he do not desire to insist too much on his victory by fill Trafalgar - road with " the Hallelujah Chorus " . he be discretion itself . 

 when she come back to the parlour   astoundingly natty in a muslin apron of Georgiana 's   to announce supper , she make no reference to the concert which she be interrupt . he abandon the concertina gently , caress it into its leather shell . he be full to the brim with kindliness . it seem to he that his life with Helen be commence all over again . then he follow the indication of his nose , which already for some minute have be prophesy to he that in the concoction of the supper Helen have surpass herself . 

 and she have . there be kidney   no , not in an omelette , but impale on a skewer . a novel specie of kidney , a particularity in kidney ! 

 " where didst pick this up , lass ? " he ask . 

 " it be the kidney of that rabbit that you have   buy for to - morrow , " say she . 

 now , he have no affection for rabbit as an article of diet , and he have only buy the rabbit because the rabbit happen to be go past his door   in the hand of a hawker   that morning . his perfunctory purchase of it show how he have lose interest in life and meal since Helen 's departure . and lo ! she have transform a minor part of it into something wondrous , luscious , and unforgettab1e . ah , she be Helen ! and she be his ! 

 " I have   ask Georgiana to make up my bed , " Helen say , after the divine repast . 

 " I will tell ye what I will do , " he say , in an ecstasy of generosity , " I will buy thee a piano , lass , and we will put it in th ' parlour against the wall where they book be now . " 

 she keep silence - a silence which vaguely disturb he . 

 so that he add : " and if ye're bent on a big house , there be one up at Park - road , above th ' Park , semi - detached - at least , it be the end of a terrace - as I can get for thirty pound a year . " 

 " my dear uncle , " she say , in a firm , even voice , " what be you talk about ? do not   I tell you when I come in that I have settle to go to Canada ? I think it be all decide . surely you do not   think I be go to live in a poky house in Park - road - the very street where my school be , too ! I perfectly understand that you will not   buy Wilbraham Hall . that be all right . I shall not   pout . I hate woman who pout . we can not   agree , but we be friend . you do what you like with your money , and I do what I like with myself . I have a sort of idea I would try to make you beautifully comfortable just for the last time before I leave England , and that be why I be stay . I do hope you do not   imagine anything else , uncle . there ! " 

 she kiss he , not as a niece , but as a wise , experienced nurse might have kiss a little boy . for she too , in her way , reckon herself somewhat of a diplomatist and a descendant of Machiavelli . she have think : " it be a funny thing if I can not   bring he to his knee with a tasty supper - just to make it clear to he what he will lose if he lose I . " 

 James Ollerenshaw have no sleep that night . and Helen have but little . 

 content 
 Chapter 18 

 CHICANE 

 he come downstairs early , as he have do after a previous sleepless night - also cause by Helen . 

 that it would be foolish , fatuous , and inexcusable to persevere far in his obstinacy against Helen , this he know . he see clearly that all his argument to she about money and the saving of money be ridiculous ; they would not have carry conviction even to the most passive intelligence , and Helen 's intelligence be far from passive . they be not even true in fact , for he have never intend to leave any money to Helen 's mother ; he have never intend to leave any money to anybody , simply because he have not care to think of his own decease ; he have make no plan about the valuable fortune which , as Helen have too forcibly tell he , he would not be able to bear away with he when he leave Bursley for ever ; this subject be not pleasant to he . all his ramble sentence to Helen   which he have think so clever when he utter they   be merely an excuse for not part with money - money that be useless to he . 

 on the other hand , what Helen have say be both true and convincing ; at any rate , it convince he . 

 he be a miser ; he admit it . be a miser , he see , be one way of enjoy yourself , but not the good way . again , if he really desire to enrich Helen , how much well to enrich she at once than at an uncertain date when he would be dead . dead people can not   be thank . dead people can not   be kiss . dead people can not   have curious dainty offer to they for their supper . he wish to keep Helen ; but Helen would only stay on one condition . that condition be a perfectly easy condition for he to fulfil . after pay eight thousand pound   or a bit less   for Wilbraham Hall , he would still have about ten time as much money as he could possibly require . of course , eight thousand pound be a lot of coin . but , then , you can not   measure woman   especially when they be good cook   in term of coin . for instance , it happen that he have exactly l8,000 in share of the London and North Western Railway Company . the share - certificate be in his safe ; he could hold they in his hand ; he could sell they and buy Wilbraham Hall with the proceed . that be to say , he could exchange they for Helen . now , it would be preposterous to argue that he would not derive more satisfaction from Helen than from those crackling share - certificate . 

 Wilbraham Hall , once he become its owner , would be a worry - an awful worry . well , would it ? would not Helen be entirely capable of look after it , of superintend it in every way ? he know that she would ! as for the upkeep of existence in Wilbraham Hall , have not Helen prove to he that its cost be insignificant when compare to his income ? she have . 

 and as to his own daily manner of living , could he not live precisely as he choose at Wilbraham Hall ? he could . it be vast ; but nothing would compel he to live in all of it at once . he could choose a nice little room , and put a notice on the door that it be not to be disturb . and Helen could run the rest of the mansion as her caprice dictate . 

 the process of argument be over when Helen descend to put the finishing touch to a breakfast which she have evidently concoct with Georgiana the night before . 

 " breakfast be ready , uncle , " she call to he . 

 he obey . flower on the table once more ! the first since her departure ! a clean cloth ! a general , inexplicable tuning - up of the meal 's frame . 

 you would now , perhaps , have expect he to yield , as gracefully as an old man can . he want to yield . he hunger to yield . he know that it be utterly for his own good to yield . 

 but if you seriously expect he to yield , your knowledge of human nature lack depth . something far strong than argument , something far strong than desire for his own happiness , prevent he from yield . Pride , a silly self - conceit , the great enemy of the human race , forbid he to yield . for , on the previous night , Helen have snub he - and not for the first time . he could not accept the snub with meekness , though it would have pay he handsomely to do so , though as a Christian and a philosopher he ought to have do so . he could not . 

 so he put on a brave face , pretend to accept the situation with contented calm , and talk as if Canada be the next street , and as if she go be entirely indifferent to he . Helen imitate he . 

 it be a lovely morning ; not a cloud in the sky - only in their heart . 

 " Uncle ! " she say after breakfast be do and clear away . 

 he be count rent in his cashbox in the front parlour , and she have come to he , and be lean over his shoulder . 

 " well , lass ? " 

 " have you get twenty - five pound in that box ? " 

 it be obvious that he have . 

 " I shouldna ' be surprised , " say he . 

 " I wish you would lend it I . " 

 " what for ? " 

 " I want to go over to Hanbridge and book my berth , definitely , and I have   no loose cash . " 

 now here be a chance to yield . but no . 

 " dost mean to say , " he exclaim , " as ye havena ' book your berth ? when do th ' steamer sail ? " 

 " there be one from Glasgow next Saturday , " say she - " the Saskatchewan . I secure the berth , but I do not   pay for it . " 

 " it be a rare lot of money , " he observe . 

 " oh , " she say , " I do not   want all that for the fare . I have   other thing to pay for - railway to Glasgow , etc . you will lend it I , will not   you ? " 

 her finger be already in the cashbox . she be behave just like a little girl , like a spoilt child . it be remarkable , he consider , how old and mature Helen could be when she choose , and how kittenish when she choose . 

 she go off with four five - pound note and five sovereign . " will you ask I to come back and cook the dinner ? " she smile , ironically , enchantingly . 

 " ay ! " he say . he be bind to smile also . 

 she return in something over two hour . 

 " there you be ! " she say , put a blue - green paper into his hand . " ever see one of these before ? " 

 it be the ticket for the steamer . this stagger he . a sensible , determined woman , who disappear to buy a steamer - ticket , may be expect to reappear with a steam - ticket . and yet it stagger he . he could scarcely believe it . she be go , then ! she be go ! it be inevitable now . 

 " the boat leave the Clyde at ten in the morning , " she say , resume possession of the paper , ' so we must go to Glasgow on Friday , and stop the night at an hotel . " 

 " we ? " he murmur , aghast . 

 " well , " she say , " you surely will not   let I travel to Glasgow all alone , will you ? " 

 " she be a caution , she be ! " he privately reflect . 

 " you can come back on Saturday , " she say ; ' so that you will be in time to collect your rent . there be an express to Glasgow from Crewe at 1.15 , and to catch that we must take the 12.20 at Shawport . " 

 she have settle every detail . 

 " and what about my dinner ? " he inquire . " I be go to set about it instantly , " laugh . she . 

 " I mean my dinner on Friday ? " he say . 

 " oh , that ! " she reply . " there be a restaurant - car from Crewe . so we can lunch on the train . " 

 this idea of accompany she to Glasgow please he intensely . " glasgow isna ' much I ' my line , " he say . " but you wench do as ye like , seemingly . " 

 thus , on the Friday morning , he meet she down at Shawport Station . he be in his good clothe , but he have walk . she arrive in a cab , that carry a pagoda of trunk on its fragile roof ; she have come straight from her lodging . there be a quarter of an . hour before train - time . he pay for the cab . he also buy one second - class single and one second - class return to Glasgow , while she follow the porter who trundle her luggage . when he come out of the booking - office   minus several gold piece , she be purchase paper at the bookstall , and far up the platform the porter have seize a paste - brush , and be open a cupboard of label . an extraordinary scheme present itself to James Ollerenshaw 's mind , and he trot up to the porter . 

 " I have   see to the baggage myself , " say Helen , without look at he . 

 " all right , " he say . 

 the porter touch his cap . 

 " Label that luggage for Crewe , " he whisper to the porter , and pass straight on , as if take exercise on the platform . 

 " yes , sir , " say the porter . 

 when he get back to Helen of course he have to make conversation with a nonchalant air , in order to hide his guilty feeling . 

 " so none of them have come to see you off!"he observe . 

 " none of whom ? " 

 " none o ' yer friend . " 

 " no fear ! " she say . " I would not   have it for anything . I do hate and loathe good - bye at a 

 railway station . do not   you ? " 

 " never have any , " he say . 

 the train be prompt , but between Shawport and Crewe it suffer delay , so that there be not an inordinate amount of time to spare at the majestic junction . 

 Heedless , fly - away creature that she be , Helen scurry from the North Stafford platform to the main - line platform without a thought as to her luggage . she be apparently so preoccupied with her handbag , which contain her purse , that she have no anxiety leave over for her heavy belonging . 

 as they hasten forward , he see the luggage be tumble out on to the platform . 

 the Glasgow tram roll grandiosely in , and the restaurant - car come to a standstill almost exactly opposite the end of the North Stafford platform . they obtain two seat with difficultly . then , as there be five minute to wait , Jimmy descend from the car to the asphalt and peep down the North Stafford platform . yes , her luggage be lie there , deserted , in a pile . he regain the carriage . 

 " I suppose the luggage will be all right ? " Helen say , calmly , just as the guard whistle . 

 " ay ! " say he , with the mien of a traveller , of vast experience . " I see them bring all th ' N.S. luggage over . it be th ' fust thing I think of . " 

 as a liar he reckon he be pretty good . he glance from the window as the train slide away from Crewe , and out of the tail of his eye , in the distance , over the head of people , he have a momentary glimpse of the topmost of Helen 's trunk safely at rest on the North Stafford platform . 

 he feel safe . he feel strangely joyous . he eat largely , and make very dry , humorous remark about the novelty of a restaurant on wheel . 

 " bless we ! " he say , as the express flash through Preston without stop . " it be fust time as I have   begin a bottle o ' Bass in one town and finish it in another . " 

 he grow positively jolly , and the journey seem to be accomplish with the rapidity of a dream . 

 content 
 chapter 19 

 the tossing 

 " you say you would see it into the van , " pout Helen - she who never pout ! 

 " Nay , lass , " he correct she , " I say I would see them bring all th ' luggage over . " 

 the inevitable moment of reckoning have arrive . they stand together on the platform of St. Enoch 's , Glasgow . the last piece of luggage be be remove from the guard 's van under the direction of passenger , and there be no sign whatever of Helen 's trunk . this absence of Helen 's trunk do not in the least surprise James Ollerenshaw ; he be perfectly aware that Helen 's trunk repose , at that selfsame instant , in the lose luggage office at Crewe ; but , of course , he have to act surprise . in case of necessity he could act very well . it be more difficult for he to act sorrow than to act surprise ; but he do both to his own satisfaction . he climb into the van and scan its corner - in vain . then , side by side , they visit the other van at the head of the train , with an equal result . 

 the two guard , be Scotch , respond to inquiry with extreme caution . all that they would answer for be that the trunk be not in the train . then the train be draw out of the station by a toy - engine , and the express engine follow it with grave dignity , and Helen and Jimmy be leave star at the empty rail . 

 " something must be do , " say Helen , crossly . " ay ! " Jimmy agree . " it be long past my tea - time . we must find out if there be anything to eat I ' Scotland . " 

 but Helen insist on visit the station - master . now , the stationmaster at St. Enoch 's be one of the most important personage north of the Tweed , and not easily to be see . however , Helen see he . he point out that the train come from London in two portion , which be divide in Scotland , one go to Edinburgh , and his suggestion be that conceivably the luggage have be put into the Edinburgh van in mistake for the Glasgow van . such error do occur sometimes , he say , imply that the North Western be an english railway , and that surprising thing happen in England . he say , also , that Helen might telephone to Edinburgh and inquire . 

 she endeavour to act on this counsel , but come out of the telephone cabin say that she could not get into communication with Edinburgh . 

 " well go over to Edinburgh and see for yourself , " say Jimmy , tranquilly . 

 " yes , and what about my steamer ? " Helen turn on he . 

 " Scotland canna ' be so big as all that , " say Jimmy . " not accord to th ' map . we could run over to Edinburgh to - night , and get back to Glasgow early to - morrow . " 

 she consent . 

 just as he be take two second return to Edinburgh   they have snatch railway egg and railway tea while wait for a fast train   he stop and say : 

 " unless ye prefer to sail without your trunk , and I could send them on by th ' next steamer ? " 

 " Uncle , " she protest , " I do wish you would not   be so silly . the idea of I sail without my trunk ! why do not   you ask I to sail without my head ? " 

 " all right - all right ! " he respond . " but do not   snap mine off . two second return to Edinburgh , young man , and I will thank ye to look slippy over it . " 

 in the Edinburgh train he could scarcely refrain from laugh . and Helen , too , seem more in a humour to accept the disappearance of five invaluable trunk , full of preciosity , as a facetious sally on the part of destiny . 

 he draw out a note - book which he always carry , and do mathematical calculation . 

 " that make ' twenty - seven pound eighteen and ninepence as ye owe I , " he remark . 

 " what ? for railway ticket ? " 

 " railway ticket , tip , and that twenty - five pound I lend ye . I be make ye a present o ' my fare , and dinner , and tea and so forth . " 

 " twenty - five pound that you lend I ! " she murmur . 

 " yes , " he say " Tuesday morning , while I be at my cashbox . " 

 " oh , that ! " she ejaculate . " I think you be give I that . I never think you would ask I for it again , uncle . I would completely forget all about it . " - 

 she seem quite sincere in this amazing assertion . 

 his acquaintance with the way of woman be thus enlarge , suddenly , and at the merely nominal expense of twenty - five pound . it be a wondrous proof of his high spirit and his general contentedness with himself that he should have submit to the robbery without a groan . 

 " what be twenty - five pun ' ? " he reflect . " there will be no luggage for she at Edinburgh ; that steamer'll go without she ; and then I shall give in . I shall talk to she about the way o ' providence , and tell she it be bear in upon I as she must have Wilbraham Hall if she be in a mind to stay . I shall save my face , anyhow . " 

 and he far decide that , in case of necessity , in case of Helen at a later stage push her inquiry as to the luggage inconveniently far he would have to bribe the porter at Shawport to admit to she that he , the porter , have make a mistake in the labelling . 

 when they have satisfy themselves that Edinburgh do not contain Helen 's trunk - no mean labour , for the lose luggage office be close , and they have to move mountain in order to get it open on the plea of extreme urgency - Jimmy Ollerenshaw turn to Susan 's daughter , say to himself that she must be soothe regardless of cost . miracle would not enable she to catch the steamer now , and the hour be fast approach when he would benevolently offer she the gift of Wilbraham Hall . 

 " well , lass , " he begin , " I be right sorry . what be to be do ? " 

 " there be nothing at all to be do , " she reply , smile sadly . she might have upbraid he for carelessness in the matter of the luggage . she might have burst into tear and declare passionately that it be all his fault . but she do not . " except , of course , that I must cable to mother . she be come to Quebec to meet I . " 

 " that will do to - morrow , " he say . " what be to be do to - night ? in th ' way o ' supper , as ye might say ? " 

 " we must go to an hotel . I believe the station hotel be the good . " she point to a sign and a direct black hand which say : " to the hotel . " 

 in a minute James Ollerenshaw find himself in the large and most gorgeous hotel in Scotland . 

 " look here , wench , " he say . " I do not   know as this be much in my line . Summat a think less gaudy'll do for my old bone . " 

 " I will not   move a step far this night ! " Helen declare . " I be ready to drop . " 

 he remember that she must be soothe . 

 " well , " he say , " here go ! " 

 and he stride across the tessellated pavement under the cold , scrutinize eye of menial to a large window mark in gold letter : " Bureau . " 

 " have ye get a couple of bedroom like ? " he ask the clerk . 

 " yes , sir , " say the clerk   who be a perfect lady . " what do you want ? " 

 " do not   I tell ye as we want a couple o ' bedroom , miss ? " 

 after negotiation she push across the counter to he - two disc of cardboard number 324 and 326 , each mark 6s . 6d . he regard the price as fantastic , but no cheap room be to be have , and Helen 's glance be dangerous . 

 " why , " he mutter , " I have   get a four - room cottage empty at Turnhill as I would let for a month for thirteen shilling , and paper it ! " 

 " where be your luggage , sir ? " ask a muscular demon with shiny sleeve . 

 " that be just what we want to know , young feller , " say Jimmy . " for the present , that be all as we can lay our hand on . " and he indicate Helen 's satchel .  

 his experience in the lift be exciting , and he suggest the laying of a tramway along the corridor of the fourth floor . the beautiful starch creature who bring in his hot water   without be ask   find he in the dark struggle with the electric light , which he have extinguish from curiosity and have not be able to rekindle , have lose the location of the switch . 

 at 10.30 the traveller be seat at a table in the immense dining - room , which be populate by fifteen waiter of various european nationality , and six belate guest include themselves . the one item on the menu which do not exceed his comprehension be Welsh rarebit , and he order it . 

 it be while they be wait in anticipation of this dish that he decide to commence operation upon Helen . the fact be , he be become very anxious to put affair on a definite footing . 

 " well , my girl , " he say , " cheer up . if ye tak ' my advice ye'll make up yer mind to stop I ' owd England with yer owd uncle . " 

 " of course I will , " she answer , softly ; and add : " if you will do as I want . " 

 " buy that barrack ? " 

 she nod . 

 he be on the very point of yield ; he be on the very point of say , with grandfatherly , god - like tone of utter beneficence : " lass , ye shall have it . I would not   ha ' give it ye , but it be like as if what must be - this luggage be lose . it be like as if Providence be in it . " he be on the very point of this decisive pronouncement , when a novel and dazzling idea flash into his head . 

 " listen here , " he say , bend across the table towards she , " I will toss thee . " 

 " toss I ? " she exclaim , startle . 

 " ay ! I will toss thee , if thou'lt stay . head I buy the barrack ; tail I do not , and you live with I in a house . " 

 " very well , " she agree , lightly . 

 he have not really expect she to agree to such a scheme . but , then , young woman name Helen can be trust absolutely to falsify expectation . 

 he take a sixpence from his pocket . 

 " head I win , eh ? " he say . 

 she acquiesce , and up go the sixpence . 

 it roll off the table on to the Turkey carpet   Jimmy be not so adroit as he have be in his tossing day , and seven Austrians , Germans , and Swiss spring towards it with a simultaneous impulse to restore it to its owner . 

 Jimmy jump to his foot . 

 do not   touch it ! " he cry , and bent over it . 

 " Nay , nay ! " he mutter , " I have   lose . th ' old man 's lose , after all ! " 

 and he return to the table , have make a sensation in the room . 

 Helen be in paradise . " I be surprised you be ready to toss , uncle , " say she . " however , it be all right ; we can get the luggage to - morrow . it be at Crewe . " 

 " how dost know it be at Crewe ? " he demand . 

 " because I have it label for Crewe . you be silly to imagine that I be go to leave you . but I think I would just leave nothing undo to make you give way . I make sure I be beat . I make sure I should have to knuckle under . and now you be goose enough to toss , and you have   lose , you have   lose ! Hurrah ! " she clap her hand softly . 

 " do ye mean to tell I , " Jimmy thunder , " as ye've   be play a game wi ' I all this time ? " 

 " of course . " she have no shame . 

 " and buy th ' steamer - ticket without meaning to go ? " 

 " well , " she say , " it be no good half - playing when you be play for high stake . besides , what be fifteen pound ? " 

 he do not let she into the secret that he also have order the luggage to be label for Crewe . they return to the five town the follow morning . and by mutual tacit agreement they never speak of that excursion to Scotland . 

 in such manner come Helen Rathbone to be the mistress of Wilbraham Hall . 

 content 
 chapter 20 

 the flitting 

 before the spacious crimson façade of Wilbraham Hall upon an autumn day stand Mr. Crump 's pantechnicon . that be to say , it be a pantechnicon only by courtesy - Mr. Crump 's courtesy . in strict adherence to truth it be just a common furniture - remove van , drag over the earth 's surface by two horse . on the outer wall of it be an announcement that Mr. Crump remove good by road , rail or steamer , and vast coloured picture of Mr. Crump remove good by road , rail and steamer . one see the van in situation of grave danger - travel on an express train over a lofty viaduct at sixty mile an hour , or roll on the deck of a steamer in a stormy sea . one see it also in situation of impressive natural beauty - as , for instance , pass by road through terrific mountain defile , where cataract rush and foam . the historic fact be that the van have never be beyond the five town . nevertheless , Mr. Crump bind himself in paint letter six inch high to furnish estimate for any removal whatsoever and , what be more , as a special boon to the five town , to furnish estimate free of charge . in this detail Mr. Crump have determine not to lag behind his fellow - furniture - remover , who , one and all , persist in refuse to accept even a small fee for tell you how much they demand for their service . 

 in the van be the entire worldly possession of James Ollerenshaw   except his house , his investment , a set of bowl up at the bowling club , and the clothe he wear , and the entire worldly possession of Helen Rathbone   except the clothe she wear . if it be ask where be the twenty - six pound so generously give to she by a love uncle , the reply be that the whole sum , together with much else , be in the coffer of Ezra Brunt , the draper and costumier at Hanbridge ; and the reply far be that Helen be in debt . I have hitherto conceal Helen 's tendency to debt , but it be bind soon or later to come out . and here it be . 

 after an adventurous journey by bridge over the North Staffordshire Railway , and by bridge over the Shropshire Union Canal , and by bridge over the foaming cataract of the Shaws Brook , and down the fearful slant of Oldcastle - street , and through the arduous terrific defile of Oldcastle - road , the van have arrive at the portal of Wilbraham Hall . it would have be easy , by open wide the portal , to have introduce the van and the horse too into the hall of Wilbraham Hall . but this course be not adopt . 

 Helen and Georgiana have precede the van , and they both stand at the door to receive the good . Georgiana be in one of Georgiana 's apron , and Helen also be in one of Georgiana 's apron . Uncle James have follow the van . he have not let it out of his sight . the old man 's attachment to even the least of his good be touching , and his attachment to the great of his good carry pathos into farce . the great of his good be , apparently , the full - rig ship and tempestuous ocean in a glass box which have stand on the table in the front room of the other house for many year . no one have suspect his esteem for that glass box and its content . he have not suspect it himself until the moment for pack it have come . but he seem to love it more than his bit of Spode china or his concertina ; and , take it with he , he have quit with a softened regret the quantity of over - blow blue rose which , in their eternal bloom , have enliven his existence during a long period even than the ship and ocean . 

 the ship and ocean be the last thing put into the van and the first thing take out , and James Ollerenshaw introduce the affair , hug against his own breast , into the house of his descendant . the remainder of the work of transference be relatively unimportant . two man accomplish it easily while the horse eat a late dinner . and then the horse and the van and the man go off , and there be nothing leave but a few wisps of straw and so forth , on the magnificent sweep of gravel , to indicate that they have ever be there . and Uncle James , and Helen , and Georgiana feel rather forlorn and abandon . they stand in the hall and look at each other a little blankly , like gipsy camp out in an abandon cathedral . an immense fire be burn in the immense fireplace of the hall , and similar fire be burn in the state bedroom , in a little drawing - room beyond the main drawing - room , in another bedroom , in the giant 's kitchen , and in one of the attic . these fire and a certain amount of cleaning be the only preparation which Helen have permit herself to make . even the expense of the coal have startle James , and she propose to get he safely in the cage before commence the serious business which would shatter all his nerve by a miracle of charm and audacity she have obtain from he the control of a sum of seven hundred and fifty pound . this sum , now lie nominally to her credit at one of James 's various bank , represent the difference between eight thousand pound   at which James have say Wilbraham Hall would be cheap   and seven thousand two hundred and fifty pound   at which James have succeed in buy Wilbraham Hall . 

 to the left of the hall , near the entrance , be quite a small room   originally , perhaps , a butler 's lair , and James be obstinate in select this room as his office . he have his desk carry there , and everything that personally affect he except his safe and the simple necessary of his bedroom . these be take , not to the state bedroom , which he have decline , after insincere pressure from Helen to accept it , but to a much small sleeping - chamber . the numerous family of Windsor chair , together with other ancient honesty , be send up to attics - too old at forty ! Georgiana be establish in a glorious attic ; the state bedroom be strew with Helen 's gear ; and scarcely anything remain unniche in the Hall save the ship and ocean . they all rest from their labour , and Helen be move by one of her happy inspiration . 

 " Georgiana , " she say , " go and make some tea . bring a cup for yourself . " 

 " yes , miss . thank you , miss . " 

 on removal day miserable distinction of class be invariably lose in the large - heartedness of mutual endeavour . 

 it be while the trio be thus drink tea together , standing , and , as it be , with loin still girt after the pilgrimage , that the first visitor to the new owner of Wilbraham Hall ring its great bell and involve Georgiana in her first ceremonial duty . Georgiana be quite nervous as she go to the door . 

 the caller be Emanuel Prockter . 

 " mother think I might perhaps be able to help you , " say he , in the slightly simpering tone which he adopt in delicate situation , and which he think suit he . what make the situation delicate , to he , be Helen 's apron - quite agreeable though the apron be . he feel , with his unerre perceptiveness , that young lady do not care to receive young gentleman in the apron of a Georgiana . his own attire be , as usual , fabulously correct ; the salient feature of it be a pair of light yellow chamois glove , loose - fitting and unbuttoned , with the gauntlet negligently turn back . these glove be his method of express the fact that the visit be a visit of usefulness and not a kid - glove visit . but Helen seem quite compose behind Georgiana 's apron . 

 " yes , " he repeat , with smile inanity , after he have shake hand . " mother think I might help you . " 

 " what a fool that woman be ! " reflect James . " and what a fool he be to put it on to his mother instead of keep it to himself ! " 

 " and what do you think , Mr. Prockter ? " Helen demand . " another cup and saucer , Georgiana . " 

 Helen 's question be one of her insolent question . 

  " perhaps his mother be not   such a fool ! " reflect James . and he perceive , or imagine he perceive , that their fear of Helen marry Emanuel be absurd . 

 Emanuel sniff humour in the air . he never understand humour ; but he be , at any rate , sufficiently gift with the wisdom of the simple to smile vaguely and amiably when he sniff humour . 

 and then Helen say , with cordial kindliness : 

 " it be awfully good of you - awfully good of you . here we be , you see ! " 

 and the degree of cordiality be such that the fear of her marry Emanuel suddenly seem less absurd to James . the truth be that James never have a moment 's peace of mind with Helen . she be continually prove that as a student in the University of Human Nature he have not even matriculate . 

 Georgiana appear with an odd cup and saucer , and a giggle statement that she have not be able to discover any more teaspoon . 

 " never mind , " say Helen . " Mr. Prockter shall have mine . " 

  " well , I be hang ! " reflect James . 

 Whereupon Georgiana depart , bear her own tea , into the giant 's kitchen . the miserable distinction of class have be mysteriously establish . 

 content 
 chapter 21 

 SHIP and OCEAN 

 the host , the hostess , and the guest all remain on their foot in the noble hall of the Wilbrahams , it not be good etiquette to sit at removal , even when company call . Emanuel , fortunately for he , be adept at perambulation with a full cup of tea in one hand and a hat or so in the other . there be two thing which he really could do - one be to sing a sentimental song without laugh , and the other be to balance a cup of tea . and it be only when he be do the one or the other that he genuinely live . during the remainder of his existence he be merely a vegetable inside a waistcoat . he hold his cup without a tremor while Helen charmingly introduce into it her teaspoon and stir up the sugar . then , after he have sip and pronounce the result excellent , be begin to admire the Hall and the content of the Hall . a proof of his real christian charity be that , whereas he have mean to have that Hall for himself , he breathe no word of envy nor discontent . he praise everything and presently he arrive at the ship and ocean , and praise that . he particularly praise the wave . 

 the heart of James instantly and instinctively soften towards he . for the realism of those foaming wave have always strike James as the final miracle of art . and , moreover , this be the first time that any of Helen 's haughty ' set " have ever deign to recognise the merit of the ship and ocean . 

 " where shouldst hang it , Master Prockter ? " James genially ask . 

 " hang it , uncle ? " exclaim Helen . " be you go to hang it ? be not   you go to keep it on the table in your own room ? " 

 she be hop that it might occupy a position not too prominent . she do not intend it to be the central decorative attraction of the palace . 

 " it ought to be hung , " say Emanuel . " see , here be the little iron thing for the nail . " 

 this gift of observation please James . Emanuel be indeed begin to show quite an intelligent interest in the ship and ocean . 

 " of course it must be hung , " say he . 

 he be very human , be Jimmy Ollerenshaw . for at least twenty - five year he have possess the ship and ocean , and cherish it , always mean one day to hang it against the wall as it deserve . and yet he have never arrive at do so , though the firm resolution to do so have not a whit weaken in his mind . and now he be absolutely decide , with the whole force of his will behind he , to hang the ship and ocean at once . 

 " there ! under the musician ' gallery would not   be a bad place , would it , Mr. Ollerenshaw ? " Emanuel suggest , respectfully . 

 James train his eye on the spot . " the very thing , lad ! " say he , with enthusiasm . 

 " Lad ! " Helen have not recover from a private but extreme astonishment at this singular mark of paternal familiarity to Emanuel when there be another and a far loud ring at the door . 

 Georgiana mince and trip out of her retreat , and open the majestic portal to a still great surprise for Helen . the ringer be Mr. Andrew Dean - Mr. Andrew Dean with his dark , quasi - hostile eye , and his heavy shoulder , and his defiant , suspicious bearing - Mr. Andrew Dean in workaday clothe and with hand that could not be call clean . Andrew star about he like a scout , and then advance rapidly to Helen and seize her hand , hurt it . 

 " I be just pass , " say , he , in a hoarse voice . " I expect you would be in a bit of a mess , so I think I might be useful . how d'ye do , Mr. Ollerenshaw ? " and he hurt James 's hand also . 

 " it be very kind of you , " Helen remark , flush . 

 " how do , Prockter ? " Andrew jerk out at Emanuel , not take his hand . 

 this abstention on Andrew 's part from physical violence be capable of two interpretation . the natural interpretation be that Andrew 's social method be notoriously casual and capricious . the interesting interpretation be that a failure of the negotiation between Emanuel and Andrew for a partnership - a failure which have puzzle Bursley - have leave rancour behind it . 

 Emanuel , however , display no symptom of be disturb . his blandness remain intact . nevertheless , the atmosphere be mysteriously electric . Helen feel it to be so , and an atmosphere which be deem to be electric by even one person only , ipso facto , be electric . as for James Ollerenshaw , he be certainly astonish by the visit of Andrew Dean ; but , be absorb in the welfare of his ship and ocean , he permit his astonishment , to dissolve in a vague satisfaction that , anyhow , Helen 's unexplained quarrel with Andrew Dean be really at an end . this call be assuredly Andrew 's way of expiatory repentance . 

 " the very thing ! " he repeat , glance at Emanuel as if in expectation . 

 Emanuel do not seem to comprehend that aught be expect of he . he amiably stand , with hand still appropriately gloved , and his kindly glance wander between the ship and ocean and the spot which he have hit on for the ship and ocean 's last resting - place . 

 " where be the step , Helen ? " James inquire , and , after a brief silence : " Georgiana ! " he yell . 

 the girl fly in . 

 " bring we a pair o ' step , " say he . 

 follow an unsuccessful search for the pair of step , which Andrew Dean ultimately discover in a corner of the hall itself , lie flat behind a vast roll of carpet which be include in the good purchase for seven thousand two hundred and fifty pound . the step be find , Georgiana explain at length how she distinctly remember see one of the man put they behind the roll of carpet . 

 " now , what be it ? " Andrew vigorously question . he be prepare , evidently , to do anything that a man may do with a pair of step . when the operation be indicate to he , his first act be to take off his coat , which he throw on the floor . 

 " Hammer ! nail ! " he ejaculate . and Georgiana , intimidate by his tone , contrive to find both hammer and nail . it be true that the hammer be a coal hammer . 

 and in a remarkably short space of time he be balance on the summit of the step with a nail in one hand , a hammer in the other , a pencil behind his ear , and another nail in his mouth . the other three encircle he from below , with upturned face and open mouth , like young bird expect food .   not that young bird expect food wear glove so appropriate to the occasion as be Emanuel 's .   James Ollerenshaw be impress by the workmanlike manner in which Andrew measure the width of the glass box and mark it off on the wall before begin to knock nail . the presence of one nail in Andrew 's mouth while he be knock in the other with a coal hammer , prevent he from outrage the social code when the coal hammer embrace his finger as well as the nail in the field of its activity . unhappily , when it come to the second nail , no such hindrance operate . 

 the nail , have be knock in , be duly and satisfactorily test . 

 then solemnly James seize the glass box contain the ship and ocean , and bear it with all possible precaution to the pair of step in front of the great door . Andrew descend two storey , and , bend his body , receive the box from James as a parson receive a baby at the font . he then remount . the step rock . 

 " I would happen well hold them , " say James . 

 " it will be all right , " say Andrew . 

 " I will hold they , " say Emanuel , hasten forward . 

 the precise cause of the accident will probably never be know , but no soon do Emanuel lie his gloved hand on the step than the whole edifice , consist of step , Andrew , and ship and ocean totter and fall . 

 " clumsy fool ! " Andrew be distinctly hear to exclaim during his swift passage to the floor 

 the ship and ocean be incurably disintegrate into a mess of coloured cardboard , linen , and stick . 

 and catastrophe even more dreadful might have occur have it not be for the calm and wise tact of Helen . where a person be pleased by an event , that person can usually , without too much difficulty , exercise a calm and wise tact upon other person whom the event have not please . and Helen be delight by the catastrophe to the ship and ocean . the ship and ocean have form no part in her scheme for the decoration of the hall ; her one poor solace have be that the relative proportion of the hall and of the ship and ocean be such that even a careful observer might have spend hour in the former without discover the latter ; on the other hand , some blunder ninny might have light instantly on the ship and ocean , and awkwardly inquire what it be do there . so Helen be really enchant by the ruin . she handle her man with notable finesse : Uncle James savage and vindictive , but uncertain upon whom to pour out his anger ; Emanuel nurse his injure innocence ; and Andrew Dean nurse his elbow , his head , and vengeance . she also find a moment in which to calm Georgiana , who have run flying and hysterical into the hall at the sound of the smash . 

 even the step be break . 

 after a time harmony be establish , both Uncle James and Emanuel be , at bottom , man of peace . but it be undeniable that Uncle James have lose more than gold , and that Emanuel have be touch in a perilous place - his conceit of himself . 

 then Georgiana sweep up the ship and ocean , and James retire to his own little room , where he assume his turkish cap , and begin to arrange his personal effect in a manner definite and final , which would be a law for ever to the servant of Wilbraham Hall . 

 leave with the two young man , Helen go from triumph to triumph . in quite a few minute she have they actually talk to each other . and she end by speed they away together . and by the time they depart each be convince that Georgiana 's apron , on Helen , be one of the most bewitching manifestation of the inexpressibly feminine that he have ever be privileged to see . 

 they take themselves off by a door at the farth end of the hall behind the stair , whence there be a short cut through the undulating ground to the main road . 

 Helen ascend to the state bedroom , where there be simply everything to be do ; Georgiana follow she , after have make up the fire , and , while help to unpack box , offer gossamer hint - fluffy , scarcely palpable , elusive thing - to her mistress that her real ambition have always be to be a lady's - maid , and to be serve at meal by the third , or possibly the fourth , housemaid . and the hall of Wilbraham Hall be abandon for a space to silence and solitude . 

 now , the window of Uncle James 's little room be a little window that live modestly between the double pillar of the portico and the first window of the great dining - room . rest from his labour of sort and placing , he gaze forth at his domain , and mechanically calculate what profit would accrue to he if he cut off a slip a hundred and fifty foot deep along by the Oldcastle - road , and sell it in lot for villa , or build villa and sell they on ninety - nine - year lease . he be engage in his happy exercise of mental arithmetic when he hear footstep crunch the gravel , and then a figure , which have evidently come round by the north side from the back of the Hall , pass across the field of James 's vision . this figure be a walk baptism to the ground it trod . it drip water plenteously . it be , in a word , soak , and its garment clung to it . its yellow chamois glove clung to its hand . it have no hat . it hesitate in front of the entrance . 

 Uncle James push up his window . " what be amiss , lad ? " he inquire , with a certain blandness of satisfaction . 

 " I fall into the Water , " say Emanuel , feebly , mean the sheet know as Wilbraham Water , which diversify the park - like splendour of Wilbraham Hall . 

 " how didst manage that ? " 

 " the path be very muddy and slippery just there , " say Emanuel . 

 " had not   you well run home as quick as may be ? " James suggest . 

 " I can not , " say Emanuel . 

 " why not ? " 

 " I have   get no hat , and I be all wet . and everybody in Oldcastle - road will see I . can you lend I a hat and coat ? " 

 and all the while he be steadily baptise the gravel . 

 Uncle James 's head disappear for a moment , and then he throw out of the window a stiff yellow mackintosh of great age . it be his rent - collect mackintosh . it have the excellent quality of match the chamois glove . 

 Emanuel thankfully take it . " and what about a cap or something ? " he plaintively ask . 

 " tak ' this , " say Uncle James , with remarkable generosity whip the turkish cap from his own head , and hand it to Emanuel . 

 Emanuel hesitate , then accept ; and , thus uniquely attire , speed away , still baptise . 

 at tea   tea proper   James recount this episode to a somewhat taciturn and preoccupy Helen . 

 " he do not   fall into the Water , " say Helen , curtly . " Andrew Dean push he in . " 

 " how dost know that ? " 

 " Georgiana and I see it from my bedroom window . it be she who first see they fight , or at any rate arguing . then Andrew Dean charge he in , as if they be play football , and walk on ; and Emanuel Prockter scramble out . " 

 " H'm ! " reflect James . " well , if ye ask I , lass , Emanuel bring that on himsen . I never seed a man look a big foo ' than Emanuel look when he go off in my mackintosh and turkish cap . " 

 " your turkish cap ? " 

 " one of them . " 

 " with the tassel ? " 

 " ay ! " 

 " it be a great shame ! that be what it be ! I be sure he do not   look a fool ! he be be very badly treat , and I will - " 

 she rise from the table , in sudden and speechless indignation . 

 " you should ha ' see he , lass ! " say James , and add : " I wish ye have ! " he try to be calm . but she have spring on he another of her disconcert surprise . be it , after all , possible , conceivable , that she be in love with Emanuel ? 

 she sit down again . " I know why you say that , uncle " - she look he in the face , and put she elbow on the table . " now , just listen to I ! " 

 highly perturb , he wonder what be come next . 

 content 
 chapter 22 

 confessional 

 " what be the matter with Emanuel Prockter ? " Helen ask ; meaning , what be the imply fault of Emanuel Prockter . 

 there be defiance in her tone . she have rise from the table , and she have sit down again , and she seem by her pose to indicate that she have sit down again with a definite purpose , a purpose to do grievous harm to the soul 's peace of anybody who differ from the statement which she be about to enunciate , or who give the wrong sort of answer to her catechism . she be wear her black mousseline dress   theoretically " do with " , which in its young day always have the effect of rouse the grande dame in she . she lay her ringless hand , lightly clasp , on a small , heavy , round mahogany table which stand in the middle of the little drawing - room , and she look over James 's shoulder into the vista of the great drawing - room . the sombre , fade magnificence of the Wilbrahams - a magnificence of dark wood , tassel curtain , rep , and gilt - be her theatre , and the theatre suit her mood . 

 still , Jimmy Ollerenshaw , somewhat embitter by the catastrophe of the afternoon , conceive that he be not go to be brow - beat . 

 " what be the matter with Emanuel Prockter , " say he , " be as he be probably get a cold by this . " 

 " yes , and you be glad ! " Helen retort . " you think he look a fool after he have be in the water . and you be glad . " 

 " I dunna think , " say James , " I be sure . " 

 " but why should you be glad ? that be what I want to know . " 

 James could not sagaciously reply to this query . he merely scratch his head , tilt one of his turkish cap to that end . 

 " the fact be , " she cry , with a grammatical carelessness which be shocking in a woman who have profess to teach everything , " every one have get their knife into Emanuel Prockter . and it be simply because he be good - look and well - dress and sing beautifully . " 

 " good - looking ! " murmur James . 

 " well , be not   he ? " 

 " he be pretty , " say James . 

 " no one ever say he have a lot of brain " 

 " I never do , " James put in . 

 " but what do that matter ? he be polite . he do know how to behave himself in polite society . if Andrew Dean push he into the water , that be not   his fault . Andrew be strong than he be , but that be no credit to Andrew Dean . it be to his discredit . Andrew Dean be nothing but a bully - we all know that . he might have push you into the water , or I . " 

 " he might , " James admit , " if I have be silly enough to get between the water and he . " 

 " and I should like to know who look a fool when Andrew Dean fall off those step . and just listen to the language the man use . I will say this for Emanuel Prockter - I never hear he swear . " 

 " no , " say James . " he wear glove . he even wear them when he take his bath of a November afternoon . " 

 " I do not   care who know it , " Helen observe , hotly , " I like Emanuel Prockter . " 

 " there be nobody as dunna ' know it , " say James . " it be the talk of Bursley as you have   set your cap at he . " 

 " I do not   wear cap , " say Helen . " I be not a servant . " 

 " Hat , then , " James correct himself . " Ye'll not deny as you wear hat , I reckon . I have   see ye in forty . " 

 " I know who start that tale , " Helen explode . " Andrew Dean start that tale . " 

 " no , " say James . " it be Mrs. Prockter , I be think . " 

 " have Mrs. Prockter speak to you about I and - and Emanuel ? " 

 James hesitate . but the devil - may - care , agreeably vicious Ollerenshaw impulse be afoot in he , and he do not hesitate long . 

 " she have , " say he . 

 " what a ridiculous , fat old woman she be , with her fancy ! " 

 frankly , James do not like this . he be in a mind to resent it , and then a certain instinct of self - preservation prompt he to seek cover in silence . but in any battle of the sex silence be no cover to the male , as he ought to have know . 

 Helen pursue he behind his cover . " I wonder who she be set her cap at ? I suppose you will not deny that she wear a cap ? " 

 it be quite a long time since James Ollerenshaw have blush ; but he blush at these word . nothing could have be more foolish , inept , on his part . why should be blush because Helen express a vague , hostile curiosity as to -the direction of Mrs. Prockter 's cap ? what have the direction of Mrs. Prockter 's cap to do with he ? yet blush he do . he grow angry , not - curiously enough - with Helen , but with himself and with Mrs. Prockter . his anger have the strange effect of make he an arrant coward . he get up from his chair , have push away his cup towards the centre of the table . as tea be over he be within his right in do so . 

 " I mun be get to work again , " he mutter . 

 " please do wait a minute , uncle , " she say imperiously . " can not   you see I want to talk to you ? can not   you see I have   get something on my mind ? " 

 deliberately challenge in this way , the formidable James be no more than a sheep to the shearer . until he meet Helen , he have perhaps never receive deliberate , audacious challenge and even now he be far from be accustom to they . so he just stand foolishly near his chair 

 " I can not   talk to you while you be stand up , she say . 

 so he sit down . how simple it ought to have be for he to exert authority over Helen , to tell she fiercely that he have no intention of be talk to like that , and that if she persist in such tactic the front door be at her entire disposal ! she have no claim on he . yet he eat his humble pie and sit down . 

 " so they be say that there be something between Emanuel Prockter and I , be they ? " she recommence , in a new , mollified voice , a voice that wave the white flag over her head . 

 " it wouldna ' surprise I to hear as they be , " say James . 

 " and suppose there be something between we , uncle , should you mind ? " 

 " I do not   know as I should mind , " say he " and I do not   know as it ' ud matter a brass button if I do mind . " 

 " what should you do , uncle ? " 

 " I should do as I have   always do , " say he ; " eat and sleep and take my walk abroad . they as want to marry will marry , and they will marry what suit them . but I shall tak ' my meat and drink as usual . " 

 " would you come to the wedding ? " 

 " I have   only get a funeral suit , " say he . " but I would buy I some tog if Emanuel ' ud tak ' this place off my hand at what I give . " 

 " would you give I a wedding - present ? " 

 " I would give thee some advice . it be what thou'rt most in need of . " 

 his tone be gloomy and resign . 

 she slip round the table and sit on the arm of his chair . 

 " you be a horrid old thing , " she tell he - not for the first time . " I be in need of advice . and there be no one can give it I but you . " 

 " Nay , nay ! " he recoil . " there be Sarah Swetnam . you be as thick as thief . " 

 " she be the very last person I can go to , " say Helen . 

 " and why ? " 

 " because Andrew be engage to her sister , of course . that be the awful part of it , " 

 " ay ? " he question . 

 " yes . because , you see , it be Andrew Dean that I be in love with . " 

 she say it in very pert and airy accent . and then the next moment she put James into terrible consternation by cry , and clutch his arm . he see that she be serious . light beat down upon he . he have to blink and collect himself . 

 " I ' thy place , lass , " he say , " I should keep that to mysen . " 

 " but I can not , uncle . that is , I have not   do . Andrew know . you do not   understand how much I be in love with he . I have   - he be - " 

 " Thou'st not kiss he ? " 

 " not exactly - but - " 

 " he be be kiss you in mistake for his other young woman ? " 

 Helen nod . 

 " Helen , what ' ud thy mother say ? " 

 " it be because of Andrew Dean that I come to live in Bursley , " say she . " I know I should not   see he often enough if I stay in Longshaw . so I come here . you know we have always like each other , I think , ever since he spend two year at Longshaw at Spitz Brothers ' . then I do not   see he for some time . you know how rude and awkward he be . well , there be a coolness . and then we do not   see each other for another long time . and then when I next see he I know I really be in love with he .   of course , I never say anything to mother . one do not , you know . and she be so take up with her own affair , poor dear !   and I think he be really fond of I . I think so because he be so cross and queer . he be like that , you know . and , after all , it be not that that make he cross and queer . it be just because he be as good as engage to Lilian , and he do not   like to tell I . and I never know . how could I guess ? I have never hear there be anything between he and Lilian . and besides , although he be cross and queer , he say thing to I that he ought not   to have say , consider how he be carry on with Lilian . it be then that I settle on come to Bursley . there be no reason why I should stay in Longshaw . I see he again in Longshaw , after he be engage to Lilian , and yet he never tell I ! and then , when I come here , the first thing I hear be that he be engaged to Lilian . it be that afternoon when Sarah call ; do you remember , uncle ? " 

 he remember . 

 " I see Mr. Dean that night , and somehow I tell he what I think of he . I do not   know how it begin ; but it do . he say he could not   help be engage to Lilian . he say it be one of those engagement that go on by themselves , and you can not   stop they . he want to stop it . but he be engage before he know where he be - so he say . he say he prefer I , and if he have know - so of course I be oblige to be very angry with he . that be why I do not . speak to he at first at Mrs. Prockter 's ; at least , that be partly why . the other reason be that he have accuse I of run after Emanuel - of all people ! I have be , you know . but what have that get to do with Andrew , see that he be engage to Lilian ? besides , I would be do it on purpose . and he be so insolent . and then , to crown all , Mrs. Prockter make I dance with he . no wonder I faint ! he be the rude , rudest , cruel man I ever know . " 

 she wipe her eye . 

 " H'm ! " muse James . 

 " he will simply kill poor little Lilian ! " she sob . 

 " what be that get to do with you , if you and Emanuel have get nothing to do with he ? it be not   you as'll be hang when Lilian 's murder . " 

 " can not   you see he must not   marry Lilian ? " Helen burst out . " silly little thing ! how can she understand he ? she be mile beneath he . " 

 " be there anybody as do understand he ? " James ask . 

 " I do , " say she . " and that be flat . and I have   get to marry he , and you must help I . I want to tell you , and now I have   tell you . do not   you think I have   do right in be quite open with you ? Most girl be so foolish in these thing . but I be not . be not   you glad , uncle ? " 

 " glad inna ' the word , " say he . 

 " you must help I , " she repeat . 

 content 
 chapter 23 

 NOCTURNAL 

 many thing which previously have not be plain to James Ollerenshaw be plain to he that night , as , in the solitude of his choose room , he reflect upon the astonishing menu that Helen have offer he by way of supplement to his tea . but the chief matter in his mind be the great , central , burning , blind fact of the endless worry cause to he by his connection with the chit . he have buy Wilbraham Hall under her threat to leave he if he do not buy it . even at Trafalgar - road she have fill the little house with worry . and now , within a dozen hour of arrive in it , she have fill Wilbraham Hall with worry - fill it to its farth attic . if she have select it as a residence , she would have fill the Vatican with worry . all that James demand be a quiet life ; and she would not let he have it . he wish he be back again in Trafalgar - road . he wish he have never meet Helen and her sunshade in the park . 

 that be to say , he assert to himself positively that he wish he have never meet Helen . but he do not mean it . 

 and so he be to help she to wrest Andrew Dean from Lilian Swetnam ! he be to take part in a shameful conspiracy ! he be to assist in ruin an innocent child 's happiness ! and he be deliberately to foster the raw material of a scandal in which he himself would be involve ! he , the strong , obstinate , self - centre old man who have never , till Helen 's advent , do anything except to suit his own convenience ! 

 the one bright spot be that Helen have no genuine design on Emanuel Prockter . as a son - in - law , Andrew Dean would be unbearable ; but Emanuel Prockter would have be - well ; impossible . Andrew Dean   he muse   be at any rate a man whom you could talk to and look at without feel sick . 

 when he have gaze at the affair from all point of view , and repeat to himself the same deep moral truth   such as " there be no do nowt wi ' a young woman afore she be forty "   about thirty - nine time , and pity himself from every quarter of the compass , he rise to go to bed ; he do not expect to sleep . but the gas be not yet in order , and he have only one candle , which be nearly at its latter end . the lady - Helen and Georgiana - have retire long since . 

 he leave his little room , and be just set forth on the adventure of discover his bed - chamber , when a bell ring in the bowel of the house . his flesh creep . it be as if - 

 " the clock strike twelve , and shake the silent tower . " 

 then he collect his power of memory and of induction , and recognise in the sound of the bell the sound of the front door bell . some one must be at the front door . the singular and highly - disturbing phenomena of distant clanging , of thrill , and of flesh creeping be all resolve into the simple fact that some one be at the front door . 

 he go back into his little room ; instead of open the front door like a man , he open the window of the little room , and stick out the tassel of his cap . 

 " who be there ? " he demand . 

 " it be I , Mr. Ollerenshaw , " say a voice , queenly and nervous . 

 " not Mrs. Prockter ? " he suggest . 

 " yes . " 

 " I reckon ye'd like to come in " he say . 

 she admit the desire with a laugh which strike he as excessively free . he do not know whether to be glad or sorry that Helen have depart to bed . he do not even know whether to be glad or sorry that Mrs. Prockter have call . but he vividly remember what Helen have say about cap . 

 naturally , he have to let she in . he hold the candle in his left hand , as he open the door with his right , and the tassel of his cap be over his eye . 

 " you will think I be in the habit of call on you at night , " say Mrs. Prockter , as she slide through the narrow space which James allot to she , and she laugh again . " where be dear Helen ? " 

 " she be go to bed , missis , " say James , hold high the candle and gaze at the generous vision in front of he . it wear a bonnet , and a rich Paisley shawl over its flower silk . 

 " but it be only ten o'clock ! " Mrs. Prockter protest . 

 " yes . but she be go to bed . " 

 " why , " Mrs. Prockter exclaim , change the subject wilfully , " you be all straight here ! "   for the carpet have be unroll and lay . 

 and she sit down on a massive early victorian mahogany chair about fifteen foot from the die fire , and begin to fan herself with her hand . she be one of your woman who be never cold . 

 James , have nothing to say , say nothing , follow his custom . 

 " I be not ill - pleased , " say Mrs. Prockter " that Helen be out of the way . the fact be - it be you that I want to have a word with . you will guess what about ? " 

 " Mr. Emanuel ? " James hazard . 

 " precisely . I have to put he to bed . he be certainly in for a very serious cold , and I trust - I fervently trust - it may not be bronchitis . that would mean nurse , and nothing upset a house more than nurse . what happen , Mr. Ollerenshaw ? " 

 James set the candle down on another early victorian chair , there be no occasional table at hand , and very slowly lower himself to a sit posture on a third . 

 " I will tell you what happen , missis , " he say , put his hand on his knee . 

 and he tell she , begin with the loss of the ship and ocean , and end with Helen 's ever memorable word : " you must help I . " 

 " that be what happen , missis , " he say , grimly . 

 she have punctuate his recital by several exclamation , and when he have finish she give rein to her sentiment . 

 " my dear Mr. Ollerenshaw , " she say , in the kind manner conceivable , " how I sympathise with you ! how I wish I could help you ! " 

 her sympathy be a genuine comfort to he . he do not , in that instant , care a fig for Helen 's notion about the direction of cap . he be simply and humanly ease by the sweet tone of this ample and comely dame . besides , the idea of a woman such as Mrs. Prockter marry a man such as he be   he know   preposterous . she belong to a little world which call he " Jimmy , " whereas he belong to a little world of his own . true , he be wealthy but she be not poor - and no amount of money   he think   could make a bridge to join those two world . nevertheless , here she be , talk to he alone at ten o'clock at night - and not for the first time , either ! obviously , then , there be no nonsense about she , whatever nonsensical world she belong to . 

 she run over with sympathy . have no further fear of Helen make trouble in her own family , she have all her feeling at liberty to condone with James . 

 the candle , throw a small hemisphere of feeble radiance in the vastness of the dim hall , sit on its chair between they . 

 " I can help you , " she say , suddenly , after grunt from James . " I be call on the Swetnams the day after to - morrow . I will tell they about - about to - day , and when Mrs. Swetnam ask I for an explanation of it , I will be mysterious . if Lilian be there , Mrs. Swetnam will certainly get she out of the room . then I will just give the faint hint that the explanation be merely jealousy between Emanuel and Mr. Dean concern - a certain young lady . I shall treat it all as a joke ; you can rely on I . immediately I be go lilian will hear about it . she will quarrel with Andrew the next time she see he ; and if he wish to be free , he may be ! " 

 she smile the arch , naughty , pleasantly - malign smile of a terribly experienced dowager . and she seem positively anxious that James should have Andrew Dean for a son - in - law . 

 James , in his simplicity , be delighted . it appear to he a mephistophelian ingenuity . he think how clever woman be , on their own ground , and what an advantage they have in their immense lack of scruple . 

 " of course , " say she , " I have always say that a marriage between Andrew Dean and Lilian would be a mistake - a very serious mistake . they be quite unsuited to each other . she be not   in love with he - she be only be flatter by his attention into draw he on . I feel sorry for the little thing . " 

 at a stroke , she have convert a shameful conspiracy into an act of the high virtue . and her smile change , too - become a good smile , a smile on which a man might depend . his heart go out to she , and he contemplate the smile in a pleased , beatific silence . 

 just then the candle - a treacherous thing - flame up and go out . 

 " oh ! " cry Mrs. Prockter . 

 and James have not a match . he never smoke . and without an atlas of the Hall , show the location of match - box , he see no hope of find a match . 

 the fire be as good as go . a few cinder burn red under the ash , show the form of the chimney - piece , but no more . 

 " an ye get a match ? " he ask she . 

 " no , " she say , drily , " I do not   carry match . but I can tell you I do not   like be in the dark at all . " her voice come to he out of nothing , and have a most curious effect on his spine . 

 " where be you , Mr. Ollerenshaw ? " 

 " I be a - sit here , " he reply . 

 " well , " say she , " if you can not   find a match , I think you have well lead I to the door . I certainly can not   find my way there myself . where be your hand ? " 

 then a hand touch his shoulder and burn he . " be that you ? " ask the voice . 

 " ay ! " he say . 

 and he take the hand , and the hand squeeze his hand - squeeze it violently . it may have be due to fear , it may have be due to mere inadvertence on the part of the hand ; but the hand do , with unmistakable , charming violence , squeeze his hand . 

 and he rise . 

 " what be that light there ? " question the voice , in a whisper . 

 " where ? " he whisper also . 

 " there - behind . " 

 he turn . a luminance seem to come from above , from the unseen height of the magnificent double staircase . as his eye grow accustomed to the condition , he gradually make out the detail of the staircase . 

 " you would well go and see , " the whispering voice command . 

 he drop the hand and obey , creep up the left wing of the staircase . as he face about at the half - landing , he see Helen , in an orange - tint peignoir , and her hair all down her back , hold a candle . she beckon to he . he ascend to she . 

 " who be there ? " she inquire , coldly . 

 " Mrs. Prockter , " he murmur . 

 " and be you sit together in the dark ? " she inquire , coldly . 

 the story that the candle have expire seem feeble in the extreme . and for he the word " cap " be write in letter of fire on the darkness below . 

 he make no attempt to answer her question . 

 content 
 chapter 24 

 see a lady home 

 those word of Helen 's begin a fresh chapter in the life of her great - stepuncle , James Ollerenshaw . they set up in he a feeling , or rather a whole range of feeling , which he have never before experience . at tea , Helen have hint at the direction of Mrs. Prockter 's cap . that be nothing . he could not be hold responsible for the direction of Mrs. Prockter 's cap . he could laugh at that , even though he faintly blush . but to be catch sit in the dark with Mrs. Prockter , after ten o'clock at night , in his own house ; to have the fact point out to he in such a peculiar , meaningful tone as Helen employ - here be something that connect he and Mrs. Prockter in a manner just a shade too serious for mere smiling . here be something that have not before happen to he in his career as rent - collector and sage . 

 not that he mind ! no , he do not mind . although he have no intention whatever of dispute the possession of Mrs. Prockter with her stepson , he do not object to all the implication in Helen 's remarkable tone . on the contrary , he be rather pleased . why should not he sit with a lady in the dark ? be he not as capable as any man of sit with a lady in the dark ? he be even willing that Helen should credit he , or pretend to credit he , with have prearrange the dark . 

 ah ! People might say what they choose ! but what a dog he might have be have he care to be a dog ! here he be , without the slight preliminary practice , successfully sit with a lady in the dark , at the first attempt ! and what lady ? not the first - comer ! not Mrs. Butt ! not the Mayoress ! but the acknowledge queen of Bursley , the undisputed leader of all that be most distinguished in Bursley society ! and no difficulty about it either ! and she have squeeze his hand . she have continue to squeeze it . she , in her rich raiment , with her fine way , and her correct accent , have squeeze the hand of Jimmy Ollerenshaw , with his hard old clothe and his turkish cap , his simple barbarism , his lack of style , and his uncompromise dialect ! why ? because he be rich ? no . because he be a man , because he be the good man in Bursley , when you come down to essential . 

 so his thought run . 

 his interest in Helen 's heart have become quite a secondary interest , but she recall he to a sense of his responsibility as great - stepuncle of a capricious creature like she . 

 " what be you and Mrs. Prockter talk about ? " she question he in a whisper , hold the candle towards his face and scrutinise it , as seem to he , inimically . 

 " well , " he say , " if you must know , about you and that there Andrew Dean . " 

 she make a brusque movement . and then she beckon he to follow she along the corridor , out of possible earshot of Mrs. Prockter . 

 " do you mean to say , uncle , " she demand , put the candle down on a small table that stand under a large oil - painting of Joshua and the Sun in the corridor , " that you have   be discuss my affair with Mrs. Prockter ? " 

 he see instantly that he have not be the sage he imagine himself to be . but he be not go to be bully by Helen , or any other woman young than Mrs. Prockter . so he stiffly brazen it out . 

 " ay ! " he say . 

 " I never hear of such a thing ! " she explode , but still whisper . 

 " you say as I must help ye , and I be help ye , " say he . 

 " but I do not   mean that you be to go chatter about I all over Bursley , uncle , " she protest , adopt now the pain , haughty , and over - polite attitude . 

 " I do not   know as I have   be chatter all over Bursley , " he rebut she . " I do not   know as I be much of a chatterer . I might name they as could give I a start and a beating when it come to talk the nose off a brass monkey . Mrs. Prockter come in to inquire about what have happen here this afternoon , as well she might , see as Emanuel go home with a couple o ' gallon o ' my water in his pocket . so I tell she all about it . she be a very friendly woman . and she be promise to do what she can for ye . " 

 " how ? " 

 " why , to get Andrew Dean for ye , see as ye're so fix on he , wi ' as little gossip as maybe . " 

 " oh ! so Mrs. Prockter have kindly consent to get Andrew Dean for I ! and how do she mean to do it ? " 

 James have no alternative ; he be oblige to relate how Mrs. Prockter mean to do it . 

 " now , uncle , " say Helen , " just listen to I . if Mrs. Prockter say a single word about I to any one , I will never speak either to she or you again . mind ! a single word ! a nice thing that she should go up to Swetnam 's , and hint that Andrew and Emanuel have be fight because of I ! what about my reputation ? and do you suppose that I want the leaving of Lilian Swetnam ? I ! the idea be preposterous ! " 

 " you want them badly enough this afternoon , " say he . 

 " no , I do not , " she contradict he passionately . " you be quite mistaken . you misunderstood I , though I be surprised that you should have do . perhaps I be a little excited this afternoon . certainly you be think about other thing . I expect you be expect Mrs. Prockter this evening . it would have be nice of you to have tell I she be come . " 

 " i - " 

 " now , please let it be clearly understand , " she sweep on . " you must go down and tell Mrs. Prockter at once that you be entirely in error , and that she be on no account to breathe a word about I to any one . whatever you be both think of I can not imagine ! but I can assure you I be extremely annoyed . Mrs. Prockter put her finger in the pie ! let she take care that I do not   put my finger into her pie ! I always know she be a gossip old thing , but , really - " 

 " Mr. Ollerenshaw ! " a prettily plaintive voice rise from the black depth below . 

 " there ! she be get impatient for you ! " Helen snap . " run off to she at once . to think that if I have not   happen to hear the bell ring , and come out to see what be the matter , I should have be the talk of Bursley before I be a day old ! " 

 she pick up the candle . 

 " I must have a light ! " say James , somewhat lamely . 

 " why ? " Helen ask , calmly . " if you could begin in the dark , why can not   you finish in the dark ? you and she seem to like be in the dark . " 

 " Mr. Ollerenshaw ! " the voice be a little nearer . 

 " she be come ! " James ejaculate . 

 Helen seem to lose her courage before that threat . 

 " here ! take this one , then ! " say she , give James her candle , and flee down the corridor . 

 James have the sensation of transact a part in a play at a theatre where the scenery be absolutely realistic and at the same time of a romantic quality . moonlight stream in through the window of the interminable corridor be alone want to render the illusion perfect . it be certainly astonish - what you could buy with seven thousand two hundred and fifty pound ! perhaps the most striking portion of the scenery be Helen 's peignoir . he have not before witness she in a peignoir . the effect of it be agreeable ; but , indeed , the modern taste for luxury be incredible ! he wonder if Mrs. Prockter practise similar extravagance . 

 while such notion run through his head he be hurry to the stair , and drop a hail of candle - grease on the floor . he find Mrs. Prockter slowly and cautiously ascend the stairway . if he be at the summit of Mont Blanc she have already reach Les Grands Mulets . 

 " what be it ? " she ask , pausing , and look up at he with an appealing gesture . 

 " what be what ? " 

 " why have you be so long ? " - it be as if she imply that these minute without he be an eternity of ennui . he grow more and more conceited . he be already despise Don Juan as a puling boy . 

 " Helen hear summat , and so she have come out of her bedroom . she be nervous I ' this big house . " 

 " do you tell she I be here , Mr. Ollerenshaw ? " by this time he have rejoin she at Les Grands Mulets . 

 " no , " he say , without sufficiently reflect . 

 " she do not   hear I call out , then ? " 

 " do ye call out ? " if he be in a theatre , he also could act . 

 " perhaps it be just as well , " say Mrs. Prockter , after a momentary meditation . " under the circumstance she can not possibly suspect our little plot . " 

 their little plot ! in yield to the impulse to tell she that Helen be unaware of her presence in the house he have forget that he have make it excessively difficult for he to demolish the say plot . he could not one moment agree with enthusiasm to the plot , and the next moment say that the plot have well be abandon . some man , doubtless , could . but he could not . he be scarcely that kind of man . his proper course would have be to relate to Mrs. Prockter exactly what have pass between himself and Helen , and trust to her common sense . unhappily , with the intention of please she , or reassure she , or something equally silly , he have lie to she and render the truth impracticable . however , he do not seem to care much . he have already push Helen 's affair back again to quite a secondary position . 

 " I suppose ye think it will be all right , missis , " he say , carelessly - " ye go up to Mrs. Swetnam 's o ' that ' n , and - " 

 " rely on I , " say she , silence he . 

 thus , without a pang , he leave Helen to her fate . 

 they have touch the ground - floor . 

 " thank you very much , Mr. Ollerenshaw , " say Mrs. Prockter . " good - night . I will make the good of my way home . " 

 curious , how sorry he feel at this announcement ! he have become quite accustomed to be a conspirator with she in the vast house light by a single candle , and he do not relish the end of the performance . 

 " I will step along wi ' ye , " say he . 

 " oh , no ! " she say . " I really can not   allow - " 

 " allow what ? " 

 " allow you to inconvenience yourself like that for I . " 

 " Pooh ! " say he . 

 and he , who have never in his life see a lady to her door , set out on the business as though he have do nothing else every night of his life , as though it be an enterprise that do not require practice . 

 he open the door , and put the candle on the floor behind it , where he could easily find it on return . " I will get a box o ' match from somewhere while I be out , " say he . 

 he be about to extinguish the candle when she stop he . " Mr. Ollerenshaw , " she say , firmly , " you have not   get your boot on . those slipper be not thick enough for this weather . " 

 he gaze at she . should he yield to she ? the idea of yield to she , for the mere sake of yield to she , present itself to he as a charming idea . so he disappear with the candle , and reappear in his boot . 

 " you will not   need a muffler ? " she suggest . 

 now be the moment to play the hardy Norseman . " oh , no ! " he laugh . 

 this concern for his welfare , come from such a royal creature , be , however , immensely agreeable . 

 she stand out on the step ; he extinguish the candle , and then join she and bang the door . they start . several hundred yard of wind pitch - dark drive have to be traverse . 

 " will you kindly give I your arm ? " she say . 

 she say it so primly , so correctly , and with such detachment , that they might have be in church , and she say : " will you kindly let I look over your Prayer Book ? " 

 when they arrive at the gas - light Oldcastle - road he want to withdraw his arm , but he do not know how to begin withdraw it . hence he be oblige to leave it where it be . 

 and as they be approach the front gate of the residence of Mr. Buchanan , the Scotch editor of the Signal , a perfect string of people emerge from that front gate . Mrs. Buchanan have be give a whist drive . there be sundry Swetnams among the string . and the whole string be merry and talkative . it be a fine night . the lead pearl of the string bear down on the middle - aged pair , and peer , and pass . 

 " good - night , Mrs. Prockter . good - night , Mr. Ollerenshaw . " 

 then another couple do the same . " good - night , Mrs. Prockter . good - night , Mr. Ollerenshaw . " 

 and so it go on . and the string , laugh and talk , gradually disappear diminuendo in the distance towards Bursley . 

 " I suppose you know you have   do it this time ? " observe Mrs. Prockter . 

 it be a dark saying , but James fully understand it . he feel as though he have drunk champagne . " as well be hang for a sheep as a lamb ! " he say to himself . and deliberately squeeze the royal arm . 

 nothing violent happen . he have rather expect the heavens to fall , or that at least Mrs. Prockter would exclaim : " unhand I , monster ! " but nothing violent happen . 

 " and this be I , James Ollerenshaw ! " he say to himself , still squeeze . 

 content 
 chapter 25 

 GIRLISH confidences 

 one afternoon Sarah Swetnam call , and Helen in person open the great door to the visitor . 

 " I see that frock in Brunt 's three day ago , " Helen begin , kiss the tall , tightbound , large - boned woman . 

 " I know you do , Nell , " Sarah admit . " but you need not   tell I so . do not   you like it ? " 

 " I think it be a dream , " Helen reply , quickly . " turn round . " but there be a certain lack of conviction in her voice , and in Sarah 's manner there be something strained . accordingly , they both become extravagantly effusive - or , at any rate , more effusive than usual , though each be well aware that the artifice be entirely futile . 

 " all alone ? " Sarah ask , when she have recover from the first shock of the hall 's magnificence . 

 " yes , " say Helen . " it be Georgiana 's afternoon out , and uncle 's away , and I have not   get any new servant yet . " 

 " Mr. Ollerenshaw away ! no one ever hear of such a thing ! if you know he as well as we do , you would have faint with surprise . it ought to be in the paper . where be he go to ? " 

 " he be go to Derby , to try to buy some property that he say be go very cheap there . he be be go three day now . he get a letter at breakfast , and say he must go to Derby at once . however , he have to finish his rent . the trouble be that his rent never be finish , and I be bother all the time by people come with three and sixpence , or four shilling , and a dirty rent - book oh ! and the dirt on the coin ! my dear , you can not   imagine ! there be one good thing . he will have to come back for next week 's rent . not that I be sorry he be go . it give I a chance , you see . by the time he return I shall have my servant in . " 

 " do tell I what servant you be go to have ? " 

 " well , I go to that agency at Oldcastle . I have   get a german butler . he speak four language , and have beautiful eye . " 

 " a german butler ! " 

 if it have be a german prince Sarah could not have be more startled nor more delighted . 

 " yes , and a cook , and two other maid ; and a gardener and a boy . I shall keep Georgiana as my own maid . " 

 " my child , you be go it ! " 

 " my child , I come here to go it . " 

 " and - and Mr. Ollerenshaw be really pleased ? " 

 Helen laugh . " Uncle never go into rapture , you know . but I hope he will be please . the fact be , he do not   know anything about these new servant yet . he will find they instal when he return . it will be a little treat for he . my piano come this morning . care to try it ? " 

 " rather ! " say Sarah . " well , I never see anything like it ! " this be in reference to her first glimpse of the great drawing - room . " how you have   improve it , you dear thing ! " 

 " you see , I have my own cheque - book ; it save worry . " 

 " I see ! " say Sarah , meaningly , put her purse on the piano , her umbrella on a chair , and herself on the music - stool . 

 " shall we have tea ? " Helen suggest , after Sarah have perform on the Bechstein . 

 " yes . let I help you , do , dearest . " 

 they wander off to the kitchen , and while they be seat at the kitchen - table , sip tea , side by side , Sarah say : 

 " now if you want an idea , I have   get a really good one for you . " 

 " for I ? what sort of an idea ? " 

 " I will tell you . you know Mrs. Wiltshire be dead . " 

 " I do not . I do not   even know there be a Mrs. Wiltshire . " 

 " well , there be , and there be not   any long . Mrs. Wiltshire be the main social prop of the old rector . and the annual concert of the St. Luke 's Guild have always be hold at her house , down at Shawport , you know . awfully poky ! but it be the custom since the Flood , and no one ever dare to hint at a change . now the concert be to have be next week but one , and she be just go and die , and the rector be wonder where he can hold it . I meet he this morning . why do not   you let he hold it here ? that would be a splendid way of open your house - Hall , I beg its pardon . and you could introduce the beautiful eye of your german butler to the entire neighbourhood . of course , I do not   know whether Mr. Ollerenshaw would like it . " 

 " oh ! " say Helen , without blench , " uncle would do as I wish . " 

 she muse , in silence , during a number of second . 

 " the idea do not   appeal to you ? " Sarah query , disappointment in her tone . 

 " yes , it do , " say Helen . " but I must think it over . now , would you care to see the rest of the house ? " 

 " I should love to . oh dear , I have   leave my handkerchief with my purse in the drawing - room . " 

 " have mine ! " say Helen , promptly . 

 but even after this final proof of intimate friendship , there still remain an obstinate trifle of insincerity in their relation that afternoon . Helen be sure that Sarah Swetnam have pay the call specially to say something , and that the something have not yet be say . and the apprehension of an impending scene gradually take possession of her nerve and disarrange they . when they reach the attic , and be enjoy the glorious view of the moorland in the distance and of Wilbraham Water in the immediate foreground , Helen say , very suddenly : 

 " will the rector be in this afternoon ? " 

 " I should say so . why ? " 

 " I be think we might walk down there together , and I could suggest to he at once about have the concert here . " 

 Sarah clap her hand . " then you have   decide ? " 

 " certainly . " 

 " how funny you be , Nell , with your decision ! " in Helen 's bedroom , amid her wardrobe , there be no chance of dangerous topic , the attention be monopolise by one subject , and that a safe one . 

 at last they go out together , two model of style and deportment , and Helen pull to the great front door with a loud echo clang . 

 " fancy that place be all empty . be not   you afraid of sleep there while your uncle be away ? " 

 " no , " say Helen . " but I should be afraid if Georgiana be not   afraid . " 

 after this example of courageous introspection a silence fall upon the pair ; the silence hold firm while they get out of the ground and cross Oldcastle - road , and take to the Alls field - path from which a unique panorama of Bursley - chimney , kiln , canal , railway , and smoke - pall - be to be obtain . Helen be determine not break the silence . and then come the moment when Sarah Swetnam could no long suffer the silence ; and she begin , very cautiously : 

 " I suppose you have   hear all about Andrew and Emanuel Prockter ? " 

 Helen perceive that she have not be mistaken and that the scene be at hand . " no , " say she . " what about they ? " 

 " you do not   mean to say you have   not hear ? " 

 " no . what about ? " 

 " the quarrel between those two ? " 

 " Emanuel and Mr. Dean ? " 

 " yes . but you must have hear ? " 

 " I assure you , Sally , no one have tell I a word about it . "   which be just as true as it be untrue . 

 " but they quarrel up here . I do hear that Andrew throw Emanuel into your lake . " 

 " who tell you that ? " 

 " it be Mrs. Prockter . she be call on the mater yesterday , and she seem to be full of it - accord to the mater 's account . Mrs. Prockter 's idea be that they have quarrel about a woman . " 

  " Mrs. Prockter shall be repay for this , " say Helen to herself . 

 " surely Emanuel have not   be fall in love with Lilian , have he ? " say Helen , aloud . she consider this rather clever on her part . and it be . 

 " oh , no ! " reply Sally , positively . " it be not lilian . " and there be that in her tone which could not be express in ten volume . " you know perfectly well who the woman be , " Helen seem to hear she say . 

 then Helen say : " I think I can explain it . they be both at our house the day we remove . " 

 " oh , be they ? " murmur Sarah , in well - act surprise . 

 " and Mr. Dean fall off some step that Emanuel be suppose to be hold . I think he be furious - but not to that point . that be probably the secret of the whole thing . as for Mr. Dean have push Emanuel into the lake , I do not   believe a word of it . " 

 " then how be it that Emanuel have a cold and have to stay in bed ? " 

 " my dear , to have a cold it be not   necessary to have be throw into Wilbraham Water ! " 

 " that be true , " Sarah admit . 

 " however , " Helen calmly proceed , " I will find out all about it and let you know . " 

 " how shall you find out ? " 

 " I shall make Emanuel tell I . he will tell I anything . and he be a dear boy . " 

 " do you see he often up here ? " Sarah inquire . 

 " oh , yes ! " this be not true . " we get on together excellently . and I be pretty sure that Emanuel be not - well - interested in any other woman . that be why I should say that they have not be quarrel about a woman . unless , of course , the woman be myself . " she laugh , and add : " but I be not jealous . I can trust Emanuel . " 

 and with marvellous intrepidity she look Sarah Swetnam in the face . 

 " then , " Sarah stammer , " you and Emanuel - you do not   mean - " 

 " my dear Sally , do not   you think Emanuel be a perfectly delightful boy ? " 

 " oh , yes ! " say Sarah . 

 " so do I , " say Helen . 

 " but be you - " 

 " between ourselves , " Helen murmur . " mind you , between ourselves - I could imagine stranger thing happen . " 

 " well , " say Sarah , " this be news . " 

 " mind , not a syllable ! " 

 " oh , of course not . " 

 " by the way , " Helen ask , " when be Andrew and Lilian go to get marry ? " 

 " I do not   know . no one know . one confidence for another , my dear ; they do not   always hit it off . " 

 " what a pity ! " Helen remark . " because if ever two people be suit to each other in this world , they be . but I hope they will shake down . " 

 they arrive at the rector 's . 

 content 
 chapter 26 

 the concert 

 on another afternoon a middle - aged man and a young - hearted woman emerge together from Bursley Railway Station . they have a little luggage , and a cab from the Tiger meet they by appointment . impossible to deny that the young - hearted one be wear a flower silk under a travel mantle . the man , before get into the cab , inquire as to the cost of the cab . the gold angel of the Town Hall rise majestically in front of he , and immediately behind he the Park , with the bowling - green at the top , climb the Moorthorne slope . the bowling season be of course over , but even during the season he have scarcely play . he be a change person . and the great change of all have occur that very morning . throughout a long and active career he have wear paper collar . paper collar have suffice he , and they have not shock his friend . but now he wear a linen collar , and eleven other linen collar be in his carpet - bag . yet it have be say , by some individual who obviously lack experience of human nature , that a man never change the style of his collar after forty . 

 the cab drive up to Hillport , and deposit flower silk and one bag at the residence of Mrs. Prockter . it then ascend higher , pass into the ground of Wilbraham Hall , and ultimately stop at the grandiose portal thereof , which be wide open . 

 the occupant of the cab be surprised to see two other cab just depart . the next moment he be more than surprised - he be startle . a gentleman in evening dress stand at the welcome door , and on perceive he this gentleman run down the step , and , with a sort of hurried grace , take his carpet - bag from he , address he in broken English , and indicate by incomprehensible word and comprehensible sign that he regard he , the new arrival , as the light of his eye and the protector of the poor and of the oppress . and no soon have he get the new arrival safe into the hall than he strip he of hat , coat , and muffler , and might have proceed to extreme have not his attention be distract by another vehicle . 

 this vehicle contain the aged rector of Bursley . 

 " ha ! Mr. Ollerenshaw ! " cry the divine . " your niece tell I only yesterday that you be still in Derby buying property , and would not be back . " 

 " I have   buy it , parson , " say James . 

 " ha ! ha ! " say the divine , rub his hand . he stoop habitually , which give he the air of always try to glimpse at his toe over the promontory of his waist . and as James make no reply to the remark , he repeat : " ha ! ha ! so you decide to come to my concert , eh ? " 

 " I only hear of it yesterday , " say James . 

 " well , " say the divine , " I be afraid they will be wait for I . ha ! ha ! this way , be not   it ? fine place you have   get here . very fine ! noble ! " 

 and he disappear through the double door that lead to the drawing - room , which door be part for he by a manikin whose clothe seem to be hold together by new sixpence . during the brief instant of opening , a vivacious murmur of conversation escape like gas from the drawing - room into the hall . 

 James glance about for his bag - it be go . the gentleman in evening dress be out on the step . dishearten by the mysterious annihilation of his old friend the bag , James , weary with too much and too various emotion , go slowly up the grand staircase . in his bedroom the first thing he see be his bag , which have be open and its content suitably bestow . thus his hair - brush be on the dressing - table . this miracle complete his undoing . he sit down on an easy - chair , draw the eider - down off the bed , and put it on his knee , for the temperature be low . he do not intend to go to sleep . but he do go to sleep . it be simply a case of nature recover from emotion . 

 he sleep about an hour , and then , have brush his wispish hair , he descend the stair , determine to do or die . perhaps he would not have plump himself straight into the drawing - room have not the manikin clothe in sixpence assume that the drawing - room be his Mecca and throw open the door . 

 a loud " hush ! " greet he . the splendid chamber be full of woman 's hat and man 's head ; but hat predominate . and the majority of the audience be seat on gilt chair which James have never before see . probably there be four or five score gilt chair . at the other end of the room the aged rector sit in an easy - chair . Helen herself be perch at the piano , and in front of the piano stand Emanuel Prockter . except that the room be much large , and that , instead of a faultless evening dress , Emanuel wear a faultless frock - coat   with the rest of a suit , the scene remind James of a similar one on the great concertina night at Mrs. Prockter 's . 

 many thing have happen since then . still , history repeat itself . 

 " O love ! " exclaim Emanuel Prockter , adagio and sostenuto , thus divert from James a hundred glance which James certainly be delighted to lose . 

 and Helen make the piano say " o love ! " in its fashion . 

 and presently Emanuel be launch upon the sea of his yearning , and voyage behind the hurricane of passion . and , as usual , he hide nothing from his hearer . then he hove to , and , as it be , climb to the main - topgallant - sail in order to announce : 

 " o love ! " 

 it be not surprising that his voice crack . Emanuel ought to have be the last person to be surprised at such a phenomenon . but he be surprised . to he the phenomenon of that cracking be sempiternally novel and astounding . it pain and shock he . he wonder whose the fault could be ? and then , accord to his habit , he think of the pianist . of course , it be the fault of the pianist . and , while continue to sing , he slowly turn and gaze with sternness at the pianist . the audience must not be allow to be under any misapprehension as to the identity of the culprit . unfortunately , Emanuel , wrap up , like the artist he be , in his performance , have himself forget the identity of the culprit . Helen have cease to be Helen ; she be merely his pianist . the thing that he least expect to encounter when gaze sternly at the pianist be the pianist 's gaze . he be accustom to flash his anger on the pianist be back . but Helen , who have see other pianist at work for Emanuel , turn as he turn , and their eye meet . the collision disorganise Emanuel . he continue to glare with sternness , and he cease to sing . a contretemp have happen . for the fifth of a second everybody feel exceedingly awkward . then Helen say , with a faint , cold smile , in a. voice very low and very clear : 

 " what be the matter with you , Mr. Prockter ? it be not   my voice that crack . " 

 the minx ! 

 there be a half - hearted attempt at the maintenance of the propriety , and then Wilbraham Hall ring with the laughter of a joke which the next day have become the common precious property of all the five town . when the aged rector have restore his flock to a sense of decency Mr. Emanuel Prockter have vanish . in that laughter his career as a singer reach an abrupt and final conclusion . the concert also come to an end . and the collection , by which the divine always terminate these proceeding , be the large in the history of the Guild . 

 a quarter of an hour or twenty minute later all the guest , member , and patron of the St. Luke 's Guild have leave , most of they full of kind inquiry after Mr. Ollerenshaw , the genial host of that so remarkably successful entertainment . the appearance and disappearance of Mr. Ollerenshaw have be a little disturbing . first it have be announce that he be detain in Derby , buy property . indeed , few person be unaware that , except for a fly visit in the middle , of two day , to collect his rent , James have spend a fortnight in Derby purchasing sundry portion of Derby . certainly Helen have not expect he . nor have she expect Mrs. Prockter , who two day previously have be call away by telegram to the bedside of a sick cousin in Nottingham . nor have she expect Lilian Swetnam , who be indispose . the unexpected lady have not arrive ; but James have arrive , as disconcert as a ghost , and then have fade away with equal strangeness . none of the depart audience have see even the tassel of his cap . 

 Helen discover he in his little room at the end of the hall . she be resplendent in black and silver . 

 " so here you be , uncle ! " say she , and kiss he . " I be so glad you get back in time . can you lend I sixpence ? " 

 " what for , lass ? " 

 " I want to give it to the man who be take away the chair I have to hire . " 

 " what be become of that seven hundred and seventy pound odd as ye have ? " 

 " oh , " she say , lightly , " I have   spend that . " she think she might as well have do with it , and add : " and I be in debt - lot . but we will talk about that later . Sixpence , please . " 

 he blench . but he , too , have be expensive in the pursuit of delight . he , too , have tiresome trifle on his mind . so he produce the sixpence , and accept the dissipation of nearly eight hundred pound in less than a month with superb silence . 

 Helen ring the bell . " you see , I have   have all the bell put in order , " she say . 

 the gentleman in evening dress enter . " Fritz , " say she , " give this sixpence to the man with the chair . " 

 " yes , miss , " Fritz dolefully reply . " a note for you , miss . " 

 and he stretch forth a charger on which be a white envelope . 

 " excuse I , uncle , " say she , tear the envelope . 

 " Dinna ' mind I , lass , " say he . 

 the note run : 

 " I must see you by the Water to - night at nine o'clock . do not   fail , or there will be a row . - A.D. " 

 she crush it . 

 " no answer , Fritz , " say she . " tell cook , dinner for two . " 

 " who be he ? " demand James when Fritz have bow himself out . 

 " that be our butler , " say Helen , kindly . " do not   you like his eye ? " 

 " I wouldna ' swop he eye , " say James . he could not trust himself to discuss the butler 's eye at length . 

 " do not   be late for dinner , will you , uncle ? " she entreat he . 

 " Dinner ! " he cry . " I have my dinner at Derby . what about my tea ? " 

 " I mean tea , " she say . 

 he go upstairs again to his room , but do not stay there a moment . in the corridor he meet Helen , swish along . 

 " look here , lass , " he stop she . " a straight question deserve a straight answer . I be not give to curiosity , as a rule , but what be Emanuel Prockter do on my bed ? " 

 " Emanuel Prockter on your bed ! " Helen repeat , blankly . he see that she be suffer from genuine surprise . 

 " on my bed ! " he insist . 

 the butler appear , have hear the inquiry from below . he explain that Mr. Prockter , after the song , have come to he and ask where he could lie down , as he be conscious of a tendency to faint . the butler have indicate Mr. Ollerenshaw 's room as the only masculine room available . 

 " go and ask he how he feel , " Helen command . 

 Fritz obey , and return with the message that Mr. Prockter have " one of his attack , " and desire his mother . 

 " but he can not   have his mother , " say Helen . she be at Nottingham . he tell I so himself . he must be delirious . " and she laugh . 

 " no , she be not , " James put in . " she be at wum "   home . 

 " how do you know , uncle ? " 

 " I know , " say James . " Her'd well be send for . " 

 and she be send for . 

 content 
 chapter 27 

 unknotte and KNOTTING 

 when Mrs. Prockter arrive it be obvious to Helen , in spite of her wonderful calm upon discover James Ollerenshaw 's butler and page , that the lady be extremely ill - at - ease . and Helen , though preoccupy herself by matter of the high personal importance , do what she could to remedy a state of affair so unusual . probably nobody , within the memory of that generation , have ever see Mrs. Prockter ill - at - ease . Helen inquire as to the health of the sick relative at Nottingham , and receive a reply in which vagueness be mingle with hesitancy and a blush . it then become far obvious to the perspicuous Helen that Mrs. Prockter must have hear of her stepson 's singular adventure , and either resent Helen 's share in it , or be ashamed of Emanuel 's share in it . 

 " you know that Emanuel be here ? " say Helen , with her most diplomatic and captivate smile . 

 but Mrs. Prockter do not know . " I think Mr. Ollerenshaw want I , " Mrs. Prockter explain , ' so I come as quickly as I could . " 

 " it be I who want to speak to you , " say Helen . " the truth be that Emanuel be lie on uncle 's bed , unwell or something , and he express a wish to see you . he be sing at the concert - " 

 " so sorry I be not   able to be here , " Mrs. Prockter insert , with effusive anxiety . 

 " we miss you awfully , " Helen properly respond . " the rector be inconsolable . so be everybody , " she add , feel that as a compliment the rector 's grief might be deem insufficient . " and he have a breakdown . " 

 " who ? emanuel ? " 

 " I be accompany he , and I be afraid it be my fault . anyhow , he do not   finish his song . and then we miss he . he have ask the butler to let he lie down somewhere , and uncle find he in his bedroom . I hope it be nothing serious . " 

 " oh , my dear girl , " say Mrs. Prockter , regain somewhat her natural demeanour in a laugh , " if it be only one of Emanuel 's singing breakdown , we need not   worry . can I go up and talk sense to he ? he be just like a child , you know . " 

 " let I take you up , " cry Helen . 

 and the two woman ascend the grand staircase . it be the first time the grand staircase have be use with become dignity since Mrs. Prockter have use it on her visit of inspection . that staircase and Mrs. Prockter be make for each other . 

 no soon have they disappear than James pop out of his lair , where he have be bid , and gaze up the staircase like a hunter stalk his prey . thearrival of the page in sixpence put he out of countenance for a moment , especially when the page begin to feed the hall fire in a manner contrary to all James 's lifelong notion of feeding fire . however , he pass the time by give the page a lesson . 

 Helen tap at the bedroom door , leave Mrs. Prockter to enter , and descend the stair again . 

 " be she up there with he ? " James ask , in a whisper . 

 Helen nod . 

 " Ye'd well ask her stop and have something to eat wi ' us , " say James . 

 Helen have to reconcile James Ollerenshaw to the new scale of existence at Wilbraham Hall . she have to make he swallow the butler , and the page , and the other servant , and the grand piano - in themselves a heavy repast - without count the evening dinner . up to the present he have say nothing , because there have be no fair opportunity to say anything but he might start at any moment . and Helen have no reason to believe that he have even begin n the process of swallow . she argue , with a sure feminine instinct and a large experience of mankind , that if he could only be dodge into tacitly accept the new scale for even a single meal , her task would be very much simplify . and what an ally Mrs. Prockter would be ! 

 " tell cook there will be three to dinner , " she say to the page , who flee gleefully . 

 after a protract interval Mrs. Prockter reappear . 

 she begin by sigh . " the foolish boy be seriously damage , " say she . 

 " not hurt ? " Helen ask . 

 " yes . but only in his dignity . he pretend it be his throat , but it be not . it be only his dignity . I suppose all singer be child , like that . I be really ashamed to have to ask you to let he lie there a little , dear Miss Rathbone ; but he be positively sure that he can not   get up . I have   be through these crisis with he before , but never one quite so bad . " 

 she laugh . they all laugh . 

 " I will let he lie there on one condition , " Helen sweetly reply . " and that be that you stay to dinner . I be rely on you . and I will not   take a refusal . " 

 Mrs. Prockter look sharply at James , and James blush . 

 " James , " she exclaim , " you have   tell she . and you promise you would not   till to - morrow . " 

 " Nay ! " say James . " I have   say nowt ! it be you as have let it out , now , missis ! " 

 " tell I what , Mrs. Prockter ? " Helen ask , utterly unexpectant of the answer she be to get . 

 " my dear girl , " say the eld dame , " do not call I Mrs. Prockter . I be Mrs. Ollerenshaw . I be the property that your uncle have be buy at Derby . and he be my sick relative at Nottingham . we prefer to do it like that . we could not have survive engagement and felicitation . " 

 " oh , you wicke sinner ! you - you terrible darling ! " Helen burst out as soon as she could control her voice . 

 Mrs. Ollerenshaw weep discreetly . 

 " bless we ! bless we ! " murmur James , not to beseech a benediction , but simply to give the impression   quite false   that , in his opinion , much fuss be be make about nothing . 

 the new scale of existence be definitely accept . and in private Mrs. Ollerenshaw entirely agree with Helen as to the merit of the butler . 

 after dinner James hurry to his lair to search for a book . the book be not where he have leave it , on his original entry into Wilbraham Hall . within two minute , the majority of the household staff be engage in find that book . ultimately the butler discover it ; the butler have be read it . 

 " ay ! " say James , open the volume as he stand in front of the rich , expensive fire in the hall . " Dickens - Charles Dickens - that be the chap 's name . I could not   think of it when I be tell you about th ' book th ' other day . I mun ' go on wi ' that . " 

 " could not   you play we something ? " respond his wife . 

 in the triumph of concertina over grand piano , poor Emanuel , lie wound upstairs , be forget . at five minute to nine Helen stole , unperceive , away from the domestic tableau . she have by no mean recover from her amazement but she have screen it off by main force in her mind , and she be now occupy with something far more important than the blameless amour of the rich old man in Hillport . 

 by Wilbraham Water a young man be walk to and fro in the deep autumn night . he wear a cap and a muffler , but no overcoat , and his hand be push far down into the pocket of his trouser . he regard the ground fixedly , and stamp his foot at every step . then a pale grey figure , with head envelop in a shawl , and skirt carefully withdraw from the ground , approach he . 

 he do not salute the figure , he do not even take his hand out of his pocket . he put his face close to her , and each could see that the other 's feature be white and anxious . 

 " so you have   come , " say he , glumly . 

 " what do you want ? " Helen coldly ask . 

 " I want to speak to you . that be what I want . if you care for Emanuel Prockter , why do you play that trick on he this afternoon ? " 

 " what trick ? " 

 " you know perfectly well what I mean . so I will thank you not to beat about the bush . the plain fact be that you do not   care a pin for Prockter . " 

 " I never say I do . " 

 " you have   make every one believe you do , anyhow . you have   even make I think so , though all the time I know it be impossible . an ass like that ! " 

 " what do you want ? " Helen repeat . 

 they be both use a tone intend to indicate that they be enemy from everlaste to everlasting , and that mere word could not express the intensity of their mutual hatred and scorn . the casual distant observer might have conceive the encounter to be a love idyll . 

 there be a short silence . 

 " I break off my engagement last night , " Andrew Dean mutter , ferociously . 

 " really ! " Helen comment . 

 " you do not   seem to care . " 

 " I do not   see what it have to do with I . but if you talk to Lilian Swetnam in the same nice agreeable manner that you talk to I , I can not   say I be surprised to hear that she break with you . " 

 " who tell you she break ? " Andrew demand . 

 " I guess , " say Helen . " you would never have have the courage to break it off yourself . " 

 Andrew make a vicious movement . 

 " if you mean to serve I as you serve Emanuel , " she remark , with bitter calm , " please do it as gently as you can . and do not   throw I far . I can only swim a little . " 

 Andrew walk away . 

 " good - night , " she call . 

 " look here ! " he snarl , come back to she " what be the matter with you ? I know I ought not   to have ask Lilian to marry I . everybody know that . it be universally agree . but be you go to make that an excuse for spoil the whole show ? what be up with you be pride . " 

 " and what be up with you ? " she inquire . 

 " Pride , " say he . " how could I know you be in love with I all the time ? how could - " 

 " you could not , " say Helen . " I be not . no more than you be with I . " 

 " if you be not   in love with I , why do you try to make I jealous ? " 

 " I try to make you jealous ! " she exclaim , disdainfully . " you flatter yourself , Mr. Dean ! " 

 " I can stand a good deal , but I can not   stand lie , and I will not ! " he explode . " I say you do try to make I jealous . " 

 he then notice that she be cry . 

 the duologue might have extend itself definitely if her tear have not excite he to uncontrollable fury , to that instinctive cruelty that every male be capable of under certain condition . without ask her permission , without utter a word of warning , he rush at she and seize she in his arm . he crush she with the whole of his very considerable strength . and he add insult to injury by kiss she about forty seven time . woman be such strange , incalculable creature . Helen do not protest . she do not invoke the protection of Heaven . she exist , passively and silently , the unremonstrating victim of his disgraceful violence . 

 then he hold she at arm 's length . " will you marry I ? " 

 " yes , " she say . 

 " do you try to make I jealous ? " 

 " yes . " 

 later , as they walk by the lake , he ejaculate : " I be an awful brute ! " 

 " I like you as you be , " she reply . 

 but the answer be lack in precision , for at that moment he be be as tender as only an awful brute can be . 

 " of course , " she say , " we must not   say anything about it yet . " 

 " no , " he agree . " to let it out at once might make unpleasantness between you and the Swetnams . " 

 " oh ! " she say , " I be not   think of that . but there be another love - affair in the house , and no house will hold two at once . it would be nauseate . " 

 that be how they talk in the five town . as if one could have too much love , even in a cottage - to say nothing of a Wilbraham Hall ! Mrs. Ollerenshaw placidly decide that she and James would live at the Hall , though James would have prefer something a size small . as I have already notice , the staircase suit she ; James suit she , too . no one could guess why , except possibly James . they get on together , as the five town say , " like a house afire . " 

 Helen and Andrew Dean be satisfied with a semi - detached villa in Park - road , with a fine view of the gold angel . woman vary , capricious being ! Helen be perfectly satisfied with one servant . but she dress rather well than ever . 

 the END 
